LOK SABRA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE HINDUSTAN TRACTORS LIMI'IED (ACQUISITION 
AND TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) BILL, 1978 
L-lb bel As in troduced in Ipk Sabha 7 J 
1. Page 4, line 5,-
rsu:. "0 thee " ~ "other" 
2. Page 7, line 27,-
fill:. "set cion " ~ "section" 
3. Page 7, line 29,-
for "sub- sectaion n 1l!.&l "sub- section" 
4. Page 14, line 13,-
after "in to " in ser t "in " 
5' • Page 14, line 35',-
before ''the state" insert "the Custodian, or" 
6. Page 14, line 36,-
omit "or the Custodian." 
7. Page 17, line 3,-
for "LIARIUTIES" read "LIABILITIES" 
NEW DELHI; 
March 3r 1978 
Phalguna 12, 1899 ( Salta) 

As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABIIA ON 
. 8m No. 22 of 11'78 
':r<! tH.JiiJ·.,;"ii. \. 
THJ. HIJ)JDUSTAN TRACTORS LIMITED (ACQUISITION AJm 
TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) BILL, 1978 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTElt I 
PRla.IMIN ARY , . 
C4uSJC8 
1. Short title and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPI'ER II 
ACQUIsmON AND TRANSFER OF THE UNDER'l'AIONGS OF THE COMPANY 
3. Transfer to and vesting in the Central Government of the under-
takings of the Company. 
4. General effect of vesting. 
S. Company.to be li$ble for .certain prior liabilities. 
6. Vesting o~ the undertakings of the Company in t.he State G~vem­
ment of Gujarat. 
7. Power of State Government to direct vesting of the ~dertak­
ings of the Company in a Government company. 
CHArT~m 
PAYMENT OF AMOmms 
8. Payment of amount. 
9. Payment of further amount. 
CHAPTER IV 
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF mE 'UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY 
10. Management. etc., of the undertakings of· the Company. 
11. Duty to deliver possession of property a~quired and documents 
relating thereto. 
12. Accounts to be rendered by the Company or any other person. 
13. A'Ccounts. 
CHAPI'ER V 
PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE EMPLOYEES OF THE COMPANY 
14. Employment of certain employees to continue. 
15. Provident fund and other funds. 

U 
CHAPTER VI 
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS 
CLAusm 
16.,. Appointmept. ,of Commissioner of Payments. 
17. Payment 'by- the Central Government to the Commissioner. 
.----
18. :Certain powerl of the Central GoYemment or State Go_D· 
ment or Government company. 
19. Claims to be made to the Commissioner. 
20. Priority of claims. 
21. Examination of claims. 
22. Admission or rejection of claims . 
23. Disbursement of amount by the Commissioner to claimants. 
24. Disbursement of amounts to the Company. 
25. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be deposited to the gefterat 
revenue account. 
26. Assumption of liability. 
'Ii" ,'! 
CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANIOUS 
27. Act to have overriding effect. 
28. Provision relating to contratts. 
29. Transfer of assets, etc., to be void in certain cases. 
30: Protection "of action taken in good faith. 
31. ~enalties. 
32. Offences by companies. 
33. Delegation of powers. 
34. Power of Central Government to make rules. 
35. Power to remove diftlculties. 
36 Declaration as to the policy of the State. 
THE SCHEDULE. 
T ' 

85 of 1951. 
8m No. 22 of 1978 
THE HINDUSTAN TRACTORS LIMITED (ACQUISITION AND 
TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) BILL, 1978 
A 
BILL 
to provtde for the acquisition and 'tTa.mfer of the undertakings oj 
Hindustan Tractors Limited, Vishwamitri, Vadodara, for the pur-
pose Of ensuring the conti,nuity of ?"odu.ction of goods which are 
'vital to meet the needs of the general public and for matters connected 
,'therewith or' incidental thereto. 
WllBRI:4S Hindustan Tractors Limited, Vishwamitri, Vadodara, are 
engaged in the manufacture and distribution o~ tractors which are 
vital to meet the needs of the genera} public; 
AND WHEBEAs the management of the undertakings of Hindustan 
5 Tractors Limited was conducted in a manner highly detrimental to the 
public interest and had suffered heavy losses; 
AND' ~hereas the management of the undertakings of Hindustan Trac-
tors Limited was taken over by the Central Governm~nt under section 18A 
.of ~ Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951; 
10 AND whereas it is necessary to ncquir~ the undertakings ot 
Hfndustan Tractors Limited to ensure the continuance of the production 
of goods which are vital to meet the needs of, the general public; 

Short 
title and. 
commen-
cement. 
Deftnl-
tiona. 
2 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-ninth Year of the Republ1c 
e~ India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Hindustan Tractors Limited (Acqui- S 
sition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1978. 
(2) It shall come into force on the 1st day of April, 1978. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "appointed day" means the 1st day of April, 1978; 
(b) "Authorised Controller" means the Gujarat Agro Industries 10 
Corporation Limited, Ahmedabad, which took over the management 
ot the undertakings of the Company by virtue of the Order of the 
Government of India in the Ministry of Industrial Development No. 
S.O. 137 (E) /18A/IDRA/73, dated the 12th MarCh, 1973, made under 
clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section l8A of the Industries (Deve- 15 
lopment and Regulation) Act, 1951; 65 ot 1951. 
(c) "bank" means-
(i) the State Bank of India constituted under the State 23 of 195~. 
Bank of India Act, 1955; 
(ii) a subsidiary bank as defined in the State Bank of India 20 f 1 59 
,(SubsidtR!'y Banks) 'Act, 1959; 38 0 9 • 
(iii) a corresponding new bank constituted under section 3 
of tile Billildng Companies (Acquisition and 'l'rahsfer of 'Under-
takings) Act, 1970; 5 of 1970. 
(iv) any other bank, b\!ing a scheduled bank as defined in 25 
clause (e) of section 2 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 193'; 2otl934. 
(~) ~'CommiS8ioner" means the Commissioner of ,Paymenta ap-
, pqinted under section 16; 
~ (e), "COln~any" Ineans Hmdustan Tractors Limited, 'be~g a 
'eotHtlahy as'de'ftlied ~n the Compa~tes Ae:t, 1956, and having Its'~egis- 30 10tl956. 
tered office at Vishwamitri, Vadodara; -
(n "'Custodian" means the CUstodian appolttted linder *tib~sec­
tion (3) of sectlon 10 to take over, or carryon, themafiageim~tOf 
the undertakings of the 'C~pany; , 
(g) "date of taking over" means the date on 'which the manage- 35 
mept oj, the ,under~lIkings of the Company was taken over by tbe 
Authorised Controller; 
(h)" "Government c~mpany" has the meaning assignal to it by 1 of 1958. 
, section 617 01 the Companies Act, 1956; 
(i) "n'otification" means a notification published in the official 40 
Gazette; 
'I.. 'b ',' (j) I prescri ed" 
Act; 
means prescribed by rules made under tbiI 

! of 1956. 
S 
10 
r :1 
(Ie) '!spedfied daM" means such date as the cmtral GOftminent 
may, for the purpose of any provision o£ this AId, by bOtifteatifJft, 
epacify aad d4ft.erent dates may be specified for ~tpl'O'rision.s 
of W. Act; 
(l) "State Government" means the State Governtnent 6f 
Gujarat; 
(m) words and· expresSions used herein and not defined but 
defined il'1 the Comparues Act, i956, shall· have the meailings, resJ>ec-
ttvely, assigned to thetn in that Act. . 
CHAPTti II 
A.CQUISlTION AND TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTA:KIN.GS OF THE COMPAllY 
-3. On the appointed day, the 'uRdertaki1lgs of the 'Compawy, "8114 ihe 
right, title and interest of Hle Company in relation to its Uftdertakmp, 
shall, by virtue of this Act, stand transferred to, and shall vest in, the 
IS Central Government. ' .•• ~.~ 
4. (1) The undertakings of the Company referred to in section 31hal1 
be deemed to include all assets, rights, lease-holds, powers, authorities 
and privileges, and all prop'eI'ty, movable and immovable, including 
lands, buildings, workshops, stores, instruments machinery and equip' 
30 ment, bank balance$, cash balances, cash on han.d, reserve funds,. inVest-
ments and book debts and all other rights and interests in, or ariling-out 
of, such property as were immediately before the appointed day ial,;Cllle 
ownenhip, possession, power or control of the Company, whether wlihin 
or outside India, and all books of account, registers and all other doau-
2S ments of whatever nature relating thereto aDd shall be deemedio include 
the liabilities and obligations specified in sub-section (2) of seeton 5. 
(2) All property as aforesaid which have vested in the Central Gov-
ernment under section 3 shall, ." forae (}f such .-tihg, . be :freed and 
discharged from any trust, obligation, mortgage. chal1'!, lk!t1 'aDd 'all'other 
encumbrances affecting them, and any attaohment. lDjUHcfiott, : decree 
30 "r order of any court, tribunal, officer or other authority restricting the 
use of such property in any manner shall be deemed to M.ve beeD. with-
drawn. 
(3) Where any licence Or other instrument iii relation to \ the ullder-
toldnas of the Company bad been granted at my time: belate 'the ap-
3S pointed day, to the Company by the Central Governlnet\t,a (Stttte Gov-
ernment or any other authority, the Central Govemmen~, the State 
Government of Gujarat or, as the case may be, the Goverruoent company, 
in which the right, title and interest of the Cgmpany in relation to its 
undertakings have vested und~r section 7, shall, on and from ihe,awointed 
40 day, be deemed to be substituted in such licence or other instrument in 
, pieee of the Company referred to therein as if such lteellee or other ins-
trument bad beeh granted to it and shall hold ·such '~nee tit 'the under-
tatmgs orMly part thereof specffted in such ot~'instrume'ntlf(trlthe re-
4S mainder of the period for which 'the CornpanywOuld f have 'tiehl such 
licence or undertakings or any part thereof under such other instrument. 
Tranaf. 
to and 
veatinl 
in the 
Central 
Govern-
ment of 
the 
under-
takings 
of the 
Com-
pany. 
General 
effect at 
veninl· 
I 

Company 
to be 
liable for 
certain 
prior 
Uablli-
tiel. 
(4) Every mortgagee of any property whicb. has veste~ under this Act 
in the Central Government and every person holding any charge, lien 
or other interest in, or in. relation to, any such property. shall give. within 
such time and in such manner as may be prescribed, an intimation to the 
Commissioner of such. mortgage, charge, lien or othee interest. S 
'. 
(5) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the mort-
gagee of any property referred to m sub-section (4) or any other person 
holdinS any charge, lien or other interest in, or in relation to,' any such 
property shall be entitled to claim, in accordance with his rights and 
interests, payment of the mortgage money or other dues, in whole or in 10 
part,. out of the amounts specified in section 8. and also out of the monies 
determined under section 9. but no such mortgage, charge, lien or other 
interest sball be enforceable against any property which has vested in 
the Central Government. 
(6) If, on the appointed day, any suit, appeal or other proceeding of 15 
whatever nature in relation to any matter speCified in sub-section (2) of 
section 5 in respect of the undertakings of the Company instituted or 
preferred by or against the Company is pending, the same B,hall not abate, 
be discontinued or be, in any way, prejudicially affected by reason of the 
transfer of the undertakings of the Company or of. anything contained ih 2 
this Act, but the suit, appeal or other p'I'oceeding may be continued. pro-
secuted or enforced by or against the Central Government, or the State 
Government, or where the undertakings of the Company are directed, 
under section 7, to vest in a Government company, that Government com-
pany. ~5 
.5. (1) Every liability other than the liabilityspecifled in sub-section 
·(Z). OL the Company in respect of any period prior to the appointed day, 
Irhall be the liability of the Company and shall be enforceable against it 
and not against the Central Government, or the State Government, or 
where the undertakings of the Company are directed, under section. 7, to 30 
vest in a Government company, against that Government company. 
(Z) Any liability arising in respect of-
(a) loaDS advanced by th.e Central Government or the State 
Government, .r both, totbe Company (together with interest due 
thereon). on or after the date of taking over; 35 
(b) loaDs advanced by a bank to the Company' (together with 
interest due· thereon) on or ,.Iter the date of taking over; 
(c) loans advaaced· by the Industrial Reeonstruction ~rpora­
tion of India Limited. to the Company (together with inietwt dUe 
thereon) OR ~ lifter the date of taking OVel'; 40 
(d) w .... salaries and other dues of employees of the Com-
pany and the dues on ~count of any deduction made from 'Wages 
and salaries aDd other dues of employees. relating to any period 
. eemmendng OIl and frOm the date of taking over; . 
I j, } ;",~ , 
(e) any debt ~curred by the Company dUl'ing any period COJD- 45 
me~'W on aDd from the date of taldni over, not being a debt 
faluA..lI1lder clause (a), clause (b), dause (c) or ela_so, (d) or 
speeUled,in Category 1 of the Sc:~dule; 

s 
10 
IS 
20 
2S 
D 
shall. OIl and :from the appo'nted day, be the liability of the Central 
Government, Or the State Government, or the Govel'lilnent company 
aforesaid and shall be discharged by the Centnl Government or the 
Stlde Govel'lllllellt, or the Govemment company aforesaid .as and when 
repayment of ,.reh loans becomes~due or as and when sueb wares, .a· 
, ries and other'dues and debt become due and payable. 
(3) For. the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that,-
(0) save as otherwise expressly provided in this section or in 
. any other provision of this Act, no liability, including any liability 
'arising out of any guarantee given by the State Government in res· 
pect of any loan or advance given to 'the Company but not including 
the liability specified' in sub-section (2), 01. :the Company in relation 
to its under~akings in respect of any period prior to the appointed 
day, shall be enforceable against the Central Government, or the 
State Government, or where the undertakings of the Company are 
directed, under section 7, to vest in a Government company, against 
that GOvemment company; 
(b) no award, decree or order of any court, tribunal, officer or 
other authority in relation to the undertakings of the Company, pas8-
ed after the appointed day, in respect of any matter, claim or Bispute, 
not being a matter, claim or dispute in relation to any matter referred 
to in sub-section (2), which arose before that day, shall be enforce.-
able against the Central Government, or the State Government, or 
where the undertakings of the Company are directed, under section 
7, to vest in a Government company, against that Government 
company; 
(c) no liability incurred by the Company before the apPQinted 
day, for the contravention of any provision of. law for the time being 
in force, shall be enforceable against the Central Government, or the 
State Government, or where the undertakings of the Company are 
directed, under section 7, to vest in a Government company, against 
Ithat Government company. 
., 
fi.' (1) Notwithstanding anything con~ned in sections 3 i and 4, the Vea"", 
Centr¥ q?verm;nent shall, as soon as may 'be, after the commencement of ot the 
3S this Act, 'direct, by notification, that the un~akings of tbe Company, under-
and th~ rig~t" title and interest of the Company in relation to i~ under- takin,. 
takings, which have vested in the Central Government under section 3- , cg the 
and such of the liabiJities of the Company as are specified in I!ub-section in~::ny 
(2) :of,gection 5, WII, in5tead of continuing to vest in the Central GoY- State 
40 ernment, vest in ,the State Government\(\l Gujarateither on the date of Govern:. 
the! notification or on such earlier or later-,date (I1ot being a date earlier ment Of 
than the appointed day) as may be specified in the notification. Gn.larat. 
(2) Where the right, title and interest of the Company in relation to 
its undertakings ,~d the liabilities of the Company specified In IU~ 
4S section (2) o:fi section 5 vest in the State Government under sub.eection 
(1), the State Government shall, on and from the date of such vesting, 
be d~med to have become the owner in relation to such undedakiDgs, 
and ~ll the rights and liabilities of the Central Government in relation 
to such undertakings shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be 
So deemed tohawe become the rights and liabilities, respectively, of the 
State Government. 

Power of 
Btate 
Govern-
ment 
to direct 
vesting 
of the 
under-
takings 
of the 
Company 
ina 
Govern-
ment 
company. 
6 
.7. (1) Notw~tb&ttmding anything contained in sections 3, 4 and 6. 
t~StRte G~filrnm.ellt:may, if it is satisfied that a Government company 
is. willing to £OIDPly, or has complied with such terms and conditions 
as that Government may think fit to impose, direct, by notification, that 
the undertakings of the Company, and the right, tiUe and interest of 5 
the Company in relation to its undertakings and such of the liabiltti~ of 
the Company as are specified in 'Sub-section (2) of section 5, which have 
v.asted in the Central Government under section 3 e.nd thereafter in the 
State Government under section 6 shall, instead of continuing to vest in 
the State Government, vest in the Government company either on the 10 
date of the notiflcation or on such t!arlier or later date (not being a ~te 
earlier than the appojnted day) as may be specified in the noti1tcation. 
~). Where the right, title and interest, and the liabilities specified 
d I' 
in 8ub-lt€!:tipn, (2) of section 5, ()f the Company in relation to its under-
~. vest in a Government compAny under sulb-section (1), the Gov- 15 
emment company shaLl, on and from the date of such vesting, be deemed 
to have become the owner in relation to such und~rtakings, and all the 
rights and liabilities of the Central Government or the State Government 
in relation to such undertakings shall. on and from the date of such 
vesting, be doeemed to have become the rights and liabilities, respectively, 20 
of, the Gownment company. 
CHAPI'ER III 25 ... 
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS 
Payment 8. For the transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Gov.eml;D.pt. ~~r 
of ' ~f~n la,' of the undertakin.g. of the Comp~ny aq~ Ole ri,gllt. ti~ apo 
amOlftlt .. : j ; \ inter~ of the. C,ompany in relatiol) to its un,4ertekings, t~ere.1I be 
·lll JiWn: 'tty the Central Government to the Omtpany, in cQJJh, 'I),el in the 30 
•• ",(. j m4rmer spedfled in Chapter VI, an ~101l,nt of l'1,lpee5 one hW1,Clred 'IJJJ!i 
.. ' ; :~; flffy lakhs. ." ' 
Payment 
of f"ftb,er 
amoUJ;l,t', . 
I . .f1) For tbe deprintiOft of the Company of the management of its 
. UNiettainp, Chere shan be gWen to the Company by the Central Gov-
era.ent 8ft amount cal_ated at the rate of rupees ftfty thousand per 3S 
. annum for the periodcommeneingon the date of taking over IIDCI ending 
on the ap,POinted day. 
(z,) '!'he ..... t speftfted in section 8 and the amount detennine4 UDder 
sub-Hdlon. (1) sh .. U carry simple interest at the rate of four per cent. 
per enDtIID 'for the perted commencing on the appointed clay and ending 40 
on die date on ~ch payment of saeh amounts is made by the Central 
G-.rnment to the Commissioner. 
dB) Th~ .mounts determined in accordance with the pI'OWsions • 
sub-scctions (1) and (2) shall be given by the Central Government to 
the Company in addition to the amount specified in section 8. 4S 

, 
CHAPTER IV 
MANAGEMENT,. ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE CoMPANY 
10. (1) The State Government in which the undertakings of the Com-
pany and the right, title and interest of the Company in relation to its 
S undertakings vested under section 6 shall be entitled to exercise aU such 
powers and do all such things as the Company is authorised to exercise 
and do in relation to its undertakings. 
(2) The general superintendence, direction, control and management 
of the affairs and business of the undertakings of the Company, the right, 
10 title and interest in relation to which have vested under section 3 in the 
Central Government and, under section 6, in the State Government, shall,-
(a) where a direction has been made by the State Government 
under sub-section (1) of section 7, vest in the Government coupany 
specifled in such direction; or 
IS (b) where no such direction has been made by the State 
Government, vest in one or more Custodians appointed under 
sub-section (3), 
and thereupon the Government company so specified or the Custodian so 
appoint\..>d shaH be entitled to exercise all sooh powers and do all sueh 
20 things I\S the Company is authorised to exercise and do in relation to its 
undertakings. 
(3) The State Government may appoint one or more individuals ot 
a Government company as the Custodian of the undertakings of the Com-
pany in' relation to which no direction has been made by it under sub-
2S saetion (1) of section 7. 
11. (1) On the vesting of the management of the undertakings of 
the Company in the State Government under setcion 6, every person in 
whose possession or custody or under whose control any, property referred 
tb in sub-s~taion (1) of section 4 may be, shall deliver the property to 
30 the State Government forthwith. 
(2) Any· person, who 'on the appointed day has in his possession or 
under his cotrtrol any books, documents or other papers relating to the 
uRdertalt!ings of' the Company which h4ts vested in the State Govern-
ment under section 6 and which belong to the Company. or, would hav£> 
35 so belpnged.. if· the undertakings of the COlilpany had not vested in the 
State Government, shall be liable to account for the said books, docu-
ments or, other papers' tet the State Government and shall deliver them 
up to the State Government. 
_. (3) The State Government may take. or cause to be taken. all neces-
40 sary steps for securing possession of all properties which have vested 
in that' Government under this Act. 
(4) The Central G9vernment may issue such directtioJis as' it may 
deem desirable.' in the' circumstanees of the case to the State Govern-
ment .as to its powers and, duties and the State Government may also, 
4S if. it so desir.es, apply to the Central Government at any time for instrue-
ti«imS as to the manner in" which the management of: the undertakings 
. of the. Company. shall be conducted bv it ()(' in- relation to anr other 
matter arising in th~ CO~ of such managemen~, 
Manaie-
ment, etc., 
of the 
under-
takings 
of the 
Com-
pany. 
Duty to 
deliver 
possession 
of 
property 
acquired 
Rnd docu-
ments 
relating 
thereto. 

Accounts 
t.o be 
rendered 
by the 
Company 
or any 
other 
person. 
8 -- . 
(5) On the vesting of the management of the undertakings of the 
Company in a Government company or in the Custodian, the provisions 
of sub-sections (1) to (4) shall apply to, or in relation to, the Govern-
ment company or the Custodian, as the case may be, as they apply to, 
or in relation to, the State Government, subject to the modification that 5 
the references to the State Government shall be construed as references 
to the Government company or the Custodian, as the case may be. 
12. (1) Where, in pursuance of any decree, order or injunction of 'lny 
court or otherwise,-
(a) the Authorised Controller was, after the date of taking over 10 
and before the appointed day; and 
(b) the Central Government, the State Government. or the Gov-
ernment Company, as the case may be, is on or after the appointed 
day, 
prevented from taking over the management of any part of the under- IS 
takings of the Company, the Company, or any other person in possession, 
custody or control of. such part. shall, within sixty days from the appointed 
-day, render accounts to the State Government or the Government Com-
pany in relation to the period commencing on the date of taking over and 
ending on the date on which such part was or is handed over to the 20 
Authorised Controller or, as the case may be. the Central Government, 
the State Government, or the Government Company, with regard to the-
(i) assets and stores of the undertakings or any part thereof, 
acquired, utilised or sold during the said period; and 
(ii) income derived by the Company or any other person from 25 
the undertakings or any part thereof during the said period. 
(2) If, on examination of the accounts referred to in sub-section (1), 
any income or other moneys is or are found to have been derived by 
the Comnany or any other person from such undertakings or any part 
thereof during the period referred to in that sub-section or any other 30 
moneys are found to be payable, such income or either moneys shall be 
recoverable by the Central Government, the State Government or the 
Government company from the Company or such other person, as the 
~ase may be, and from the amount payable under this Act to the Com-
panv and the debt due to the Central Government, the State Govern- 35 
ment or the Government company on this account shall rank as an 
unsecured debt. 
(3) If no account is rendered by the Company or such other person 
..In respect of _ the undertakings or any part. thereof within the p~riod 
referred to in sub-section (1) or if the Central Government, the State 40 
Government or the Government company, as the case may be, has any 
reason to believe that the account rendered by the Company or such 
other person is incorrect or false in any material particular, the Cerltral 
Government, the State Government or the Government company may 
refer the matter to the Commissioner and thereupon the Commissioner 
shall determine the income derived by the Company or such other per- 45 
son from such undertakings or any part thereof during the period refer-
J!ed to in sub·section (1) and take steps to recover the said income or 
other moneys from the Company or such other person and from the 
amount payable to the Company under this Act as if the debt due to 
the Central Government, the Stat.e Government or the Government 50 
company on this account were an unsecured debt. 

(4) No mortgage, charge, lien or other encumbrance in relation to 
the undertakings of the Company or any part thereof shall be binding 
on the Central Government, the State Government or the Government 
company, if such mortgage, charge, lien or other encumbrance was 
5 created, at any time during the period in which the Authorised Controller 
was, and the Central Government, the State Government or the Govern-
ment company, as the case may be, is, prevented, by any decree, order 
or injunction of any court of otherwise, from taking over the manage-
ment of the undertakings or any part thereof. 
10 13. The Custodian sball maintain accounts o~ the undertakings of the 
1 of 1956. Company in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956. 
14 of 1947 
CHAPTER V 
PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE EMPLOYEES OF THE CoMPANY 
1'. (1) Every person who has been, immediately before the appointed 
IS day, employed in any of the undertakings of the Company shall b .!come, 
on and f'rom the appointed day or such later date, as the case may be, an 
employee of the State Government or, as the caSe may be, of the Govern-
ment company in which the right, title and interest of the' Company in 
relation to its undertakings, have vested under this Act, and shan hold 
20 office or, service under the State Government, or the Government com-
pany, as the case may be, with the same rights and privileges uta pen-
sion, gratuity and other matters as would have been admissible to him 
if there had been no such vesting and shall continue to do so unless and 
until his employment under the State Government, or the Government 
2S company, as the case may be, is duly terminated or until his remunera-
tion and other conditions of service are duly altered by thE;. State Gov-
ernment, or by the Government company, as the case may be. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Int1uslrial Disputes 
Act, 1947, or in any other law for the time being in force, the transfer of 
30 the services of any officer or other person employed in any of ~e under-
takings of the Company to the State Government, or the Government 
company, shall not entitle such officer or other employee to any compen-
sation under this Act or under any other law for the time being in force 
and no such claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other 
3S authority. --
(3) Where, under the terms of any contract of service or otherwise, 
any person, whOse services become transferred to the State Government, 
or the Government company, by reason of the provisions of this Act, is 
entitled to any arrears of salary or wages or any payment for any leave 
40.'hot availed of or any other payment, 'not being payment by way of ~a­
t11ity or pension, such person may, except to the extent of such liability 
which has been taken over by the Central Government or the State Gov-
ernment or the Government company under sub-section (2) of section 5. 
enforce his claim against the Company, by which he was employed imme-
45 diately before such transfer but not against the Central Government, of 
~e State Government, or the Government company. 
15. Where moneys representing prOvident fund, superannuation £'und, 
welfare fund or other fund for the benefit of the persons employed in any 
of the undertakings of the Company have vested in an authority establish-
50 ed under any law for the time being in force, such moneys shall con-
tinue to vest in such authority for the benefit of the said penlons. 
Accounts, 
Employ-
ment of 
certaita 
employees 
to 
continue. 
Provi-
dent fund 
and 
other 
fundi. 

Appoint-
ment of 
Commis~ 
sioner of 
PaymentS. 
Payment 
by the 
Central 
Govern-
ment to 
the 
Commis-
sioner. 
Certain 
powers 
of the 
Central 
Govern-
ment Or 
State 
Govern-
ment 
or Gov-
ernment 
company, 
I • 
10 
CHAPIDER VI 
COMMISSIONER OF PA YMI4N'l'8 
16. (1) Th" Central Goverament shaU, for the purpose of disburplW the 
amouDb pa,Ya),le, to the ~pany under sections 8 'and 9, hy IaGtification, 
appoint a Commissioner of 'Payments. 5 
(2) :The1Cenual GoverlUlient Olay appoint sum otber persoDS ,Its it mar 
think fit, to assist the Commissioner and :tbereupou the Commi-iODcr ..... 
authorise 'one or more of such persons also to exercise all or any of the 
j)Owers exereisable by 'him under this Act and 'difterent persons tnay be 
authorised ,to ~rtise·Mfferent powers. 10 
(3) Any person authorised by the Commissioner to exercise any of 
the powers exerdsa.ble by the. Commissioner may exercise those powers 
In the same manner and with the same etlect as if they have been con-
r1eRad on tbat.panon dil!edly by' this Act and net by .. y. _-authorisation. 
(4) The .. laries and allo.wances of the Commissioner and otberper· IS 
SODS QPointed UDder this section shall be defrayed ou.t of the Consolicla" 
. Fund of Iadia. 
17. (1) The Central Government shall, within thirty days' from the 
'specified date, pay, in cash, to the Commissioner, for payment to the 
'Company- :w 
(a) an amount equal to the amount specified in sectwn 8, and 
(b) an Mllount equal to the amount payable to the Company 
under section 9'. 
(2) A deposit accnunt shall be o~ned hy the Cent?al Govemment in 
fa\'our of the Commissioner, in the Public Account of Inrli'8/, and every 25 
amount paid under this Act to the Commissioner shall be deposited by 
him to the credit of, the said deposit account and thereafter the said 
deposit account shall be operated by the Commissioner. 
(3) The interest accruing on the amounts standing to the credit of the 
deposit account referred to in sub-section (2) shall enure to the benefit 30 
of the Company. 
18. (1) The Central Government, or the State Government, or the 
Government company, as the case may be, shall be entitled to receive 
up to ,the specified date, to the exclusion of all other persons, any money 
due to the Company, in relation to its undertakings which have vested in 3S 
the Central Government, or the State Government, or ,the Government 
cl'>mpany, realised after the appointed day notwithstanding that the rea-
iUsation pertains to a period prior to the appoin.ted day. 
(2) The Central Government, or the State Government, or the Govern-
ment company, as the case may be, may malce a claim to the CommisSioner 40 
with regard to every payment made by it after the appointed day for'dis-
charging any liability of the Company, not being any liability speCified 
!insub-section (2) of section 5, in relation to any period prior to the ap-
pointed dfty; and every such claim shall have priority in accordance with 
the priorities attaching, under this Act, to the matter in relation to which 45 
such liability has been discharged by the Central Government. or Uae 
State Government, or' the Government company. 

(3) . Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the liabilities of the Com-
pany in reapect of any transaction prior to the appointed day, which have 
not been discharged on or before the RpeCitiled date, shall be the liabilltii!s 
of the Company. 
S 19. Every person having a claim against the Company shall pref~r such 
claim before the Commissioner within thirty days from the speoified date: 
Provided that if the Commissioner is satisfied that the claimant was 
prevented by sufficient ca.use from preferring the claim within: tM c;aid 
period of thirty days, he may ,enter~in ~he claim within a further period 
10 of thirty days and not thereafter. 
15 
20 
25 
, 130. The claims arising out of the matters specified in the &meEIule 
shall have priorities in accordance with the following principles, 
nametly:-
(a) Category I shall have precedence over all other Cakgories 
and Category 11 shall have precedence over Category III, and so on; 
(b) the claims specified in each of the Categories, except Cate-
gory III, shall rank equally arid be paid in full, but, if the amount is 
insufficient to meet such claims in full, they shall abate in equal pro-
portions and be paid accordingly; 
(c) the liabilities specified in Category III shall be discharged. 
subject to the priorities specified in this section, in accordance with 
the terms of the secured loans and the priority, inter se, of such loans; 
and 
(d) the question of discharging any liability with regard to a 
matter specified in a lower Category shall arise only U a surplus is 
left after meeting all the liabilities specIfied in :the immediately higher 
Category. 
Claims 
to be 
made to 
the 
Commis-
, sioner. 
Priority 
of 
claims. 
2l. (1) On reoeipt . .of the claims made under ~tion 19, the Commis- Examina-
sionershall arrange !the claims in the oIlder of priorities specified in the tion of 
30 Schedule and exantine ,the same in accordance with such order of claims. 
priorities. 
(,2) If, on examination of the claims, the Commissioner is of opinion 
that the amount paid to him under this Act is not sufficient to meet the 
liabilities specified in any lower Category, he shall not be required to eX8-
35 mine the claims in respect of such lower Category. 
%Z. (1). After exammina ·the claims withre£erence to the priorities 
set out in .the Schedule, the Commissioner l'hall fix a date on or helott" 
which every claimant shall rue the proof of his claim faili~ which he 
will be excluded from the benefit of the disbursement made by the Com-
40 missioner. 
(2) Not less than fourteen days' notice of the date so fixed shaLl be 
given by advertisem~nt in one issue of a daily newspaper in the English 
,1aQjuageand in one issue of such daiJ.y newspaper in the regional language 
as the ·CommiSiioner may consider suitable, and every such notice shall 
45 J!a11 upon the claimant to file the proof of his claim with the CommissioneI 
within the time specified in the advertisement. 
Admis-
sion Or 
rejection 
of 
claims. 

DIsburse-
ment- of 
amount 
by the 
Commil .. 
sioner to 
clai-
mants. 
Disburse-
ment of 
amounts 
to the 
Compatl" 
12 
(3) Every claimant who fails to file :the proof of his claim within the 
time specified by the Commissioner shall be excluded from the disburse-
mE'.nts made by the Commissioner. 
(4') The CommisSioner shall, after such investiga:tion as may, in his 
opinion, be necessary and after giving the Company an opportunity of 5 
refuting 'the claim and after giving the claimant a re3sonable opportunity 
of being heard, in writing, admit or reject the claim in whole or in part. 
(5) The Commissioner shall have the power to regulate his own pro-
cedure in all matters ariSing out of the discharge of his functions, includ-
Ing the place or places at which he will hold his sittings and shall, for 10 
the purpose of making an investigation under this Act; have ,the same 
powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908, while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely:-
(a) the summoning and E'nforcing rthe attendance of any witness 
and examining him on oath; J 5 
(b) the discovery and production of any document or other 
material object producible as ev,idence; 
(c) the reception of evidence on affidavits; 
(d) the issuing of any commission for the examination of wit-
nesses. 20 
15 ot 1908. 
(6) Any investigation before the Commissioner shall be deemed to 
be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the 
Indian Penal Code and the Commissioner shall be deemed to be a civil 45 of 1860. 
court for the purposes of, section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973. 2 S 2 of 1974. 
(7) A claimant who is dissatisfied with the decision of the Commis-
sioner may prefer an appeal against the decision to the principal civil court 
of original jurisdiction within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the 
registered office ofi the Company is situated: 
Provided that where a person who is a Judge of a High Court is 30 
aptkrlnted to be the Commissioner, the ap'peal shall lie to the High Court 
of Gujarat, and such appeal shall be heard and disposed of by not less 
than two Judges of that High COUTt. 
23. After admitting a claim under this Act, the amount due in respect 3S 
of such claim shall be paid by the Commissioner to the person or persons 
to whom such sums are due. and, on such payment, the liability of the 
Company in respect of such claim shal~ stand discharged. ' 
24. (1) If, out of the monies paid to him in relation to the undertakings 
of the Company, there is a bal:lnce left after meetin:~ the liabilities as 40 
specified in the Schedule, the Commissioner shall disburse such balance to 
the Company. 

13 
(I) Where the possesSion of any machinery, equipment or other 
property, has vested in the Central Government, or the State Govern-
ment, or the Government company, under this Act, but such machinery, 
equipment .or other property doe!" not belong b the Company, i,~ shall be 
5 lawfud for the f..!entral Government, or the ~ate Government or the , 
Government company Ito continue to poss~ such machinery or equip-
ment or other property on the same tenns and conditions under which 
they were possessed by the Company immediately before the appointed 
day. 
10 25. Any money paid to the Commissioner which remains undisbursed 
or unclaimed for a period of three ye>ars from Ithe last day on which the 
disbursement wa.c:; made shall be transf.etrred by the Commissioner to the 
general revenue account of the Central Government; but a claim to any 
money so transferred may be preferred to the Central Governmenl~ by 
15 the person entitled to such payment and shall be dealt with 11.8 if such 
traruter had not heen made, the order, if any, for payment of the claim 
being treated as an order for the refund of the revenue. 
26. (1) Where any liability of the Company arising out of ':any item 
specified in Category I, Category -II and Categol'Y In of the Schedule is 
20 not disch8l'ged fully by the Commissioner out of the umOunt paid to him 
under this Act, the Commissioner ,.hall intimate in writini to the Central 
Government the extent of that liability which remaill'l undischarged and 
that liability shall be assumed by the Central Government. 
(2) On the vesting of the undertakings of the Company in the State 
25 Government or the Government company under this Act, the liabt1ity 
assumed by the Central Government under sub-section (1) shall be the 
liability of the State Government or the Government company, as the 
case may be. 
30 
CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
27. The prOVISIons of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the 
time being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any 
law, other than this Act, or in any decree or order of any court, tribunal 
35 or other authority. 
28. (1) Every contract entered into by the Company in relation to 
its undertakings before the date of taking over for any service, sale or 
supply, and in force immediately before the appointed day, shall, on and 
from the expiry of one hundred and eighty days from the appointed day, 
40 cease to have effect unless such contract is, before the expiry of that 
period, ratified, in writing, by the Central Government. or the State Gov-
ernment. or the Government company. and, in ratifying such contract, the 
Central Government, the State Government, or the Government com-
pany, as the case may be. may make such alterations or modifications 
45 therein as it may think fit.·~ 
Undis-
bursed 
or un-
claimed 
amount 
to be 
deposited 
to the 
general 
revenue 
account. 
Assumption 
of liability. 
Act to 
haVe 
over-
riding 
effect. 
Provision 
relating to 
contracts. 

orransfer 
of 
eesets. 
etc., 
to be 
wid in 
c~rtBin 
C3seS. 
Protec-
tion of 
action 
taken 
in good 
faith. 
Penal-
tieL 
14 
(2) Every contract entered into by the Company or the Authorised 
Controller on behalf of the Company, in relation to its undertakings. I)n 
or after the date of taking over for any service, sale or supply and'in 
for.ce immediately before the appointed day shall remain in force, unless 
sooh contract is terminated or modified or altered by the Central Gov- 5 
emment, the State Government or the' Government company, as the case, 
may be, within a period of one hundred and eighty days from' the 
appointed day. 
(3) The Central Government, the State Government or the Govern-
ment company, as the case may be, shall not refuse to ratify, terminate, 10 
modify or alter a contract wrder sub-section (I) or sub-seetlon (2)-
(a.) unless it is satisfied that such contract is unduly onerous or 
has been entered into bad faith or is detrimental to the interests of the 
undertakings of the Company; and 
(b) except after giving to the parties to such contract a reasonable IS 
opportunity of being heard and recording in writing its reasons for 
refusal to ratify the contract or for terminating the contract or, for 
making any alteration or modification therein. 
m. (H Except with the prior approval of the Central Government, 
the State Government or the Government company, neither the Compally 20 
nor any other person in possearlon of the undertakings oi the Company 
or any part thereof. the management or the' possession of' whieh could not 
be taken over by the Authorised Controller or the Central Government 
or the State Government or the Government company by reason of any 
decree, order or injtlDeticm of any court or otherwise shall, on and from 25 
th~ appointed day. transfer by sale, mortgage or otherwise any property 
or other assets forming part of the undertakings of the Company and any 
such transfer. without such prior approval, shall be void and inoperative. 
(2) Any person who contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 30 
two years, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with 
both. 
30. (1) No suit,. prosecution. or other legal proceeding shaD lie 
against the Central Government or any officer of that Govemment; or 
the State Government, or the Government company, or any officer of the 35 
State Government or the Custodian or the Government company or other 
person authorised by the Central Government, or the State Government, 
or the Government company. f('lr anything which is in good faith done 
or intended tl) be done under this Act. 
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Centr.al . 40 Government or any officer or other employee of that Government, or the 
State Government. or the Custodian or the povernment company, or any 
offteer or other employee of the State Government or of the' Gover-nment 
company or other person authorised by the State Governmellt, or the 
Government company. for any damage caused or likely to be caused' by, 45 
anythin~ which is in good faith done or intended to be done uJllder this 
Act; 
31. Any person who,-
(a) having in his possessirm, custody or control any property 
forming part of any undertaking of the Company. wrongfully with- c 
holds such property from the Central Government, or the State S 
Government, or the Government company; or . 

1& 
(b) wrongfully obtains possession of, or retains, any property 
forming part of any undertaking of the Company or wilfully with-
holds or fails to furniah to the Central 'Government, or the State 
Government, or the Government company, or any person 'or body 
5 of persons specified by that Government, or the State Government, 
or the Government company, any document relating to such under-
taking which 'may be in his possession, custody or control or fails 
to deliver to the Central Government, or the State Government, or 
the Government company or any person or body of persons specified 
10 by the Central Government, or the State Government, or the 
Government company, any assets, books of account, regitJters or 
other documents in his possession, custody or control, relating to 
the undertaking of the Company; or 
(c) wrongfully removes or destroys any property forming part 
15 of any undertaking of the Company or prefers any claim under this 
Act which he knows or has reasonable cause to believe to be false 
or grossly inaccurate, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which m~y exteBd to 
two years, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or 
20 with both. 
32. (1) Where an offence under this' Act has been committed by a Offences 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed W81!l by com. 
in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of panies. 
the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed 
25 to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against 
and punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any 
such person liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence was 
committed without his knowledge 0.17 that he had exercised all due 
30 diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(Z) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where 
any offence Wlder this Act has been committed by a company and it is 
proved that the offence has ooeJl committed with the co~t or conni-
vance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, 
35 manager, secretary, or other officer of the company, such dir~ctor, 
manager, secretary. or othes officer shall be deemed to be guilty of 
that offence and shaH be liable to be proceeded agairuJt aDd pwlished 
accordingly. 
40 
Explanation.-For the purpbses of this section,-
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm 
or other association of individuals; and 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the 
firm. 
45 33. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, direct that all Delegation 
or any of the powers exercisable by it under this Act, other than tlie of powers. 
power conferred by section 34, may also be exercised by such person or 
persons as may be specified in 1,;be notifi~~tJon. -- - . 

I6 
(2) Whenever any 'delegation of power is made under sub-section \2), 
the person tp whom such power has been delegated shall act under the 
direction, control and supervisiolt ot the Central Government. 
Power of 34. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules 
Central for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 5 
Govern-
ment to 
make 
rules. 
Power to 
remove 
diftlcu1-
ties. 
Declara-
tion .. to 
the 
polley 
of the 
State. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the follow-
ing matters, namely:-
(a) the time within which, and the manner in which, an inti~ 
mation shall be given to the Commissioner under sub-section (4) of 10 
section 4; 
(b) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, 
prescribed. 
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act 
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of IS 
Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days, which 
may be comprised in one session or i!l two or more successive sessions, 
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the 
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making 
any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should .20 
not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified 
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule. 
35. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the prOVISIons of this 25 
Act, the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the 
proyisions of this Act, remove the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period 
of two years from the appointed day. 
36. It is hereby declared that this Act is for giving effect to the 30 
policy of the State towards securing the principles specifted in clause 
(b) of article 39 of the Constitution. 
Explanation.-In this section "State" bas the same meaning as in • article 12 of the Constitution. 

5 
10 
IS 
20 
17 
THE SCHEDULE 
(See sections 5, 20, 21, 22, 24 and 26) 
ORDER OF PRIORlTIES 110ft THE DISCHARGE OF LIAJULlTII'S OF THE COMPANY 
PART A 
Post-take-oVer management period 
Category I 
Loans advanced by the Gujarat Agro Industries Corporation for 
carrying on any trading or manufacturing operations. 
PARTB 
Pre-take'-over management period 
Category II 
Arrears in relation to the provident fund, salaries, wages and 
other amounts ~ue to the employees of the Company. 
Category III 
Secured loans. 
Category IV 
Revenue, taxes, cesses, rates or any other dues to the Central 
Government, a State Government, a Local Authority or a State Elec-
tricty Board. 
Category V 
(i) Any credit availed of by the Company for the purpose of 
carrying on any trading or manufoacturing operations. 
(it) Any other dues. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Hindustan Tractors Limited, Vaciodara, was a private company wholly 
owned by its nominees. For various reasons including mismanagement, 
the Company began to show steady decline in production and incurred 
heavy losses, facing imminent closure. After investigation into the 
affairs of this Company, the management of its undertakings was taken 
over by !the Oentral Government on the 12th March, 1973, under the In-
dustries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, and was entrusted to 
the Gujarat Agro-Industries Corporation being the Authorised Controller. 
The period of the management will expire on the 11th March, 1979. The 
Company is engaged in the manufacture of agricultural tractors. After 
the take over of the management of the undertakings of the Company. 
the production in the Company. which had come to a standstill in Nov-
ember, 1972, has progl'tillively improved. The net losses have come down 
from the level of Rs. 80 lakhs for the year ending March, 1973 to Rs. 9 
lakhs for the year ending March, 1977 and during 1977-78 they expect to 
achieve a nominal net profit of Rs. 1 lakh. After careful consideration 
of the whole matter and with a view to improving the technical and eco-
nomic viability of the undertakings, the Central Government have decided 
to acquire the undertaking'S of the Company and vest them in the State 
Government of Gujarat. 
2. At the time of· take over of the management of the undertakings of 
the Company, it was clear that it was not possible for the Company to 
meet all its past dues. Accordingly, the Central Government issued an 
order on the 26th April, 1973, under section 18FB of the Industries 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, suspending the operation of 
all the contracts, agreements, settlements, etc., in force immediately 
before the take over and also payment of the liabilities as on the date 
of the take-over, excepting tHose Telating to banks and financial institu-
tions. The period of this order, which cannot exceed .five years in aggre-
gate, expires on the 25th April, 1978. Immediate action is, ,therefore, re-
quired to be taken to acquire the undertakings of the Company by legis-
lation. It has, therefore, been decided to introduce a Bill in the current 
session of Parliament. The BiLl seeks to acquire the undertakings of 
Hindustan Tractors Limited. 
NEW D~HI; GEORGE FERNANDES. 
The 25th February, 1978. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 5 (55) /76-AEI (II), dated the 22nd February, 1978 
from Shri George Fernandes, Minister of Industry to the Secretary, Lok 
Babha.] 
The President, having been inf<lrmed of the subject matter of the Bill 
to acquire the undertakings of the Hindustan Tractors Limited "The 
Hindustan Tractors Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) 
Bill, 1978", by Act of Parliament, recommends, under clauses (1) and (3) 
of article 117 of the Constitution, the introduction of the said Bill and its 
consideration by Lok Sabha. 
18 

FINANClAL MEMORANDUM 
Sub-clause (2) of clause 5 of the Bill provides that the liability arising 
in respect of loans advanced by the Central Government, State Govern-
ment, Banks and Industrial Reconstruction Corporation of India Limited 
to the Company after the management of the undertakings of the Com-
pany had been taken over by the Central Government and the wages, 
salaries and other dues of the employees of the Company and any debt 
incurred by the Company, other than those mentioned above, in respect 
of the period after the management had been so taken over, but, exclud-
ing the liabilities specified in Category I of the Schedule to the Bill, shall. 
on and from the appointed day, be the liability of the Central Govern-
ment, the State Government of Gujarat or the Government company, as 
the case may be, and shall be discharged by the Central Government, 
State Government or the Government company as and when repayment 
of such loans or amounts, or such wages, salaries and other dues, become 
due and payable. It is estimated that the expenditure on this accoLlnt 
will be of the order of Rs. 3,92,00,000. 
2. Clause 8 of the Bill provides for the payment in cash, and in the 
manner specified in Chapter III of the Bill, an amount of Rs. 1,50,00,000 
for vesting in the Central Government, the right, title and interest of 
Hindustan Traotors Limited in relation to undertakings owned by it. 
3. Sub-claUSE.' (1) of clause 9 of the Bill provides for payment of fur-
ther amount in cash, in consideration' for the deprivation of the Com-
pany o£ the management of its undertakings, an amount calculated at the 
,rate of Rs. 50,000 per annum, for the period commencing on the date on 
which the management of the undertakings of the Company was taken 
over by the Central Government and ending on the 1st April, 1978, that 
is the appointed day. It is estimated that this amount wLll be of the 
order of Rs. 2.50,000. 
4. Sub-clause (2) of clause 9 of the Bill provides for payment of 
simple interest on the amount specified in clause 8 and sub-clause (1) 
of clause 9 at the rate of four per cent. per annum for the period com-
mencing on the appointed day and ending on the date on which paymenrt; 
of such amount is made by the Central Government to the Commissioner 
of Payments. It is estimated that the interest'lipayment in terms of the 
provisions of the said sub-clause is likely to be about Rs. 50,000 per month. 
5. Clause 16 of the Bill provides for the appointment of Commissioner 
of Payments by the Central Government with adequate staff to assist 
him for the pW1>Ose of cUsbursing the amount payable to the Company. 
The ~alary and allowances of the Commissioner of Payments and his 
staff and expenditure on office and establishment will be defrayed out 
of the Consolidated Fund of India. The estimated expenditure (In t.rus 
account is likely to be Rs. 16,000 per month. 
6. Clause 26 of the Bill provides for assumption of liabilities to the 
extent that it is not met up to and including Category III (secured loans) 
ot the Schedule attached to the Bill. It . is estimated that the shortfall 
on this account in payment due to the banks would be of the order of 
Rs. 1,50,00,000. This will be assumed by the Central Government and 
transferred immediately ,to the State Government of Gujarat or the Gov-
ernment company as the case may be. 
7. The Bill, if enacted, is not likely to involve any other reCl.&u mg or 
non-recurring expendi·ture. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 34 of the Bi1:l empowers the Central Government to make rules 
to carry out the prov~ions of the Bill among other things to provide for 
the time wirthin which, and the m.anner in which, an intimation referred 
to in sub-clause (4) of clause 4 of the Bill shall be given. 
The matters in respect of which such rules may be made are matters 
of procedure and administrative detail and it is not practicable to 
provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of aegislative power 
IS, therefore, of a normal character. ' 
20 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the acquisition and transfer of the undertakings of Hindu-
stan Tractors Limited, Vishwamftri, Vadodara, for the purpose of. 
ensuring the continuity of production of goods which are vital to 
meet the needs of the general publi'C and for matters connected there-
with or incidental thereto. 
(Shri George Fernandes. 
Minister oj Ind'U8try) 