THE STATE BANK OF INDIA (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 19S7 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 

5 23 of 1955. 
10 
15 
DIU No. 22 of 12$1, 
THE STATE BANK OF INDIA (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1951 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the State Bank of India Act, 1955. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the State Bank of India (Amendment) Short title. 
Act, 1957. 
2. In section 21 of the State Bank of India Act, 1955 (hereinafter Amen4ment 
referred to as the principal Act), after sub-section (2), the following ~!.sectlon 
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
" (2A) The chairman ex officio shall be a member of every 
Local Board and Local Committee constituted under this sec-
tion.". 
3. To section 23 of the principal Act, the following proviso shall Amendment 
be added, namely:- ~~.eection 
"Provided that nothing in clause (c) shall apply to the chair-
man in relation to his membership of a Local Board or of a Local 
Committee." . 
4. In section 33 of the principal Act,- Amendment 
of section (1) in clause (i) ,- 33. 
(a) after sub-clause <f>, the following sub-clause shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"(ff) subject to such directions as may be issued by 
the Central Board, book-debts or other assets of any 
undertaking engaged in the financing of h~purchase 
transactions which are hypothecated to the State Bank 
as security for such advances, loans or credits;"; 

~ 
(b) in sub-clause (h), for the words; brackets and letters 
"sub-clauses (f) and (g)", the words, brackets and letters 
"sub-clauses (f), (0) and (g)" shall be substituted; 
(2) after clause (x), the following clause shall be inserted, 5 
namely:-
"(xa) the acting as agent for the Central Government 
or any State Government or any corporation in implement-
ing any scheme for financing the construction of dwelling 
houses, and in advancing or lending of money from out of 10 
the funds placed at its disposal as such agent by the Govern-
ment or corporation to any person upon such security (in-
cluding the security of any immovable property) and on 
such terms and conditions and for such periods as may, not-
withstanding anything contained in this Act, be approved IS' 
by the Government or corporation by which such funds have 
been placed;"; 
(3) after clause (xix), the following clauses shall be inserted, 
namely:- . 
C( (xixa) in consultation with the Reserve Bank and on 20 
the recommendation of the Central Board, the subscribing to, 
buying, acquiring, holding or selling of any shares or de-
bentures of any such financial institution as may be notified 
by the Central Government. in this behalf; 
(xixb) the advancing or lending of money to persons 
engaged in such industries or classes of industries as may 25 
be specified by the Central Board by directions issued in this 
behalf for any period in excess of six months but not exceed-
ing seven years, and subject thereto and to such directions 
as may be issued by the Central Board, such advance or 
loan may be made on such terms and conditions and upon 30 
such security (including the security of any immovable pro-
perty) as the State Bank may deem fit; 
(xixc) the advancing or lending of money to any co-
operative housing society, all the membp.rs· of which are 
officers or employees of the State Bank, and subject to such 35 
directions as may be issued by the . Central Board, such 
advance or loan may be made for such periods in excess of 
six months, on suc:;h terms and conditions and upon such 
security (including the security of any immovable property) 
as the State Bank may deem fit;". 40 
Amendment 5. In sub-section (1) of section 42 of the principal Act, for the 
of aec:tion word "February", the word "March" shall be SUbstituted. 42. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Some of the restrictions in the State Bank of India Act relating 
to the grant of loans and advances for periods in excess of six months 
and against the primary security of immovable property are sought 
to be removed in the Bill in order to enable the Bank to assist· in 
providing adequate medium-term finance to industries in the con-
text of the industrial development contemplated under the Second 
Five Year Plan. 
Opportunity has been taken to include a few other amendments 
relating to the internal procedure of the Bank to facilitate perform-
ance of its activities. 
T. T. KRISHNAMACHARI. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 16th May, 1957. 
3 . 

Otherbusi-
ness which 
the State 
Bank may 
transact. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE STATE BANK OF INDIA ACT, 1955 
No 23 OF 1955 
• • • • • 
33. Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, the 
State BaDk may carry on and transact any of the following kinds of 
business, namely:-
(i) the advancing and lending of money and the opening 
of cash credits upon the security of-
(a) 
• • • • • 
(h) fully paid shares of companies with limited liability 
or immovable property or documents of title r~lating thereto 
as collateral security only where the original security is one 
of those specified in sub-clauses (a) to (e) and, subject to 
such directions as may be issued by the Central Board, 
where the original security is one of the kinds specified in 
sub-clauses (I> and (g): 
Provided that where the Central Government or a St~te 
Government or any Government or ,authority outside India, 
which the Central Government may approve in this behalf, 
may accept from the State Bank any advances or loans 
under any law for the time being in force, the Central Board 
may, if it thinks fit, make such advances or loans without 
any specific security; 
• • • • • 
Balance 42. (1) A general meeting (hereinafter referred to as an annual 
~s~~t!tc., general meeting) shall be held at such time and at such place where 
Ba~ may d there is a local head office of the State Bank, as shall from time to 
:: ge!~r!tae time be specified by the Central Board before the end of February 
meeting. in each year, and a general meeting may be convened by the State 
Bank at any other time: 
Provided that the first annual general meeting shall be held at 
Bombay. 
• • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the State Bank of India Act, 1955. 
(Slsri T. T. KmhnamDdlari. 
Minuter of PiNmce.) 