69 Of 1961. 
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
~l ~o.~ ~f ~.3 
THE INSTITUTES OR TECHNOLOGY (AMENDMENT) 
BILL) I963 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Institutes of Technology Act, 1961. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fourteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may.be called the Institutes of Technology 
(Amendmenrt) Act, 1963. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Short title 
I\Jld com-mence_ 
ment. 
Z. In section 2 of the Institutes of Technology Act. 1961 (herein- Am.end_ 
after referred to as the principal Act), after the words "the Indian ~~!m~. 
Institute of Technology, Bombay,", the words "the College of Engi-
10 neering and Technology, Delhi," shall be inserted. 
15 
20 
3. In section 3 of t.he principal Act,- ArQend_ 
ment of 
(a) in clause (c), after sub-clause (i), the following sub- section 3. 
clause shall be inserted, namely:-
"(ia) in relation to the society known as the College of 
Engineering and Technology, Delhi, the Indian Institute of 
Technology, Delhi;"; 
(b) in clause (j). after su'b-clause (i), the following sub-
clause shall be insel1ted, namely:-
"(ia) the College of Engineering and Technology, 
Delhi;". 

Amend-
ment of 
section 4. 
Amend. 
Dlent of 
section 12. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 38. 
Colle~e of 
Engineer-
in~ and Techno_ 
logy, Delhi 
.to cease 
to be at'll. 
liatect 
Collegeot 
University 
of Delhi. 
2 
4. In section 4 of the principal Act, after sub-section .(1). the 
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
.. (IA) The College of Engineering and Technology, Delhi 
shall, on such incorporation, be called the Indian Institute of 
Technology, Delhi.". S 
5. In sub-section (3) of sectipn 12 of the princ'ipal Act, for the 
word, brackets and letter "clause (c)", the word, brackets and letter 
"clauae (e)'~ shall be, and shall be deemed always to have been, 
substituted. . 
6. In section 38 of the principal Act, in clause (b), for the words 10 
"any Academic Council constituted in relation to any Institute", 
the words "the Staff Committee constituted in relation to the 
College of Engineering and. Technology, Delhi and any Academic 
Council constituted in relation to any other Institute" shall be 
substituted. IS 
'1. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Delhi University 
Act, 1922, or the Statutes made thereunder, the College of Engineer- 8 of 1922. 
ing and Technology, Delhi, incorporated under this Act, shall, on 
the commencement of this Act, cease to be an "Affiliated College" 
within the meanmg of clause (a) of section 2 of the Delhi Univer- 20 
sity Act, 1922, except as respect things done or omitted to be done 
before such cesser. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Pursuant to the recommendations of the Implementation Com-' 
mittee of the Development Plan of the Delhi Polytechnic, Delhi, the 
College of Engineering and Technol'ogy, Delhi, was set up and it 
admitted the first batch of students in 1961. The College was 
registered as a Society under the Societies Registration Act, 1860, 
with its administration vesting in an autonomous Board 'of Gover-
nors. The College prepares students for the first degree in Mechani-
cal, Electrical, Civil and Chemical Engineering and Textile Techno-
logy of the University of Delhi. The College is fully financed by 
the Central Government. 
2. Assistance for the establishment of the College' has been 
secured from the United Kingdom; the British Industries have 
agreed to make contributions for the supply of equipment to the 
College of the value of £ 250,000 and the Government of U.K. will 
make available to the College the services of 10 Professors under 
the Colombo Plan. Arrangements have also been made for the 
training of Indian teachers of the College in U.K. Universities and 
Institutions. 
3. With the arrival of the British Professors, the interest of the 
Government of U.K. and the industrialists of that cQuntry in the 
working of the College became more and more pronounced culmi-
nating in the desire on the part of both the Indian staff and their 
British colleagues to develop the College into a first class technolo-
gical institution. 
4. Negotiations for securing further assistance for the College 
from the U.K. have led to an understanding that U.K. will increase 
the assistance from £250,000 to £600,000 for equipment and will 
make available services of five more professors and a,lso increase 
number of training facilities if India will take steps to ensure that 
the College would have the power to shape its own academic poli-
cies and courses; and further, the Government of India would make 
adequate provision of funds for the C011ege to construct buildings 
to house the equipment to be supplied by U.K. 
5. In the present conditions of the country, concerted efforts are 
required to be made for economic mobilisation and this involves 
3 

4 
training of large number of high grade technologists. The scheme 
of the College may therefore be enlarged with advantage to enable 
it to function like the other four Institutes of Technology established 
by the Centraf Government in the country. The College has already 
succeeded -in creating an atmosphere which instils in the minds of 
students a spirit of objective enquiry and a sense of purpose and is 
helping them develop a balanced and integrated personality. 
6. One of the important tasks of the College is to meet the present 
and future needs of industry and technology. The broad objectives 
of the College are similar to the Indian Institutes of Technology, 
Kharagpur, Bombay, Madras and Kanpur which are governed by the 
Institutes of Technology Act, 1961, although in actual working, there 
will be difference of emphasis on separate fields, particularly at the 
advanced level. The Bill seeks (i) to retain the individuality of the 
College by declaring it an institution of national iIIl\POrtance under 
article 246, read with Seventh Schedule, List I, entry 64 of the Cons-
titution, (ii) rename it as "In~iian Institute of Technology, Delhi" 
and (iii) to bring it within the ambit of the Institutes of Technology 
Act, 1961. The Institute will have the power to grant degrees, 
diplomas and other academic distinctions as at present possessed by 
the four Indian Institutes of Technology, Kharagpur, Bombay, 
Madras and Kanpur. 
NEW DELHI; HUMAYUN KABIR. 
The 8th April. 1963. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Bill seeks to declare the College of Engineering and Tech-
nology, Delhi, as a body corporate, rename it as 'Indian Institute of 
Technology, Delhi' and bring it within the ambit of the Institutes of 
Technology Act, 1961. 
2. The Institute will maintain the departments covering various 
fields of science, engineering and technology for training of technical 
personnel. Finances, required by it for exercise of its powers and 
discharge of its functions, shall be payable by the Central Govern-
ment in the shape of grants-in-aid each year. At this stage, it Is not 
possible to frame an accurate estimate of the man-power, equipmen.t, 
etc., needed to enable the Institute to exercise its powers and dis-
charge the functions provided under the Institutes of Technology 
Act, 1961, but, since the development of the Institute will be accord-
ing to the proposals that may be approved .by the Government, the 
funds, to be given will be for programmes so approved. They will 
depend on the number of courses and departments that may be open-
ed by the Institute, as determined by the Government, to fulfil its 
obligations to the needs of the nation. The total outlay on the 
scheme is, however, expected to be of the order of Rs. 5·65 crores 
(excluding the cost of equipmen.t to be received from the U.K.) and 
ultimate recurring grant from Government will be of the order of 
Rs. 65 lakhs per annum. 
3. In the budget for 1963-64, a total provision of Rs. 90·42 lakbs 
(excluding the cost of equipmen.t to be received from U.K. as gift) 
has been proposed. Funds to be made available in the subsequent 
years will be determined each year. A provision of Rs. 250 lakhs 
was originally made in the Third Five Year Plan for the project. 
However, the Planning Commission has agreed that the financial pro-
vision. required during the Plan period for the implementation of the 
project will be found by adjustment within the Plan. 
4. The Institute has been empowered to receive grants, gifts, 
donations, benefactions, bequests or transfers from private bodies or 
individuals. 
6 

6 
5. All monies placed at the disposal of the Institute will constitute 
th~ Fund of the Institute and will not lapse at the end of the year. 
It shall be taken into account in making funds available to the 
Institute in subsequent years. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE INSTITUTES OF TECHNOLOGY ACT, 1961 
(59 OF 1961) 
• • • '. • • 
CHAPrER I 
PRELIMINARY 
• • • • • • 
Z. Whereas the objects of the institutions known as the IndiaD Declara. 
Institute of Technology, Bombay, the Indian Institute of Technology, tion of certain in-Kanpur and the Indian Institute of Technology, Madras are such as stitutions 
to make them institutions of national importance, it is hereby a,s mstitu_ 
declared that each such institution is an institution of national =~~l 
importance. import-
3. In .this Act" unless the context otherwise requires,-
• • • ... • • 
(c) "corresponding Institute" means,-
(i) in relation to the society known as the Indian Insti-
tute of Technology, Bombay, the Indian Institute of 
Technology, Bombay; 
(ii) in relation to the society known as the Indian Insti-
tute of Technology (Kanpur) Society, the Indian Institute 
of Technology, Kanpur; and 
(iii) in ,relation to the society kn9wn as the Indian 
Institute of Technology, Madras, the Indian Institute of 
Technology, Madras; 
• • • • • • 
ance. 
Deftni-
,tiona. 
(j) "society" means any of the following societies registered 
under the Societies Registration Act, 1860, namely:- 21 of 1860. 
(i) the Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay; 
7 

(ii) the Indian Institute of Technology (Kanpur) 
Society; 
(iii) the Indian Institute of Technology, Madras; 
• • • • • • 
CHAPTER n 
THE INSTITUTES 
Incorpora_ 4. (1) Each of ~he Institutes mentioned in section 2 shall be a 
tion ot body corporate haVlng perpetual succession and a common seal 
Institutes. and shall, by its name, sue and,be sued. 
(2) The body corporate constituting each of the said Institutes 
shall consist of a Chairman, a Director and other members of the 
Board for the time being (\f the Institute . 
• • • • • • 
12. (1) • • • • • • 
Ter.mot 
office of. (3) The term of office of a member nominated under clause (c) 
=~es of section 11 shall be two years from the 1st day of January of the 
and allow. year in which he is nominated. anees pay_ . 
able to. • • • • • • 
members 
otBoard. 
Tranlli_ 
tionalpl'O-
visions. 
CHAPTER IV 
MIscELLANEOUS 
38. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act,-
• • • • • • 
(b) any Academic Council constituted in relation to any 
Institute before the commencement of this Act shall be deemed 
to be the Senate c'onstituted under this Act until a Senate is 
constituted under this Act for that Institute; 
• • • • 

• 
LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
• 
to amend the Institutes of Technology Act, 1961. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (3) of 
article 117 of the Constitution of India, recommended 
to Lot Sabha the consideration of the Bill. 
• 
M.N.KAUL, 
Secretary . 
(Shri Humayun Kabir, 
Minilter of Scientific &search 
and Cultural Affairs.) 