As Int

in

Bill No. 22 of 1985

THE CONSTITUTION (FIFTY-SECOND AMENDMENT)
BILL, 1985
A
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

Br it enacted by Parliament in the ' Thirty-fifth Year of the Republic’ of
India as follows:— :

३. (0 This Act may be called the Constitution (Fifty-second Amendment)
Act, 1985...

5 (2) Tt shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2, In article 101 of the Constitution,’ in sub-clause (a) of clause (3), for
the words, brackets and figures “clause (1) of article 102”, the words, brackets
and figures “clause (1) or clause (2) of article 102” shall be substituted.

10 3. In article 102 of the Constitution—
(a) for the brackets, fisure and words “(2) For the purposes of this
article”, the words “Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause” shall
be substituted;

(b) the following clause shall be inserted at the end, namely:—

15 (2) A person shall be disqualified for being a member of either
House of Parliament if he is so disqualified under the Tenth Schedule.”.

4. Vi article 190 of the Constitution, in sub-clause (a) of clanse (3), for
the words, brackets and figures “clause ( 1) of article 191”, the words, brackets
and figures “clause (1) or clause (2) of article 191” shall be substituted.

Short

title

and
commesice.
ment.
Amend-
ment of
article 101.

Amend-
ment of

_ article 102,

Amend-
ment of
article 190,



Amend-
ment of
article 191,

Addition
of Tenth
Schedule.

_ Sf paragraphs 3, 4 and 5

5, In article 191 of the Constitution, —

(@ for the brackets, figure and words “(2) For th

th Explanatio;

Ie pe

thi

words

(9) the following clause

all be inserted at the

5
2 A person shall bie disqualified for being
Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council of a
disqualified under the Tenth Schedule,”,
6, After tho Ninth Schedule to the Constitution, the following Schedule.
shall be added, namely:— हु 10

‘TENTH SCHEDULE
[Articles 102(2) and 191 (2)]
Provisions as to disqualification on ground of defection

1, Interpretation in this Schedule, unless the context otherwise requires, —

@ “House” means either House of

Parliament or the Legislative ‘5
Assembly or, as the cage may be, either Hou a

Se of the Legislature of a State;

(9) “legislature party”, in relation to a member of a Hou
to any political party in accordance with
or Paragraph 3 or, as the case may be,
consisting of all the members of that Hou:
to that political party in accordance with!

se belonging
the provisions of paragraph 2
paragraph 4, means the group!
se for the time being belonging 20
the said provisions;

MN ss sys . हि
(० “original political party”, in relation to a. member of a House,

means. the political party to which he belo:
8 nes for the py si
sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph a; purposes of

(व) “paragraph” means a paragraph of this Schedule, 25,
2. Disqualification on Sroumd of defection,—¢1) Subject to the provisions
so » 4 member of a House ‘belonging* 10 an itis
party shall be disqualified for being a member of ‘the House— 7 काका
(a) if he hi htarily gi i ip of i
partys oe (38 voluntarily given up his membership of such political
30
ins from voting in such House contrary to
political party to which he belongs or by any
ed by it in this behalf, without obtaining, in

ion of such political patty, person or authority;

(6) if he votes or absta
any direction issued by the
Person or authority authoris:
either case, the prior permiss
or

35

हु (०) if he, has been expelled from such

with the procedure established by the constit
such political party, :

political party in accordance
ution, rules or regulations of

Explanation.—For the Purposes of this sub-paragraph, —

है @ an elected member of a House shall
political party, if any, by which he was set w
as such member;

be deemed to belong to the 40
iP as a candidate for election

tte amas

40

f any pt
member, be deemec

5
it complying with the requirements of article 99 or,
case may be, article 188
10 (2) An elected member of a House who has been elected ag such otherwise

than as a candidate set up by any political party shall be disqual
a member of the House if he joins any political party after such el

(3) A nominated member oi a House shall be disqualified for being a

member of the House if he joins any political patty after the expiry of six

15 months from the date on which he takes his seat after complying with the
Tequixements of article 99 or, as the case may be, article 188,

“"(@) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this

paragraph, a person who, on the commencement, of the Constitution (Fifty-

second Amendment) Act, 1985, is a member of a House (whether elected or
20 nominated as guch) shall,—

@ where he was a member of a political party immediately before
such commencement, be deemed, for the purposes of sub-paragraph (1),
oi this paragraph, to have been elected as a member of such House as a
candidate set up by such political party;

(i) in any other case, be.deemed to be an elected member of the
House who has beea elected as such otherwise-than as a candidate set up
by any political party for the purposes: of sub-paragraph (2) of this para-
gtaph or; as the case may be, be deemed to be a nominated. member of the
, House for the purposes of sub-paragraph (3) of this paragraph.

3. Disqualification on ground of defection not to apply in case of split—
Where a member of a House makes a claim that he and any other
members of his legislature patty constitute the group representing a faction)
which has arisen ag a result of a split in his original political party and such
group consists of not less than one-third of the members of such: legislature

b

25

30

party,— Is
38 (@ he shall not be disqualified under sub-paragraph (1) of paragrapl
2 on the ground that he has voluntarily given up his membership of his
original political party or has voted, or abstained from voiing, in such

House contrary to any direction issued by such party or by any person of
authority authorised by such party in that behalf without obtaining the prior

permission of such party, person or authority or has been expelled from
such party; and
(0) from the time of such split, such faction shall be deemed to ba
the political party to which he belongs for the purposes of sub-paragraph
45 (1) of paragraph 2 and to be his original political party for the- purposes
of this paragraph,
4, Disqualification on ground of defection not to apply im case of merger.—-
(1) A member of a House shall not be disqualified. under sub-paragraph
(1) of paragraph 2 where his original political party merges with another political
5० Party and he claims that he and any other members of his original political
party—



io

(a) have become meinbers of such other polifical party or, as the case
Bay 0:

of a new puiitical Parly lonmed by such merger; or

(6) have not accepted tke merg
group,

rand opied io iu

clion 88 a separate
and from the time of such merger, suct other political party or new political 5
partly or group, as the case may be, shall be deemed to be the political party
to which be belongs for the Purposes of sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 2 and
“co be his original political party for the purposes oi 1 ub-paragraphi.

i

(2) For the purposes. of sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph, the merger
of the original political party of a member of a House shall be deemed to have
taken place if, and जाए if, not less than two-thirds of the members of the;
legislature party concerned have agreed to such merger,

10

5. Exemption,—Notwithstanding anything qontained in this Schedule, a
petson who hag been elected to the office of the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker
of the House of the People or the Deputy Chaizman of the Council of States 15
or the Chairman or the Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council
of a State or the Speaker or the Depuiy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly
of a State, shall not be disqualified under this Schedule,—

(@ if he, by reason of his election to such office, voluatarily gives up
the membership of the political parly to which he belonged immediately 95
before such election and does not, so long as he continues to hold such
office thereafter, rejoin that political Patty or become g member of another
political party; or

(8) if he, having given up by reason of his election to such office his
membership of the. political party to which he belonged immediately before, 25
such election, rejoins such political party after he ceases to hold such ofiice,

6. Decision on questions as to disqualification on ground of defection
(1) If any question arises as to whether a member of a House has become
subject to disqualification under this Schedule, the question shall be referred
for the decision of the Chairman or, ag the case may be, the Speaker of such 3
House and his decision shall be final:

Provided that where the question which has arisen is as to whether the

. Chairman or the Speaker of a House has become subject to such disqualifica-

tion, the question shall be referred for the decision of such member of the

House as the House may elect in this behalf and his decision shall be final, 35
(2) All proceedings under sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph in relation
to any question as to disqualification of a member of a House under this Schedule
shall be deemed to be proceedings in Parliament within the meaning of article
122 or, as the case may be, proceedings in the Legislature of a State within the

meaning of article 212. 40
7. Bar of jurisdiction of courts.—Notwithstanding anything in this Consti-
iution, no court shall have any jurisdiction in respect of any matter connected

with the disqualification of a member of a House under this Schedule,

8. Rules.—(1) Subject to the provisions of sub-paragraph (2) of this

paragraph, the Chairman or the Speaker of a House may make rules for giving 45

effect 10 the provisions of this Schedule, and in particular, and without prejudice:
to the generality of the foregoing, such rules may provide for —

erent
use with who
such po

h parties for the
thereof, may be file

(८) the reports which a political party shall furnish with regard to
expulsion from, or admission to, such political party of any members of
the House and the officer of the House to whom sucky reports shalj be

ro furnished; and
for decidi ¢ i referred to in sub-
a) the procedure for deciding any question res 1 to ;
parasapt (i) ot paragraph 6 including the procedure for any inquiry which
may be made for the purpose of deciding such question,
(2) The rules made by the Chairman or the Speaker of a House under
15 t

sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph shall be laid 88 soon as may be after they.
are made before the House for a total period of thirty days which may Ye on
prised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and shall take ¢ sch
upon the expiry of the said period of thirty days unless they are sooner approves b
0 with or without modifications or disapproved by the House and where they are
* so approved, they shall take effect on such approval in the form in which they
were laid or in such modified form, as the case may be, and where they are so:
disapproved, they shall be of no effect.

(3) The Chairman or the Speaker of a House may, without prejudice to

the provisions of article 105 or, as the case may be, article 194, and to any

* other power which he may have under this Constitution direct that any wilful

contravention by any person of the rules made under this Paragraph may be
dealt with in the same manner as a breach of privilege of the House.’

मा se eee



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The evil of political defections has been a matter of national concern,
Tf it is not combated, it is likely to undermine the very foundations of
our democracy and the principles which sustain it, With this object, an
assurance was given in the Addresg by the President to Parliament that
the Government intended to introduce in the current session of Parlia-
ment an anti-defection Bill, This Bill is meant for outlawing defection
and fulfilling the above assurance.

2. The Bill seeks to amend the Constitution to provide that an elected
member of Parliament or a State Legislature, who has been elected as
a candidate set up by a political party and a nominated member of Par-
liament or a State Legislature who is a member of -a political party at
the time he takes his seat or who becomes a member of a political party
within. six montlis after he takes his seat would be disqualified on the
ground of defection if he voluntarily relinquishes his membership of
such political Party or votes or abstaing from voting in such House con-

trary to any direction of such party or is expelled from such party. An
independent member of Parliament or a State Legislature shall also be
disqualified if he joins any politi

before the expiry of six months from the
date on which he takes his seat shall be disqualified #f he joins any
“Political party after the expiry of the said period of six months, The Bill
also makes suitable provisions with respect to splits ij
political parties. A special provision
enable a person who hag been elected
to sever his connections with his pol:

7, and mergers of,
has been included in the Bill to
as the presiding officer of a House
itical party. The question as to

rmined by
the question is with reference.
decided by a member of the

the presiding officer of the House; where
to the presiding officer himself, it will be
House elected by the House in that behalf.

3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects,

New Deum;

The 23rd January, 1985, A. K. SEN,

ANNEXURE

EXTRACTS FROM THe CONSTITUTION or INDIA

* *
101. (1) * * ‘ 7
(8) Iba ber of either House of Parliament—
(a) becomes subject to any of the disqualifi
clause (1) of article 102, or

oned in

(8) resigns his seat by writing under his hand addressed jo the
Chairman or the Speaker, as the case may be, and his resignation is
accepted by the Chairman or the Speaker, as the case may be,

his seat shall thereupon become vacant:

Provided that in the case of any resignation referred to in subclass
(b), if from information received or otherwise and oir mal ‘ag ve
inquiry as he thinks fit, the Chairman or the Speaker, as the “ e ‘i y =.
is satisfied that such resignation is not.voluntary or genuine, he shall n
accept such resignation.

* # * * *

102, (1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for
being, a member of either House of Parliament— ;

(a) if he holds any office of profit under the Government of India
or the Government of any State, other than an office declared by
Parliament by law not to disqualify its holder;

(b) if he is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a com-
petent court; |

(९) if he is an undischarged insolvent; ; |

(व) if he is not a citizen of India, or has voluntarily acquired the
citizenship of a foreign State, or is under any acknowledgment o:
allegiance or adherence to a foreign State; |

(९) if he is so disqualified by or under any law made by Parlia-
ment.

Fe urposes of this article a person shall not be deemed to
hold on aie of prea under the Government of India or the Government
of any State by reason only that he is a Minister either for the Union or
for such State.

* * cs * we
190. (1) * * * *
(3) If a member of a House cf the Legislature of a State—

(a) becomes subject to any of ‘the disqualifications mentioned

in clause (1) of article 191; or

‘(b) resigns his seat by writing under his hand addressed to the

Speaker or the Chairman, as the case may be, and his. resignation
is accepted by the Speaker or the Chairman, as the case may be,

7

Vacation
of seats.

Disquali.
fications
for mem-
bership.

Vacation
of seats.



Disquali.

Acations

for mem_
bership.

8

his seat shall thereupon become vacant:

Provided that in the case of any ignation
clause (b), if from information received or other
such inquiry as he thinks fit, the Speaker or the
may be, is satisfied that such resignation is not
he ‘shall not accept such resignation.

voluntary or genuine,

* co * * *

191, (1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for
being; a member of the Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council of a
State—

(a) if he holds any office of profit under the Government of
India or the Government of any State specified in the First Sche-
dule, other then an office declared by the Legislature of the State
by law not to disqualify its holder;

(8) if he is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a com-
petent court;

(c) if he is an undischarged insolvent;

(d) if he is not a citizen of India, or has voluntarily acquired
the citizenship of g foreign State, or is under any acknowledgment
of allegiance or adherence to a foreign State;

(e) if he is so disqualified by or under any law made by Parlia-
ment. है

62) For the purposés of this article, a person shall not be deemed
to hold an office of profit under the Government of India or the Gov-
ernment of any State specified in the First Schedule by reason only
that he is a Minister -either for the Union or for such State.

* # * * *

बा



LOK SABHA

A हि |
BILL है iz
further to amend the Constitution of India, हु :

(Shri Ashok Sen,. Minister of Law and Justice.)