LOK SABHA 
CORRIGENDA' 
to 
THE COAL· MINES PROVIDENT 'FUND AND BONUS SCHEMES (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1965 
(To be/As introduced in Lok Sabha) 
1. Page 1, in the marginal heading to clause 1,-
for ItShrpr t" read "Short" 
2. 
-
Page 7, against line 15, in the margin,-
for "43" read "45" -
3. Page 11, line 40,-
omi t "onlt 
4. Page 12, line 25,-
for '"employees''' read IItemployees,", r 
5. Page.16, line 1 from bottom,-
for "by" read "1ntl -
," 
P.T.O. 

-: 2 :-
6. Page 16, line 2 from bottom,-
for "consideration" read "introduction" 
-' 
7. Page 19, in the marginal head1ng-to sect1on-l~· 
after "mQ.t'-!;;'t' "insert "duen 
NEW DELHI; 
March 29 1965 
'Chaitr a e, i887(Saka' . -

('to BE INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA) 
BiU No. 22 of 196$. 
THE COAL MINES PROVIDENr fUND AND BONUS 
SCHEMES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1965 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Coal Mines Provident Fu.nd and Bonus Schemes 
Act, 1948. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixteenth Year of the Republic 
of India 3S follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be o.llled the Coal Mines Provident Fund Shrort 
and Bonus Schemes (Amendment) Act, 1965. title 
and 
5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern- commen-
, ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. cement. 
2. In section 2 of the Coal Mines Provident Fund and Bonus Amend-
46 of 1948. Schemes Act, 1948 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) ,- ment of 
section 2. 
(1) after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, 
10 namely:-
'(44) "coal" includes lignite;'; 
2557 (B) LS-l 

(2) for clause ~b), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
, (b) "coal mine" means any excavation where any 
operation for the purpose of searching for or obtaining coal 
has been or is being carried on, and includes- S 
(i) alliborings and bore holes; 
(ii) all shafts, in or adjacent to and belonging to a 
coal mine, whether in the course of 'being sunk or not; 
(iii) all levels and inclined planes in the course of 
being driven; 10 
(iv) any open cast working or quarry, that is to say, 
an excavation where any operation for the purpose of 
searching for or obtaining coal has been or is being carri-
ed OlD., not being a shaft or an excavation which extends 
below superjacent ground; 15 
(v) all conveyors or aerial rope-ways provided for 
the bringing into or removal from a coal mine of coal or 
other articles or for the removal of refuse therefrom; 
(vi) all adits, levels, planes, machinery, works, rail-
ways, tramways' and sidings, in or adJ~cent to and be- 20 
longing to a coal mine; 
(vii) all workshops situated within the precincts of a 
coal mine and under the same management and used for 
purposes connected with that coal mine or a number of 
coal mines under the same management; 25 
(viii) any office of a coal mine; 
(ix) all power stations for supplying electricity for 
the purpose of working the coal mine or a number of 
coal mines under the same management; 
(x) any preInises for the time being used for deposit- 30 
ing refuse from a coal mine, or in which any operation 
in connection with such refuse is being carried on, being 
premises exclusively occupied by the employer of the 
coal ~ne; 
(xi) all hospitals and canteens maintained for the 
benefit of the employees of a coal mine or a number of 3S 
coal mines under the same management; 
(xii) any coke oveR or plant; 

s 
, 
I 
(~ii) any premises in or adjacent to and belonging 
to a coal mine, on which any plant or other machinery 
connected with a coal mine is situated or on which any 
process ancillary to the work of a coal mine is being 
carned on.'; 
(3) for clause (d), the follOwing clause shall be substituted, 
nameIy:-
'(d) "employee" means any person who is employed for 
wages in any kind of work, manual or otherwise, in or in 
10 connection with a coal mine, and who gets his wages directly 
or indirectly from the employer, and include&-
IS 
20 
(1) any person employed by or through a contrac-
tor in or in connection with a coal mine, and 
(2) for the purposes of the Coal Mines Provident 
Fund Scheme, also 
(i) any other person who is employed as a 
sweeper, mali, teacher or domestic servant in or in 
connection with a coal mine and who receives wages 
directly from the employer, and 
(ii) any apprentice or trainee who receives 
stipend or other remuneration from the employer.'; 
(4) for clause (e), the following cIause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
'(e) "employer", when used in relation to • coal mine, 
25 means any person who is the immediate proprietor or lessee 
or occupier of the coal mine or of any part thereof and In 
the case of a coal mine the 'business whereof is being carried 
on by a liquidator or receiver, such liquidator or receiver 
and in the case of a coal mine owned by a company the 
30 business whereof is being carried on by a managing agent, 
such managing agent; but does nfJt i~clude a person who 
merely receives a royalty; rent or ftne from the coal mine, 
or is merely the proprietor of the coal mine, subject to any 
lease, grant or licence for the working thereof, or is mere hr 
3~ the owner of the soil and not interested in the coal of the 
coal mine; but any contractor for the working of a coal mine 
or any part thereof shaH be subj ect to this Act in like manner 
as if he were an employer, b~'t not so as to exempt the eIl\ .. 
ployet' from any ~~bi1ity;'; 

(5) in clause (f), the word "and" occurring at the end shall 
.. -----.-- -_be_omitt~ and~ter that clause, the following clause shall be 
inserted, namely:""::-
'(if) "managing agent" has the meaning assib'tled to it 
" 
in the Companies Act, 1956; and'. r, 1 of 1956. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 3. 
Insertion 
Of new 
sections 
3A to 
3D. 
Constitu-
tion of 
Board at 
Trustees. 
3. In section 3 of the principal Act, after sulb-section (1), the fol-
lowing sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
" (1 A) The Fund shall vest in, and be administered by, the 
Board constituted under section 3A.". 
4. After section 3 of the principal Act, the following sections shall 10 
be inserted, namely:-
"3A. (1) The Central Government may, by noUftcation in 
the Official Gazette, constitute, with effect from such date as 
may be specified therein, a Board of Trustees for the territories 
to which this Act extends (hereinafter in this Act referred to as IS 
the Board) consisting of the following persons, namely:-
(a) a Chairman appointed by the Central Government; 
(b) the Cool Mines Provident Fund Commiss~oner, e:r; 
officio; 
(c) three persons appointed by the Central Government; 20 
(d) not more than six persons representing Govem~ 
ments of such States a5 the Central Government may specify 
in this behalf from time to time, appointed by the Central 
. Govemmeht; 
(e) six persons representing employers, a·ppointed by 2S 
the Central Government after consultation with such organi-
sations of employers as may be recognised by the Central 
Government in this ·behaij, and of whom at least one shall 
be a ·person who is not a. member of any such c:ft'tanisation; 
(f) six persons representing employees, appointed by 30 
the Central Gcvernment after consultation with such organi-
sations of employees as may be recognised by the Central 
Government in this behalf and of whom at least one shall be 
an employee himc;elf and at least one shall be a person who 
is not a member of any 'SUch organisation. 3S 
(2) The terms and conditions subject to which a member of 
the Board may be appointed and the time, J?lace and procedur~ . 

5 /CJ/ 
of the meetings of the Board shall be such as may be provided 
for in the Coal Mines Provident Fund Scheme. 
- --------- -- . (3} The Board shall administer the Fund vested in it in such 
manner as may ,be specified in the Scheme aforesaid. 
s 
10 
IS 
20 
30 
35 
(4) The Board shall perform such other functions as it may 
be required to perform by or under any provisions of the Scheme 
aforesaid. 
3B. The Board of Trustees constituted under section 3A shall Board 
be a body corporate under th.e name specified in the notification : Trus-
constituting it, having perpetual succession and a common seal bee~ to 
and shall by the said name sue and be sued. body 
corporate-
3C. (1) The Central Government shall appoint a Coal Mines Appoint-
Provident Fund Commissioner, who shall be the chief executive ment of 
officer of the Board and shall be subject to the general control offtcers. 
and superintendence of the Board. 
(2) The Central Government may also appoint as many 
other officers, whose minimum monthly salary in the scale of pay 
(if any) applicable to them is not less than four hundred rupees, 
as it may consider necessary to assist the Coal Mines Provident 
Fund Commissioner in the discharge of his duties. 
(3) Subject to the provisicns of sub-sections (1) and (2), 
the Board may appoint s.uch other officers and employees as it 
may consider necessary for the efficient administration of the 
Coal Mines Provident Fund Scheme. 
(4) The method of recruitment, salary and allawance3, 
discipline and other conditions of service of the Coal Mines 
Provident Fund CommiS3ioner shall be such as may be specified 
by the Central Government and such salary and allowances 
shall be paid out of the Fund. 
(5) The method. of recruitment, salary and allowances, 
discipline aa4 other conditions of service of other officers and 
employees of the Board shall he such as may be specified by the 
Board with the approval of the Central Government. 
3D. (1) Where any employee who is a subscriber to any Trau-
provident fund of the coal mine in which he is employed becomes fer of 
a member of the Fund in accordance with the provisions of any accounta. 
Coal Mines Provident Fund Scheme, the accumulations in the 
providle!n.t fund of the coal mine standing to the credit of the 
employee shall, notwithstanding anything to the ~ontrary con-

8 
tained in any law for the time being in force or in any deed or 
other instrument establishing the .provident fund but subject to 
--- -------__ .the provisions, if any, contained. in the Scheme be transferred by 
such person and within such time as may b~ provided in :.Iihe 
Scheme, to the Fund and shall be credited to the account of the S 
employee in the Fund. 
(2) Where a ·member of the Fund leaves his employment 
in a coal mine and obtains re-employmen.t in any other estab-
lishment (not being a coal mine to which the Coal Mines 
Provident Fund Scheme applies) and becomes a subscriber to 10 
anY.provident fund of that establishment, the amount of accu-
mulations to the credit of such employee in the Fund shall be 
transferred, within such time as may be specifted by the Central 
Government in this behalf, to the credit of his account in the 
provident fund of the establishment in which he is re-employ- 15 
ed, if the employee so desires and the rules in relation to that 
provident fund pennit such transfer. 
(3) Where any employee who is a subscriber to any provi-
dent fund of an establishment (not being a coal mine to which 
the Coal Mines Provident Fund Scheme applies) leaves his 2Q 
employment in that establishment and obtains re-employment 
in a ~ mine and becomes a member of the Fund, the amount 
of accumulations to the credit of such employee in the provident 
fund of the establishment left by him shall, if the employee 80 
desires and the rules in relation to such provident fund so 25 
permit, be transferred to the credit of his account in the Fund.". 
Amen.d_ 5. In se~tian 5 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the 
ment of fonowing sub-sectian shall be inserted, namely:-
sectionS. 
Insertion 
of new 
section 
'IA. 
Determi-
nation of 
moneys 
due 
. from 
emp- . 
loyers. 
"(3) The employer shall pay the bonus in accordance with 
the Scheme as aforesaid.". 30 
8. M~r section 7 of the principal Act, the following section sha'n 
be inserted, namely:-
"7A. (1) The Coal Mines Provident Fund Commissioner or 
..my other officer duly authorised in this behalf by the Central 
Government may, .by order, determine the amount due from any 35 
employer under any provision of this Act or of any scheme 
framed thereunder and for this purpose may conduct such 
enquiry Ii$ be JD'Y· clmn necessary. 

501 1908. 
\ 
5 
10 
43 of 1860. 15 
20 
30 
35 
... , 
\ 
, 19.3 
(2) The officer conducting the enquiry under sub-Gec-
tion (1) shall, for the purpose of such enquiry, have the same 
powers as are vested in a court under 'the Code of Civil Proce-
dure, 1908 for trying a suit in respect of the following mlltters, 
narnely:-
(4) enforcing the attendance of any person or examin-
ing him on oath; 
(b) requiring the discovery and production of docu-
ments; 
(c) receiving evidence on aftldavit; 
(d) issuing commissions for the examination ef witnes-
sese , : I:J 
'. ~ 
and any such enquiry shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding 
within the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purpoae 
of section 196, of the Indian Penal Code. 
(3) No order determining the amount due from any 
employer shall be made under sub-section (1) unless the 
employer is given a reasonable .opportunity of representing his 
case. 
·1 " 
(4) An order made under this section shall be final and 
shall not be questioned in any court of law.". 
I 
7. In section 9 of the principal Act,-. Amend.-
ment of 
shall be section t. (a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section 
substituted, namely:-
"(1) If any person-
(a) contravenes any provision of this Act or of any 
scheme framed thereunder, he shall be punishable with 
impriSoDment for a term which may extend to six 
mon~hs, or with fine which may extend to one thousand 
rupees, or with both; 
(b) who has been convicted of any o1fence punish-
able as aforesaid. is again guilty of any such offence 
within a period of two years from the date of the 
previous conviction, he shall .be punishable on convic-
tion with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to one year, or with fine which may extend to two 
thousand rupees, or with both."; 

l~~ 'j 
Amend-
ment of 
section 10. 
, (b) in ,sub-section (2), for the words "any' such scbeme';, 
the ,WOrd, brackets and figure "sub-section (1)" shall be substi-
tuted· -- - -. . , 
(c) after sub-section (2), the following su'b-section shall be 
inserted., namely: - S 
"(3) No coul"t inferior to 'that of a presidency magis-
trate or a magistrate of the first class shall try any offence 
punishable under sub-secflion (1) .u. 
S. In section 10 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (2)- 10 
(i) for clause (a), the following clause shall be substi-
tuted, namely:-
U (a) require an emplQyer or any contractor from 
whom any amount is recoverable under section tOE-
(i) to furnish such infonnation, or IS 
(ii) to produce in the office Qf the Inspector or 
s~ch other place as may be nearer to the employer 
or, as the case may be, the contractor, such accounts, 
books, registers and other documents, 
relating to the employment of persons in a, coal mine 20 
as the Inspector may consider necessary for the purposes 
of any scheme framed under this Act;"; 
(ii) in clause (b), for the words "enter any coal mine 
or its office", the words "and with such assistance, if any, as 
he may think fit, enter and sea:rch any coal mine" shall be 2S 
su~itu~; 
(iii) in clause (c) ,-
"" (i) after the word "employer", the wonif, figures 
and letter "or any contractor from whom any amoun~ 
is recoverable under section l()E" shall be inserted; 30 
(ii) the words "or its office" shall be omitted; 
(iv) after clause (c), the following clauses shall be in-
serted, namely:-
"(d) make copies of, or take extracts from, any 
accounts, books, registers or' other documents m'aintain~ 35 
ed in relation to a coal mine and where he has reason 

41 at 1880. 
,of I •. 
, 
10 
IS 
• /95 
to believe that any offence under tbia Act baa been 
committed by an employer or contractor, seize with 
su~ _~istance' 81 he may think fit, 8U.Ch ~nts, boob, 
registers or other documents or portions thereof as he 
may conaider relevant in respect of that offence; 
(e) exerci.le such other powers 81 any such Scheme 
may provide."; 
(b) after auJb.section (2), the following aub-&ectioDa shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(2A) Every person required. to furnish any information 
or produce any doctmlent under clause (4) or clause (b) of 
sub-section (2) shall be d~med to be legally bound to do 80 
within the meaning of section 175 of the Indian Penal Code. 
(%8) The prdvisioDS of the Code of Criminal Proce-
dure, 1898 shall, 80 far as may be, apply to any search or 
aeizure under sub-section (2) as they apply to any search or 
seizure made under the authority of a warrant ialUecl 
under section 98 of the said Code.". 
9. In section lOA of the principal Act, aftel1 the words "any !Amend· 
20 scheme framed under this Act", the words, brackets, ftgurea 1/1 and ::: of 
letters "or any accumulations required to be transferred under sub- 1M. on 
section (1) or sub-section (3) of section 3D or ,any damages re-
coverable under section lOF or any charges p~yable by the employer 
under this Act in respect of. the administration of any such scheme" 
2, shall be inserted. 
]0 
, 
10. After section lOA of the principal Act, the following sections lDIertiaD 
aball be inserted, namely:- ._, :: 
lOB 1:0 
101'. 
'- -ulOB. (1) Where the employer !s a finn or oth~ aarocJ.ation Determi-
of. individuals, all, or any of the partners or members thereof, nation Of 
or where the employer is a company, all or any of the directors ;:nplopt 
thereof, may be prosecuted and punished under this Act for any tame.-
offence for which the employer is punishable: e8M1. 
Provided that where a firm, association or company hu Jiven 
notice in writing to the Coal Mines Provident Fund Com· 
missioner or any officer specified by the Central Government 
in this behalf that it has nominated,-

. (4) in the ease of a firm, any of its partners, 
---(b)-in the ease ·of an association, .any of its members, 
(c) in the case of a company, ~y of its directors, 
who is resident in each case in any place to which this Act 
atends Uld who is in eaoh oaseeither in tact in cherge of the 5 
management of, or holds the largest IlUIIl'ber. of ~ares in, such 
firm, association or company, to assume the responsibility of the 
'eIDlployer . fat the Purp03es of this Act or of any scheme framed 
thereunder, .such partner, member or direCtor, as the eaR may 
be, shall, so long as he continues to SO reside aIld ,be in charge or 10 
hold the largest number of shares as aforesaid, be deemed to be 
the employer for the purposes of this Act or. any scheme lramed 
thereunder. unless a notice in writing cancelling his Domioation 
or stating that he has ceased. to be a partner, member or direc-
tor, as the case may be, is received:by *he Coal Mines Provident 15 
Fund Commissioner or any officer specified by the. Central Gov-
ernment in this behalf. 
·(2) Where the employer is a Government or any local 
authority, all or any of the oftlcers or persons au-
thorised by . such Government Or local authority, as the cue 20 
may . be, to manage the affairs of the coal mine, "imall, notwith-
stmdiftg . any thing to the contrary contained in any law or con-
tract for the time being in force, be deemed to be the 8lIlployers 
. or employer in respect of the coal mine and may be proaecuted 
IIU'ld .paDished under this Act for any offence for which the 25 
employer is punishable. 
loe: (1) The Central Government may, by ootifteation in 
the Ofticial Gazette, direct that any power exercIsable by it 
under this Act or any scheme framed thereunder shall, sub-
ject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the noti- 30 
ftcation, be exercisable als~o by the Coal Mines~dent Fund 
Commissioner or .any officer authorised in this .'behalf by the 
Central Government. 
(2) -rile Board· may delegate to its C~airman or the Coal 
Mines Provident Fund Commissioner or any other ofB~r of 35 
the Board, subject to such conditions and limitations, if any. 
,as ·the ,Board ~ay specify, such of the powers and functio~ of 
. . the·Board under this Act or any scheme framed thereunder 
'.. the Board may deem necessary for the eftlclen~ adminiltra .. 
tlOIl of any scheme framed uncl~ this Aet. .. 40 
, 

5" . 
IS 
20 
30 
. lQD •. (1) The contribution shall be . payable by the em- ~t 
~er (hereinafter referred to as the employer's ,contribution) of contrl-
and _by Jhe_ employ~(hereinafter referred. to as the ein- buttc:n by 
ployee'~ contribution) at such rat~ as may be specifted in the ::::!eI'I 
COJl Mines, Provident Fund. Scheme, and the employer shall covery 
pay the employer's contribution as well as the employee's. ' COD- thereof 
tribution, whether or not he has recovered from any employee from. 
the employee's share of the contribution. =-
(2) . The amount of anycontri·bution paid by, the em-
ployer on behaH of a member shall, no~ithstancUng anything 
to the contrary contained in ~ny other law for the time being 
in force or any contract, be recoverable by means of. deduction 
from the wages of the member and not otherwise. 
(3) Save as otherwise provided in the Coal Minelt Provi-
dent Fund Scheme, no' deduction under sub-section. (2) shall be 
made from any wages other than such as are paid in respect of 
the period for which the contribution is payable. 
. 
(4) Notwithstanding any contract to the contrary, the em-
ployer shall not be entitled to deduct the employer's contribu-
tiOll or the charges referred to in section lOA' from. the wages 
of a member or otherwise to. recover such contribution 01' 
charges from such member. . oj " 
lOE. (1) The amount of contribution (that is to say the Recovel7 
employer's contribution· as well as the employee's contribution) of moni. 
and any charges referred to in section lOA paid or payable br eID-
by an employer in respect of an employee employed.by or :r:r~., 
through a contractor and any bonus paid or payable under any tai..ctprjlJ 
Coal Mines Bonus' Scheme in respect of any such employee . 
. may be recovered by such employer from the, contractor either 
by' deduction from any amount payable to the contractor under 
any contr,act ,or as a debt payable by the contractor. 
-" 
(2) A contractor from whom the amounts mentioned in 
sub.aeetion (1) may be recovered in respect of Qny employee 
employed by or through him may, sav~ as otherwiae provided 
3S in the Coal Mines Provident Fund Scheme, recover from such 
ep:nployee the employee's contribution under any ~u.ch Scheme 
by deduction from the wages payable to the employee ,subject 
to the condition that no such deduction shall be made from 
, ,~ wases pther than such as are payable in . respect of the 
40 period to which the employee's contribution on"~' 

\~~ _ .. , 
12 
(3-)' Notwithstanding any' contract to the contrary, no con-
tractor ahal1 be entitled, to deduct the employer's contribution 
--------- .. ----or the charges or bonus referred to in sub-aection (1) from the 
amount payable to an employee employed by or through him 
Power. 
NCO" ....... 
AmacL 
mat at 
PkIt 
Schedule. 
Q1' otherwise to recover such contribution or charges or bonus S 
~ auch employee. 
lOF. Where an employer makes default in the payment at 
any contribution or bonus or any charges payable by him under 
any acl1emeframed under this Act, or where any person who i8 
required to transfer provident fund act:umulations in accord- 10 
ance with the provisions of sectioil 3D makes default in. the 
transfer of such accumulations, the Central Government may 
recover from such employer or person, as the case may be, 8I1ch 
~amages, not exceeding twenty-five per cent. of the amount of 
~ars, as it may .think fit to impose." IS 
11. After section IIA of the principal Act, the following section 
shall be inserted, namely:-
.cUB. If aJ:ly diftlculty arises in giving effect to the provi-
sions of this Act or any scheme fram~ thereunder, the Central 
Government may, by order published in the Oftlclal Gazette, ~o 
make such provision or give such direction not inconsistent 
with the purposes of this Act, as it appears to it to be necessary 
or expedient for removing the diftlcu1ty.". 
12. In the First Schedule to the principal Act.-
(a) in item 2, for the word "employeesutbe words and 2S 
brackets "employees (whether employed by an employer direct-
ly or by or through a contractor) ," shall be substituted; 
(b) after item 2, the following. Uem shan be inserted, 
lWJle1y:-
"2A. The manner in which employees' contributions 30 
. uay be recovered by contractors from employees employed 
by or through such contractors."; 
(c) for item 4. the following item shall be substituted, 
namely:-
1.14. The constitution of any committee foraMisting the 3S 
'D_ .. "", II. ,pya.I 'U. , 

18' I { 
. (eI) for, item ~, the following item ahall be substituted, 
nam.ly:~ 
'~. The opening ot regional and other' omen."; 
(e) in item 1, tor the words "and the maXimum amount of 
such deduction or forfeiture", the words ",the m8.xim.um amount 
of 1Uc:!h deduction or forfeiture and the utilisation of such de-
ducted or forfeited amounts" shall be substituted; 
(f) in item l1, after the word "employer", the words "or 
contmctor" shan be inserted; 
....... 
10 (g) far item 14, the following items shall,'be substituted, 
namely:-
"1 SA. The manner in which accwriulations in any exist-
ing provident fund shall be transferred to the Fund under 
section 3D, and the mode of valuation of any assets which 
15 may be transferred by the person administering such 
provident fund. 
14. Any other matter which is to be provided for in the 
Coal Mines Provident Fund Scheme or which may be ne-
cessary or proper for the purpose of imPlementing that 
20 Scheme.". 
\:. ... 
. "r ... 1 
11. In the Second Schedule to the principal Act,- .Amend. 
meDtot 
"employer", the words "or SecODd «I) in item 6, after the word 
contractor" shall be inserted; 
2S 
(b) for item 7, the following items shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"M. The transfer, by an employer to the Fund or any 
. other fund specified. -4 by the Central Government, of the 
amount of bonus remaining unpaid or unclaimed for a 
period of six months from the end of the quarter to which 
the bonus relates and the extinguishment of the employer's 
liability to his employees to the extent of the amount so 
transferred. 
7. Any other matter which is to be provided for in the 
Coal Mines Bonus Scheme or wbich may be necessary or 
proper for the purpose of implementing that ~heme."t 
Schedule. 

ContiDu-' "1L The' BOIII'd 'Of'~CODSt1tuted UDQer the Coal,Mines Pr0-
=: vident Fwld Scheme and functioning immediately befor .. -tAe com-
---Boud!t --- mencement ,~f this Ac.t shall, until the constitution of a B9~ of 
Trutees. Trustees' Under Section 3A Of' the pnnclpal Act as amended by this 
¥, be deemed. to be tbe, Board of Trustees constituted. under the S 
TraDsfer 
allervic:e 
of em-
ployees 
or the 
u1stinc 
Board to 
the new 
Board. 
said section SA. " , ., .... . 
" 
15. EVery Person who is employed immediately before' the' com-
mencement of' this ACt under tIb.e Board ot Trustees 'coDst1tuted 
under t!:te ~oal .Mines Provident Fund Scheme and functioning im-
mediately before such commencement (J1erein~er in this section 10 
referred to as the existing Board) ahall, on and from such com-
~,becGme an. employee of the Board of Trustees, constitut-
ed or deemed to be constituted under section 3A of the principal Act 
as amended by this Aat (hereinafter in this section referred to as 
. the-'DI'W':' BoaM-), and shall hold his: oIlce or service under the new J S 
'lburd:b;yt'the·same tenure, at the sameremunerati.oll ancl upon the 
Same terms and conditions: and with the same· rights and privileges 
u' to peMion, leeve,gratWty, prow.deat·fUDd, and other. matters as 
he would have held the sa~ if this Act had oot beG, passed, and 
shall continue to do so unless and until his employment is terminated. 20 
or Wltil such tenure~ remuneration and terms and conditions are 
duly altered !by the'new BOard:' 
, - ~ .. 
Provided'bat the tenure t remuneration and teJ:ms and~nd.itioDa 
of service of any such person shall not be altered to his disadvantage 
without the prevjous approval of the Central Government. 2S 
.. 

,)PI 
.' 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND RBASONS 
The Coal Mines Provident FuDd. and Bonus Schemes Act,. 1948, 
. me1res provision for the framing of Provident Fuad and Bonus 
Schemes for persons employed in' coal mines. The Dumber .of subs-
en·bera under the schemes is more than four Jalrbs The.accumula-
tions in the Fund invested in the Central Gowrnm.ent .-witles 
amounted to Rs. 44· 30 crores at tlie end of September, 1964. 
The Act was last amended in 1951. Since then the working of 
the Act has revealed certain lacunae which are proposed to be recti-
fted. by means of this Bill. 
, . 
The main amendments proposed to the original Act are as 
follows:-
(i) The existing definitions of the terms 'coal mine', 
'employee' and 'employer' are being suitably revised to make 
them more comprehensive and to bring'them in line 'lV1'th' the 
amendments made in th~ 'Mines Act, 1952 and the Employees' 
Provident ·Funds Act, 1952. The teml 'employ.ee' . will now in-
clude persons employed by or tbro~gh a contJiactor. Malis, 
sweepers, domt!stic servants and teachers employed ,iIi or . jn 
connection with coal mines along with apprentices or trainees 
who receive stipend or other remUDe'ration c:Iil'8etly from. the 
'eJIlployer are also proposed to be included within the 'deftilition 
of the tenn 'employee' toanable them to 'get the _neAt of 
provident fund. 
(ii) IA new provision is being made for transfer of provi-
dent fund accumulations from other provident funds to Coal 
Mines Provident Fund and vice versa on transfer of the em .. 
ployees from one establishment to another to ensure the conti-
nuity of their provident fund . 
. ' .. -1 
(iii) Provision is also being made for enhanced penalty of 
imprisonment up to one year or fine of Rs. 2,000 or.both for con-
travention of any of the provisions of the Act or the Schemes 
within two years of previous conviction. 
(iv) In view of the difficulties experienced in giving the 
benefit of the provident fund to the employees employed by or 
15 

1. 
through contractors proviJion i8 being made to enable the coli-
tractors to NCover the amount of members' contributiODl r:from 
such employees and to make it obligatory on the contractors to ._ 
pay to the employer the amount paid by the employers on 
account of the employees employed through the contractors. 
. (v) Provision is also being made for the recovery of damages 
from the employers in cases of default in the payment of any 
contribution or any charges under any Scheme or in transfer-
ring prowdent fund accumulations. 
The Bill seeks to give effect to the above proposals. 
NEW DELHI' , ASOKE KUMAR SEN. 
The 4th March, 1965. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATIONS UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 1 (34) /64-PF-I, dated the 20th Ma!reh, 1965 
. from Shri Asoke K. -Ben, Minister of Law .and Social Security to 
the Secretary, Lok Sabha.] 
The President of India having been infonned of the subject 
matter of the Coal Mines Provident Fund and Bonus Schemes 
(Amendment) Bill, 1965 has, in pursuance of clause (1) of article 
117 of the Constitution, recommended the consideration of the Bill 
by the Lok Sabha. 

-~ 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clauses 12 and 13 of the Bill seek to amend the First and Second 
Schedules of the Cord MJftes PrOvident Fund and. Bonus Schemes 
Act, 1"948 which prescribe matters tQ be provided for in the Coal 
Mines Provident Fund Sch.e1nes and in the Coal Mines Bonus 
Schemes. The matters: proposed to be included in the aafd Schedules· 
inter CIlia relate to the manner of recovery of contributions by 
contractors, the manner in which accumulations in the existing pro- • 
vident fund shall be transferred to the Fund and vice verBCI. 
These matters are matters of procedural detail andlhe delega-
tion of legislative power with respect to them is of a nomial char-
acter. 
11 
2557 (B) LS-3 
17 ,. , 
\ .. 

, 
-. 
~ 
Interpre-
tation. 
-------------------
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE COAL MINI'S PRoVIDBNT Fmm AND BoNUS 
SCHEMES ACT, 1948 
(46 OF 1948) 
• • • • 
Z. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject 
or context,-
• • • • • 
(b) "coal mine" means any excavation where my opera-
tion for the purpose of obtaining coal has· been or is being car-
ried on, and includes all works, machinery, tramways and. sid-
ings, whether above or below ground, in or adJacent to or be-
longing to a coal mine: 
Provided that jt shall not include any part of the coal mine 
on which a manufacturing process is being carried on unless 
such process is a process for coke-making or the dressing of 
minerals; 
• • • • • 
(d) "employee" means any person who is employed in any 
kind of wor!t, manual or otherwise, in or in connection with a 
coal mine and who gets his wages directly or indirectly from 
the employer; 
(e) "employer" means the owner of a coal mine as defined 
in clause (g) of section 3 of the Indian Mines Act, 1923. " of 1923. 
• • • • • 
Penalty. 9. (1) Any scheme framed under this Act may provide that any 
person who contrayenes any of the provisions thereof shall be punish-
able with imprisonment for a tenn which may extend to six months, 
or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with 
both. 
(2) No Court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable 
Wtder any such scheme except on a report in writing of the facts 
constituting such offence made by an Inspector with the previous 
sanction of such authority as may be specified in this behalf by the 
Central Government. 
18 

It. '. 
10. (l) • • • • • • IDapedon. 
(2) An Inspector may, in respect of any coal mine within his 
'Jurisdictron,~-----' -" ',' "', '---''-
(a) require an employer ,'to fumiab such information as he 
may consider necessary for the purposes of any scheme framed 
under this Act; ,. 
(b) at any-reasonable time, enter any coal mine or iti ofBce 
ana require anyone found in charge thereof to produce before 
him such accounts, books, registers and other documents relat-
ing to the employment of persona in the coal mine as he may 
.,consider necessary; 
:., .1 I," 
(c) examine, with respect to any matter relevant to any of 
the purposes aforesaid, tpe employer, his agent or servant or any 
.other person found in charge of the coal mine or its oftlce or 
whom the Inspector has reasonable cause to believe to be or to 
have been an emplOyee! in the coal mine . 
• • • • • 
lOA. Any amount due from an employer in 'respect of any contri- Mode of 
bution or bonus undeP any schenf'e framed. tinder this Act may be rec0gel') 
recovered by the Central Government in the same manner as an at money 
arrear of land revenue. from an employer. 
• · ' • 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
(See section 3) 
• • 
Matters to be prooided for in the Coal Mines Provident Fund Scheme 
• • • • • 
2. Payment of contributions to the Fund by employers and by, 
or on behalf of, employees, the rate, time and manner of such pay-
ment and the manner in which. such contributions may be recovered . 
• • • • • 
4. The constitutioh of a Board of Trustees consisting of nominees 
of the Central Government and representatives of employers and 
employees nominated by the Central Government in consultation 
with the representative organisations concerned, subject to the con-
dition that the number of the representatives of the employees shall 
not be less than the number of the representatives of the employers; 
the number of Trustees and the terms and conditions under which 
they may be nominated, and the time, place and procedure of meet-
, ings of the Board. 

5. The appointment at of!lcers and servants of the Board and the 
opening of regional and other offices. 
• • • • • 
'7. The conditions under which withdrawals from the Fund may 
be permitted and any deductiol\ or forfeiture may be made and the 
maximum amount of INCh deduation or forfeiture. 
• • • • • 
11. The registers and records to be maintained by the employer 
and the returns to be fumdshed by him. 
• • • • • 
14. Any other matter which may be necessary or proper for the 
purpose of implementing the Coal Mines Provident Fund Scheme. 
'mE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(See section 5) 
MatteTs to be provided fOT in the Coal Mines Bonus Scherr&e 
• • • • • 
6. The relisters and records to be maintained by the employer 
and the returns to be furnished by him. 
~. Any other matter which may be necessary or proper for the 
purpose of implementing the Coal Mines Bonus Scheme. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Coal Mines Provident Fund and 
Bonus Schemes Act, 1948. 
(Shri Asoke K. Sen, Minister of Law and Social Secunty.) 