 
Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Bill No. 22 of 2023
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023
By
Sඁඋංආൺඍං Sඎඇංඍൺ Dඎ඀඀ൺඅ, M.P.
ൺ
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
      Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2023.
   (2) It shall come into force such date, as the Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In Part IV of the Constitution, after article 48A, the following article shall be inserted, 
namely:—
   "48B. The State shall endeavour to reduce emissions and eventually realize the goal of 
net zero emission for a clean sustainable and habitable environment which shall provide for 
a inclusive posterity, for all citizens."
Short title and 
commencement.
5 Insertion of new 
article 48B.
Achieving net 
zero emissions 
for  a sustainable 
future.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Climate change and its allied issues are a pressing contemporary concern which 
transcend political borders and impact people across nationalities. The challenge to 
mitigate, sustain and adapt climate change though enormous, also brings up a historic and 
unparalleled opportunity for the human race to collectively work for the future of its 
existence. In such a scenario, India joined other responsible nations with the declaration 
of its pledge of net zero emissions by 2070 and further released its long-term strategy of 
achieving net zero emissions by 2070 at the recent 27th Conference of Parties (COP-27) in 
Egypt’s Sharm el-Sheikh. 
In such a state of affairs, it is imperative that federal polity of the country should 
work cohesively to contrive a path of national development which is distinctive yet at the 
same time serves balance between economic growth and climate sustainability. The state 
policy considerations demand inclusion of net zero emission targets to make long-term low 
emission development strategy a success, for the world to witness. 
Directive Principles of State Policy (DPSP) under Part IV of the Constitution have 
played a pivotal role in guiding the policies in India. They have been amended periodically 
as per the dynamic situations. Therefore in the light of contemporary exigencies, insertion 
of this new article is imperative. 
This amendment will provide a mandate which has also become necessary to fulfil and 
implement other existing elements of DPSP such as in articles 38, 47, 48A, 49 and 51. It also 
includes the expression “inclusive” to ensure participation, balancing livelihood and growth 
of all the citizens of our nation in this new phase of developmental journey. 
Hence this Bill.
      Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                                                                                        SUNITA DUGGAL
24, 2022

LOK SABHA
_______
ൺ
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
_______
(Shrimati Sunita Duggal, M.P .)