THE BAN ON COW SLAUGHTER BILL, 2009
By
SHRI YOGI ADITY ANATH, M.P.
A
BILL
to prohibit the slaughter of cow and its progeny.
WHEREAS article 48 of the Constitution enjoins on the State to organise agricultural
and animal husbandry on modern and scientific lines and in particular to take steps for
preserving and improving the breeds and prohibiting the slaughter of cow and its progeny.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Ban on Cow Slaughter  Act, 2009.
 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, “cow” includes a bull, bullock, ox,
heifer or calf.
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Bill No.  22 of  2009
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Definition.5

2
3.  Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force or
any usage or custom to the contrary, no person shall slaughter or cause to be slaughtered or
offer or cause to be offered for slaughter any cow in any place.
4.  No person shall sell or offer for sale or cause to be sold beef or beef products in any
form for any purpose.
5.  Any person who slaughters a cow or is caught selling beef or beef products shall be
punished with imprisonment which may extend to ten years or with fine which may extend to
rupees one lakh or with both.
Prohibition of
slaughter of
cow.
Prohibition of
sale of beef.
Punishment.
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Article 48 of the Constitution enjoins on the State to organise agricultural and animal
husbandry on modern and scientific lines and in particular to take steps for preserving and
improving the breeds and prohibiting the slaughter of cow and its progeny. In view of the
consideration that the cow and its entire progeny must  be saved to provide milk, as well as
manure, it becomes imperative to impose complete ban on the cow slaughter.
N
EW DELHI; YOGI  ADITYANATH
June 10, 2009.
3

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to prohibit the slaughter of cow and its progeny.
————
(Shri Yogi Adityanath, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2238LS(S5)—24-06-2009.