1
THE RESERV ATION FOR THE SCHEDULED CASTES AND THE
SCHEDULED TRIBES IN PRIV ATE SECTOR BILL, 2016
By
DR. UDIT RAJ, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for reservation for persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes in private sector and for matters connected therewith.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Reservation for the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes in Private Sector Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
Short title and
extent.
Bill No. 22 of  2016
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “private sector” means any organisation or establishment which is owned
purely by private individual or corporation or limited company or any organisation in
which the Government of India or a State has no financial interest and wherein not
less than one hundred persons are employed;
(b) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(c) ‘reservation’ means reservation in the matter of appointments and promtotion
in services in favour of persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes, in private sector.
3. (1) The Central Government shall give due encouragement to private sector to
make provisions for reservation in favour of persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes
and the Scheduled Tribes in their organisations in proportion to the population of the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the State, wherein such private organisation
has its headquarters.
(2) The encouragement as provided in sub-section ( 1) may include—
(i) special concessions under various existing Central schemes; and
(ii) loans from nationalized banks at reduced rate of interest in such manner as
may be prescribed.
4. The Central Government shall cause to be laid an annual report before both Houses
of Parliament about the action taken under this Act.
5. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Definitions.
Government
to encourage
private sector
to make
provision for
reservation.
Annual
report.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
At present, reservation is available in favour of persons belonging to the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in services under the State. The only category in which
the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes were once
proportionately over-represented was Group ‘D’ posts, however, due to outsourcing policy
of the Government and hiring of service on contract basis particularly in Group ‘D’ post
work, the number of persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes
in Government jobs has considerably come down. Hence, the number of opportunities
available for the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes has
been reduced.
After liberalisation and privatisation, the number of jobs in the private sector has
increased considerably. However, the presence of the persons belonging to the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in such private sector jobs is almost negligible. They are
not a part of the share or stock market, private sector banks, media, private education sector,
information technology, telecommunication and other related fields where the
representations of the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes is negligible. The Government must make concessions and special schemes to
encourage the private sector to open up job avenues in favour of persons belonging to the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes by providing reservation in the matter of
appointments and promotion in services in their establishments.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; UDIT RAJ
February 9, 2016.

4
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matter of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for reservation for persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes in private sector and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Dr. Udit Raj, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4268LS(S3)—26-02-2016.