THE BASIC AND PRIMARY EDUCATION (COMPULSORY TEACHING
IN MOTHER TONGUE) BILL, 2014
BY
SHRI OM PRAKASH YADAV, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the compulsory use of mother tongue in imparting basic and primary
education to children in all educational institutions and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Basic and Primary Education (Compulsory Teaching
in Mother Tongue) Act, 2014.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "basic education" means education provided in preparatory schools or
kindergarten or such other schools where basic education is imparted, by whatever
name called;
Short title
and extent.
Bill No. 22 of  2014
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Definitions.5
10

2
(c) "educational institution" includes a school which is run by Government or
by any other authority designated by it or by a private institution, association or trust,
whether aided by Government or not, recognized or unrecognized, imparting education
to the children from primary level;
(d) "mother tongue" means the language generally spoken in the family of a
child who learns it from his mother and other family members and which is one of the
languages mentioned in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution of  India;
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(f) "primary education" means education up to the level of middle class or eighth
standard.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, every educational institution shall impart basic and primary education to the children
in their mother tongue or dialect generally spoken in the region or State, as the case may be,
where such an institution is located, in addition to Hindi or English language, as the case
may be, so as to properly develop the faculties of the children:
Provided that if the mother tongue of a child is not the language generally spoken in
the area in which the educational institution is located, the educational institution shall make
arrangements for imparting education to that child in his mother tongue:
Provided further that arrangements may be made in imparting education in the mother
tongue only if a minimum number of children, as may be prescribed, are interested in getting
education in that language.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the appropriate Government shall appoint
language teachers in all Government run or aided schools and provide requisite
infrastructure for that purpose.
(3) The appropriate Government shall derecognize the educational institutions not
complying with the provisions of this Act for such period as it may deem necessary  and
impose such other sanctions as may be prescribed after giving such institutions a reasonable
opportunity to defend their cases.
4. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite funds to the States for appointing language teachers and for
providing other infrastructure required for the purposes of this Act.
5. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the removal of the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made or direction be given after three years of the
commencement of this Act.
6. ( 1) The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
(2) The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
7.  (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the  successive sessions aforesaid,
Parliament agrees in making any modification in the rule or agrees that the rule should not be
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the
case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Compulsory
imparting of
basic and
primary
education in
mother tongue
of the child.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
For a child, the easiest language to acquire knowledge and understanding of worldly
affairs is his mother tongue. He learns to speak his mother tongue from his mother and family
members, who generally speak the language spoken from generations or the dialect of their
forefathers or of the area or region in which they reside. In major parts of our country, Hindi
is the main language with different dialects at different places but it is written in Devanagari
script and can be understood easily. Then, there are regional languages. A total of twenty-
two languages have been recognized by our Constitution. The mother tongue, no doubt, is
the most appropriate language for a child to develop his faculties. However, when a child is
admitted in the play school or Kindergarten or primary school, more so in the so called elite
or public schools, he has to switch over to English medium, which is the medium of instruction
in such schools. At this stage the real difficulty of the child begins. He speaks and understands
a particular language, i.e., his mother tongue, but the education is imparted to him in a
different language. This causes strain and in order to become a part of the system he starts
ignoring his own mother tongue. In the Hindi speaking areas, students of public schools
cannot count in Hindi and do not recognize Hindi alphabet because in their school they
cannot speak in their language and have to speak only in English. In many schools, students
are penalized if they speak in language other than English. Though the child learns English
under compulsion but he is not at ease with this language and on the other hand he does not
develop sufficient knowledge of his own language. It is, therefore, necessary that a child
should be imparted basic and primary education in his mother tongue, which is the easiest
language for him. Thereafter, the child can acquire the skills in other languages and opt for
the language of his choice for his further studies.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; OM PRAKASH YADA V
June 6, 2014.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall appoint language
teachers and provide requisite infrastructure for it. The expenditure in respect of schools in
Union territories and those funded or aided by the Central Government shall be borne out of
the Consolidated Fund of India. Clause 4 of the Bill provides that the Central Government
shall provide requisite funds to the States for carrying out the purposes of this Bill. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
estimated that a sum of rupees one thousand crore per annum will be involved as recurring
expenditure.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGA TED  LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only. The delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

GMGIPMRND—722LS(S3)—27-06-2014.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the compulsory use of mother tongue in imparting basic and primary education
to children in all educational institutions and for matters connected therewith and
incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Om Prakash Yadav, M.P.)