THE GUTKA   AND  PAN MASALA (PROHIBITION) BILL, 2020
By
DR. KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI, M.P.
to prohibit the production, promotion and sale of gutka and pan masala.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Gutka and Pan Masala  (Prohibition) Act, 2020.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this  Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) “gutka” includes combination of tobacco containing arecanut, synthetic katha,
lead, arsenic, magnesium carbonate, and any other substance causing injury to health
on consumption; and
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 22 of  2020
Definitions.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(ii) “pan masala” includes,—
(a) Khaini, jarda or any preparation containing betel nuts, lime, katha
(catechu) and tobacco whether or not containing other ingredients such as
cardamom, copra or menthol; and
(b) any flavouring material containing tobacco, chemical ingredients or
carcinogenic elements which are hazardous to human consumption.
3. Manufacturing, promotion or selling of pan masala and gutka is hereby
prohibited.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section the expression "selling" includes selling
of pan masala and gutka online.
4. Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 3 shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years or with a fine which may extend to
rupees five lakhs or with both.
5. No Court inferior to that of a Chief  Metropolitan Magistrate or Chief Judicial
Magistrate, as the case may be, shall try any offence punishable under this Act.
6. All Offences punishable under  the Act shall be cognizable.
7. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
A
MENDMENT TO INDUSTRIES (DEVELOPMENT AND REGULATION) ACT, 1951
8. In the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, in the First Schedule, in
Entry 38, in item (1), for the word, “Cigarettes” the words “Cigarettes, including Gutka and
Pan Masala” shall be substituted.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of  thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Prohibition of
pan masala
and gutka.
Punishment.
Court
empowered
to try
offences.
Offences to
be cognizable.
Amendment
of the
Industries
(Development
and
Regulation)
Act, 1951.
Power to
make rules.
65 of 1951.
5
10
20
Act to have
overriding
effect.
15
25
30

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
A large number of children, youngsters and adults are getting habituated towards the
use of Pan Masala and Gutka which is proving to be very hazardous to their health. The
number and frequency of Pan Masala and Gutka users are increasing day by day and this
naturally causes damage to their health and threatens their very existence.
All the above mentioned substances can cause severe damage to one's health by
leading to deadly diseases like cancer. Teenagers habituated to regular consumption of all
these substances will suffer from problems in brain development, thereby leading to learning
and anxiety disorders.
In fact recent studies by the Mumbai based Tata Institute for Fundamental Research
and Rajiv Gandhi Cancer Institute, Delhi, Gujarat Cancer Research Society, Ahmedabad have
proved the deadly effects of using pan masala and gutka. V arious States including the State
of Gujarat have banned the sale of gutka and pan masala.
In spite of such State level prohibition, a national level prohibition is the need of the
hour.
This Bill seeks to prohibit the production, promotion and sale of pan masala and gutka.
N
EW DELHI; KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI
October 24, 2019.
3

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purpose of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
4

ANNEXURE
THE INDUSTRIES (DEVELOPMENT AND REGULATION)  ACT, 1951
* * * * *
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
[See section 2 and 3 (i)]
Any industry engaged in the manufacture or production of any of the articles
mentioned under each of the following headings or sub-headings, namely:—
* * * * *
38. MISCELLANEOUS  INDUSTRIES:
(1) Cigarettes.
* * * * *
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to prohibit the production, promotion and sale of gutka and pan masala.
————
(Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—4512LS(S3)—20-01-2020.