THE UNION DUTIES OF EXCISE (ELECTRICITY) DISTRIBUTION
REPEAL  BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to repeal the Union Duties of Excise (Electricity) Distribution Act, 1980.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Union Duties of Excise (Electricity) Distribution
Repeal Act, 2006.
2. The Union Duties of Excise (Electricity) Distribution Act, 1980 is hereby
repealed.
Short title.
Repeal of Act
14 of 1980.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 22 of 2006

2
3. (1) The repeal by this Act of the repealed enactment shall not affect any other
enactment in which the repealed enactment has been applied, incorporated or referred
to;
and this Act shall not affect the validity, invalidity, effect or consequences of
anything already done or suffered, or any right, title, obligation or liability already
acquired, accrued or incurred, or any remedy or proceedings in respect thereof, or any
release or discharge of or from any debt, penalty, obligation, liability, claim or demand,
or any indemnity already granted, or the proof of any past act or thing;
nor shall this Act affect any principle or rule of law, or established jurisdiction,
form of course of pleading, practice or procedure, or existing usage, custom, privilege,
restriction, exemption, office or appointment, notwithstanding that the same
respectively may have been in any manner affirmed or recognized or derived by, in or
from the enactment hereby repealed;
nor shall the repeal by this Act of the enactment revive or restore any jurisdiction,
office, custom, liability, right, title, privilege, restriction, exemption, usage, practice,
procedure or other matter or thing not now existing or in force.
(2) Sub-section ( 1) shall not be held to prejudice or affect the general
application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 with regard to the effect of
repeal of this Act.
Savings.
10 of 1897.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Commission on Review of Administrative Laws headed by Shri P.C. Jain, in
the Report submitted to the Government on 30th September, 1998, recommended,
inter-alia  the repeal of the Union Duties of Excise (Electricity) Distributing
Act, 1980.
2. The aforesaid recommendations of the Commission on Review of
Administrative Laws were examined by the Department of Revenue and it was found
that the said enactment had no further application and is obsolete.
3. The Bill proposes to repeal the aforesaid enactment to remove the obsolete
laws from the statute book. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW D ELHI; P. CHIDAMBARAM.
The 20th December 2005.
————
PRESIDENT'S  RECOMMENDATION  UNDER  ARTICLE  117 OF
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
————
[Copy of letter No. 275/72/2001-CX.8A, dated the 17th February, 2006
from Shri P. Chidambaram, Minister of Finance to the Secretary-General,
Lok Sabha]
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Union Duties
of Excise (Electricity) Distribution Repeal Bill, 2006, has recommended under article
117(1) of the Constitution of India, the introduction of the Bill in Lok Sabha.
3

LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to repeal the Union Duties of Excise (Electricity) Distribution Act, 1980.
————
(Shri P . Chidambaram, Minister of Finance)
MGIPMRND—6049LS(S5)—6-3-2006.