1
THE COAL MINES (CONSERV ATION AND DEVELOPMENT)
AMENDMENT BILL, 2012
A
BILL
further to amend the Coal Mines (Conservation and Development) Act, 1974.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Coal Mines (Conservation and Development)
Amendment Act, 2012.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Coal Mines (Conservation and Development) Act, 1974, in section 6, in sub-
section (1), for the words "rupees ten per tonne", the words "rupees fifty per tonne" shall be
substituted.
Short title
and
commencement.
Amendment
of section 6
of Act 28 of
1974.
Bill No. 22 of 2012
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Coal Mines (Conservation and Development) Act, 1974 provides for the
conservation of coal and development of coal mines and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
2. Section 6 of the Act provides that the Central Government shall levy and collect
such duty of excise not exceeding rupees ten per tonne on all coal raised and despatched
and on all coke manufactured and despatched as may be fixed from time to time by notification.
The Central Government, by notification No. S.O. 727(E), dated the 25th June, 2003, enhanced
the rate of excise duty from rupees three and paisa fifty to rupees ten per tonne for coking
or non-coking coal.
3. Out of the total collection of excise duty, only thirty-five per cent. is being utilised
for two schemes framed by the Central Government, namely, (i) the Conservation and Safety
in Coal Mines, and (ii) the Development of Transportation Infrastructure in Coalfield Areas
and the remaining sixty-five per cent. is reserved for the Jharia-Raniganj Master Plan. This
will enable partial funding for implementation of Jharia-Raniganj Master Plan which is
addressing the issues of fires and land subsidence in the old mined out areas in Jharia and
Raniganj coalfields which were taken over at the time of nationalisation.
4. In August, 2009, the Central Government approved the master plan dealing with
fires, subsidence and rehabilitation in the Jharia and Raniganj coalfields at a total outlay of
rupees 9770 crores. It is to be implimented over a period of 10 years. The annual requirement
of bunds would be about ruppes 977 crores. The implementation of the master plan envisaged
funding of rupees 350 crores per annum from the internal resources of Coal India Limited
and rupees 350 crores from the collection of excise duty at the current rate of rupees ten per
tonne. It is proposed to enhance the current rate of excise duty to bridge the gap in funding
which is to the extent of ruppes 277 crores each year over the 10 years period of
implementation of the master plan.
5. Since, the aforesaid section 6 confers power upon the Central Government to fix, by
notification, rupees ten as maximum rate of excise duty, the excise duty cannot be increased
further without amendment of the Coal Mines (Conservation and Development) Act, 1974.
It is, therefore, proposed to amend the provisions of aforesaid section 6 of the aforesaid Act
to increase the maximum amount of excise duty from the existing maximum ceiling of rupees
ten per tonne to rupees fifty per tonne for all types of coal.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; SRI PRAKASH JAISWAL.
The 24th February, 2012.
2

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE COAL MINES (CONSERV ATION AND DEVELOPMENT)
ACT, 1974
(28 OF 1974)
* * * * *
6. (1) With effect from the appointed day, there shall be levied and collected on all coal
raised and despatched, and on all coke manufactured and despatched, from the collieries in
India, such duty of excise, not exceeding rupees ten per tonne, as may be fixed from time to
time by the Central Government by notification, and different rates of duty may be levied on
different grades or description of coal or coke:
Provided that the Central Government may, by general or special order, exempt any
special grade or grades or description of coal or coke from the levy of such duty of excise.
* * * * *
Imposition of
excise duties.

GMGIPMRND—4426LS(S3)—14-03-2012.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
Bill
further to amend the Coal Mines (Conservation and Development) Act, 1974.
————
(Shri Sri Prakash Jaiswal, Minister of Coal)