Amendment of
article 84.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2021
 By
SHRI BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB,  M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called Constitution  (Amendment) Act, 2021.
2. In article 84 of the Constitution, in clause (b), for the words "twenty-five
years", the words "twenty-one years" shall be substituted.
3. In article 173 of the Constitution, in clause (b), for the words "twenty-five
years", the words "twenty-one years" shall be substituted.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
   Bill No. 22 of  2021
Amendment of
article  173.
Short title.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is the world's largest democracy. More than 80 crore people are registered
as eligible voters with the Election Commission of India. It is a heartening fact that
a sizeable portion of this number consists of youth. In order that popular Houses in
India are truly representative, it is essential that the youth of nation are given due
representation in these Houses.
The Indian Constitution, when originally enacted, set the age of eligibility for
a voter as twenty-five years. At that time, the youth in India was not considered to
be ready for a larger political role which could justify setting a lower age limit.
However, after about thirty-eight years of the working of the Constitution, the
voting age was reduced to eighteen years by the Constitution (Sixty-first
Amendment) Act, 1988. It was felt that the youth then was more literate and politically
conscious than what they were at the time of framing of the Constitution and
unrepresented youth of the country needed to be afforded an opportunity to give
vent to their feelings and to help them become a part of the political process. Ever
since then, a demand has been raised to reduce the age of eligibility for election as
member of Lok Sabha and State Legislative Assemblies from twenty-five years to
twenty-one years.
The Indian Constitution largely follows the British model structurally, if not
philosophically, though with some modifications. The age of candidacy for members
of the House of Commons was set at twenty-one years, which was reduced further
to eighteen years few years ago. The age of eligiblity for membership of the Canadian
House of Common is eighteen years, which is the same as for the Australian House
of Representatives. Across globe, majority of democracies have set the eligibility
age for membership of popular Houses at par with the voting age.
India is a much younger country compared to be aforesaid nations. For a
country which was about one-third population in the age group of 15-25 years, it
would be quite unreasonable that people below the age of twenty-five years are
not allowed to contest elections to popular Houses and contribute proactively to
the political process. It is therefore, necessary that in order to establish a truly
democratic polity, the age of entry to popular Houses is reduced to at least twenty-
one years.
With the above object in view, the Bill seeks to amend article 84 and 173 of
the Constitution to reduce the age from twenty-five years to twenty-one years of a
person to be qualified to be chosen to fill a seat in Lok Sabha and State Legislative
Assemblies.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW D ELHI; BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB
September 1, 2020.
2

ANNEXURE
[EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA]
* * * * *
84. A person shall not be qualified to be chosen to fill a seat in Parliament
unless he—
(a) * * * *
(b) is, in the case of a seat in the Council of States, not less than thirty years
of age and, in the case of a seat in the House of the People, not less than twenty-
five years of age; and".
* * * * *
173. A person shall not be qualified to be chose to fill a seat Ligislature of a
State unless he—
(a) * * * *
(b) is, the case of seat in the Legislative Assembly, not less than twenty-five
years of age and, in the case of a seat in the Legislative Council, not less than
thirty years of age; and
* * * * *
3
Qualification for
membership of
Parliament.
Qualification for
membership of
the State
Legislature.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—1018LS—17.03.2021.