THE JAMIA MILLIA ISLAMIA (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
By
Suki G.M. Banatwaut.a, M.P.

A
BILL

to amend the Jamia Millia Islamia Act, 1998,

Be it enacted by
follows :--

Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as

1, (1) This Act may be called the Jamia Mi ja Islamia (Amendment) Act, 2000.
(2) It shall come into force at once.

2. In the Long Title of the Jamia Millia Islamia Act, 1988 (hereinafter referred to as
the Principal Act):—
(i) the words “establish and” shall be omitted: and

(ii) after the word “University”, the words “for Promoting education,
Particularly of the Muslims”, shall be inserted,

As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

«Varn 20 \
‘
हटाए saiepig “
(orrention 0०16)

Ee नं

Se es

‘Short title and
commence-
‘ment,

Atnendment of
the Long Title,


Amendment of
Section 2.

‘Amendment of
Section 4.

Amendment of
Section 6.

Amendment of
Section 7.

Amendment of
Section 18.

Amendment of
Section 25

Amendment of
Schedule,

2
3. In section 2 of the principal Act, in clause (0)—

(i) after the word “founded”, the words “by the Sheikhul Hind Maulana
Mehmudul Hassan, Maulana Mohammed Ali, Hakim Ajmal Khan, Dr. Mukhtar Ahmed
i Khwaja and other leaders of the Muslim community” shall

(ii) after the words “which is incorporated as a Univer under this Act”, the
words “and which is recognised as a minority educational institution under the
Constitution of India” shall be inserted.

4. In section 4 of the principal Act, in clause (i), after the words “shall be applied”, the
words “to promote the educational and cultural advancement, particularly of the Muslims
and” shall be inserted.

5. In section 6 of the principal Act, for clause (ii), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely: —

“(i) to promote the study of the religions and cultures of India as well as the
development of Islamic and the Indian civilizations.”

6. In section 7 of the principal Act, in the proviso, after the words “the Scheduled
Tribes”, the words “the Muslims, Other Backward Classes, the Urdu-speaking community,
the intemal students, outstanding players, the sons/daughters/spouses of the permanent
employees and the staff of the University”, shall be inserted.

7. In section 18 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after clause (6), the following
clause shall be added, namely:—

“(e) to decide and lay down the extent of reservation for each category as is
referred to.in section 7."

8. In section 25 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in clause (०), after the word
“examination”, the words “which shall ordinarily be Urdu, to the extent possible” shall be
added.

9. In the Schedule to the principal Act, in statute 11, after clause (xx), the following
clauses thereunder shall be inserted, namely:—

“Others

(xxi) six persons representing Muslim culture and learning to be co-opted by
the Anjuman (Court);

(xxii) two persons representing Urdu language and literature to be co-opted by
the Anjuman (Court);

(xxiii) the President and the General Secretary of the University Students’
Union;

(xxiv) eleven students to be elected by simple majority by students of the.

various faculties classified into groups in the manner prescribed by the Ordinance;

(xxv) fifteen ex-students to be elected by the Alumini (old students)
Association in the manner prescribed by the Ordinance.”.

10

25

|


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Consequent to a court decision, the reservation scheme hitherto in vogue in the Jamia
Millia Islamia, Delhi, is in jeopardy. This has created a serious situation and a crisis in the
Jamia.

This Bill seeks to restore the reservation scheme and the original, historic and
minority character of the Jamia,

New Detut; G.M. BANATWALLA
February 2, 2000.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 9 of the Bill amends Statute 1] to provide that eleven students shall be elected
{0 the Anjuman (Court) by simple majority by students of the various faculties clase
into groups in the manner prescribed by the Ordinance. Similarly. fiftcen ex-studhan shall
be elected by the Alumini (Old Boys) Association in the manner prescribed by the Ordi-
nance.

The matters for which ordinances may be made pertains to matter of detail and it iy

not possible to provide for them in the Bill. The delegation of legislative power is,
therefore, of a normal character.



ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE JAMIA MILLA ISLAMiA Agr, 1988

(58 oF 1988)

THE JAMIA MILLIA ISLAMIA ACT, 1988
No. 58 of 1988
[8th October, 1988]

Act to establish and incorpcrate a teaching University in the Union territory of
Delhi and to provide for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

Wheareas it is expedient to establish and incorporate a teching University at New

lhi, to dissolve the “Jamia Millia Islamia Society, Delhi”, a society registered under the

ities Registration Act, 1860 and to transfer to and vest in the said University all
ies and rights at the said Society;

. * . * *

2. In the Act, and in all Statues made hereunder, unless the context otherwise Definitions.
‘Tequires,—

(a) academic staff means such categories of staffas are designated as academic
staff by the Ordinances;

* * . * *

(0) University means the educational institution known as “Jamia Millia Islamia”
founded in 1920 during the Khilafat and Non-Co-operation Movements in response
to Gandhiji’s call for a boycott of all Government-sponsored educational institutions
which was subsequently registered in 1939 as Jamia Millia Islamia Society, and de-
clared in 1962 as an institution deemed to be a University under section 3 of the
University Grants Commission Act, 1956, and which is incorporated as a University
under this Act,

* * * . *

4. On and from the commencement of this Act,— Dissolution of

the Jamia
() the Society known as the Jamia Millia Islamia Society, Dethi, shall be Milla Islamia

dissolved, and all property, movable or immovable, and all rights, powers and Society and
Privileges of the said Society shall be transferred to and vest in the University and aster of all

shall be applied to the objects and purposes for which the University is established; ue

. . . न .

6. The University shall have the following powers, namely: — Powers of the
University,

(i) to provide for instruction in such branches of learning as the University may,
from time to time, determine and to make provisions for research and for the
advancement and dissemination of knowledge:

(id to promote the study of the religions, philosophy and culture of India;

* * * * *

7. The University shall be open to persons for cither sex and of whatever Tace, creed, University
or class, and it shall not be lawful for the University to adopt or impose on any person ope! 0 all

test whatsoever of religious belief or profession in order to entitle him to be admitted berger
in as a teacher or student or to hold any office therein or to graduate there at:

5


6

Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the University from
making appropriate provisions for reservation for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes,
the physically handicapped persons and women.

. . . . *
‘The Anjuman 18. (1) The constitution of the Anjuman (Court) and the term of office of its members
(Court). shall be prescribed by the Statutes,

(2 Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Anjuman (Court) shall have the follow-
ing powers and functions, namely:—

(a) to review, from time to time, the broad policies and programmes of the
University and to suggest measures for the improvement and development of the
University;

(8) to consider and pass resolutions on the annual report and the annual ac-
counts of the University and the audit report on such accounts;

(0) to advise the Visitor in respect of any matter which may be referred to it for

advice; and
(d) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed by this Act or Statutes.
. . . . .
Power to make 25. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the Ordinances may
Ordinances. provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—

(a) the admission of students to the University and their enrolment as such;

(b) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees, diplomas and certifi-
cates of the University;

(©) the medium of instruction and examination;
. * * * *
THE SCHEDULE
(See Section 24)
‘THe STATUTES OF THE UNIVERSITY
. ‘ * * *
11, ANJUMAN (COURT):
(1) The Court shall consists of the following persons, namely: —
Ex-officio Members:
(i) Amir-e-Jamia (Chancellor),
. * . . .
(xx) The Chairman of the Central Board of Secondary Education, Delhi.

(2) All members of the Anjuman (Court) other than ex-officio members, shall
hold office for a term of three years.

. * . . *


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to amend the Jamia Millia Islamia Act, 1998.

(Shri G. M. Banatwalla, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—3479LS—1 1-2-2000