F H °
ming;
“4

AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

Lp “

Bill No. 22 of 2005
THE ELECTRICITY (PRIORITY SUPPLY TO RURALAREAS AND
AGRICULTURE SECTOR) BILL, 2005

By

Suri R. SaMBasiva RAO, M.P.
A

BILL

to provide for the compulsory supply of electricity to the agricultural sector and
rural areas

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Républic of India as follows: —

1. (7) This Act may be called the Electricity (Priority Supply to Rural Areas and Short title and

A riculture Sector) Act, 2005
(2) It extends to the whole of India. |
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— .

(a) "agriculture" includes poultry, dairy farming, orchards, rearing of animals and

(5) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of that
and in other cases, the Central Government

extent.

Definitions.


jt SS +

Supply of

electricity to

Agriculture
and rural
households
and villages
industries.

Power to
make rules.

(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and

(d) “village industries" means small scale industries in villages and includes khadi-

and cottage industries

3. (/) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the appropriate Government shall ensure that seventy percent of ‘he total electricity
generated within its territorial jurisdiction including the electricity generated by foreign
companies shall be supplied to the agricultural sector, rural houscholds and village
industries.

(2) The appropriate Government shall, within its territorial jurisdiction, allocate

quantum of electricity to be supplied to the villages in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that in every village electricity shall be supplied— |

(a) to the farmers atleast for three hours every day for agricultural purposes at
half the rate; |

(5) free of cost to every household belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes and other weaker sections of the society atleast for two hours during morning and
evening every day; and

(c) to village industries at such concessional rate as may be prescribed atleast for
five hours every day for six days in a week.

4. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for

carrying out the purposes of this Act.

है ५ 435
ae
if
a
Pt

8

५0५

os
eek


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS |

it is said that India lives in villages and it is true that more than seventy percent. of our
population lives in villages and earns its livelihood through agriculture, horticulture rearing
of animals, poultry and other village industries of various kinds. But, unfortunately the major

part of rural India lives in dark, as most of the villages are yet to be electrified Agriculture is
Mainly dependent on monsoon. Even if there are tubewells, they do not function in the
absence of regular power supply. In fact there is little power supply to rural areas. Major
chunk of power generated in the country is consumed by cities. In fact thirty percent of the
opulation living in cities is consuming almost the entire power generated in the country
is has resulted in the backwardness of the rural areas

For desired results and to achieve progress, major portion of power generated has to
be diverted to rural areas of the country and that too according to the ratio of the population
is step will boost agricultural and industrial production apart from serving domestic

oF
१०६

ind industrial purposes in rural areas compulsorily .

ra
५

Hence this Bill.

New DELHI: R. SAMBASIVA RAO

requirements. It is, therefore, proposed to supply electricity to households and for agricultural .



Pe .

half rate to farmers for three hours every day, free of cost to Scheduled Castes/Tribes and

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides that appropriate Government shall supply electricity at

other weaker sections of the society and at concessional rates to village industries. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India in relation
to Union territories. The expenditure in respect of States will be met out of their respective
Consolidated Funds. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees ten
crore is likely to be involved | हे ँ a

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five crore is also likely to be involved
with respect to giving of connections where electricity is not available at present a

A


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

_ Clause 4 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
purposes of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only.


LOK SABHA

‘
A
BILL
to provide for the compulsory supply of electricity to the agricultural sector and rural
: areas. . ह
\
i | (Shri R. Sambasiva Rao, M.P.)

_MGIPMRND—4256LS(S-3)—18-02-2005.