1
Short title and
commencement.
THE CLINICAL ESTABLISHMENTS (REGISTRA TION AND
REGULATION) AMENDMENT BILL, 2018
By
SHRI DUSHYANT CHAUTALA, M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Act, 2010.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation)
Amendment Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No.  22 of  2018
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In section 5 of the Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Act, 2010
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), after clause (e), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
"(ea) setup and maintain an online portal for the clinical establishments to
update the records and real time data;".
3. (1) In section 12 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following sub-
sections shall be inserted, namely:—
"(3) The clinical establishments whose annual revenue exceeds rupees
fifty lakh shall update the real-time position of occupancy of the beds in
their respective premises on the online portal setup by the National council under
clause (ea) of section 5.
(4) The clinical establishments whose annual revenue exceeds rupees fifty lakh
shall publish an annual report stating the monthly implementation progress of
clause (b) of section 13B.".
4. After section 13 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted,
namely:—
"13A. (1) The National Council shall, in consultation with State Councils, meet
quarterly to determine the range of rates for each type of medical procedures and services
provided by the clinical establishments.
(2) The rates for each type of medical procedures and services in different
geographical locations (like villages, town, and metro) shall be decided considering the
economic status of the people and on the basis of the cost of infrastructure, equipments,
consumables and skilled human resources.
(3) The rates under sub-section (2) may be revised as per annual market inflation.
13B. The district registering authority or any other body authorized by the Central
Government shall visit, call for information and inspect the clinical establishments on a
quarterly basis to ensure that—
(a) clinical establishments are open to any person without any discrimination
on the ground of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth, language or any of them;
(b) clinical establishments with an annual revenue exceeding rupees fifty lakh
reserve ten per cent. of the total number of operational beds for medical examination
and treatment free of charge in each department for the poor sections, whose annual
income is less than rupees twenty five thousand; and
(c) clinical establishments charge rates of medical procedures and services as
determined under sub-section ( 2) of section 13A.".
Amendment
of section 5.
Amendment
of section 12.
Insertion of
new sections
13A and 13B.
Rate
determination
for Clinical
Establishment.
Registering
Authority to
visit, call for
information
and inspect
the clinical
establishments.
23 of 2010.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND REASONS
Article 21 of the Constitution states that no person shall be deprived of his life or
personal liberty except according to procedure established by law. However, providing
rudimentary healthcare is equivalent to putting the life of an individual in danger just because
he is economically incapable to afford decent healthcare. It is prerogative of the Government
to ensure that nobody under any circumstance, whatsoever, shall be deprived of his/her life
and provision of good healthcare is one of the prominent ways to achieve this.
The Honourable Supreme Court, in the landmark judgment of Consumer Education
and Research vs. Union of India, 1995 held that the right to health and medical care is a
fundamental right and it is the obligation of the State not only to provide emergency medical
services but also to ensure the creation of conditions necessary for good health.
Furthermore, Part IV of the Indian Constitution, the Directive Principle of State Policy
lays down the duties of the State which includes provision of good healthcare. Article 39(e)
states that the health and strength of workers, men, women, and children are not abused.
Article 41 imposes duty on State to public assistance for those who are sick and disable.
Article 42 states that it's a primary responsibility of the State to protect the health of infant
and mother by maternity relief. Article 47 spells out the duty of the State to raise the level of
nutrition, the standard of living and public health of its people as its primary responsibility.
However, it is observed that the Government despite taking various initiatives has not
been able to provide a comprehensive medical and health facilities which all the citizens are
entitled to. After the adoption of neo-liberal policy framework from 1990 onwards, corporate
hospitals rose at a startling rate. Thus, it has become difficult for an ordinary family of our
country to be able to access good healthcare. As per the Medical Council of India (MCI),
since independence the number of private medical colleges in India has grown at a startling
rate with a pace much greater than that of the Government medical Colleges.
With this sharp rise, these private clinical establishments started building up cartels,
thereby charging exuberant prices for medical services. There have been plenty of examples
in the past, whereby poor families had to go through  grave mental and monetary exploitation
by these clinical establishments. Hence, these private hospitals need to be regulated by a
statutory framework to stop the exploitation of the vulnerable sections of the society.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Clinical Establishments (Registration and
Regulation) Act, 2010 with view to —
(a) determine the range of rates for each type of medical procedures and services
provided by the clinical establishments; and
(b) reserve ten per cent of the total number of operational beds for medical
examination and treatment in clinical establishments for the poor sections of the society.
Hence, this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; DUSHYANT CHAUTALA
November  30, 2017.
3

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that National Council shall setup and maintain an online
portal for the clinical establishments to update the records and real time data. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
likely to involve a recurring annual expenditure of rupees fifty crore  from the Consolidated
Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be
involved.

5
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CLINICAL ESTABLISHMENTS (REGISTRATION AND REGULATION) ACT, 2010
(ACT NO. 23 OF 2010)
* * * * * *
5. ( a) * * * * * *
(b) * * * * * *
(c) * * * * * *
(d) * * * * * *
(e) * * * * * *
(f) perform any other function determined by the Central Government from time
to time.
* * * * * *
12. (1) For registration and continuation, every clinical establishment shall fulfil the
following conditions, namely:—
(i) the minimum standards of facilities and services as may be prescribed;
(ii) the minimum requirement of personnel as may be prescribed;
(iii) provisions for maintenance of records and reporting as may be prescribed;
and
(iv) such other conditions as may be prescribed.
(2) The clinical establishment shall undertake to provide within the staff and facilities
available, such medical examination and treatment as may be required to stabilise the
emergency medical condition of any individual who comes or is brought to such clinical
establishment.
* * * * * *
Functions of
National
Council.
Condition for
Registration.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Act, 2010.
————
(Shri Dushyant Chautala, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3639LS(S3)—23.01.2018.