THE TUBERCULOSIS (PREVENTION AND CONTROL) BILL, 2017
By
DR. KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI, M.P.
——————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
——————
CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
P
ROHIBITION OF DISCRIMINATION
3. Prohibition of discrimination.
CHAPTER III
MOLECULAR TESTING AND DAILY DOSAGE TREATMENT
4. Central and State Governments to take measures.
5. Molecular Testing and daily dose of Multi-drug Resistant (MDR-TB)
Tuberculosis.
6. Availability of latest Anti-Tuberculosis drugs.
7. Guidelines for testing centres.
CHAPTER IV
D
IGITAL DATABASE  AND TRACKING OF TUBERCULOSIS TREATMENT AND CARE
8. Mandatory notification of Tuberculosis patients.
9. Enrolment under Aadhaar for Tuberculosis patients seeking treatment.
CHAPTER V
I
DENTIFICATION OF VULNERABLE SECTIONS OF THE POPULATION
10. Identification of vulnerable section of the population.
11. State Government to present list of vulnerable sections to the Central Government.
CHAPTER VI
WELFARE MEASURES BY CENTRAL AND STATE GOVERNMENT
12. Nutritional, financial and psycho-social support for tuberculosis patients.
13. Tuberculosis related awareness programs.
14. Guidelines for care, etc. of children and HIV-positive persons affected by
Tuberculosis.
Bill No. 230 of 2017
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

(ii)
CLAUSES
CHAPTER VII
NATIONAL AND STATE TUBERCULOSIS ELIMINATION BOARDS
15. Constitution of the National Tuberculosis Elimination Board.
16. Functions of the National Board.
17. Constitution of State Tuberculosis Elimination Board.
CHAPTER VIII
A
PPOINTMENT OF OMBUDSMAN
18. Appointment of Ombudsman.
19. Powers of Ombudsman.
20. Procedure of complaint.
21. Reasonable opportunity of being heard.
22. Authorities to assist Ombudsman.
23. Report to State Government.
CHAPTER IX
P
ENALTIES
24. Penalty for failure to comply with orders of Ombudsman.
25. Prohibition of victimization.
26. Court to try offences.
CHAPTER X
M
ISCELLANEOUS
27. Act to have overriding effect.
28. Protection of action taken in good faith.
29. Delegation of powers.
30. Central Government to make guidelines.
31. Power of Central Government to make rules.
32. Power of State Governments to make rules.
33. Power to remove difficulties.

THE TUBERCULOSIS (PREVENTION AND CONTROL) BILL, 2017
By
DR. KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the prevention, diagnosis, treatment and control of the spread of tuberculosis
and for the protection of the rights of patients affected by the tuberculosis disease
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
W
HEREAS  the continued spread of tuberculosis is a matter of grave concern to all and
there is an urgent need for the prevention and control of the said disease;
AND WHEREAS there is a need to protect and secure the rights of persons who are
affected with tuberculosis and vulnerable to the said disease;
AND W HEREAS there is a necessity for effective care, support and treatment for
tuberculosis;
Bill No. 230 of 2017
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
AND W HEREAS  the General Assembly of the United Nations has adopted the
Sustainable Development Goals, which call for a reduction in tuberculosis-related deaths
and the World Health Organization has adopted the End TB Strategy for a reduction in the
incidence of Tuberculosis by 2035 through collective global efforts;
A
ND WHEREAS the Republic of India, being a signatory to the aforementioned Goals
and Strategy, it is expedient to give effect to the said Goals and Strategy.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Tuberculosis (Prevention and Control) Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government, may,  by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Aadhaar” means Aadhaar number issued by the Unique Identification
Authority of India under sub-section (3) of section 3 of the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery
of Financial and other Subsidies Benefits and Services) Act, 2016;
(b) “discrimination” means any act or omission which directly or indirectly,
expressly or by effect, immediately or over a period of time,—
(i) imposes any burden, obligation, liability, disability or
disadvantage on any person or category of persons, based on one or more
tuberculosis-related grounds; or
(ii) denies or withholds any benefit, opportunity or advantage from any
person or category of persons, based on one or more tuberculosis-related
grounds,
and the expression “discriminate” to be construed accordingly;
(c) “guidelines” means any statement or any other document issued by the
Central Government indicating policy or procedure or course of action relating to
tuberculosis to be followed by the Central Government, State Governments,
Governmental and non-Governmental organisations and establishments and
individuals dealing with prevention, control and treatment of tuberculosis;
(d) “HIV-positive person” means a person whose HIV test has been confirmed
positive;
(e) “Multi-drug Resistant Tuberculosis (MDR-TB)” means a strain of the
tuberculosis bacteria resistant to two of the most effective anti-tuberculosis drugs
available, isoniazid and rifampicin;
(f) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;
(g) “NIKSHAY” means a web based solution for monitoring of tuberculosis
patients developed by the National Informatics Centre;
(h) “person” includes an individual, a Hindu Undivided Family, a company, a
firm, an association of persons or a body of individuals, whether incorporated or not,
in India or outside India, any corporation established by or under any Central or State
Act or any company including a Government company incorporated under the
Companies Act, 1956, any Limited Liability Partnership under the Limited Liability
Partnership Act, 2008, any body corporate incorporated by or under the laws of a
Definitions.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
1 of 1956.
6 of 2009.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
18 of 2016

3
country outside India, a co-operative society registered under any law relating to
cooperative societies, a local authority and every other artificial juridical person;
(i) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made by the Central Government or
the State Government, as the case may be;
(j) “Revised National Tuberculosis Control Program (RNTCP)” means the
program launched by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in 1997;
(k) “State Government” in relation to a Union territory, means the Administrator
of that Union territory appointed by the President under article 239 of the Constitution;
(l) “tuberculosis” means an infectious disease caused by a bacterium,
Mycobacterium Tuberculosis that is spread through the air; and
(m) “tuberculosis-affected person” means an individual who is suffering from
any strain of the tuberculosis disease.
CHAPTER II
PROHIBITION OF DISCRIMINATION
3. No person shall discriminate against the tuberculosis-affected person on any ground
including any of the following, namely:—
(a) the unfair treatment in, or in relation to employment or occupation;
(b) the denial or discontinuation of, or unfair treatment in, healthcare services;
(c) the denial or discontinuation of, or unfair treatment in educational
establishments and services thereof;
(d) the denial or discontinuation of, or unfair treatment with regard to, the right
of movement;
(e) the denial or discontinuation of, or unfair treatment with regard to the right
to reside, purchase, rent or otherwise occupy, any property;
(f) the denial of access to, removal from, or unfair treatment in, Government or
private establishment in whose care or custody a person may be;
(g) the isolation or segregation of a tuberculosis-affected person.
CHAPTER III
MOLECULAR TESTING AND DAILY DOSAGE TREATMENT
4. The Central Government and every State Government, as the case may be, shall
take all measures as it deems necessary and expedient for the prevention of spread of
tuberculosis, in accordance with the guidelines.
5. (1) The measures to be taken by the Central Government or the State Government
under section 4 shall include the measures for providing, as far as possible, Molecular
Testing methods for diagnosis and daily dosage treatment for those living with Multi-drug
Resistant (MDR-TB) Tuberculosis, in particular.
(2) The Central Government shall issue necessary guidelines in respect of protocols
for tuberculosis relating to Molecular Testing and Daily Dosage treatment, which shall be
applicable to all persons and shall ensure their wide dissemination.
6. The Central Government shall take steps to ensure the introduction and
availability of the latest anti-tuberculosis drugs in all public hospitals and Government-
run pharmacies.
Prohibition of
discrimination.
Central and
State
Governments
to take
measures.
Molecular
Testing and
daily dose of
Multi-drug
Resistant
(MDR-TB)
Tuberculosis.
Availability
of latest anti-
tuberculosis
drugs.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
7. No diagnostic centre or laboratory shall conduct a diagnostic test for tuberculosis
or Multi-drug Resistant Tuberculosis except in accordance with the guidelines laid down
for such test under this Act.
CHAPTER IV
D
IGITAL DATABASE AND TRACKING OF TUBERCULOSIS TREATMENT AND CARE
8. Every public and private hospitals and clinics shall notify tuberculosis patients
under their treatment and care on the web-based NIKSHAY platform under the Revised
National Tuberculosis Control Programme to facilitate real time tracking of treatment and
care such patients.
9. The Central Government and every State Government shall take measures to ensure
that every Tuberculosis-affected person is enrolled under Aadhaar to ensure unique
identification of patients seeking care and facilitate direct benefit transfers under the welfare
measures mentioned under Chapter VI of this Act.
CHAPTER V
I
DENTIFICATION OF VULNERABLE SECTIONS OF THE POPULATION
10. ( 1) Every State Government shall, with the assistance from the Central
Government, carry out identification of the poor and vulnerable sections of the population
within the jurisdiction of each tuberculosis program in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The identification under sub-section (1) shall include, but shall not be limited to
women, children, below poverty line households and HIV-positive persons.
11. Every State Government shall, within six months of the Act coming into force,
present the Central Government with a list of vulnerable sections within every tuberculosis
program and formulate a plan to create awareness and initiate preventive measures about
disease among such vulnerable sections.
CHAPTER VI
W
ELFARE MEAURES BY CENTRAL AND STATE GOVERNMENT
12. (1) The Central Government and every State Government shall take measures to
facilitate better access to welfare, access to persons infected or affected by tuberculosis,
which shall include but will not be limited to:
(a) nutritional support, if malnutrition or undernourishment is detected, under
the public distribution scheme or any other related food security scheme;
(b) financial support, under a health insurance or coverage scheme, for below
poverty line patients to reduce out of pocket expenditure;
(c) psychological and social support, through free counseling, for patients and
their families.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), the Central and State
Governments shall frame schemes to address the needs of tuberculosis-affected women
and children as well those from vulnerable sections of society, including those who are
HIV positive.
13. The Central Government and State Government shall formulate tuberculosis related
information, education and communication programmes which are non-discriminatory.
Guidelines for
testing
centres.
Mandatory
notification
of
Tuberculosis
patients.
Enrolment
under Aadhaar
for
Tuberculosis
patients
seeking
treatment.
Identification
of vulnerable
sections of
the
population.
State
Government
to present list
of vulnerable
sections to
the Central
Government.
Nutritional,
financial and
psycho-social
support for
Tuberculosis
patients.
Tuberculosis
related
awareness
programs.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

5
14. The Central Government shall lay down guidelines for care, support and
treatment of children affected with tuberculosis and HIV-positive persons affected by
tuberculosis.
CHAPTER VII
N
ATIONAL AND STATE TUBERCULOSIS ELIMINATION BOARDS
15. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute a National Tuberculosis Elimination Board, to facilitate the eradication of
tuberculosis in the country.
(2) The National Board shall include,—
(a) The Union Minister of Health and Family Welfare— Chairperson;
(b) The Secretary, Union Ministry of Health and Family Welfare— Member;
(c) representatives from the Indian Council of Medical Research to be nominated
by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed— Member;
(d) representatives from Health Departments of every State Government to be
nominated by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed—  Member;
(e) medical practitioners from private medical hospitals and clinics to be
nominated by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed— Member;
(f) members from affected communities to be nominated by the Central
Government in such manner as may be prescribed— Member; and
(g) representatives from non-Governmental Organisations working in the field
of prevention, control and treatment of tuberculosis to be nominated by the Central
Government in such manner as may be prescribed— Member.
(3) The salary and allowance payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
members of the National Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
16. The National Board shall,—
(a) formulate a comprehensive strategy to ensure the elimination of the disease,
with an aim to achieving national and international commitments;
(b) keep track of new medical diagnostic technologies and anti-tuberculosis
drugs and ensuring their easy availability;
(c) provide incentives to the private sector to assist in the elimination of
tuberculosis;
(d) create awareness and prevention strategies on the basis of the mapping and
identification conducted by every State Government under section 10;
(e) track the activities of the Ombudsman appointed under section 18;
(f) receive quarterly reports from the State Tuberculosis Elimination Boards;
(g) ensure that adequate financial, nutritional and psycho-social support is
provided to tuberculosis-affected patients under a variety of Government schemes;
and
(h) take decisions regarding any other policy or scheme related to tuberculosis
and the rights of the patients seeking treatment and care for the said disease.
Guidelines for
care, etc. of
children and
HIV-persons
affected by
tuberculosis.
Constitution
of the
National
Tuberculosis
Elimination
Board.
Functions of
the National
Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

6
17. (1) Every State Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a State Tuberculosis Elimination Board to carry out the functions of this Act.
(2) The State Tuberculosis Elimination Boards shall consist of a Chairperson and
such other number of members as may be determined by the State Government in
consultation with the National Board.
(3) The salary and allowance payable to Chairperson and other member of the State
Tuberculosis Elimination Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER VIII
APPOINTMENT OF OMBUDSMAN
18. (1) Every State Government shall appoint one or more Ombudsman—
(a) possessing such qualification and experience as may be prescribed, or
(b) designate such number of officers not below the rank of District Magistrate,
to exercise such powers and discharge such functions, as may be conferred on
Ombudsman under this Act.
(2) The terms and conditions of the service of an Ombudsman appointed under
clause (a) of sub-section (a) shall be such as may be prescribed by the State Government.
(3) The Ombudsman appointed under sub-section (1) shall have such jurisdiction in
respect of such are or areas as the State Government may, by notification, specify.
19. (1) The Ombudsman shall, upon a complaint made by any person, inquire into the
violation of the provisions of this Act, in relation to healthcare services by any person, in
such manner as may be prescribed by the State Government.
(2) The Ombudsman shall maintain records of complaints in such manner as may be
prescribed.
20. The complaints shall be made to the Ombudsman in such manner, as may be
prescribed.
21. The Ombudsman shall, after giving an opportunity of being heard to the parties,
pass such order, as he deems fit, giving reasons therefor.
22. All authorities including the civil authorities functioning in the area for which the
Ombudsman has been appointed under section 18 shall assist in execution of orders passed
by the Ombudsman.
23. The Ombudsman shall, after every six months, report to the State Government, the
number and nature of complaints received, the action taken and orders passed in relation to
such complaints and such report shall be published on the website of the Ombudsman and
a copy thereof be forwarded to the Central Government.
CHAPTER IX
P
ENALTIES
24. Whoever fails to comply with any order given by an Ombudsman within such time
as may be specified in such order shall be liable to pay a fine which may extend upto ten
thousand rupees and in case the failure continues, with an additional fine which may extend
to five thousand rupees for every day during which the failure continues.
25. No person shall subject any other person or persons to any detriment on the
ground that such person or persons have taken any of the following actions namely:—
(a) made complaint under this Act;
Constitution
of State
Tuberculosis
Elimination
Boards.
Appointment
of
Ombudsman.
Powers of
Ombudsman.
Procedure of
complaint.
Reasonable
opportunity
of being
heard.
Authorities to
assist
Ombudsman.
Report to
State
Government.
Penalty for
failure to
comply with
orders of
Ombudsman.
Prohibition
of
victimization.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

7
(b) brought proceedings under this Act against any person;
(c) furnished any information or produced any document to a person exercising
or performing any power or function under this Act; or
(d) appeared as a witness in a proceeding under this Act.
26. No court other than the court of Judicial Magistrate First Class shall take cognizance
of an offence under this Act.
CHAPTER X
MISCELLANEOUS
27. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time in force or in any instrument having effect
by virtue of any law other than this Act.
28. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central
Government, the State Government, the Ombudsman or any member thereof or any officer
or other employee or person acting under the direction either of the Central Government,
the State Government, or Ombudsman in respect of anything which is in good faith done or
intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rules or guidelines made thereunder or
in respect of the publication by or under the authority of the Central Government, the State
Government or Ombudsman.
29. The Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, may, by
general or special order, direct that any power exercisable by it under this Act shall, in such
circumstances and under such conditions, if any, as may be mentioned in the order, be
exercisable also by an officer subordinate to that Government or the local authority.
30. The Central Government may, by notification, make guidelines consistent with
this Act and any rules thereunder, generally to carry out the provisions of this Act.
31. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary for removing
the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of the period
of two years from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament.
32. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry out the
provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
33. (1) The State Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the
provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be, after it is made before the Legislature of that State.
Court to try
offences.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Delegation of
powers.
Central
Government
to make
guidelines.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power of
Central
Government
to make
Rules.
Power of State
Governments
to make Rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Although tuberculosis is a preventable and treatable disease, yet it continues to be a
serious public health epidemic in India. India bears the highest tuberculosis burden in the
world, accounting for 23 per cent. of the global incidence of active tuberculosis patients. It
is estimated that 1,400 Indians die every day due to tuberculosis. Since India is a signatory
to the World Health Organization’s ‘End TB Strategy’ and the United Nations’ Sustainable
Development Goals, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has formulated the National
Strategic Plan to eliminate Tuberculosis by 2025.
To supplement the strategies outlined within this Plan, the Bill aims to address all
aspects of the diagnosis, treatment, prevention and control of the spread of tuberculosis as
well as the rights of the patients seeking care. It mandates the creation of a National
Tuberculosis Elimination Board, which will be the apex body directing all efforts to combat
the disease along with State-level Boards. It also provides for appointment of an Ombudsman
to address the grievances of patients and related stakeholders.
The Bill prohibits certain discriminatory acts that stigmatize patients and their families
and mandates the Central Government and State Governments to undertake welfare measures
to provide financial, nutritional and psycho-social support to patients from vulnerable
sections of the population. To facilitate the tracking of tuberculosis treatment and care, the
Bill makes it mandatory for both public and private hospitals and clinics to notify tuberculosis
patients under their care on the web-based NIKSHAY portal and encourage all patients
seeking care to enroll under Aadhaar.
Tuberculosis is India’s most severe public health crisis and combating it will require
the collective and sustained effort of all stakeholders. The Bill aims to ensure that India will
achieve its goal to eliminate tuberculosis by 2025 and it seeks to achieve the above objects.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI
November 27, 2017.
8

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides that the Central Government and every State Government,
as the case may be, shall take all measures as it deems necessary and expedient for the
prevention of spread of tuberculosis, in accordance with the guidelines. Clause 5 provides
for measures to be taken by the Central Government or the State Government for providing
Molecular Testing methods for diagnosis and daily dosage treatment for those living with
Multi-drug Resistant (MDR-TB) Tuberculosis. Clause 10 provides for every State
Government to carry out identification of the poor and vulnerable sections of the population
within the jurisdiction of each tuberculosis program. Clause 12 provides that the Central
Government and every State Government to take measures to facilitate better access to
welfare, access to persons infected or affected by tuberculosis including nutritional support,
financial support and social support. Clause 15 provides that the Central Government shall
constitute a Board to be known as the National Tuberculosis Elimination Board. Clause 17
provides for constitution of the State Tuberculosis Elimination Boards. Clause 18 provides
for appointment of Ombudsman. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve an annual recurring expenditure
of about rupees one hundred crore from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved.
9

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 4 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make guidelines consistent
with the proposed legislation and rules thereunder to carry out its provisions. Clause 32 of
the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the provisions of
this Act. As matters in respect of which rules may be made under the aforesaid provisions
are matters of procedure and administrative detail only, the delegation of legislative power
is, therefore, of a normal character.
10

LOK   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the prevention, diagnosis, treatment and control of the spread of tuberculosis
and for the protection of the rights of patients affected by the tuberculosis disease
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2721LS(S3)—15-12-2017.