1
THE COMPULSORY TEACHING OF BHAGAV AD GITA  AS A
MORAL EDUCATION TEXT BOOK IN EDUCATIONAL
INSTITUTIONS BILL,  2019
By
SHRI RAMESH BIDHURI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory teaching of Bhagavad Gita as a moral education text book in
educational institutions and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth  Year of the Republic of  India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Teaching of Bhagavad Gita as a Moral
Education Text Book in Educational Institutions Act,  2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In  this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government; and
Short title
and
commencement.
Definitions.
Bill No. 230 of 2019
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(b) “educational institution” means any school, by whatever name called,
imparting education up to senior secondary level.
3.  Every educational institution shall compulsorily teach Bhagavad Gita as a moral
education text book.
4. The appropriate Government shall appoint such number of teachers, as it may
deem necessary with such qualifications, as may be specified by the Central Government,
for teaching Bhagavad Gita as a moral education text book in every educational institution.
5. The appropriated Government shall derecognise a school, which does not comply
with the provisions of section 3:
Provided that a school shall be given reasonable opportunity of being heard before
any decision on its derecognition is taken.
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the States for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
7. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the provisions of this Act, shall
apply to minority institutions only if the management of such institutions convey to the
appropriate Government their willingness to include the teaching of Bhagavad Gita as a
moral education text book in their school curriculum.
8.  The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
Compulsory
Teaching of
Bhagavad Gita
as a moral
education text
book.
Central
Government
to provide
funds to the
State
Governments.
Appropriate
Government to
appoint
teachers for
teaching
Bhagavad Gita
as a moral
education text
book.
Derecognition
of schools for
non-compliance
of the
provisions of
the Act.
Application
of Act on
minority
educational
institutions in
certain
situation.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
5
10
15

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Srimad Bhagavad Gita has been the book of India’s soul. It is also the greatest book on
the moral and value education. Bhagavad Gita not only holds holy significance to the people
of India but also guides the moral and value thinking in the time of depravity and chaos.
The teachings of Gita is ageless and unbounded. It contains the teaching ranging from
spiritual awakening to leadership and management. Teachings of Gita is teaching of humanity
and brotherhood. Many great thinkers from our time such as Swami Vivekananda,
Sri Aurobindo, Albert Einstein, Mahatma Gandhi as well as Madhavacharya, Shankara and
Ramanuja, from bygone ages, have all deliberated upon its timeless teachings.
Mahatma Gandhi has also said “When doubts haunt me, when disappointments stare
me in the face, and I see not one ray of hope on the horizon, I turn to Bhagavad Gita. Let the
Gita be to you a mine of diamonds, as it has been to me; let it be your constant guide and
friend on life’s way”.
It is highly deplorable that such vast literature containing infinite teachings for all age
groups is neglected by our educational institutions. It is high time to make sincere effort to
spread the teachings to our children and grown ups. Teaching of Bhagavad Gita as a
compulsory moral education text book in educational institutions will enable the younger
generation to enrich their personality, noble traditions and thoughts of Bhagavad Gita will
make them better citizens.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAMESH  BIDHURI
August  8, 2019.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall appoint teachers
for teaching of Bhagavad Gita as a compulsory moral text book in every educational institution.
Clause 6 provides that the Central Government shall provide adequate funds to the
State Governments carrying out the purposes of this Act. The Bill, if enacted, would involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring
expenditure of about rupees five thousand crore will be involved from the Consolidated
Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees  hundred crore is also likely to be involved.

l
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory teaching of Bhagavad Gita as a moral education text book in
educational institutions and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Ramesh Bidhuri, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—2817LS(S3)—01-11-2019.