1
Short title and
commencement.
THE DISASTER MANAGEMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
By
DR. SHASHI THAROOR, M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the Disaster Management Act, 2005.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Disaster Management (Amendment) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After section 46 of the Disaster Management Act, 2005, the following section shall
be inserted, namely: —
"46A. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Fund to be called the National Rehabilitation and Reconstruction Fund for meeting the
expenses for post disaster rehabilitation and reconstruction.
(2) The Central Government shall, within sixty days from the date of commencement of
this Act, in consultation with the National Authority, lay down guidelines for allocation of
funds under the National Rehabilitation and Reconstruction Fund.
Bill  No. 231  of  2018
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
10
Insertion of
new section
46A.
National Reha-
bilitation and
Reconstruc-
tion Fund.

2
5
10
(3) The Central Government shall make adequate budgetary allocations towards the
National Rehabilitation and Reconstruction Fund.
(4) When a State Government is unable to meet expenses for post-disaster rehabilitation
and reconstruction, the Central Government shall, on a request made by a State Government,
within thirty days from the date of request, allocate funds in accordance with the guidelines
framed under sub-section (2):
Provided that where the Central Government fails to allocate funds as requested
by the State Government, the reasons for doing so shall be clearly communicated to
the State Government concerned.
Explanation.—Expenses for post disaster rehabilitation and reconstruction shall
include expenses for long term reconstruction and rehabilitation measures.".

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Disaster Management Act, 2005 established a legal regime to govern various
facets of disaster management in the country through the co-operation and co-ordination
between the Central Government and the State Governments. The Act established the State
Disaster Response Fund and the National Disaster Response Fund to meet the expenses for
emergency relief work.
However, under the existing State Disaster Response Fund and the National Disaster
Response Fund guidelines, there is no provision to provide for any financial assistance to
the State Government for rehabilitation and reconstruction measures, even though
rehabilitation and reconstruction are integral components of disaster management. People
displaced and adversely affected by a disaster should not be deprived of their right to life
and dignity as guaranteed under article 21 of the Constitution due to lack of resources with
the State Government for rehabilitation and reconstruction measures. Therefore, a separate
statutory fund with sufficient resources needs to be established by the Central Government
to assist State Governments for this purpose. The Report of the Task Force, 2013 which
reviewed the Disaster Management Act, 2005 had recognized that the Act does not provide
a specific mechanism to support post-disaster recovery and reconstruction, and therefore
recommended inserting a regular provision in the Act for this purpose.
In situations where the State Government does not have adequate funds to meet the
expenses arising for rehabilitation and reconstruction works, it is the responsibility of the
Central Government to provide adequate additional assistance in a time bound manner.
Guidelines are required to be framed by the Central Government to govern the procedure for
the allocation of such funds to ensure uniformity and objectivity in policy.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SHASHI THAROOR
November 18, 2018.
3

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for constitution of a National Rehabilitation and
Reconstruction Fund for meeting the expenses for post disaster rehabilitation and
reconstruction.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees ten thousand crore per
annum would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Disaster Management Act, 2005.
————
(Dr. Shashi Tharoor, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—2053LS(S3)—19-12-2018.