                                                            Bill No. 231 of 2022
THE MOTOR VEHICLES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
SHRI UNMESH BHAIYYASAHEB PATIL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of
India as follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act,
2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government
may, by notification in the official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
 AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
Amendment of
section 8. 2. In section 8 of the Motor Vehicle Act, 1988, in sub-section (4), after
the first proviso the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:–
“Provided further that the licensing authority shall not refuse to issue
a learner’s license to applicant affected by leprosy if such applicant
has been certified by a registered medical practitioner as having either
been cured of leprosy or having been administered with the first dose
under Multi-Drug Therapy and with continuing treatment for leprosy
being provided by such registered medical practitioner.”
59 of 1988.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Leprosy, caused by the bacteria Mycobacterium leprae, primarily
affects the peripheral nervous system causing skin lesions, numbness, and
other deformities. As per the latest data from National Leprosy Eradication
Programme (NLEP), a total of 65,147 new leprosy cases were detected
during the year 2020-21 in India. India accounts for over half of the
world’s new leprosy patients, according to World Health Organisation.
According to the 20th Law Commission report titled “Eliminating
Discrimination against Persons Affected by leprosy” as of 2014, India
accounts for fifty eight per cent. of the new leprosy cases in the world,
leading the list of countries that have reported high figures of leprosy
infection globally. Although leprosy may cause irreversible disabilities,
with advances in medicine, it is now a completely curable disease that can
be rendered non-infectious early on in treatment itself, through Multi-Drug
Therapy, which has cured more than fifteen million persons over two
decades alone. Government of India has undertaken programs to provide
free-of-cost treatment to Persons affected by leprosy. A major obstacle to
uplift the status of Persons affected by leprosy is the social stigma
associated with leprosy. In many spheres of life, such persons continue to
be outcast from society.
The United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities, 2007 (“UNCRPD”) promotes, protects and ensures the full
and equal enjoyment of all human rights and fundamental freedoms by all
persons with disabilities. India has signed and ratified the UNCRPD, and
is also a member of the UN General Assembly that unanimously passed the
Resolution on the Elimination of Leprosy.
Despite the fact that the notable efforts have been made so far and
have significantly improved the lives of many people affected by leprosy
and their family members, the long-standing stigma associated with leprosy
and the archaic laws that apply to them persist. Thus, in order to remove
the stigma of leprosy and eliminate the discrimination that still exists in
society, the laws that directly affect the individual must be revised.
In addition to the various laws that had been amended to eliminate
discrimination, one such law is the Motor Vehicle Act of 1988, which does
not grant license to the persons affected by leprosy. This need is to amend
section 8 of the Motor Vehicle Act, 1988, as an exercise in affirmative
action to accommodate the needs of people suffering from leprosy. The
amendment makes the licensing authority liable to not deny a learner’s
license to any person affected by leprosy.
Hence this Bill.
   NEW DELHI;                         UNMESH BHAIYYASAHEB PATIL
23 November, 2022.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE MOTOR VEHICLES ACT, 1988
ACT NO. 59 OF 1988
* * * * * *
    8. (1) Any person who is not disqualified under section 4 for driving a
motor vehicle and who is not for the time being disqualified for holding or
obtaining a driving licence may, subject to the provisions of section 7, apply
to the licensing authority having jurisdiction in the area–
* * * * * *
(4) If, from the application or from the medical certificate referred to in
sub-section (3), it appears that the applicant is suffering from any disease or
disability which is likely to cause the driving by him of a motor vehicle of the
class which he would be authorised by the learner’s licence applied for to
drive to be a source of danger to the public or to the passengers, the licensing
authority shall refuse to issue the learner’s licence:
Provided that a learner’s licence limited to driving an invalid carriage
may be issued to the applicant, if the licensing authority is satisfied that he is
fit to drive such a carriage.
* * * * * *
4
Grant of
learner’s
licence.

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
further to amend the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988.
————
(Shri Unmesh Bhaiyyasaheb Patil, M.P .)