1
Bill No. 231of  2019
THE CENTRAL UNIVERSITIES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
By
SHRIMA TI RITI PA THAK, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Central Universities Act, 2009.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Central Universities (Amendment) Act,  2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title
and
commencement.
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2. After section 3D of the Central Universities Act, 2009 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act) the following sections shall be inserted, namely:—
“3E. There shall be established in the Sidhi region of Madhya Pradesh, a University,
which shall be a body corporate, to be known as the Central University of Madhya Pradesh,
having its territorial jurisdiction extending to the whole of the State of Madhya Pradesh,  as
specified in the First Schedule to this Act.
3F. There shall be established in the Sidhi region of Madhya Pradesh, a Tribal
University, which shall be a body corporate, to be known as the Central Tribal University of
Madhya Pradesh, having its territorial jurisdiction extending to the whole of the State of
Madhya Pradesh,  as specified in the First Schedule to this Act, to provide avenues of higher
education and research facilities primarily for the tribal population of India.”.
3. In section 5 of the principal Act, for the existing proviso, the following proviso shall
be substituted, namely:—
“Provided that the Tribal Universities established under sections 3D and 3F shall, in
their respective jurisdictions, take additional measures for paying special attention to the
tribal centric higher education and research, including art, culture and customs.”
4. In the First Schedule to the principal Act, after entry 12, the following entries shall
be inserted, namely:—
“12A. Madhya Pradesh Central University of Whole of the
Madhya Pradesh State of Madhya Pradesh.
  12B. Madhya Pradesh Central Tribal University of Whole of the
Madhya Pradesh State of Madhya Pradesh.’’.
Insertion of
new sections
3E and 3F.
2
Establishment
of Central
University of
Madhya
Pradesh.
Establishment
of Central
Tribal
University of
Madhya
Pradesh in
Sidhi region.
Amendment
of section 5.
Amendment
of the first
schedule.
25 of 2009.
5
10
15
20

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Establishment of a Central University and a Central Tribal University in Sidhi region of
State of Madhya Pradesh will provide access to higher education and improve its quality. It
will also facilitate the way for higher education and research facilities for the people of the
State. Apart from this, tribal university in the Sidhi region of Madhya Pradesh will provide
education and research facilities in tribal art, cultures and customs to tribal population of
India and promote advanced knowledge for enrichment of technology. Apart from
concentrating on tribal education, all educational and other activities will be implemented in
this Central University, like any other Central University. As of now, there is no Central
University in the Sidhi region of Madhya Pradesh.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Central Universities Act, 2009 with a view to
provide for the establishment of a University in the Sidhi region of Madhya Pradesh namely
“Central University of Madhya Pradesh” and a Tribal University, namely, ‘‘Central Tribal
University of Madhya Pradesh”.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RITI  PATHAK
July 19, 2019.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to insert the new sections 3E and 3F in the Central Universities
Act, 2009 so that two new central universities, namely, “Central University of Madhya
Pradesh” in Sidhi region and “Central Tribal University of Madhya Pradesh” can be established
which shall be the body corporate, whose jurisdiction extends to whole of the State of
Madhya Pradesh. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred
crores will be involved per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees two thousand crores is also likely to be
involved.

5
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT  FROM  THE CENTRAL  UNIVERSITIES  ACT, 2009
(25OF 2009)
* * * * *
5. * * * * *
Provided that the Tribal University established under section 3D shall take additional
measures for paying special attention to the tribal centric higher education and research,
including art, culture and customs.
* * * * *
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
[See section 3(4)]
Serial Name of the Name of the University T erritorial
No. State jurisdiction
(1) (2) (3) (4)
1. Andhra Pradesh Central University of Whole of the
Andhra Pradesh State of Andhra Pradesh
* * * * *
* * * * *
12. Kerala Kerala Central University Whole of the State
of Kerala.
13. Odisha Central University Whole of the
of  Odisha State of  Odisha
* * * * *
Objects of
University.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Central Universities Act, 2009
————
(Shrimati Riti Pathak,  M.P .)
MGIPMRND—2809LS(3/F)—01-11-2019.