Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 231 of  2017
THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2017
By
SHRI JAGDAMBIKA PAL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In section 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, in sub-section (1), in the
Explanation,  for clause (b), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
“(b) “wife” includes—
(i) a woman who has been divorced by, or has obtained a divorce from her
husband and has not remarried; and
(ii) a woman who has married a man during the subsistence of his first marriage
and has been living with that man as his wife for a reasonable period of time.”.
Amendment
of section
125.
2 of 1974.
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Section 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 provides for maintenance to the
neglected wife, child and parents. The object is to prevent starvation and vagrancy by
compelling the person to perform the obligation which he owes in respect of his wife, child,
father or mother who are unable to support themselves.
A woman married to a man during the subsistence of his first marriage is not entitled to
claim maintenance as in law a second marriage during the subsistence of the first marriage is
not legal and valid. Such a woman though she is de facto  the wife of the man, in law she is
not his wife. In such a situation the second wife cannot claim the benefit of section 125 for no
fault of her. The husband is absolved of his responsibility of maintaining his second wife.
This is manifestly unfair and unreasonable. The man should not be allowed to take advantage
of his own illegal acts. Law should not be insensitive to the suffering of such women.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 with a view to
enable the second wife to claim maintenance from her husband.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; JAGDAMBIKA  PAL
November 27, 2017.
3

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973
(2 OF 1974)
* * * *
CHAPTER  IX
ORDER  FOR  MAINTENANCE  OF WIVES , CHILDREN  AND  PARENTS
125. (1) If any person having sufficient means neglects or refuses to
maintain—
(a) his wife, unable to maintain herself, or
(b) his legitimate or  illegitimate  minor child, whether married
or not, unable to maintain itself, or
* * * *
Explanation.— For the purposes of this Chapter,—
(a) “minor” means a person who, under the provisions of the
Indian  Majority Act, 1875  (9 of 1875) is deemed not to have
attained his majority.
(b) “wife” includes a woman who has been divorced by, or has
obtained a divorce from, her husband and has not remarried.
* * * *
Order for
maintenance of
wives, children
and parents.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
————
(Shri Jagdambika Pal, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2659LS(S3)—18.12.2017.