1
THE RAILWAYS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
SHRI RAMMOHAN NAIDU KINJARAPU, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Railways Act, 1989.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Railways (Amendment)  Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 3 of the Railways Act, 1989, after sub-section (2), the following sub-
section shall be inserted, namely:—
"(2A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), the Central
Government shall, by notification, constitute a new Zonal Railway with headquarter
at Vishakhapatnam consisting of the Waltair Railway Division of the East Coast
Railway Zone and Vijayawada, Guntur and Guntakal Railway Division of the South
Central Railway Zone.".
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. 232 of  2017
Amendment
of section 3.
24 of 1989.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The unscientific division of the erstwhile State of Andhra Pradesh in the year 2014 left
the residual State of Andhra Pradesh with a number of challenges and disadvantages. To
overcome such difficulties and to make up for the loss of resources establishment of a
separate railway zone was promised to the residual State of Andhra Pradesh under the
Thirteenth Schedule as per section 93 of the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014.
Post the reorganisation of the State of Andhra Pradesh none of the Railway zones
operating in the State of Andhra Pradesh has its headquarters within the State. This has
caused great inconvenience to the public of the State of Andhra Pradesh. The concerns of
railway commuters of the State are no longer the priority of any of the railway zones. People
from the State have to travel all the way to the neighbouring States of Odisha and Telangana
to the Zonal headquarters. Since the State is in a rebuilding phase after having lost out
greatly due to the partition of the erstwhile State, a separate railway zone which caters to the
special needs of the State for commotion as well as strengthening infrastructure is direly
needed.
This situation was already recognised as an inevitable result of the State reorganisation
and that is why the Reorganisation Act assured to set up a separate railway zone for the
State of Andhra Pradesh.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Railways Act, 1989 with a view to constitute a
new Zonal Railway headquarter at Visakhapatnam consisting of the Waltair Railway Division
of the East Coast Railway Zone and Vijayawada, Guntur and Guntakal railway divisions of
the South Central Railway Zone.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAMMOHAN NAIDU KINJARAPU
November 28, 2017.

3
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to constitute a new Zonal Railway headquarter at
Visakhapatnam consisting of the Waltair Railway Division of the East Coast Railway Zone
and Vijayawada, Guntur and Guntakal railway divisions of the South Central Railway Zone.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
It is likely to involve an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees 
one hundred crore*
from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore* is also likely to be
involved.
*Member may be requested to furnish requisite amount.

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE RAILW AYS ACT, 1989
(24 OF 1989)
* * * *
CHAPTER II
RAILW AY ADMINISTRATIONS
3. (1) The Central Government may, for the purpose of the efficient administration of
the Government railways, by notification, constitute such railways into as many Zonal
Railways as it may deem fit and specify in such notification the names and headquarters of
such Zonal Railways and the areas in respect of which they shall exercise jurisdiction.
(2) The Zonal Railway existing immediately before the commencement of this Act
shall be deemed to the Zonal Railways constituted under sub-section (1).
* * * *
Zonal
Railways.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Railways Act, 1989.
————
(Shri Rammohan Naidu Kinjarapu, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2674LS(S3)—18-12-2017.