1
THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT (ESTABLISHMENT OF A
PERMANENT BENCH AT SILCHAR) BILL, 2016
By
MS. SUSHMITA DEV, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a permanent Bench of the
Gauhati High Court at Silchar.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Gauhati High Court (Establishment of a Permanent
Bench at Silchar) Act, 2016.
2. There shall be established a permanent Bench of the Gauhati High Court at Silchar
and such judges of the Gauhati High Court, being not less than three in number, as the Chief
Justice of that High Court may from time to time nominate, shall sit at Silchar in order to
exercise the jurisdiction and power for the time being vested in that High Court in respect of
cases arising in the districts of Cachar, Karimganj, Hailakandi and Dima Hasao.
Short title.
.
Bill No.  232 of 2016
Establishment
of a
Permanent
Bench of
Gauhati High
Court at
Silchar.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Gauhati High Court for the States of Assam, Nagaland, Mizoram and Arunachal
Pradesh is located at Gauhati. Out of the total submitted cases in Gauhati High Court,
approx. forty to forty-five cases belong to the districts of Barak V alley, namely, Cachar,
Karimganj, Hailakandi and Dima Hasao.
The distance between these districts of Barak Valley and Gauhati is a few hundred
Kilometres and the road and rail often remain interrupted during heavy monsoon due to
landslides, etc. The districts of the Barak V alley have a population of approximately
forty lakh. People have to travel long distance causing them immense inconvenience in
order to reach the High Court at Gauhati to pursue their cases. This is a great financial
strain for the residents of the valley, most of whom belong to economically weaker families.
For long, there has been a demand from the persons living in the region that a Bench of
the High Court be set up at Silchar in Cachar district which is very important town in the
State of Assam.
The Silchar town is developing as a center of trade and business. It has hundreds of
tea gardens and the presence of Central Public Sector Undertakings like the Oil and Natural
Gas Corporation Limited and the Hindustan Paper Corporation Limited. Therefore,
establishment of a permanent Bench at Silchar in Cachar district will help mitigate the
problems of the persons residing in the Barak V alley region.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW D ELHI; SUSHMITA DEV
July 25, 2016.
2

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a permanent Bench of the
Gauhati High Court at Silchar.
————
(Ms. Sushmita Dev, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2576L(S3)—04-10-2016.