As introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 232 of 2024
THE SCHEDULED CASTES AND SCHEDULED TRIBES 
(RESERV ATION IN POSTS AND SERVICES AND  
FILLING UP OF V ACANCIES IN A TIME  
BOUND MANNER) BILL, 2024
By
Shri Arun Bharti, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for reservation in posts and services under the Central Government and private 
sector for persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and  
timely filling up of vacancies meant for Scheduled Castes and  
Scheduled Tribes to ensure their equal Representation and  
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy- fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Reservation 
in Posts and Services and Filling up of Vacancies in a Time Bound Manner) Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement.
5

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appointing authority”, in relation to a service or post in an establishment, means 
the authority empowered to make appointment to such service or post;
(b) “establishment” means every such establishment owned, established, controlled, 
managed or financed by the Government and includes—
(i) a Ministry or department or subordinate office or attached office of the Government;
(ii) a public sector undertaking or statutory authority constituted under any 
Central Act;
(iii) a corporation in which not less than fifty-one per cent. of the paid-up share 
capital is held by the Government;
(iv) a university established by a Central Act and its affiliated colleges, including 
medical and engineering colleges and institutions;
(v) a primary or secondary school or any other educational institution including 
private unaided and aided institutions;
(vi) an industry, trade or business;
(vii) a Government company as defined under section 2(45) of the Companies 
Act, 2013; and
(viii) an autonomous body, organisation or institution receiving grant or aid from 
the Consolidated Fund of India;
(c) “Government” means the Central Government;
(d) “private sector” means any organisation or establishment which is not owned by 
the Central Government; 
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(f) “promotion by non-selection” means promotion made on the basis of seniority  
cum-fitness;
(g) “promotion by selection” means promotion made on the basis of merit-cum 
seniority;
(h) “recruitment year” means the calendar year for which the recruitment is made; 
(i) “Scheduled Caste” shall have the same meaning assigned to them in clause (24) 
of article 366 of the Constitution;
(j) “Scheduled Tribes” shall have the same meaning as assigned to them in clause 
(25) of article 366 of the Constitution; and
(k) “vacancy’’ means vacancy in a service or post reserved for the Scheduled Castes 
and Scheduled Tribes in the offices under the Central Government or in establishments 
which are wholly owned or managed by the Central Government or in which fifty-one 
per cent. shares are held by the Central Government. 
3. (1) The Government shall reserve such percentage of posts for persons belonging to 
the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes for appointment in establishments and private 
sector by direct recruitment and promotion, as may be prescribed.
(2) The posts reserved under sub-section (1) shall be filled in such manner, as may be 
prescribed.
2
Definitions
Reservation in 
appointment 
by direct 
recruitment and 
promotion.
10
5
30
40
35
25
20
15
18 of 2013.

4. In the case of promotion by selection from one Group ‘A’ post to another Group ‘A’ 
post in Government which carries the scale of pay, the maximum of which is equal to or 
less than the maximum of the scale of pay of a Director in the Central Secretariat Service or 
equivalent posts in other establishments, the officers belonging to the Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes shall be considered for appointment.
5. ( 1) Appointment to an unreserved vacancy shall be open to all eligible persons 
including a person belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
(2) Where such unreserved vacancy is filled by direct recruitment or promotion by 
selection by a person belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes on the basis 
of merit, then, such person shall be appointed against the unreserved vacancy.
6. (1) The maximum age limit fixed for direct recruitment to a service or post shall be 
relaxed by five years for persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
(2) The maximum age limit fixed for promotion to a post, if any, shall be relaxed by five 
years for persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
7. The examination fee or application fee, determined for recruitment to a service or 
post through competitive examination or otherwise, shall be reduced to such extent for 
persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, as may be prescribed.
8. (1) Any standard of suitability, excluding the essential and desirable qualifications, 
required for appointment by direct recruitment to a post shall be relaxed for persons 
belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, if sufficient number of such 
candidates possessing requisite standards are not available to fill the vacancies reserved for 
them.
(2) The experience required for appointment by direct recruitment to a post shall be 
relaxed for persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, if at any stage 
of selection, sufficient number of such candidates possessing the requisite experience are 
not available to fill the vacancies reserved for them.
9. (1) Where a qualifying examination is held to determine fitness of eligible persons 
for promotion by non-selection and sufficient number of persons belonging to the Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes fulfilling the qualifying standards are not available to fill the 
vacancies reserved for them, such qualifying standards shall be relaxed, consistent with the 
minimum standards of fitness required for appointment to the post, in the case of persons 
belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
(2) Where qualifying examination is held to determine merit of eligible persons for 
promotion by selection and sufficient number of persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes 
and Scheduled Tribes fulfilling the qualifying standards are not available to fill the vacancies 
reserved for them, such qualifying standards shall be relaxed, consistent with the minimum 
standards of merit required for appointment to the posts, in the case of persons belonging to 
the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
10. The vacancies reserved for persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes shall be filled by persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, 
respectively.
10
3
Unreserved 
vacancies to 
be open to 
members of 
the Scheduled 
Castes and 
Scheduled 
Tribes.
5
30
40
35
25
20
15
Reserved 
vacancies to be 
filled by persons 
belonging to 
the Scheduled 
Castes and 
Scheduled 
Tribes 
respectively.
Reservation 
in case of 
promotion.
Relaxation in 
qualifications 
and experience.
Fee concession.
Relaxation of 
age.
Inclusion of 
the Scheduled 
Castes and the 
Scheduled Tribes 
officers in select 
list in case of 
promotion within 
Group ‘A’.

11. Where posts in an establishment are to be abolished and as a result thereof, the 
services of certain persons are required to be either surrendered or terminated, no such 
surrender or termination shall be made in respect of persons belonging to the Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes, if it results in lowering their representation in relation to the 
percentage of reservation fixed for them.
12. (1) Every establishment shall designate an officer of such rank, as may be prescribed, 
to function as a liaison officer for the purpose of ensuring that the provisions of this Act or the 
rules made thereunder or any direction or instruction issued by the Government regarding 
reservation are not contravened.
(2) The liaison officer shall, from time to time, inspect and verify the documents, records 
and reports with respect to appointments of persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes made by the appointing authority by direct recruitment or promotion.
(3) Where the liaison officer is satisfied that the establishment of which he is the liaison 
officer has contravened the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder or any 
direction or instruction issued, he shall report such contravention to such authority as the 
Central Government may by notification designate. 
(4) On receipt of report of contravention under sub-section (3), the designated authority 
shall take such action against the person responsible for such contravention as may be 
prescribed.
13. (1) Every appointing authority, or an officer authorised by him in this behalf, shall 
maintain such documents and records, and furnish every year a report on the appointments of 
persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes made by direct recruitment 
and promotion, in such manner and at such time, as may be prescribed.
(2) The appointing authority or any other officer authorised by him shall make available 
such documents and records for inspection, furnish such information, and render such 
assistance, to the liaison officer, as may be necessary, to enable him to carry out his functions 
under this Act.
14. The Central Government shall, subject to the availability of finance and other 
resources, develop and organise training programmes to advance the competence of persons 
belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes for appointment to services and 
posts.
15. Whoever knowingly makes a false claim that he is a member of the Scheduled Caste 
or Scheduled Tribe shall be liable to punishment for a term which may extend to three years 
or with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees or with both.
16. Whoever knowingly issues a false Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe certificate 
shall be liable for punishment for a term which may extend to three years or with fine which 
may extend to fifty thousand rupees or with both.
17. (1) Every appointing Authority shall, within one month of the existence of a vacancy, 
compulsorily notify that vacancy.
(2) The vacancies referred to in sub-section (1),—
(a) besides being notified by the Employment Exchange, shall also be notified 
in such newspapers, including vernacular newspapers, as may be prescribed; and
(b) shall be given wide publicity on State run and other media channels.
Compulsory 
notification 
of vacancies 
reserved for 
the Scheduled 
Castes and 
Scheduled 
Tribes.
Penalty for 
issuing false 
caste certificate.
Penalty for 
making false 
claim.
Training 
programme 
for Scheduled 
Castes and 
Scheduled 
Tribes.
Maintenance 
of documents 
and records 
and furnishing 
of report by 
appointing 
authority.
10
5
30
40
35
25
20
15
Abolition 
of posts not 
to affect the 
representation 
of members of 
the Scheduled 
Castes and 
Scheduled 
Tribes.
Liaison officer.
4

18. (1) Every vacancy notified under section 17 shall be filled within six months from 
the date of notification.
(2) Every unfilled vacancy shall be carried forward till such vacancy is filled and in no 
case shall be de-reserved.
19. Whoever, intentionally contravenes the provisions of section 18 shall be liable to 
punishment for a term which may extend to three years or with fine which may extend to 
fifty thousand rupees or with both.
20. All memoranda issued or purported to have been issued by the Government in 
relation to reservation of posts in civil services for members of the Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes, immediately before the commencement of this Act, shall, in so far as they 
relate to the matters for which provisions have been made in this Act and are not inconsistent 
therewith, be deemed to have been issued under this Act as if this Act had been in force on 
the date on which such memoranda were issued.
21. The Government may, for giving effect to the provisions of this Act or the rules 
made thereunder, issue such directions to establishments, as it deems fit.
22. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent 
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument having 
effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.
23. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such 
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the percentage of posts for reservation and the manner of reservation under sub-
section (1) of section 3;
(b) the manner of filling vacancies under sub-section (2) of section 3;
(c) the extent of reduction in examination fee and application fee under section 7;
(d) the rank of the officer to be designated as the liaison officer under sub-section 
(1) of section 12;
(e) the documents and records to be maintained and the time and manner of 
furnishing report under sub-section (1) of section 13.
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this section shall be laid, as soon 
as may be, after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule.
Act to have 
overriding 
effect.
Power to make 
rules.
10
5
20
15
Compulsory 
filling of 
vacancies 
reserved for 
the Scheduled 
Castes and 
Scheduled 
Tribes.
Penalty for not 
notifying or 
filling vacancies.
Existing office 
memoranda to 
continue.
Power to issue 
directions.
35
30
25
5

6
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The principles of social justice and affirmative action are fundamental to the Indian 
Constitution, which guarantees equality and prohibits discrimination on the grounds of 
caste, religion, race, and sex. The Scheduled Castes (SCs) and Scheduled Tribes (STs), as 
historically marginalized communities, have faced systemic discrimination, exclusion, and 
deprivation. As part of the broader effort to uplift these communities, the Indian government 
has implemented reservations in public sector jobs and services, as mandated by the 
Constitution under Articles 15(4), 16(4), and 46.
However, despite the provision of reservations, there have been significant delays in 
filling reserved vacancies, resulting in a backlog that denies SCs and STs timely access to 
employment opportunities. These delays further exacerbate the socio-economic disparities 
between these communities and others. The Bill aims to address these challenges by ensuring 
that vacancies reserved for SCs and STs are filled in a time-bound and systematic manner, 
with clear timelines and accountability mechanisms. The Bill also seeks to strengthen the 
reservation framework to enhance the representation of SCs and STs in public services, 
ensuring that they benefit from the constitutional provisions designed to improve their 
socio-economic status.
One of the major challenges in the implementation of reservation policies has been the 
delay in filling up vacancies reserved for SCs and STs in government departments, public 
sector enterprises, and state institutions. These delays arise due to various reasons, including 
bureaucratic inefficiencies, procedural bottlenecks, and lack of accountability. As a result, 
the intended beneficiaries of reservations, i.e., the SCs and STs, are often deprived of job 
opportunities in a timely manner, leading to frustration, alienation, and perpetuation of 
inequalities. The Bill aims to address this problem by establishing clear timelines for the 
filling of reserved vacancies and creating mechanisms for monitoring and enforcement.
A core principle of this Bill is to promote equality of opportunity for SCs and STs in 
public sector employment. While reservation is a necessary tool for rectifying historical 
injustices, it is equally important that these provisions are effectively implemented to make 
a tangible difference in the lives of SC and ST individuals. Timely filling of reserved posts 
will allow these communities to benefit from the affirmative action intended for their welfare 
and advancement, contributing to a more just and inclusive society.
The Bill mandates that all vacancies reserved for SCs and STs in central and state 
government services be filled within a fixed and reasonable time frame. The proposed time 
limit will ensure that SCs and STs are not left waiting for prolonged periods to access their 
constitutional rights.
The Bill is an important legislative measure to ensure that the constitutional provision of 
reservation in public sector jobs for SCs and STs is implemented efficiently and effectively. 
The Bill will address the critical issue of delayed recruitment, reduce backlogs, and provide 
a framework for transparent, accountable, and time-bound filling of reserved vacancies.
By ensuring that vacancies reserved for SCs and STs are filled within a stipulated time 
frame, the Bill seeks to accelerate the socio-economic empowerment of these communities, 
provide them with equal opportunities for growth, and contribute to a more inclusive and 
just society. The timely and effective implementation of this Bill will go a long way in 
fulfilling the constitutional promise of justice, equality, and opportunity for all citizens, 
regardless of their caste or tribe.
Hence this Bill.
New Delhi;                                   A R U N  B H A R T I  
November 13, 2024

7
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
 Clause 17 of the Bill provides for compulsory notification and publicity of vacancies 
reserved for persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. The Bill, 
therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is 
estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is likely to 
be involved per annum. 
 No non-recurring expenditure will be involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
 Sub-clause (1) of clause 3 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to prescribe 
the extent and manner of reservation by direct recruitment and promotion in civil services 
for persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. Sub-clause (2) thereof 
empowers the Central Government to prescribe the manner of filling such vacancy. 
 Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to prescribe the extent of fee 
concession for persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. 
 Sub-clause (1) of clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to prescribe 
the rank of the officer who may be designated as the liaison officer. 
 Sub-clause (1) of clause 13 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to prescribe 
the manner of maintaining documents and records, and the manner and time of furnishing 
report on appointments of the members of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes made 
by direct recruitment and promotion, by the appointing authority. 
 The matters in respect of which rules may be made or notification may be issued are 
essentially matters of detail or procedure. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, 
of a normal character.
8

LOK SABHA
a
BILL
to provide for reservation in posts and services under the Central Government and private 
sector for persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and  
timely filling up of vacancies meant for Scheduled Castes and  
Scheduled Tribes to ensure their equal Representation and  
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
(Shri Arun Bharti, M.P .) 