1
THE CANCER PATIENTS (FREE MEDICAL TREATMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI P. KARUNAKARAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for free medical treatment to cancer patients in Government hospitals.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Cancer Patients (Free Medical Treatment, Bill, 2015.
(2) It extends to whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 232 of  2015
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title,
extent and
commencement.5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "cancer patient" means a citizen of India who has been clinically diagnosed
with any type of cancer or is under treatment of cancer; and
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. The appropriate Government shall provide free medical treatment to every cancer
patient in Government hospitals, in such manner as may be prescribed.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, 'free medical treatment' includes
supply of medicines, laboratory test, medical therapy and para medical products free of cost
to a cancer patient.
4. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds, from time to time, to the State Governments for the
effective implementation of the provisions of this Act.
5. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the sessions, and if before the expiry of the
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses
agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rules should
not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect,
as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Definitions.
Appropriate
Government to
provide free
medical
treatment to
cancer
patients.
Central
Government to
provide
adequate fund.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to make
rules.
10
20
15
25
5

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Cancer is one of the chronic disease of the modern era. More people are dying of
cancer than ever before. The disease in most of the cases is diagnosed in advance stage and
leads to death of patient. However, in many cases, due to early detection of the ailment and
medical advancement, the cancer patients have been cured and are leading normal lives. The
battle against the cancer is very much taxing emotionally, physically and financially. Therefore,
the need of the hour is that the State should play a more proactive role in the medical
treatment of cancer patients especially by extending them a helping hand financially to
confront the grave and traumatic disease.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; P.  KARUNAKARAN
July 13, 2015.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for free medical treatment to cancer patients. Clause 4
provides that Central Government shall provide adequate funds to the State Governments
for purposes of the Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees one thousand crore would be
involved as recurring expenditure per annum.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

GMGIPMRND—2331LS(S3)—31-10-2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for free medical treatment to cancer patients in Government hospitals.
————
(Shri P. Karunakaran,, M.P.)