1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
By
SHRI ASADUDDIN OWAISI, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment)  Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After article 371-J of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
Short title, and
commencement.
Bill No. 232 of  2019
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Insertion of
new article
371-K.
5

2
"371-K. (1) The President may, by order made with respect to the State of Bihar,
provide for special responsibility of the Governor to establish a separate development
council for the Seemanchal region to be known as the Seemanchal Regional Developmental
Council (hereinafter referred to as the Council) to exercise the powers conferred on and
to perform the functions assigned to it under this article.
(2) The Council shall be a body corporate having perpetual succession and a common
seal, with the powers to acquire, hold and dispose of both movable and immovable property,
to enter into and execute contracts, to sue or be sued, as well as any other power in
connection with or ancillary to the above and further to the objectives of the Council,
including those specifically mentioned in this article.
(3) The office of the Council shall be at such place within the Seemanchal Region as
the Council may think fit:
Provided that the Council may establish such number of offices at such places, as it
deems necessary to discharge its functions and fulfil its objectives.
(4) The Council shall consist of—
(a) a Chairperson;
(b) one whole time member to be elected by way of the adoption of a resolution
to that effect by the House of the People;
(c) not less than four members and maximum six members excluding the
Chairperson, to be appointed by the Governor of the State of Bihar, of which—
(i) at least two shall be members having special knowledge of or
professional experience in either one or more subjects of rural development,
urban planning, irrigation and public works, public health, health management,
engineering,  conservation  and  environmental  sciences,  agricultural
sciences, public administration and service delivery, finance, law, education,
infrastructure development, and any other subject as may be deemed useful
for the Council to perform its functions and fulfil its objectives under this
article; and
(ii) two shall be whole time members elected by electorates consisting of
representatives of municipalities, district boards and other such local
authorities in the Seemanchal region; and
(d) all elected members of the House of the People and legislative Assembly of
State of Bihar representing Seemanchal region ex-officio members.
(5) Every members of the Council shall be a whole-time member, and shall hold office
for a term of five years from the date on which he enters office, or up to the age of sixty-five
years, whichever is earlier.
(6) The Governor shall, before appointing any person as a Chairperson or a member of
the Council, except for the whole time member elected under clause (b) of sub-section (4),
reasonably verify that such person has no financial or other interest in the Council as is
likely to affect prejudicially his functions as a Chairperson or member, as the case may be.
(7) The Council shall,—
(a) conduct quarterly public hearings for residents of Seemanchal region;
(b) provide equitable opportunity to persons residing in the Seemanchal region
to access education, health services and employment;
(c) provide for the infrastructure necessary for accessing education, health
services, employment, flood risk management, connectivity, communication, irrigation
and bridges in the Seemanchal region;
Special
provisions
with respect
to State of
Bihar.
15
20
5
10
35
40
25
30
45

3
(d) ensure that adequate training is imparted for gainful employment to persons
residing in the Seemanchal region;
(e) provide for the basic care, including nutrition, shelter, clean environment,
and proper sanitation sanitation facilities for persons residing in the Seemanchal
region;
(f) ensure children below the age of seventeen years are not employed in any
kind of labour in the Seemanchal region;
(g) ensure protection to, and make special provision for, women, children,
economically backward classes, persons with disabilities, persons who were displaced
due to environmental causes or developmental efforts or persons saved from human
from trafficking or any other form of exploitation;
(h) encourage opportunities for investment, entrepreneurship, research and
innovation in the Seemanchal region;
(i) provide for equitable access to governance, access to justice and legal aid,
and delivery of all public services to the persons residing the Seemanchal region;
(j)provide for civic development, potable water and electricity in the Seemanchal
region; and
(k) provide access to banking and financial services to any persons residing in
the Seemanchal region.
(8) The Council shall prepare and cause to be published—
(a) a Strategic Development Plan once in every three years setting out the
development priorities of the Council for the next three years; and
Explanation.—The Strategic Development Plan shall include such research,
analysis and proposed measures as are necessary for the execution of the objectives
of the Council.
(b) a Seemanchal Annual Development Report, consisting of the measures
undertaken or to be undertaken by the Council including the manner of allocation of
financial and human resources.
(9) The Council shall have the power to, call for information, inspect, recommend and
monitor in relation to executing its objectives as specified in clause 8, including—
(a) conducting research, collecting data and analysing information;
(b) monitoring the implementation of the Strategic Development Plan and the
Seemanchal Development Report;
(c) formulating, approving, financing and implementing any plans, programmes,
projects and schemes for the Seemanchal region or any part thereof, including providing
financial support through grants;
(d) coordinating with any other public authority for inter-regional and intra-
regional development;
(e) raising awareness and undertaking advocacy measures for the promotion of
practices that are beneficial for the overall well being of the persons residing in the
Seemanchal region;
(f) consulting experts for excuting the objectives of the Council;
(g) making requisite rules, regulations, orders and byelaws as may be deemed
necessary by the Council; and
(h) all other acts as may be deemed necessary for executing the objectives of the
Council.
15
20
5
10
35
40
25
30
45

4
(10) For the purpose of this article there shall be constituted a Fund to be called as the
Seemanchal Regional Developmental Council Fund to which shall be credited all monies
realised, realisable or received respectively by or on behalf of the Council whilsts carrying
out its objectives and powers as conferred upon it by this article and be utilised by the
Council for the payment of all sums, charges and costs necessary for carrying out the
objectives and functions of the Council under this article.
(11) The Council shall, within one hundred and twenty days from the date of its
constitution, prescribe regulations for carrying out the provisions of this article.
(12) The Council shall make bye-laws for the management of the Seemanchal Regional
Developmental Council Fund and for the procedure to be followed in respect of maintenance
of accounts of Fund, auditing of Fund, payment of money into the said Fund, withdrawal of
moneys therefrom, the custody of moneys therein and any other matter incidental thereto or
connected therewith.
(13) The President shall, in consultation with the Council, by order, made in relation to
the State of Bihar, provide for—
(a) reservation of a proportion of setas in school, colleges, technical education
and vocational training institutions in the State of Bihar for students belonging to
Seemanchal region by birth or by domicile; and
(b) identification of posts or classes of posts under the State Government and in
any body or organisation under the control of the State Government of Bihar and
reservation of a proportion of such posts for persons belonging to Seemanchal region
by birth or by domicile and for appointment thereto by direct recruitment or by
promotion or in any other manner as may be specified in the order.
(14) The Parliament, shall, by law make such provisions as are necessary to give effect
to the purposes of this article.".
15
20
5
10
25

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
It has been recognised that the region of Seemanchal in Bihar ranks lower on all
development indices than other parts of the State of Bihar. As per the Ministry of Statistics
and Programme Implementation, not only is the per capita income of people of the State of
Bihar the lowest in the nation at rupees thirty-one thousand one hundred and ninety nine,
the per capita incomes in the major districts in Seemanchal region is far lower than that
average as well (Purnea-rupees ten thousand and ninety nine, Kishanganj-rupees nine
thousand nine hundred and twenty eight, Araria-rupees eight thousand seven hundred and
seventy six, Katihar-rupees eleven thousand two hundred and seventy eight). In terms of
the State literacy rate, as determined by the 2011 Census, the districts making up the
Seemanchal Area (Purnia-51.08%, Katihar 52.24%, Araria-53.53% and Kishanganj-55.46%)
lag significantly behind the literacy rate of the State of Bihar (61.80%), itself behind the
national literacy rate (74.04%). This situation of under development is seen across a number
of indicators, as is seen from a baseline survey conducted by the Indian Council for Social
Science Research in 2008 that found that all four districts lag behind the national average in
eight indicators of socio-economic development and amenities based on 2001 census data,
as identified by the Ministry of Minority Affairs, namely, electricity connection, pucca
housing, water closet latrines, literacy rate especially female literacy rate, and also additionally
measured level of vaccination, and other health facilities. Therefore, special provisions are
required to accommodate the needs of the Seemanchal region.
The special provisions are required to establish an institutional framework for the
identification of development needs of the said region, and ensuring capacity  building and
efficient allocation of resources in order to meet such development needs as well as enhance
the socio-economic welfare of the persons belonging to the region. The need is also to
promote livelihood opportunities for people from the region by providing for local cadres in
service and reservation in educational and vocational training institutions by an amendment
to the Constitution of India.
It is accordingly proposed to insert a new Article 371K in the Constitution to provide
for special provisions for the region of Seemanchal in Bihar, which shall consist of the
districts of Araria, Purnea, Kishanganj, Supaul and Katihar. The proposed article seeks to
provide for:—
(a) establishment of a separate Development Council for the Seemanchal region;
(b) identification of specific objectives to be undertaken by the Development Council
in furtherance of the development of the Seemanchal region, including infrastructure and
access to public services;
(c) sufficient allocation of funds for development over the Seemanchal region, in
accordance with the recommendations and suggested measure identified by the Development
Council;
(d) reservation in public employment through the constitution of local cadres for
domiciles of the region; and
(e) reservation in educational and vocational training institutions for domiciles of the
region.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; ASADUDDIN OWAISI
July 1, 2019.
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for the constitution of Seemanchal Regional Development
Council. It also provides for the constitution of the Seemanchal Regional Development
Fund. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involved expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees twenty crore will be involved as recurring
expenditure per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand crore is also likely to be
involved.
6

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 2 of the Bill empowers the Seemanchal Regional Development Council to make
regulations for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. It also empowers the Council to make
bye-laws for the management of the Fund, etc. Since the regulations and bye-laws will relate
to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
7

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Asaduddin Owaisi, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—2815LS(S3)—01-11-2019.