Bill No. 233 of 2015
THE SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO THE NATIONAL
CAPITAL TERRITORY OF DELHI BILL, 2015
By
SHRI MAHEISH GIRRI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the National Capital Territory
of  Delhi for the purpose of implementation  of  development works
relating to housing, water, sanitation, roads, schools, skill
development and welfare schemes for women, children
and poor people living in the urban villages and
for matters connected
therewith.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance to the National Capital
Territory of Dehi Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such a date, as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. There shall be paid such sums of money out of the Consolidated Fund of India,
every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation by law provide, as special financial
assistance to the National Capital Territory of Delhi  to meet the costs of such development
works and welfare schemes, as may be undertaken by the Government of the National
Capital Territory of Delhi with the approval of Union Government, for the purpose of—
(i) improving the health and educational standards of the children especially
girl child;
(ii) providing employment to members of families living below poverty line;
(iii) initiating welfare schemes aimed at improving the condition of labourers
and migrants;
(iv) undertaking measures for lowering infant mortality rate, improving
maternal health and promoting institutional delivery;
(v) providing water and sanitation facilities in urban villages;
(vi) providing skill development training to unemployed youths;
(vii) creating good quality infrastructure of roads, street lights, schools,
colleges and transport;
(viii) establishing community centres;
(ix) establishing information centres and libraries;
(x) preparing and creating awareness amongst people about disaster
preparedness plan and training them to deal with disasters;
(xi) imparting sex education; and
(xii) implementing Swachch Bharat Abhiyan in urban villages.
3. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
Special
Financial
assistance to
National
Capital
Territory of
Delhi.
Act not to be
in derogation
of other laws.
5
10
15
20

3
STA TEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND REASONS
The urban villages of Delhi need financial assistance from the Central Government for
successful completion of various development works and welfare schemes of the Central
Government as well as the Delhi Government. Urban villages in Delhi are not much developed
in comparison to the other areas in terms of infrastructure facilities like that of water, sanitation
and other development indicators such as employment, per capita income, girl child education,
etc. Due to unplanned expansion and construction in the existing abadi area of villages,
these villages are susceptible to disasters. Many villages located alongside the stagnant
waters of Yamuna leave the entire region susceptible to diseases such as malaria or dengue.
Most of the construction in these village areas is unauthorized.
Special focus is also required for the overall well being of the girl child, reduction of
infant and maternal mortality rate and welfare of labourers and migrants in urban villages of
National Capital Territory of Delhi.
It is, therefore, necessary that the Central Government should provide special financial
assistance to the National Capital Territory of Delhi.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MAHEISH GIRRI
July 22, 2015.

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that there shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the
Consolidated Fund of India, every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation by law
provide, as special financial assistance to the National Capital Territory of Delhi to meet the
costs of such schemes of development, as may be undertaken by the Government of NCT of
Delhi with the approval of the Union Government.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure out of the Consolidated Fund of
India. As the sums of moneys which will be given to the National Capital Territory of Delhi as
special financial assistance by appropriation by law made by Parliament will be known only
after the welfare schemes to be implemented by the Government of National Capital Territory
of Delhi with the approval of the Central Government are identified, it is not possible at
present to give the estimates of recurring expenditure which would be involved out of the
Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of
India.
4

GMGIPMRND—2339LS(S3)—31.10.2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the National Capital Territory of Delhi for the
purpose of implementation of development works relating to housing, water, sanitation,
roads, schools, skill development and welfare schemes for women, children and poor
people living in the urban villages and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Maheish Girri, M.P.)