THE  ABOLITION  OF  CAPITAL  PUNISHMENT  BILL, 2016
By
DR. RAMESH POKHRIYAL ‘NISHANK’, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for abolition of capital punishment in India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Abolition of Capital Punishment Act, 2016.
2. (1) Capital Punishment is hereby abolished.
(2)  Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code, 1860 or any
other law for the time being in force, the maximum punishment for any offence shall not be
more than imprisonment for life.
3. Nothing in section 2 shall apply to the offences of terrorism or rape.
Bill No. 233 of 2016
Act not to
apply to
certain
offences.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title.
Abolition of
Capital
Punishment.
5 45 of 1860

2
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Capital punishment is barbarous and inhuman which goes against the ethos of a
modern civilized society. The savage act of capital punishment raises the moral question
whether the State has the right to take away someone's life.
That is why the United Nations decided to appeal to States all over the world to do
away with capital punishment. Many nations around the world have already heeded the UN
appeal.
Except the offenders, who commit the offences pertaining to terrorist activities or rape,
no other person who offend against a law should be treated as a person to be done away
with. A civilized society should have an attitude of compassion, sympathy and rectification
towards these criminals. Even a hardened criminal would think and rethink when the society
helps him to change and allows him to live and work with them. A life sentence is sufficient
for a person to repent and change his ways to become a good citizen again. The attempt of
a civilized State should be to provide enough opportunity to its citizens to realize the wrong
he has done and to rectify himself to be a good man and a good citizen.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAMESH POKHRIYAL ‘NISHANK’
August 11, 2016.
2

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for abolition of capital punishment in India.
————
(Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal‘Nishank’, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2597(S3)—04.10.2016.