1
THE POPULATION CONTROL BILL, 2019
By
SHRI AJAY BHATT, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for population control by adoption of small family norms and for matters
connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Population Control Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No.  233 of  2019
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) "appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government
of that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “child” includes an adopted child;
(c) “District Committee” means the District Population Control Committee
constituted under section 7;
(d) “Fund” means the Population Control Fund constituted under section 13;
(e) “local officer” includes an officer or employee of Gram Panchayat and
local urban bodies, principals of Government and non-Government schools and
doctors of Government and aided private hospitals;
(f) “local representative” means representative elected by the public in Gram
Panchayat and Urban local bodies;
(g) “person” means any married man or woman;
(h) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(i) “small family” means a family with two living children; and
(j) “State Committee” means the State Population Committee constituted
under section 5.
3. No person shall procreate more than two living children after a period of one
year from the date of commencement of this Act.
4. (1) The appropriate Government shall encourage, promote and motivate married
couples to opt for small family norms by providing them aid and incentives in such
manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The appropriate Government may also provide such additional incentives, as
may be prescribed, to the married couples who opt for having one living child only.
5. (1) The appropriate Government shall, with prior permission of the Central
Government, constitute a State Committee to be known as the State Population Control
Committee for the implementation of the provisions of this Act.
(2) The State Committee shall consist of:—
(a) Principal Secretary/Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in
the State Government—Chairperson ex-officio;
(b) Principal Secretary/Secretary, Ministry of Panchayati Raj in the State
Government—Member ex-officio;
(c) Principal Secretary/Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development in the State
Government—Member ex-officio;
(d) Director General, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in the State
Government—Member-Secretary.
6. The State Committee shall—
(a) encourage, promote and motivate the newly married couples to opt for
small family norms;
(b) prepare a list of couples who opt for small family norms and update the
list, from time to time;
Definitions.
No person to
procreate
more than two
living
children.
Appropriate
Government
to encourage
and promote
small family
norms.
Function of
the State
Population
Control
Committee.
Constitution
of State
Population
Control
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(c) provide reservation or preference in Government job to those couples
who opt for small family norms;
(d) provide free legal aid to those who opt for small family norms; and
(e) supervise the functions of the District Committee.
7. (1) The appropriate Government shall, in consultation with the State Committee,
constitute a District Committee to be known as the District Population Control
Committee for every district under its jurisdiction for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
(2) The District Committee shall consist of:—
(a) District Magistrate—Chairperson, ex-officio;
(b) one representative of Panchayat each at village, Kshettra or district level
in the district—Member ex-officio;
(c) one representative of Municipal Council or Corporation, as the case may
be, in the district—Member ex-officio;
(d) Chief Medical Officer—Member-Secretary.
(3) The term of the District Committee shall be five years.
8. The District Committee shall—
(a) carry out the directions given by the State Committee, from time to time;
(b) encourage, promote and motivate the newly married couples to opt for
small family norms; and
(c) propagate and disseminate within the district the provisions of this Act
through the local officers and local representatives.
9. ( 1) The meetings of the State Committee and of District Committee shall be
convened at least once in three months or every month at such place and on such time
as may be prescribed, respectively.
(2) The Member-Secretary of the State Committee or the District Committee, as the
case may be, shall call for the meeting with the permission of the Chairperson of the
concerned Committee.
(3) The Member-Secretary of the State Committee or the District Committee, as the
case may be, shall keep the minutes of the proceedings of meeting in such manner as
may be prescribed.
(4) The State Committee or the District Committee, as the case may be, shall regulate
its procedure.
(5) All orders and decisions of the State Committee or the District Committee, as
the case may be, shall be duly authenticated by the Member-Secretary of the concerned
Committee.
10. ( 1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 3, a couple may opt to
procreate more than two living children if—
(a) the mother has been diagnosed with twins in womb after having one
living child; or
(b) the couple has no child and the wife has been diagnosed in the medical
checkup with three children in womb; or
(c) a person has one or more living children from his first marriage and the
marriage has been dissolved by reasons of divorce or death of the couple spouse,
in such case the person may opt to procreate two living children from second
marriage.
Constitution
of District
Population
Control
Committee.
Functions of
the District
Population
Control
Committee.
Meetings of
the State and
District
Committee(s).
Exceptions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(2) Any couple who intends to procreate more than two living children as provided
under sub-section ( 1) shall apply to the District Committee for necessary permission in
such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The District Committee shall, on receipt of application under sub-section ( 2),
examine the reasons furnished by the applicant and grant necessary permission within a
period of one month from the date of receipt of application under sub-section ( 2), in
such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that if the District Committee is not satisfied with the reasons as specified
by the applicant it may, after giving the applicant a reasonable opportunity of being
heard, reject the application.
(4) If the District Committee deems it necessary to refer the application received
under sub-section (2) to the State Committee, the State Committee shall communicate its
decision to the applicant within a period of fifteen days from the date of receipt of such
reference from the District Committee.
11. (1) The appropriate Government shall provide the State Committee and the
District Committee, as the case may be, with such officers and employees as may be
necessary for efficient performance of the functions assigned to them under this Act.
(2) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of their
services of the officers and other employees, shall be as may be prescribed.
12. No act or proceedings of the State Committee and the District Committee, as
the case may be, shall be questioned or invalid on the ground of existence of any
vacancy or defect in the constitution of the Committee(s).
13. ( 1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute a Fund to be known as the Population Control Fund to meet the expenditure
to implement the provision of this Act including propagation and dissemination of the
provisions of this Act, salary of officers and employees and remunerative and allowance
of the members of the State Committees and District Commission.
(2) The Fund shall consist of:—
(a) budgetary allocation made in Annual Budget by the Central Government;
(b) receipt of amount of fines imposed under section 14;
(c) donation or contribution from National or International Charitable
institutions or from individuals as permitted by the Central or State Government,
as the case may be; and
(d) amount contributed under corporate social responsibility.
(3) The Fund shall be administered by the District Committee in consultation
with the State Committee.
14. Any person who contravenes the provision of section 3 of this Act shall,—
(a) not be entitled to avail any benefit under welfare schemes of the
appropriate Government;
(b) pay the fine which may extend upto rupees fifty thousand as social
compensation fees in such account head of treasury as may be prescribed:
Provided that if a person neglects or refuses to pay the fine as social
compensation fee, the District Committee may recover such fee as the arrear of
land revenue from such person in such manner as may be prescribed; and
Officers and
employees of
Committee.
Vacancies, etc.
not to
invalidate
proceedings of
commission.
Population
control Fund.
Penalty for
contravention
of the Act.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

5
(c) not be eligible to apply for any Government job and if such person is
already in Government job then he shall not be eligible to get promotion for next
five years.
15. After section 8A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, the following
section shall be inserted, namely:—
“8B. A person having two or more than two living children on the date of
commencement of this Act shall be disqualified and not eligible to contest any
election if he procreates any more living child after the commencement of this Act.”.
16. If any difficulties arises in giving effect to the provision of this Act, the Central
Government may, by notified order, make such provisions not inconsistent with the
provision of this Act as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the
difficulties:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two
years from the date of commencement of this Act.
17. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained
to the contrary in any other law for the time being in force.
18. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session,
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both House agree in making any
modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the
rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified from or be of no effect, as the
case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anyting previously done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.
Insertion of
new section 8B
in Act No. 43 of
1951.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25

6
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Next to China, India is the second largest populated country in the world. As the
population rises. so will poverty. Being a developing country, the increasing growth rate
is dragging India into a vicious cycle of population and poverty, which leads to a
development trap. This further increases other problems like illiteracy, unemployment and
inflation.
Over population is a hindrance in the path of India's economic development. Family
planning awareness should be sown among the younger generations. Smaller families
contribute to the well being of the individual as well as India's economy. Population
control is the appropriate alternative for India to promote, sustain and enhance
development. Higher population results in lower resource availability. Rapid population
growth affects capital formation, food shortages, consumer prices and social and political
unrest.
Therefore, it is necessary to enact a law to put a check on increasing population
at the earliest and make effective provisions to control the population of India.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW D ELHI; AJAY BHATT
June  27, 2019.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for incentives to the married couple opting for two
children. It also provides for incentives to married couple opting for one child norm.
Clause 5 provides for constitution of State Population Control Committee. Clause 7
provides for constitution of District Population Control Committee. Clause 11 provides
for appointment of officer and staff to the State Committee and District Committee. Clause
13 provides for constitution of Population Control Fund. The Bill, therefore, if enacted,
will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum
of rupees five hundred crore will be involved as recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees One hundred crore is also likely
to be involved.
7

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 18 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only,
the delegation of legislative power is a of a normal character.
8

MGIPMRND—2834LS(S3)—05.11.2019.
LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for population control by adoption of small family norms and for matters
connected therewith.
—————
(Shri Ajay Bhatt, M.P .)