1
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN FROM SEXUAL OFFENCES
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
SHRI KALIKESH NARAY AN SINGH DEO, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012.
B
E is enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences
(Amendment) Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 2 of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 (hereinafter
referred to as the principal Acts,—
(a) after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
'(ca) "Centre" means the One Stop Crisis Centre set up under section
38B;';
(b) after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
'(da) "child victim" means the child against whom the offence has been
committed under this Act;'; and
(c) after clause (e), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
'(ea) "Fund" means the Sexually Abused Children Rehabilitation and
Welfare Fund constituted under section 38F;'.
Bill No.  234 of  2017
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of section 2.
5
10
15
32 of 2012.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
3. In section 3 of the principal Act, after clause ( d), the following provisos shall be
inserted, namely:—
‘‘Provided that the consensual sexual intercourse or any sexual act with a child in the
age group of sixteen to eighteen years shall not constitute an offence:
Provided further that the consensual sexual intercourse or any sexual act which causes
or likely to cause any harm to the child giving the consent shall constitute an offence.’’
4. In section 19 of the principal Act, after sub-section ( 5), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:—
"(5A) where the accused is a relative of the child either through blood or adoption or
marriage or guardianship or in foster care or having a family relationship with a parent of the
child or who is living in the same or shared household with the child against whom the
offence has been committed, then, the Special Juvenile Police Unit or local police shall, after
recording the reasons in writing, make immediate arrangement to admit the child into a shelter
home or a child care institution registered under section 41 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and
Protection of Children) Act, 2015 so that at no point of time the child comes in contact in any
way with the accused.".
5. After Chapter VIII of the Principal Act, the following Chapter and sections thereunder
shall be inserted, namely:—
"CHAPTER VIIIA
S
UPPORT, REHABILITATION AND SOCIAL INTEGRATION
38A. The Central Government and every State Government shall take such measures
as it thinks fit and appropriate to ensure and undertake the process of rehabilitation and
social integration of the child victim.
38B. (1) The State Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, set up
and maintain in every district, one or more Centre to be known as the One Stop Crisis
Centre as may be required, to facilitate the child victim to deal with the trauma of abuse and
assist him in processes involved with appearing as a witness before the Special Court or
any authority handling his case.
(2) Every Centre set up under sub-section (1), shall be registered within a period of
six months from the date of commencement of this Act in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The Centre shall consist of—
(a) one Centre Co-ordinator with prescribed qualifications and experience
matters concerning children;
(b) four case-workers who are experts or professionals shaving prescribed
qualifications and experience on matters concerning child sexual abuse;
(c) two legal officers with prescribed qualifications and experience on laws
related to children;
(d) one counsellor with prescribed qualifications and experience of working
with children who are victims of sexual abuse;
Amendment
of section 3.
Amendment
of section 19.
Insertion of
new chapter
VIIIA.
Setting up of
One Stop
Crisis Centre.
Central
Government
and State
Government
to take
measures to
ensure and
undertake the
process of
rehabilitation
and social
integration of
the child
victim.
2 of 2016.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

3
(e) a panel of doctors, forensic experts, pediatricians, psychologists,
gynecologists and other professional service providers who may be called on to provide
necessary services as per the requirements in each case;
(f) two members of the State Commissions for Protection of Child Rights
constituted under section 17 of the Commission for Protection of Child Rights Act,
2005,
to be appointed by the State Government in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that at least one of the case-worker appointed under clause (b) shall be a
woman.
(4) The salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service
of persons appointed under clause (a) to (f) shall be such as may be prescribed.
38C. The Centre shall—
(a) provide basic requirements such as food, clothing, shelter and medical
attention, including counselling specific to the need of the child victim;
(b) provide assistance to every child victim at the time of medical examination
including escort of the child to the place of medical examination;
(c) provide assistance for obtaining the proof of identity, wherever required;
(d) facilitate proper investigations into the case and provide immediate special
and support services to the child victim;
(e) provide legal aid wherever required;
(f) undertake case management including preparation and follow up of individual
child;
(g) attend hearing in court in the best interest of the child;
(h) provide referral services for education, vocational training, treatment of
diseases where required;
(i) provide recreational activities including sports and cultural activities; and
(j) undertake such other measures as may be necessary for the rehabilitation and
welfare of the child victim under this Act.
38D. (1) The Centre shall submit monthly information regarding children availing the
services of the Centre under this Act to the State Government in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(2) The State Government shall, after taking into account the number of children
availing the services of the Centre, provide monthly funding to a Centre to ensure well-
being of the children in such manner as may be prescribed.
38E. The Central Government and State Government shall independently evaluate and
monitor the functioning of the Centre, at such period and through such persons or institutions
as may be prescribed by that Government.
38F. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the
official Gazette, constitute a Fund to be known as the Sexually Abused Children Rehabilitation
and Welfare Fund for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Fund shall be credited money received from body corporate and financial
institutions of both domestic and international, individuals and bodies donations.
(3) All money received in the Fund shall be utilized for carrying out the purposes of
this Act in such manner as may be prescribed.
Functions of
the Centre.
Centre to
submit
information
to State
Government.
Constitution
of Sexually
Abused
Children
Rehabilitation
and Welfare
Fund.
Government
to monitor
the
functioning of
the Centre.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
4 of 2006.
40

4
38G . The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, from time to time, provide adequate funds to the State Governments for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.”
5. After section 41 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
“41A. Where the accused is a parent or a guardian of the child, the provisions of
sections 3 to 13 (both inclusive) shall not apply in case of medical examination or medical
treatment of a child, when such medical examination or medical treatment is undertaken in the
best interest of the child without the consent from his parents or guardian:
Provided that medical examination or medical treatment of a child victim shall not apply
when the consent is obtained from the authority handling the case.”.
6. In section 43 of the principal Act, after clause ( b), the following clauses shall be
inserted, namely:—
“(c) sensitisation of all stakeholders including police officers at all levels, Magistrate,
Child Welfare Committees, Special Prosecutors and Juvenile Justice Board to make procedures
child friendly and provide periodic training on method of handling child abuse  related case;
and
(d) conduct periodic child sensitisation programmes and orientation on laws related to
children for those  involved in healing rehabilitation and other assistance programmes for
children.”.
Central
Government
to provide
funds to the
State
Government.
Insertion of
new section
41A.
Provisions of
sections 3 to
13 (both
inclusive) not
to apply in
case of
medical
examination
or medical
treatment of
a child
undertaken in
the best
interest of the
child.
Amendment
of section 43.
5
10
15

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India  is home to the largest child population in the world. Almost forty-two per cent.
of the total population of the country is under eighteen years of age. Needless to say, the
health and security of the country’s children is an integral to any vision for its progress and
development.
The Ministry of Women and Child Development enacted the Protection of Children
from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 to protect our children from offences of child sexual assault
and to provide a child-friendly system  for trial of the offences. Despite the stringent legal
provisions, India continues to rank among the top five countries with the highest rate of
child sexual abuse.
Over the past few years, various lacunae in the implementation of this Act has become
apparent. Law conviction rate (meagerly between 7-16 per cent.) and increasing pendency
of cases continue to be a hindrance in providing justice to victims of child sexual abuse.
This Bill is an effort to address the weaknesses of the present legislative framework.
A common observation is that the judicial system is overburdened with cases of
consensual sex. Any sexual activity with children under eighteen years is considered to be
an offence as the law does not recognise consent. It presents a problem as young boys and
girls in consesnual relationships are often trapped under the charges of sexual assault.
Subsequently,  victims turn hostile as they are forced in to the lawful case due to family
presssure leading to acquittals and false cases. In the light of these circumstances, there is
a need to look at consensual relationships from a different perspective and decriminalise
them depending on  whether there was a criminal intent.
Statistics released by the National Crime Records Bureau 2016 reveal that 94.8 per
cent. of rape cases saw children being raped by someone they knew including neighbours,
direct family members and relatives. The abusers often use their position of power, age
difference, intellectual or physical development, relationship of authority over child or
child’s dependency over them to their advantage. A recent study of High Court judgments
revealed that a high proportion of vicitims turned hostile when the perpetrator was an
acquaintance. To bring the conviction rate higher and punish the perpetrators, there is an
overwhelming need to separate the children from the family in cases where the alleged
perpetrator is a family member to avoid them from turning hostile.
Secondly, if the doctors conduct medical examination or treatment of the child victim
against consent of the parents, they can be prosecuted. If the parent or father is an abuser,
he may refuse to provide such consent. There is need to take into consideration cases of
incest, where the doctors cannot be criminally charged for acting in the best interest of the
child and performing the examination, without the consent of the parents.
Lack of training and sensitisation on child friendly procedure often creates traumatic
episodes for children. The need is also to provide an exhaustive list of stakeholders to be
trained to implement child friendly mechanisms during the course of trial to address the
needs of children.
Sexual abuse can scar the psyche of the affected child for life and lead to suicidal
tendencies. The current law lacks exclusive provisions for after-care, medical support and
social integration of the child which further exposes him to re-victimisation in the society.
The need of the hour is direct the State Governments to establish and maintain one stop
crisis centres in every district to provide integrated services such as police assistance, legal
aid, medical and counselling for serving the victims better.
We need to make our nation safe for children, better policing, increasing accountability,
bolstering mechanisms for prevention, and ensuring swifter prosecution should be the
approach of stakeholders involved.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI;
November,  29, 2017 KALIKESH NARAYAN SINGH DEO
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides that Central Government shall take such measures as it
thinks fit and appropriate to ensure and undertake the process of rehabilitation and social
integration of the child victim. It also provides for setting up of One Stop Crisis Centre by the
State Government to facilitate the child victim to deal with the trauma of abuse. It also
provides for appointment of experts and other persons to the Centre. It further provides for
the establishment of the Sexually Abused Rehabilitation and Welfare Fund by the Central
Government. The expenditure relating to States shall be borne from the Consolidated Fund
of the State Government concerned. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve recurring
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees fifty
crore per annum would involve from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees ten crore is also likely to be involved.
6

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN FROM SEXUAL OFFENCES ACT, 2012
* * *
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a)* * *
(b)* * *
(c) “armed forces or security forces” means armed forces of the Union or
security forces or police forces, as specified in the Schedule;
(d) “child” means any person below the age of eighteen years;
(e) “domestic relationship” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in
clause (f) of section 2 of the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005.
* * *
3. A person is said to commit “penetrative sexual assault” if—
(a) he penetrates his penis, to any extent, into the vagina, mouth, urethra or
anus of a child or makes the child to do so with him or any other person; or
(b) he inserts, to any extent, any object or a part of the body, not being the
penis, into the vagina, the urethra or anus of the child or makes the child to do so
with him or any other person; or
(c) he manipulates any part of the body of the child so as to cause penetration
into the vagina, urethra, anus or any part of body of the child or makes the child to
do so with him or any other person; or
(d) he applies his mouth to the penis, vagina, anus, urethra of the child or
makes the child to do so to such person or any other person.
* * *
19. * * *
(5) Where the Special Juvenile Police Unit or local police is satisfied that the child
against whom an offence has been committed is in need of care and protection, then, it
shall, after recording the reasons in writing, make immediate arrangement to give him such
care and protection including admitting the child into shelter home or to the nearest
hospital within twenty-four hours of the report, as may be prescribed.
* * *
43. The Central Government and every State Government, shall take all measures to
ensure that—
(a) the provisions of this Act are given wide publicity through media including
the television, radio and the print media at regular intervals to make the general
public, children as well as their parents and guardians aware of the provisions of this
Act;
(b) the  officers of the Central Government and the State Governments and
other  concerned persons (including the police officers) are imparted periodic training
on the matters relating to the implementation of the provisions of the Act.
* * *
Definitions.
Penetrative
sexual assault.
Reporting of
offences.
Public
awareness
about Act.
7

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012.
————
(Shri Kalikesh Narayan Singh Deo, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2759LS(S3)—18.12.2017.