1
THE RIGHT OF CHILDREN TO FREE AND COMPULSORY
EDUCATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
By
DR. PRABHAS KUMAR SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education
(Amendment) Act, 2018.
(2)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title
and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. 234  of 2018
5
AS INTRODUCED  IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 (hereinafter
referred to as the Principal Act), after section 24, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“24A. The appropriate Government shall introduce a system or framework
for payment of performance-linked incentives to teachers over and above their gross
salary, based on fair and acceptable metrics which may include the following
parameters, namely:—
(a) biometric attendance and punctuality of the teacher;
(b) fulfilment of duties specified under sub-section (1) of section 24;
(c) improvement in students’ learning outcomes;
(d) satisfaction of the students based on certain criteria including
interactive pedagogy and engaging activities deployed by the teacher in the
classroom and attendance of students;
(e) feedback from the School Management Committee; and
(f) such other parameter (s) as may be prescribed.”.
3. In section 28 of the principal Act, the following proviso shall be inserted at the end,
namely:—
“Provided that any teacher who engages in private tution or private teaching
activity with the purpose of making pecuniary gains shall be liable to a fine as determined
and notified by the appropriate Government.”.
4. In section 29 of the principla Act, in sub-section (1), the following proviso shall be
inserted, namely:—
“Provided that the curriculum for classes seventh and eighth shall include
short modules on soft skills, digitial literacy, sex education and menstrual hygiene for
girls.”.
Insertion of
new section
24A.
Framework for
performance-
linked
incentives,
teacher
accountability
and ensuring
quality.
Amendment of
section 28.
Amendment of
section 29.
5
10
15
20
35 of 2009.
25

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 (RTE Act) was a
landmark legislation to implement the Fundamental Child Right enshrined in the article 21A
of the Constitution. However, after almost a decade, there is a need to review and amend
this Act, to align it according to the changing needs of the time and to plug some loopholes.
While Gross Enrolment Ratio at elementary level is commendable, learning outcomes
are poor as highlighted by National Achievement Survey (NAS) conduct by National Council
of Educational Research and Training. Learning outcomes, to a great extent, are dependent
upon the quality of education imparted by the teachers. The Supreme Court has also said
that “right to education is right to quality education”. Furthermore, lack of interest among
students towards school education, which is largely due to unsatisfactory quality of teaching
by teachers, is cited as one of the major reasons for dropouts.
However, at present RTE Act does not provide any system to incentivize teachers to
put extra efforts in improving their teaching quality. Thus, a new framework for payment of
Performance-linked Incentives to teachers over and above their gross salary, based on fair
and acceptable metrics, is desirable, such a framework would address, to an extent, the
issue of teachers’ accountability, education quality and high dropouts. It would also be in-
line with the Seventh Central Pay Commission’s recommendation of linking remuneration
with performance of Government employees and the introduction of performance related
pay based on annual appraisal of the employee. In addition, this would effectively increase
salary/remuneration of a good teacher, thus would make teaching profession more attractive
for the talented youth of our country.
Presently, section 28 of the Act only mentions that no teacher shall engage himself or
herself in private tuition or private teaching activity. However, the Act does not spell out
any punishment or fine in case of violation of this provision, thus rendering the section 28
ineffective in checking the rise of private tuitions by school teachers. Culture of private
tuitions by teachers has led to a situation where teachers are not motivated to give their
best in the classroom itself. Therefore, a fine should be imposed on teachers engaging in
private tuitions with profit motives.
Finally, apart from the regular academic subjects, the curriculum shall also contain
such areas (like digital literacy and soft skills) that have great practical utility today. Moreover,
since classes seventh and eighth roughly correspond to the onset of puberty in both boys
and girls, inclusion of teaching modules on sex education and menstrual hygiene in the
curriculum may help in ensuring their proper health and development.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; PRABHAS KUMAR SINGH
November 24, 2018.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for introduction of payment of performance-linked
incentives to the teachers over and above their gross salary. The Bill therefore, if enacted
would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. A recurring expenditure of
about rupees one hundred crore is likely to be incurred per annum from the Consolidated
Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is likely to be involved.

5
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE RIGHT OF CHILDREN TO FREE AND
COMPULSORY EDUCATION ACT, 2009
(35 OF 2009)
* * * * * * *
28. No teacher shall engage himself or herself  in private tuition or private teaching
activity.
* * * * * * *
29. (1) The curriculum and the evaluation procedure for elementary education shall
be laid down by an academic authority to be specified by the appropriate Government, by
notification.
* * * * * * *
Prohibition of
private tuition
by teacher.
Curriculum
and
evaluation
procedure.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009.
————
(Dr. Prabhas Kumar Singh, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—2123LS(S3)—24-12-2018.