Bill No. 234 of 2015
THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
DR. SHASHI THAROOR, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date  as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commence-
ment.
S 3 \F\BILL 2015\LS\2535LS (E)
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. For Section 124A of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:—
"124A. Whoever, by words, either spoken or written, or by signs, or by visible
representation or otherwise, brings or attempts to bring into hatred or contempt, or
excites or attempts to excite disaffection towards,  the Government established by law
in India, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, to which fine may be added, or
with imprisonment which may extend to three years, to which fine may be added, or
with fine:
Provided that the provisions of this section shall apply only when the words,
signs, visible representation or any other action directly results in incitement of violence
and commission of an offence punishable with imprisonment for life under this Code.
Explanation 1.—Mere comments or signs or visible representation or any other
act expressing disapprobation of the measures of the Government do not constitute an
offence under this section.
Explanation 2.—Mere comments or signs or visible representation or any other
act expressing disapprobation of the administrative or other action of the Government,
do not constitute an offence under this section.".
Substitution
of new
section for
section 124A.
Sedition.
45 of 1860
5
10
15

3
STA TEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Sedition as defined under section 124A of the Indian Penal Code, has been a subject of
great dissatisfaction amongst advocates of unhindered freedom of speech and expression
and critics of the Government.
Sedition, as we know today, was imported from the English legal system and enacted
as an offence in 1870, to suppress any criticism of British policies, in pre-independent India.
It became an instrument to terrorise the natives and implicate nationalist newspapers which
disapproved of British colonialism. Bal Gangadhar Tilak, Annie Besant, Jogendra Chandra
Bose and Mahatma Gandhi were amongst the first prominent figures to be charged with
sedition. In fact, Mahatma Gandhi called it his moral duty to disobey this draconian provision,
for it was enacted by an evil State.
Consequently, the Constituent Assembly decided against the inclusion of sedition as
one of the restrictions to the fundamental right of free speech guaranteed under article 19 of
the Constitution. Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru also vioced his discontent against section 124A
by stating that "the sooner we get rid of it, the better".
However, this colonial legacy continues unchecked, for protecting the sentiments of
successive Governments. It is increasingly being used to harass and intimidate journalists,
human rights activists, artists and political activists, and illustrators, according to the whims
of the members of the State and Central Government and other public institutions.
Even though the Supreme Court has narrowed the scope and applicability of
section 124A, in its landmark judgment in Kedar Nath Singh V/s State of Bihar case, where
it linked sedition to a test of tangible evidence of actual harm, the lower courts and
investigating authorities have continually overlooked this interpretation of the
Supreme Court. Section 124A was invoked to harass thousands of village who were peacefully
protesting against the establishment of a nuclear plant in the State of Tamil Nadu, where over
300 FIRs were registered without any clear evidence of incitement to violence.
Thus, there is an urgent need to amend section 124A of the Indian Penal Code in
compliance with the judgment of the Supreme Court and to prevent the possibility of undue
harassment of citizens who simply disagree with the Government.
It is also increasingly pertinent to do so because the United Kingdom itself has
abolished sedition and seditious libel, labelling it as a repressive law that caused more harm
than good.
This Bill seeks to replace section 124A of the Indian Penal Code with a new provision
which will implicate an individual for sedition only when it directly results in the use of
violence or incitement of violence and results in the commission of an offence, which is
punishable with imprisonment for life under the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
The amended provision will promote the freedom of speech and the right to express
dissent against the Government, while ensuring safeguards against the use of words to
incite violence.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SHASHI THAROOR
July 23, 2015.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
(45 OF 1860)
* * * * * * * *
124A. Whoever, by words, either spoken or written, or by signs, or by visible
representation or otherwise, brings or attempts to bring into hatred or contempt, or excites or
attempts to excite disaffection towards the Government established by law in India, shall be
punished with imprisonment for life, to which fine may be added, or with imprisonment which
may extend to three years, to which fine may be added, or with fine.
Explanation 1.—The expression "disaffection" includes disloyalty and all feelings of
enmity.
Explanation 2.—Comments expressing disapprobation of the administrative or other
action of the Government without or attempting to excite hatred, contempt or disaffection, do
not constitute an offence under this section.
Explanation 3.—Comments expressing disapprobation of the administrative or other
action of the Government without exciting or attempting to excite hatred, contempt or
disaffection, do not constitute an offence under this section.
* * * * * * * *
4
Sedition.

GMGIPMRND—2535LS(S3)—31.10.2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
————
(Dr. Shashi Tharoor, M.P.)