1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE ESTABLISHMENT OF SCHOOLS UPTO SENIOR SECONDARY
LEVEL BILL, 2019
By
SHRI SUNIL KUMAR SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
to establish schools imparting education upto senior secondary level free of cost to all
children in the country.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Establishment of Schools upto Senior Secondary
Level  Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
Bill No.  235  of  2019
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in case of a State, the Government of that
State and in all other cases, the Central Government; and
(b) "child" means a boy or a girl who has not attained the age of eighteen years.
3. (1) The appropriate Government shall establish adequate number of schools upto
senior secondary level to impart education to children from classes first to twelfth standard.
(2) For the purpose of sub-section (1), the appropriate Government may, if it deems
necessary, upgrade any of the existing primary, middle or secondary school to senior
secondary level.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (1), there shall be atleast one senior
secondary school per one thousand population in every area.
4. The appropriate Government shall provide the following facilities to every child
enrolled in a school established or upgraded under section 3:—
(i) cost of admission and all other expenditure including tuition fee shall be
borne by the appropriate Government;
(ii) books, notebooks and all other stationery items free of cost;
(iii) free hostel facilities, whenever necessary; and
(iv) scholarship in deserving cases.
5. (1) It shall be compulsory for every parent to admit their wards in school for the
purpose of education upto senior secondary level.
(2) No person shall employ any child in any job which prevents him from attending
school.
6. Whoever prevents any child from getting education upto senior secondary level
shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months.
7. (1) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, provide to the State Governments by way of grants such sums of money as
the Central Government may think fit for being utilized for the purposes of this Act.
8. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law, for the time being in force in relation to any of the matters provided under this Act.
9. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before the State legislature.
Definitions.
Establishment
of schools
upto senior
secondary
level.
Facilities to
be provided
to the
students
enrolled in
schools.
Duty of
parents to
send their
wards to
schools.
Grants by the
Central
Government.
Act not in
derogation of
other laws.
Penalty.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND REASONS
A large number of primary, middle and secondary schools have been established by
the State Governments in the States. However, the students especially in big cities, have to
face hardships in securing admission to senior secondary schools because, in most of the
cases, the last attended school imparts education upto primary, middle or secondary level.
Students are compelled to run to district education office, schools and other authorities to
get recommendations or relevant certificates to fulfil the formalities for admission in senior
secondary schools. In such a situation, it is quite natural that the children as well as parents
have to suffer mental agony.
Therefore, it has become necessary in the public interest to provide for the establishment
of schools imparting education from classes first to twelfth or upgrade the existing primary,
middle or secondary level schools to senior secondary level.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SUNIL KUMAR SINGH
November 5, 2019.
3

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for establishment of adequate number of schools or
upgrade the existing primary, middle or secondary level schools upto senior secondary level.
Clause 4 provides that the appropriate Government shall bear the cost of admission and all
other expenditure including providing of free of cost books, note books, stationery items,
hostel facility and scholarship to the students enrolled in schools. Clause 7 provides that the
Central Government shall provide funds to the State Governments for establishment of
schools. The Bill, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees seventy five crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees ninety five crore is also likely to be
involved.

5
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to establish schools imparting education upto senior secondary level free of cost to all
children in the country.
————
(Shri Sunil Kumar Singh, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—3100LS(S3)—14.11.2019.