1
Bill No. 235 of  2018
THE AGRICULTURAL WORKERS WELFARE FUND BILL, 2018
By
SHRI RAJEEV SATAV, M.P.
A
BILL
to establish a Agricultural Workers Welfare Fund for the welfare and development of
agricultural workers and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Agricultural Workers Welfare Fund Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such a date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context specifically mentions otherwise,—
(a) “agriculture” with all its grammatical variations and cognate expressions,
includes floriculture, horticulture, sericulture, the raising of crops, grass or garden
5
Short title
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
produce, dairy farming, poultry farming, stock breeding, cutting of wood or grass,
gathering of fruit, raising of man-made forest or rearing of seedlings or plants;
(b) “Fund” means the Agricultural Workers Welfare Fund constituted under
section 3;
(c) “prescribed” means as dictated by the rules of this Act; and
(d) “workers” means workers engaged in any activity connected with agriculture.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette constitute
a Fund to be known as the Agricultural Workers Welfare Fund for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
(2) The Central Government and State Government shall contribute to the Fund in
such ratios as may be prescribed.
(3) The Fund shall be administered by a Committee consisting of:—
(a) a Chairperson to be appointed by the Central Government having experience
of at least ten years in the field of farmers welfare, agriculture or rural development;
(b) a Deputy Chairperson to be appointed by the Central Government having
such qualification as may be prescribed;
(c) seven members of Parliament of whom four shall be from the House of the
People and three from the Council of States to be nominated by the respective Presiding
officers of the Houses and having a background in agriculture related activities;
(d) four members to be appointed by the Central Government to represent the
Union Ministries of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Labour and Employment, Finance
and Rural Development, respectively;
(e) four members to be appointed by the Central Government from amongst the
agricultural workers covered under this Act; and
(f) four members to be nominated by the Governments of the States to be rotated
amongst the States in alphabetical order.
(4) The Fund shall be utilized for the following purposes, namely:—
(i) payment of unemployment or sustenance allowance to agricultural workers
during off season period;
(ii) free health facilities for the agricultural workers and their families in the
hospitals to be set up for the purpose;
(iii) free educational facilities to the children of agricultural workers;
(iv) payment of compensation of workers who sustain injuries during work;
(v) payment of compensation to families of workers who die in harness;
(vi) payment of premium group life insurance cover of workers;
(vii) payment of disability allowance in case of accident on the workplace and
are not able to work further;
(viii) payment of old age pension to those workers who have attained sixty
years of age and are not gainfully employed;
(ix) provision of suitable facilities like canteen, health, recreation, water etc. at
work places;
(x) payment of bonus to workers; and
(xi) payment of maternity benefit and establishment of creche facilities for the
female agricultural workers covered under this Act and,
Constitution
of Agricultural
Workers
Welfare Fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(4) The Salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of
Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and other member of the Committee shall be such as may
be prescribed.
4. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the Committee on Cultural Education for carrying
out the purposes of this Act.
5. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Central
Government
to provide
adequate
Funds.
Act not in
derogation of
other law.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The agricultural sector of the economy in India is the largest sector in terms of
employment of the workforce. It consists of crop cultivation and other agricultural activities
such as forestry, livestock and fishing. The workers in this sector may be broadly divided
into wage workers, and farmers. Almost the entire agricultural sector (except the Plantation
Sector) is unorganized i.e. it has neither any formal system of social security nor regulation
of conditions of work.
According to estimates of the 2011 Census, there are close to 230 million people who
are employed as agricultural workers in India. More and more firm workers are moving away
from agriculture and this has been negatively affecting the country’s productivity especially
in crops which are labour intensive like Paddy, Wheat, Cotton, Sugarcane and Groundnut.
Currently, the profession of agricultural labour is of ‘all pain and no gain’. Across the country,
monthly earnings have been found to be as low as INR 1000. This poor economic state is
further worsened when coupled with the pitiable other hazardous conditions of these workers.
Excessive working hours lead to poor health and low life expectancy across the profession.
Accessibility towards basic healthcare and education as well as essential social security
schemes is virtually inexistent. The seasonal nature of this profession further adds to the
woes of these citizens, who constitute the poorest 30% of the country who are left to fend for
their lives during off-season without any money.
The agricultural workers in the Unorganised Sector face problems that arise out of
deficiency or capability deprivation in terms of inadequate employment, low earnings, low
health, etc., as well as of adversity in the absence of fall back mechanisms (safety net). These
workers have limited or no formal social security cover which increases their vulnerability
during times of illness, old age, unemployment and untimely death. The absence of social
security mechanisms is a critical factor in downturns in the conditions of these households,
many of whom are already very poor. It destroys the workers ability to contribute meaningfully,
and to increasing production and productivity. It leads to disaffection increasing social
costs, widespread crimes, and persistent ill health.
The changing nature of agricultural production — including the increased use of
chemicals and machinery — is aggravating risks. This is particularly true in a number of
developing countries where education, training and occupational safety and health services
are largely inadequate. While there is a very long way to go in terms of establishing a
satisfactory life for these workers, it is sad to say that even the bare minimum has not been
done towards realising this very important goal.
The present Bill strives to constitute a Agricultural Workers Welfare Fund to establish
through basic policy measures the rights that these workers deserve. It intend to cover
agricultural workers, who are all agricultural wage workers not protected under the Plantations
Labour Act, 1951 and marginal and small farmers. It also intends to provide a measure of
social security to agricultural wage workers and marginal and small farmers in the unorganised
sector.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAJEEV SATA V
November 27, 2018.
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the setting up of a Agricultural Workers Welfare fund
and for the benefit of agricultural workers. It also provides for a Committee consisting of a
Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and other member for administration of the Fund.
Clause 4 provides for the Central Government to provide adequate funds for carrying out the
purposes of this Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees five
hundred crore will be involved per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative powers is of normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to establish a Agricultural Workers Welfare Fund for the welfare and development of
agricultural workers and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Rajeev Satav, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—2262LS(S3)—20-12-2018.