Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE  POOR  AND  DESTITUTE  AGRICULTURAL  WORKERS
(WELFARE)  BILL,  2015
By
SHRI JANARDAN SINGH ‘SIGRIWAL’, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for welfare measures for the poor and destitute and such other
agricultural workers living in villages and constitution of a Welfare Fund
for payment of compensation in cases of death or  permanent disability,
old-age pension, medical assistance, maternity and creche facilities
 for the women workers and for regulating the conditions
of work and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Poor and Destitute Agricultural Workers (Welfare)
Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
   Bill No. 235 of  2015

2
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "agricultural land" means any cultivable land used for cultivation of any
agricultural produce, dairy farming, growing and harvesting of any horticultural
product, raising and rearing of livestock, beekeeping, poultry, growing fodder and
such other activities as may be connected with agriculture;
(b) "agricultural worker" means any person who works as a labourer on hire or
in exchange whether in cash or in kind or partly in cash and partly in kind in farming
activities including cultivation and tillage of soil, dairy farming, activities related to
harvesting of horticultural commodities and includes any activity related to production
of agricultural produce and rearing of livestock, poultry or any such work;
(c) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(d) "Authority" means the Poor and Destitute Agricultural Workers Welfare
Authority established under section 3;
(e) "employer" means any person who employs agricultural workers in any
manner;
(f) "Fund" means the Poor and Destitute Agricultural Workers Welfare Fund
constituted under section 5;
(g) "poor and destitute" means any person not living in a pucca house and
includes those who live in huts with thatched roof or kutcha house and whose annual
income from all sources does not exceed rupees ten thousand; and
(h) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the
Official Gazette, establish a Poor and Destitute Agricultural Workers Welfare
Authority for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having
perpetual succession and common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose off
property, both movable and immovable, and to contract and shall by the said name,
sue and be sued.
(3) The headquarters of the Authority shall be at Maharajganj in the State of
Bihar and the Authority may establish offices at such other places in the country as
it may deem necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(4) The Authority shall consist of the following members, namely:—
(a) the Union Minister of Labour and Employment, who shall be the Chairperson
ex-officio;
(b) a Deputy Chairperson to be appointed by the Central Government having
the background or specialization in labour related issues and such other
qualifications as may be prescribed;
(c) five members of Parliament of whom three shall be from the House of the
People and two from the Council of States to be nominated by the presiding officer of
the House concerned;
(d) four members to be appointed by the Central Government to represent the
Union Ministries of Agriculture, Finance, Labour and Employment and Rural
Development respectively;
(e) three members to be appointed by the Central Government from amongst
the poor and destitute agricultural workers in such manner as may be prescribed;
and
Definitions.
Establishment
of  a Poor
and Destitute
Agricultural
Workers and
Artisans Welfare
Authority.

3
(f) not more than four members to be appointed by the Central Government in
consultation with the State Governments, representing State Governments in the
alphabetical order and it shall be ensured that all the States get represented in the
Authority by rotation.
(5) The salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of
service of the Deputy Chairperson and other Members of the Authority shall be such
as may be prescribed.
(6) The Authority shall have a Secretariat with such number of officers and
staff with such terms and conditions of service as may be prescribed from time to
time.
(7) The Commission shall observe such procedure in the transaction of its
business, as may be prescribed.
(8) The quorum to constitute any sitting of the Commission shall be such as
may be prescribed.
4. (1) The Authority shall perform such functions relating to welfare measures
for the poor and destitute agricultural workers as may be assigned to it by the Central
Government.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1), the
welfare measures referred to therein may also provide for,—
(i) maintaining a district-wise register of poor and destitute agricultural
workers in such manner and with such particulars and details as may be prescribed;
(ii) maintaining agricultural land records from village level to district level;
(iii) maintaining district-wise register of employers employing poor and
destitute agricultural workers with such particulars and in such manner as may be
prescribed;
(iv) regulating the conditions of work and fix minimum wages for the poor and
destitute agricultural workers;
(v) payment of old-age pension to the poor and destitute agricultural workers
and provision of provident fund facilities for them;
(vi) payment of compensation at prescribed rates to the families of poor and
destitute agricultural workers who die prematurely due to accident or illness or due
to any other unnatural reason;
(vii) providing free of cost health care to the poor and destitute agricultural
workers in such manner as may be prescribed;
(viii) providing maternity and creche facilities for the female workers covered
under this Act;
(ix) providing insurance facility to all the workers covered under this Act; and
(x) such other provisions as may be deemed necessary for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
5. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute a fund for the purposes of this Act to be called the Poor and Destitute
Agricultural Workers Welfare Fund with an initial corpus of rupees ten thousand
crore to be provided by the Central Government by due appropriation made by law by
Parliament in this behalf.
(2)
 The Central Government, State Governments and employers of the poor
and destitute agricultural workers shall contribute to the Fund in such ratio as may
be prescribed.
Functions of the
Authority.
Establishment
of a Poor and
Destitute
Agricultural
Workers Welfare
Fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
4
(3) Such other sums as may be received by way of donations, contribution or
assistance from individuals, organizations or otherwise shall also be credited to the
Fund.
.(4) The Fund shall be used for the welfare of the poor and destitute agricultural
workers by the Authority in such manner as may be prescribed.
6. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, it shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to ensure effective
implementation of the provisions of this Act.
7. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent
with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the
removal of such difficulty:
Provided that no such order or direction shall be made or given after the expiry
of two years from the commencement of this Act.
8. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt within this
Act.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or
the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in
the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may
be, so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Appropriate
Government
to ensure
implementation
of the Act.
Power to remove
difficulties.
Act not in
derogation of any
other law.
Powers to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25

5
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Majority of our population lives in the villages and most of them depend on
agriculture in one way or the other. Millions of poor and destitute agricultural workers
form part of the rural population. The agricultural workers work on the fields or farms
of the farmers to earn their livelihood. They are poverty-stricken, homeless as they
live in huts with thatched roof with no security from rains and cold and are landless
and remain exploited throughout their lives. As they are unorganized they work round
the year and are denied even the basic facilities of minimum wages, maternity benefit
etc. by their employers. Even two square meals and a pair of clothes is a luxury for
them.
Ours is a welfare State. Hence it is the duty of the Central and State Governments
to protect the poor and destitute agricultural workers, who make immense contribution
to our GDP, by introducing welfare measures and legal protection for them as they too
are part and parcel of our society and the nation.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; JANARDAN SINGH ‘SIGRIWAL’
July 29, 2015.

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a Poor and Destitute
Agricultural Workers Welfare Authority. Clause 4 provides for maintaining a district-
wise register of poor and destitute agricultural workers and for provision of certain
facilities to these workers. Clause 5 provides for the constitution of the Poor and
Destitute Agricultural Workers Welfare Fund with an initial corpus of rupees ten
thousand crore to be provided by the Central Government. Thereafter funds are to be
provided annually. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, is likely to involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees five thousand
crore would be involved as recurring expenditure per annum. A no-recurring
expenditure of about rupees one thousand crore is also likely to be involved.
6

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
7

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for welfare measures for the poor and destitute and such other
agricultural workers living in villages and constitution of a Welfare Fund
for payment of compensation in cases of death or  permanent disability,
old-age pension, medical assistance, maternity and creche facilities
 for the women workers and for regulating the conditions
of work and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Janardan Singh ‘Sigriwal’, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2325LS(S3)—31.10.2015.