AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 235 of 2022
THE  TOURISM DEVELOPMENT BOARD BILL, 2022
By
SHRI SHRIRANG APPA BARNE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for establishment of Tourism Development Board
for the Development of tourism in the country and
for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Tourism Development Board Act, 2022.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Board” means the Tourism Development Board constituted under
section 4; and
(b) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Short title,
extent and
Commencement.
5
Definitions.
10

3. (1) The Central Government may, if it is of the opinion that an area has tourism
potential in view of its location, ancient or historical importance or natural beauty, it
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare that area to be a tourist destination.
(2) An area declared under sub-section (1) as tourist destination shall be developed
by the Board as per international standards.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute a Board to be known as the Tourism Development Board for development
of tourism destinations.
(2) The Board shall consist of—
(a) The Union Minister of Tourism who shall be Chairperson, ex-officio;
(b) The Union Minister of State in the Ministry of Tourism shall be
Vice-Chairperson;
(c) The Minister of Tourism of States representing each State shall act as
ex-officio member; and
(d) One member from each State having expertise in the field of tourism
development, marketing and advertisement, to be nominated by the Central
Government in consultation with State Government.
(3) The nominated members shall hold office for a period of three years.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of
nominated members shall be such as may be prescribed.
5. (1) The Central Government shall appoint the Secretary and the Chief Accounts
Officer, respectively, of the Board in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Secretary and the Chief Accounts Officer shall exercise such powers
and perform such duties as may be specified by the Central Government.
(3) The Central Government shall provide such number of other officers and
staff to the Board as may be required for its efficient functioning.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of the
officers and staff of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
6. (1) The headquarters of the Board shall be at New Delhi.
(2) The Board shall have its State offices in every State capital or at such other
places as it may deem fit for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
7. The Board shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules
of procedure in regard to the transaction of its business at its meetings, as may be
prescribed.
8. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute a Fund to be known as the Tourism Development Board Fund.
(2) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament
by law in this behalf, provide requisite sums to the Fund for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
9. The objects of the Board shall be—
(a) to promote and develop tourism;
(b) to improve and strengthen the existing infrastructure in and around ancient
monuments, heritage sites and tourist destinations;
(c) to develop new tourist destinations with all basic amenities;
15
20
25
30
35
40
5
10
2
Declaration of
an area as
Tourist
Destination.
Constitution of
Tourism
Development
Board.
Appointment
of Secretary
and Chief
Accounts
Officer and
other staff of
the Board.
Headquarter and
other offices of
the Board.
Meetings and
procedure of the
Board.
Objectives of
the Board.
Constitution
of a Tourism
Development
Board Fund.

(d) to coordinate, support and interact with other departments and agencies for
streamlining services and amenities in and around tourist destinations;
(e) to provide safety and security to tourists;
(f) to facilitate and enhance the experience of the tourists; and
(g) to publish in at least one local newspaper having circulation in that area for
inviting objections and suggestions for development of a master plan of
each tourist destination.
10. The Board shall, as soon as may be, prepare a separate Master Plan for the
development of each tourist destination:
The Board shall, before finalising a Master Plan, take into consideration all
objections and suggestions from general public made under sub section 9(g).
11. The Board shall—
(a) prepare a calendar of activities including annual festival, melas, haats to be
organized in the each forthcoming financial year for the Development of
tourism at different tourist destinations;
(b) advertise such activities as it considers necessary to promote tourism at
different tourist destinations;
(c) interact once in three months with the stake holders including representatives
of the hoteliers, local authorities, police, Archaeological Survey of India and
the Tourism Department of the State Government concerned for proper co-
ordination to develop and strengthen tourism infrastructure in and around
tourist destinations in the area;
(d) provide amenities at such rate and in such manner to the visitors as may be
notified by the Central Government in this regard;
(e) provide such other amenities as it may deem fit for the development of
tourist destinations;
(f) recommend to the Central Government the measures to be taken for the
development of tourist destinations;
(g) coordinate with the local authorities functioning in the area regarding any
developmental work undertaken or to be undertaken in or around a tourist
destinations; and
(h) maintain a website containing all essential information regarding the
tourist destinations including hotels, monuments and heritage sites, tourist
maps, help desk, district administration and tour operators with a view to
provide necessary information and help to the tourists.
12. The Central Government shall, from time to time, issue such directions to the
Board, as may be necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
13. (1) The Board shall prepare every year an annual report in such form and
manner, as may be prescribed by the Central Government, giving a full account of its
activities during the previous year, and copies of the report shall be forwarded to the
Central Government.
(2) A copy of the report forwarded under sub-section (1) shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament.
14. The Board may, by general or special order, direct that any power exercisable
by it under this Act may be exercised by such officer or local Board in such cases and
subject to such conditions as may be specified therein.
3
15
20
25
30
35
40
5
10
Master Plan
for
development
of tourist
destination.
Duties of the
Board.
Central
Government
to issue
directions.
Annual Report.
Power to
delegate.45

15. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be
necessary or expedient for removal of the difficulty:
(i) provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of
two years from the date of the commencement of this Act; and
(ii) every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is
made, be laid before each House of Parliament.
16. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both
the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however,
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of
anything previously done under that rule.
4
15
5
10
Removal of
difficulty.
Power to make
rules.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The tourism sector in India is an integral part of the Make in India programme.
The tourism industry in India plays a role of significant economic multiplier and
becomes critical since India has to grow at rapid rates and create jobs.
The objectives of tourism development are to foster understanding between
people, to create employment opportunities and bring about socio-economic benefits
to the community, particularly in the interior and remote areas and to strive towards
balanced and sustainable development and preserve, enrich and promote India’s
cultural heritage. One of the major objectives is the preservation and protection of
natural resources and environment to achieve sustainable development. India offers
geographical diversity, world heritage sites and niche tourism products like cruises,
adventure, medical, eco-tourism, etc. Promotion programmes like Incredible India has
spurred growth in Tourists’ Arrivals and Employment.
India is currently ranked 54th in World Economic Forum’s Travel and Tourism
Development Index (2021). The Government has also said that the country’s tourism
sector will recover to the pre-pandemic level by mid-2024. The Centre also said that
by 2030, the tourism sector will contribute $250 billion to the country’s Gross Domestic
Product (GDP).
By 2047, the country intends to achieve $1 trillion through the tourism sector —
a sector that was worst affected by the corona virus pandemic.
Since Tourism is a multi-sectoral activity and the industry is affected by many
other sectors of the national economy. To achieve $1 trillion target, the State has to
ensure inter-governmental linkages and coordination.
There are still a large number of places in India which have got immense tourist
potential, but due to various reasons the potential could not be best utilized. Though,
Incredible India programme has increased inflow of tourists, India still stands at
54th ranking which shows lack of facilities and amenities for the tourists.
Whether it is Central Government or State Government, development of tourism
sector can never be achieved by any Government alone. It can be developed only
when both Central and State Governments work hand in hand. Keeping present
scenario in view, a board empowered by an Act is needed to cater to the demand of
tourism development.
Hence, this Bill.
    NEW DELHI;     SHRIRANG APPA BARNE
21 November, 2022.
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the Tourism Development
Board by the Central Government. Clause 5 provides for appointment of Secretary,
Chief Account Officer and other staff of the Authority. Clause 6 provides for
headquarters and other offices of the Authority. Clause 7 provides for meetings and
procedure of the Authority. Clause 8 provides for constitution of a Tourism
Development Board Fund. Clause 11 provides for the development of tourism through
advertisement, maintaining of website and providing amenities for development of
tourist destinations. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India. At this stage, it is not possible to give the exact
amount to be incurred. However, it is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about
one thousand crore will be involved per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one thousand crore is also likely to be
involved.
6

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLA TION
Clause 16 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail
only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
7

LOK SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for establishment of Tourism Development Board for the
Development of tourism in the country and for
matters connected therewith.
—————
(Shri Shrirang Appa Barne, M.P .)