1
THE DRAFTING OF LAW IN PLAIN LANGUAGE BILL, 2018
By
SHRI RAJEEV SATAV, M.P.
A
BILL
to establish a legal framework which mandates that all Government Bills and Acts be
drafted using plain, clear and concise language in order to maximize readability,
eliminate ambiguity and ensure compliance through easy interpretation
with a view to enhance citizens' access and understanding of Laws of
India and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Drafting of Law in Plain Language Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such a date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "drafting agency" means any Central Government department, ministry or a
third party, whether Private or public that is tasked on behalf of the Government of
India to draft or amend a law;
Bill No. 236 of  2018
Short title and
commencement.
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
(b) "law" means central law and includes any central Ordinance, Order, by-law,
rule regulation, notification, custom or usages having in the territory of India the force
of law;
(c) "plain language" means a form of written expression which is characterized,
but not limited to following features, namely:—
(i) strives to be easy to read, comprehend and use by both lay persons
and experts;
(ii) avoids Latin legal maxims, foreign vocabulary and archaic jargon when
simple English equivalents are available;
(iii) when applied to legislative drafting, follows a logical flow where each
statute, procedural and substantive clause is explained with utmost clarity and
simplicity;
(iv) when applied to legislative drafting, sticks to gender-neutral terms
unless a specific provision or a whole law otherwise demands;
(v) follows other best practices appropriate to the subject or field and
intended audience; and
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. Every ministry and department of the Government of India shall strive to draft laws
in plain language to the largest possible extent to ensure that the implications and purpose
of the law are understood by the widest possible audience.
4. The drafting agency shall eliminate any ambiguity or confusion by clearly clarifying
the intended meaning of each law.
5. (1) The Union Ministry of Law and Justice shall create, maintain and regularly
update a comprehensive document called the "Legislative Drafting Manual" to lay down the
principles and guidelines to use plain language while drafting a law.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, it
shall be mandatory for the drafting agency to implement the guidelines issued under Legislative
Drafting Manual while drafting or amending an existing law.
(3) The Legislative Drafting Manual shall be made available publicly on the website of
Ministry of Law and Justice and a hardcopy shall be made available to every ministry and
department of the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
6. The Legislative Drafting Manual shall have guidelines on the following aspects but
not limited to:—
(a) restricting the usage of long winding paragraphs and superfluous language;
(b) promoting the drafting of gender-neutral laws;
(c) avoiding the usage of Latin legal maxims and other foreign language terms
and promoting the usage of the plain English equivalents terms;
(d) drafting and accessible clause which encompasses only one legal idea;
(e) minimise use of cross referencing techniques;
(f) promoting the use of clear, simple and compact definitions to improve
readability and to ensure better compliance with the law;
Plain Drafting
Language by
the Ministries
and
Departments.
Drafting
Agency to
eliminate
ambiguity in
law.
Ministry of
Law and
Justice to
maintain
Legislature
Drafting
Manual.
Guidelines for
the Legislative
Drafting
Manual.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(g) logical flow of the law which ensure that all the substantive clauses are laid
down unequivocally before the procedural aspect is defined.
7. (1) The Ministry of Law and Justice, Legislative and Legal Affairs Department shall
provide legal and drafting assistance to every Department and Ministry of the Central
Government which are in the process of drafting a new law or amendment to a law.
(2) The Legislative and Legal Affairs departments shall ensure that the standards
defined in the Legislative Drafting Manual and maintained and principles of plain language
drafting are integrated right at the very beginning of the process of drafting a new law.
8. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding inconsistent therewith
contained in any other law for the time being in force.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Ministry of
Law and
Justice to
provide legal
and drafting
assistance.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Justice James Stephen, the author of the Indian Evidence Act (1872), once remarked:
''...it is not enough to attain a degree of precision which a person reading in good faith can
understand; but it is necessary to attain, if possible, a degree of precision which a person
reading in bad faith cannot misunderstand. This statement is still as relevant today as it was
over one hundred and twenty years ago, when it first surfaced in 1891.
Legal writing has been often criticized for being unnecessarily complex, superfluous
and more importantly unintelligible to the common citizen and sometimes even to the people
well versed with it. The repercussions are even graver when this writing takes the form of
legislative writing. Legislations are of deep importance in a democratic system. They shape
up everything, right from an individual's behavior to the degree of efficiency with which a
society will work. It is imperative that every common citizen be able to gauge the meanings
and implications of laws that affect them. This basic right, therefore, should not be limited to
a select few with formal legal training.
Clear, concise and well-articulated legislation which avoids unnecessary usage of
provisos, archaic jargon and tedious legalese paves way for better understanding by the
citizens, enforcement by the executive and proper interpretation by the judiciary.
These basic tenets lie at the heast of the 'plain language movement' which has been
positively altering the face of legislative drafting since the 1970s and saving time, money and
public resources. The effect has been more pronounced in countries like Australia, Ireland,
New Zealand etc. which are based on the English common law.
The Honorable Supreme Court in 1976 observed that: "We cannot but deplore the
clumsy draftmanship displayed in a statute which affects the common man in his daily bread.
It is unfortunate that easy comprehensibility and simplicity for the laity are discarded
sometimes through over-sophisticated scholarship in the art of drawing up legislative Bills.
It cannot be overstressed that a new orientation for drafting methodology adopting directness
of language and avoiding involved reference and obscurity is overdue."
The principle of Rule of Law presupposes that those who are affected by a law should
be in a position to ascertain its meaning and effect. Therefore, plain language drafting is the
need of the hour to facilitate strengthening the rule of law and ensure better accessibility &
participation of the citizens of the country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAJEEV SATA V
November 26, 2018.
4

5
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to establish a legal framework which mandates that all Government Bills and Acts be
drafted using plain, clear and concise language in order to maximize readability,
eliminate ambiguity and ensure compliance through easy interpretation
with a view to enhance citizens' access and understanding of Laws of
India and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Rajeev Satav, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—2322LS(S3)—20-12-2018.