THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN FROM DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
By
SHRI VINOD KUMAR BOIANAPALLI, M.P .
A
BILL
to amend the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence
(Amendment) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 237 of 2018
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In section 5 of the Protecion of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005, (hereinafter
referred to as the principal Act), after clause (c), the following clauses shall be inserted,
namely:—
''(f) of the available Self-help Groups in his jurisdiction and provide her access to
such groups;
(g) of the National Skill India Policy and connect her to one of the Schemes;".
3. In section 9 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after clause (h), the following
clause shall be inserted, namely:
''(ha) to ensure that the victim has been provided access o Self-help Groups
and/or National Skill India Policy Schemes;''.
Amendment of
section 5.
Amendment of
section 9.
43 of 2005.
5
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
According to the National Crime Records Bureau of India report in the year 2012,
incidents of crime against women has increased by 6.4 per cent. The report also suggests
that a crime against women is committed in every three minutes. Fifty to seventy per cent.
women face domestic violence, while only two per cent. of them reach the police to report the
case. This gap between the actual rate of crime and the reported rate needs to be mended.
One predominant reasons cited in various researches and agreed commonly, of women
refraining  from reporting cases of domestic violence against them is their financial dependence
on the male counterpart or the household.
The need is to improve the accessibility of laws against domestic violence by equipping
women with financial independence and security. It is also required to include the institution
of Self-help Groups and the National Skill India Policy Schemes which are more inclusive and
efficient in providing financial independence and security to the victims of domestic violence.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence
Act, 2005 with a view to ensure financial security to the victims of domestic violence by
providing them access to available Self-help Groups and National Skill India Policy Schemes.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; VINOD KUMAR BOIANAPALLI
November 26, 2018.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN FROM DOMESTIC VIOLENCE ACT, 2005
(43 TO 2005)
* * * * * * *
5. A police officer, Protection Officer, service provider or Magistrate who has received
a complaint of domestic violence or is otherwise present at the place of an incident of
domestic violence or when the incident of domestic violence is reported to him, shall inform
the aggrieved person—
* * * * *
(e) of her right to file a complaint under section 498A of the Indian Penal Code,
wherever relevant:
* * * * *
9. (1) It shall be the duty of the Protection Officer—
* * * * *
(h) to ensure that the order for monetary relief under section 20 is complied with
and executed, in accordance with the procedure prescribed under the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973;
* * * * *
4
Duties of
police
officers,
service
providers and
Magistrate.
Duties and
functions of
Protection
Officers.

LOK  SABHA
——————
A
BILL
further to amend the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005.
————
(Shri Vinod Kumar Boianapalli, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—2129LS(S3)—20-12-2018.