Short title,
extent  and
commencement.
THE PREVENTION OF CRIMES IN THE NAME OF HONOUR AND
TRADITION AND PROHIBITION OF INTERFERENCE WITH THE
FREEDOM OF MATRIMONIAL ALLIANCES
BILL, 2017
By
SHRI NISHIKANT DUBEY, M.P.
A
BILL
to protect individual liberty, right of association, movement and bodily integrity and the
right of adults to choose their own partners in marriage and to prevent victimisation by
prohibiting unlawful assemblies and other conducts interfering with
matrimonial alliances in the name of honour and tradition
and for the matters connected therewith and
incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Crimes in the name of Honour and
Tradition and Prohibition of Interference with the Freedom of Matrimonial Alliances
Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 237 of  2017
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
5
10
15
2. (1) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that all persons including young
persons and women have the following rights—
(a) right to control their own lives;
(b) right to liberty and freedom of expression;
(c) right of association, movement and bodily integrity; and
(d) right to choose their own partners in marriage or otherwise.
(2) Any action by any person or group of persons that restricts or prevents the
exercise of the rights referred to in sub-section (1) shall be an offence under this Act.
3. (1) No person or any group of persons shall gather, assemble or congregate at any
time with the view or intention of condemning any marriage, not prohibited by law, on the
basis that such marriage has dishonoured the caste or community tradition or brought
disrepute to all or any of the persons forming part of the assembly or the family or the people
of the locality concerned.
Explanation.—In this Section, the expression—
(i) 'marriage' shall include a proposed or intended marriage; and
(ii) 'gather', 'assemble' or 'congregate' shall include acting in concert through the
use of any technological means or mediums.
(2) Such gathering or assembly or congregation shall be treated unlawful and every
person convening or organising such assembly and every member thereof participating
therein, directly or indirectly, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term of not less than
six months but which may extend upto one year and shall also be liable to fine up to ten
thousand rupees.
4. If any person or a group of persons, who is or are members of the family of the
couple, who has married or intends to marry, or a person or persons acting in concert with, or
at the behest of, a member of the family or a member of a body or a group of the caste or clan
or community or caste panchayat (by whatever name called) or a member of unlawful assembly
kills a women who has married or intends to marry, or kills the person whom the woman has
married or intends to marry or kills any person associated with the couple, or abets, participates
or incites such an act of killing, shall be guilty of an offence of murder under the Indian Penal
Code, 1860.
5. If any person or a group of persons, who is or are members of the family of the
couple, who has married or intends to marry, or a person or persons acting in concert with, or
at the behest of, a member of the family, or a member of a body or a group of the caste or clan
or community or caste panchayat (by whatever name called) or a member of unlawful assembly
indulges in criminal intimidation of the couple or either of them, or the members of their
family, or supporters shall be punished with imprisonment for a term of not less than one
year, which may extend upto three years and shall also be liable to fine up to thirty thousand
rupees:
Provided that if the threat be to cause death grievous hurt of the description referred
to in second part of section 506 of the Indian Penal Code, then the punishment shall extend
upto seven years of imprisonment instead of three years and fine up to thirty thousand rupees.
Explanation.—The expression 'criminal intimidation' includes repeated harassment of
the couple or either of them with the view to pressurise them not to meet or associate with
each other or live with each other or threatning the couple or either of them or their family or
any person associated with them or harbouring them of retributive action of any kind
whatsoever.
6. If any person or a group of persons, who is or are members of the family of the
couple, who has married or intends to marry, or a person or persons acting in concert with, or
Declaration of
Rights of
persons.
Unlawful
Assembly.
Harassment and
endangerment
of Liberty.
20
25
30
35
40
45
Honour
killing.
Criminal
Intimidation.
45 of 1860.
45 of 1860.

3
at the behest of, a member of the family, or a member of a body or a group of the caste or clan
or community or caste panchayat (by whatever name called) or a member of unlawful assembly
harasses a woman or her partner, or any person associated with them for exercising the rights
as mentioned in section 2 or attempts to prevent either one or both of them from exercising
these rights shall be deemed to have acted in the endangerment of their liberty and such an
act of endangerment shall be punished with imprisonment for a period of not less than two
years and extending up to ten years and fine extending up to fifty thousand rupees.
Explanation.—'Endangerment of liberty' shall include the acts of social sanctions,
ostracization or social boycott and shall include, but shall not be limited to the following
acts,—
(i) declaring the couple, who have married or intends to marry as brother and
sister provided that they are not the children from the same natural parent and such a
marriage is recognised by any law or custom for the time being in force;
(ii) bringing to bear pressure on the couple or their families or any person
associated with them or harbouring them to leave the village or area of residence
concerned;
(iii) indulging in any conduct which impedes or is likely to impede, access to
markets, community facilities, places of worship or any other necessities of life;
(iv) divesting or dispossessing the couple or their families, or any persons
associated with them or harbouring them of any land or property belonging to them;
(v) bringing to bear pressure on the couple, or their families or any person
associated with them or harbouring them to pay a fine;
(vi) causing grievous hurt, or injury, or harm  to the couple, or either of them, or
their families, or any persons associated with them or harbouring them; and
(vii) any other act or acts of harassment whether physical or mental or
psychological.
7.  Any two persons who intend to marry or associate with each other may declare their
age and willingness to marry or associate, orally or in writing, before any Government official,
who shall, on receipt of such information, inform the nearest Police Station and it shall be the
responsibility of the police to protect the said couple against any offences mentioned under
section 3 to 6 of this Act.
8. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, all
village officers, including the Sarpanch and such other officers as may be specified by the
Sub-divisional Magistrate or District Magistrate in relation to any area, if they have reason
to believe or have knowledge that any of the offences mentioned under sections 3 to 6 is
likely to be committed or has been committed shall provide such information to the nearest
police station forthwith.
(2) Any person who fails to report the commission of an offence under sub-section (1)
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description which may extend upto six months
or with fine or with both.
(3) No person shall incur any liability, whether civil or criminal, for giving the information
in good faith for the purpose of sub-section (1).
9. (1) The District Magistrate or the Sub-Divisional Magistrate shall receive any request
or information from any person or persons seeking protection from any assembly of persons
or from members of any family who are likely to or who have been objecting to any lawful
marriage.
(2) Where the District Magistrate or the Sub-Divisional Magistrate receives information
from any source that there is a likelihood of convening of an assembly openly or in secrecy
Declaration
by a couple of
the intention
to be
together.
Power to
prohibit
certain acts
and taking
preventing
measures.
Obligation of
certain
persons to
report an
offence.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
2 of 1974.

4
to condemn as objectionable any marriage proposed or solemnized, he shall, by order prohibit
the convening of such assembly and doing of any act towards the commission of any
offence under this Act by any person in any area specified in the order.
(3) The District Magistrate or Sub-Divisional Magistrate may take such steps as may
be necessary to give effect to such order including giving appropriate directions to the
police authorities concerned.
(4) The District Magistrate or Sub-Divisional Magistrate shall also take such steps as
may be necessary to ensure the safety of the persons targeted by an unlawful assembly or
by any person or a group of persons, who is or are members of the families of the couple, who
has married or intends to marry, or a person or persons acting in concert with, or at the behest
of, a member of the family, or a member of a body or a group of the caste or clan or community
or caste panchayat (by whatever name called).
(5) The District Magistrate or the Sub-Divisional Magistrate shall be in direct supervision
of the protection and safety of the persons concerned and their protection from any offence
mentioned in sections 3 to 6 of this Act.
(6) Every official called upon to act in terms of the above provisions shall  be accountable
for their lapses, omissions or failures and the concerned State Governments shall provide for
and take such action against them as may be deemed fit for their lapses, omissions or failure
to act.
10. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 all
offences under this Act shall be congnizable, non-bailable and non-compoundable.
11. Where any person is prosecuted for an offence under this Act, the burden of
proving that he has not committed the offence shall be on the person being prosecuted.
12. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
13. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days, which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Offences to
be cognizable,
non-bailable
and non-
compoundable.
Burden of
Proof.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
2 of 1974.
35

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
There has been an increase in number of crimes being committed against young couples
intending to marry or having married, in the name of vindicating the honour of the family,
caste or community. The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in Lata Singh v. State of
Uttar Pradesh rightly stated that "there is nothing honourable in such crimes, and in fact
they are nothing but barbaric and shameful acts of murder committed by brutal
feudal-minded persons."
These crimes violate the fundamental rights of citizens including the right to life and
liberty, right to bodily integrity and the freedom of movement and expression. They unduly
emphasise on framework of 'honour' to control and regulate women's sexuality and their
marital choices. Such crimes are also in violation of Article 16(1)(b) of the United Nations
Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination against Women which provides
that women should have the right to freely choose a spouse.
The Indian Penal Code, which is currently invoked to book offenders in cases of
honour crimes neither covers the entire gamut of illegal actions perpetrated in the name of
honour, nor provides for adequate provisions for ensuring protection of the consenting
couple. Therefore, the Law Commission of India, in its Report No. 242 had recommended a
legal framework to prevent acts endangering the liberty of the couple married or intending to
marry and their family members. Furthermore, the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India, in Arumugam
Servai v. State of Tamil Nadu had held that the District Magistrate/Collector and SSP/SPs of
the district as well as other officials concerned should be held accountable for their failure to
prevent honour crimes.
Therefore, in view of the need to address the grave concern, the current Bill seeks to
provide for protecting the right to life and liberty of counsenting adults, prohibition of
unlawful assemblies, criminal intimidation, harassment, violence and interference in lawful
matrimonial alliances in the name of honour and tradition and establishes power and
accountability of District Magistrates and other officials concerned to prevent such crimes.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; NISHIKANT DUBEY
November 27, 2017.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 13 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative powers is of a normal character.
6

LOK   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to protect individual liberty, right of association, movement and bodily integrity and the
right of adults to choose their own partners in marriage and to prevent victimisation by
prohibiting unlawful assemblies and other conducts interfering with
matrimonial alliances in the name of honour and tradition
and for the matters connected therewith and
incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Nishikant Dubey, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2756LS(S3)—19.12.2017.