Insertion of
new article
243EA.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
SHRIMA TI JAYSHREEBEN K. PATEL,  M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2016.
2. After article 243E of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted
namely:—
"243EA. Every member of Panchayat shall, before taking his seat, make and
subscribe before the Governor, or some person appointed in that behalf by him, an
oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose by law made by the
Legislature of the State.".
Bill No. 238 of 2016
Short title.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Oath or
affirmation
by members.
5

3. After article 243U of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,
namely: —
"243UA. Every member of Municipality shall, before taking his seat, make and
subscribe before the Governor, or some person appointed in that behalf by him, an
oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose by law made by the
Legislature of the State.".
Insertion of
new article
243UA.
Oath or
affirmation by
members.
2
5

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Every person who is elected or appointed to a Constitutional office and every Member
of Parliament or State Legislature has to subscribe an oath or affirmation before assuming
charge of his office or taking his seat in the Legislature.
However, there is no provision in the Constitution which makes it compulsory for the
elected members of the Panchayats and the Municipalities to make and subscribe an oath or
affirmation after being elected.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Constitution with a view to make it compulsory
for members of the Panchayats and the Municipalities to make and subscribe an oath or
affirmation before taking their seats.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; JAYSHREEBEN K. PATEL
July 28, 2016.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Smt. Jayshreeben K. Patel, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2594LS(S3)—06-10-2016.