                                                            Bill No. 238 of 2022
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2022
By
DR. HEENA VIJAYKUMAR GA VIT, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of
India as follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
Short title and
commencement.
 AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Amendment of
article 312. 2. In article 312 of the Constitution, in clause (1), for the words
“all-India Judicial service”, the words “all-India Judicial Service and an
all-India Education Service” shall be substituted.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In the wake of the pandemic that has hit the education systems of the
entire world hard, it becomes very necessary for a country like India to
have a stable, standard, reliable and controlled system of educating its
population. Unlike countries like the United Kingdom or any other developed
country for that matter, has a limited population to deal with that is
supported by a declining and aging population for which brilliant brains
from other countries specially India are taken out to keep up their standards
high.
The bill proposes to add Indian Education Service to the list to enhance
the standards of education in the country by bringing in more consistence and
quality in terms of teachers and education. India has come a long way after its
liberalisation or independence from the ugly British Raj which makes it among
the top destination for investment, outsourcing, and manufacturing, primarily
in the service sector. India now being a major economy still lacks in aspects
of vocational education, as almost no emphasis has been laid upon such areas
of education, skill development and on field training, which should be added
in order to give the future of the nation a brief over-view of the industries
helping then in making an informed decision in terms of the career that they
might want to choose.
The success of any country largely depends on its educated citizens and
this can be realised only if the education system functions well. This must be
the reason why the National Policy on Education, 1986, revised in 1992,
stressed the need for strengthening the education system in the country. The
government should have complete faith in the teaching community and the
teachers’ associations should play a significant role in improving education,
upholding professional integrity to enhance the dignity and status of the
teacher. Keeping this in mind, on behalf of teacher’s federations representing
teachers at all levels, from nursery to university level in India, a memorandum
was presented to the Centre some time back requesting urgent attention to
establish the Indian Education Service.
The entire teaching community of India will appreciate the commitments
which the policy has made to the nation, to the people, to the education, and
the management system. The management system is a high priority item in
education and it should receive urgent attention and support. Along with a
number of dynamic steps in the economic and development fields, the
educational management should also get top priority.
The following needs to be kept in mind for improving the education
scenario in our country. Teaching should be regarded as a profession. It is
a form of public service, which requires teachers expert knowledge
and specialised skills, acquired and maintained through rigorous and
continued research and study. It also calls for a sense of personal and
corporate responsibility for the development and welfare of the pupils they
are in-charge of.
3

4
The Ministry of Education has come out with this proposal as part of
National Education Policy-2016 and invited views from stakeholders until
end of this month. The idea of an Indian Education Service (IES) was first
floated in the late 1980s by the then Human Resource Development Minister.
By creating IES, specialists in education will occupy top administrative posts
and motivate their subordinates to work with dedication and commitment.
Hence this Bill.
   NEW DELHI;                             HEENA VIJAYKUMAR GA VIT
November 23, 2022.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * *
312. (1) Notwithstanding anything in Chapter VI of Part VI or Part XI,
if the Council of States has declared by resolution supported by not less than
two-thirds of the members present and voting that it is necessary or expedient
in the national interest so to do, Parliament may by law provide for the creation
of one or more all-India services (including an all-India judicial service)
common to the Union and the States, and, subject to the other provisions of
this Chapter, regulate the recruitment, and the conditions of service of persons
appointed, to any such service.
(2) The services known at the commencement of this Constitution as
the Indian Administrative Service and the Indian Police Service shall be
deemed to be services created by Parliament under this article.
(3) The all-India judicial service referred to in clause (1) shall not
include any post inferior to that of a district judge as defined in article 236.
(4) The law providing for the creation of all-India judicial service
aforesaid may contain such provisions for the amendment of Chapter VI of
Part VI as may be necessary for giving effect to the provisions of that law and
no such law shall be deemed to be an amendment of this Constitution for the
purposes of article 368.
* * * * * *
5
All India
Services.

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit, M.P .)