1
THE SINGLE-USE PLASTIC (REGULATION) BILL, 2018
By
SHRI ANURAG SINGH THAKUR, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for a framework to enable India to achieve its goal of eliminating single-use
plastic by the year 2022.
BE it enacted by Parilament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Single-Use Plastic (Regulation) Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
Bill  No.  238 of  2018
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
5
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Plastic target
setting.
(b) "higher education institution" includes institutions imparting education on
completion of senior secondary level;
(c) "plastic" means material which contains as an essential ingredient a high
polymer such as polyethylene terephthalate, high density polyethylene, Vinyl, low
density polyethylene, polypropylene, polystryrene resins or multimaterials like
acrylonitrile butadiene styrene, polyephylene oxide, polycarbonate or polybutylene
terephthalate;
(d) "plastic packaging" means all products which are—
(i) used for the containment, protection handling, delivery and
presentation of goods; and
(ii) partly or wholly composed of plastic;
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(f) "recycle"means the reprocessing in a production process of the waste
materials of a plastic product for the original purpose or for other purposes;
(g) "reuse" means any operation by which a plastic product, which has been
conceived and designed to accomplish within its life cycle a minimum number of trips
or rotations, is refilled or used for the same purpose for which it was conceived; and
(h) "single-use plastic" means any disposable plastic item which is designed to
be used only once before it is thrown out or recycled and includes plastic forks and
knives, plastic shopping bags, plastic coffee cup, lids, plastic water bottles, styroforam,
plastic take out containers and plastic straws.
3. The Central Government shall, within six months from the commencement of this
Act,—
(a) prescribe a target of complete elimination of plastic waste by the year 2050 in
accordance with international obligations, if any, agreed to by India;
(b) specify the year 2022 target year to implement a complete ban on single-use
plastic and the proportion of reduction of single-use plastic during each year
following the date of fixing of target year 2022; and
(c) formulate and implement a National Plastic Control Strategy for carrying out
the purposes of this Act.
4. The appropriate Government shall take necessary measures to promote sustainable
alternatives to single-use plastic including,—
(a) research by higher education institutions and others into sustainable
alternatives to plastic packaging; and
(b) the use of sustainable alternatives to plastic packaging.
5. The appropriate Government shall take measures to ensure—
(a) elimination of the production and use of plastics;
(b) increase in recycling, reuse and other forms of waste recovery in relation to
plastics; and
(c) removing plastics already in the environment for the purpose of recycling,
reusing or applying another form of waste recovery to the plastics.
6. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, no
person shall, after the target year 2022, use, stock, distribute, manufacture, sell or trade in any
single-use plastic item.
Promote
sustainable
alternatives to
plastic.
Phasing out of
existent
plastic.
Ban on single
use plastic
items.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
7. Whoever violates the provision of this Act shall be punished with a fine which shall
not be less than rupees one lakh but which may extend upto five lakhs.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
9.  (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be  comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions afore-
said, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that
the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form
or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Penalty.
Central
Government
to provide
requisite funds.
Power to
make rules.
5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India's 1.3 billion population currently produces 25,940 metric tonnes of plastic per
day, Plastic is highly non-biodegradable causing permanent damage to the environment by
disrupting ecosystems.
Single use plastic can block waterways and exacerbate natural disasters. By clogging
sewers and providing breeding grounds for mosquitoes and pests, plastic bags can increase
the transmission of vector-borne diseases like malaria.
Marine life is also impacted by the irresponsible dumping of plastic goods in water
bodies. High concentrations of plastic materials, particularly plastic bags, have been found
blocking the airways and stomachs of hundreds of species. There is evidence that the toxic
chemicals added during the manufacture of plastic transfer to animal tissue, eventually
entering the human food chain. Styrofoam products, which contain carcinogenic chemicals
like styrene and benzene, are highly toxic if ingested,damaging the nervous systems, lungs
and reproductive organs.
Further, improper disposal of plastic can cause toxicity thereby having a devastating
impact on the quality of life. Plastic waste is often burned for heat or cooking, exposing
people to toxic emissions. Disposing of plastic waste by burning it in open-air pits releases
harmful gases like furan and dioxin. This contributes to the air pollution which has become a
public health endemic in recent years. Efforts to ban single use plastic and promote
sustainable alternatives to it can help in mitigate all the ill-effects on human life and
environment.
India's commitment towards sustainable development can only be realised through
concentrated efforts of reducing pollution caused by plastic.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; ANURAG SINGH THAKUR
19 November, 2018.
4

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for research by higher education institutions and others
into sustainable alternatives to plastic packaging. Clause 5 provides that the appropriate
Government shall take measures to increase in recycling, reuse and other forms of waste
recovery in relation to plastics. Clause 8 of the Bill provides that the Central Government
shall provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this Bill. The Bill, therefore, if
enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for a framework to enable India to achieve its goal of eliminating
single-use plastic by the year 2022.
————
(Shri Anurag Singh Thakur, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—2519LS(S3)—21-12-2018.