Short title.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
SHRI RAJIV PRATAP RUDY,  M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2017.
2. After article 47 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
"47A. The state shall take steps to ensure access to safe potable water to every
household of the country.
Bill No. 238 of  2017
State to
provide access
to safe Potable
water to every
household.
Insertion of
new article
47A.
5
AS  INTRODUCED IN LOK  SABHA

2
3. In the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution,—
(i) in List II-State List, entry 17 shall be omitted;
(ii) in List III-Concurrent List, after entry 47, the following entry shall be inserted,
namely:—
"48. Water, that is to say, water supplies, irrigation and canals, drainage
and embankments, water storage and water power subject to the provisions of
entry 56 of list 1.".
Amendment of
the Seventh
Schedule.
5

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Water is the most crucial need and it remains the fundamental necessity of mankind.
This necessity has turned itself into one of the basic human rights in India. With the per
capita availability of water continuing to decline, the nation hurtles towards water scarcity.
More than three-quarters of India's rural population are dependent on ground water for
drinking, but the country's aquifers are not only under tremendous stress, the quality of
water they provide is also deteriorating.
Although the Supreme Court as well as several High Courts in the country have
upheld the citizens' right to have access to clean drinking water as a fundamental right under
the purview of article 21. India has the highest number of people in the world without access
to safe potable water. It is estimated that even today at least 63 million Indians do not have
access to clean drinking water.
The contamination of water with fluoride, iron, nitrate, arsenic and other heavy metals
has not only adversely affected health and environment but the crippling effects of fluoride
and arsenic toxicity are transforming to become a major public health issue in the country. An
alarming 80 per cent of India's surface water is gauged to be polluted due to un-treated
sewage effluents. The highly vulnerable effects of extreme weather events and climate change
have only added to the burden of India's rural poor with majority of India's rural districts
witnessing an increasing number of vector borne diseases, cholera, dysentery, jaundice,
diarrhoea and cancer. The WHO estimates that, in India, about 38 million people are affected
by waterborne diseases each year, of which over 75 per cent are children, Nearly 8 lakh
deaths are attributed to contaminated water and more than 4 lakh deaths can be attributed to
diarrhoea alone.
With 67 per cent of India's population living in rural areas it is imperative on the part of
both the State Governments and the Central Government to step up its heavy metal water
contamination, prevention and mitigation activities by providing potable water, ensuring
proper drainage system and providing piped water to every household. Incorporating the
new article under the Directive Principles of State Policy of the Constitution would act as
guidelines by the Constitution to the State in its policy formulation.
At present, water is a State subject and is considered as the primary responsibility of
the State Government. However, under the National Rural Drinking Water Programme
(NRDWP), the Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation, Government of India provides
technical and financial assistance to the States to provide safe and adequate drinking water
to the rural population.
It has been noted that there exist large scale discrepancies when it comes to providing
safe and piped potable water especially to the rural population across different states in
India. As per Census-2011 Report, 30.80 per cent of the rural households in the country get
tap water and 70.60 per cent of the urban households of the country are covered with tap
water supply. Access to safe water varies greatly from state to state. Greater than 50 per cent
of the rural population in Maharashtra and Gujarat have access to treated water while,
in Bihar, less than 2 per cent of the rural population receives treated water. The State
Governments are facing funds crunch to make proper arrangements for piped and potable
water especially in rural areas.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Constitution with a view to—
(a) put an obligation on the state to ensure access to safe potable water to every
household; and

4
(b) Transfer entry 17 of List-II, State List pertaining to 'Water', to List-III, concurrent
List so that the Parliament i.e., Central Government along with the respective State
Governments can play the dual role in the field of development of agriculture and
sustainable use of water to meet the growing needs of the society.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAJIV PRATAP RUDY
November 27, 2017.

5
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
SEVENTH  SCHEDULE
* * * * *
LIST II  STATE  LIST
* * * * *
17. Water, that is to say, water supplies, irrigation and canals, drainage and embankments,
water storage and water power subject to the provisions of entry 56 of List I.
* * * * *
LIST III  CONCURRENT  LIST
* * * * *
47. Fees in respect of any of the matters in this List, but not including fees taken in any
court.
* * * * *

LOK   SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2661LS(S3)—18-12-2017.