To 88 INTRODUCED IN Lok SaBHA

Bill No. 238 of 2015

THE DESTITUTE AND NEGLECTED WOMEN
(WELFARE) BILL, 2015

By
‘Start Gora Cutnayya SHetty, M.P.
A
BILL

to provide for the maintenance and welfare measures to be undertaken by the State for
the destitute, neglected, old, infirm or physically challenged widow, divorcee or
unmarried women through establishment of an Authority and for matters
. connected therewith or incidental thereto.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows: —

1. (1) This Act may be called the Destitute and Neglected Women (Welfare) Shor title,
Act, 2015. extent and

commence-
ment.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.

5 (3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.


Definitions.

Establishment
of Destitute
and Neglected
Women
Welfare
Authority.

Functions of
the Authority.

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) “appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government,

(6) "Authority" means the Destitute and Neglected Women Welfare Authority
established under section 3,

(c) "destitute woman" means a widow, divorcee or unmarried woman who has no
relative or kinsmen to support her or who has no independent and adequate source of
livelihood including the livelihood to her minor children and includes a woman stricken
with infirmity owing to old age, physical deformity, ailment, mental imbalance and who
lives uncared for;

(d) “prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act: and
(2) "widow" means a legally wedded female whose husband has died.

3. (7) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the
Official Gazette, establish an authority to be known as the Destitute and Neglected ‘Women
Welfare Authority to exercise the powers conferred on, and to perform the functions assigned
to it under this Act.

(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual
succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both
movable and immovable and to contract and shall by thesaid name sue and be sued.

(3) The headquarters of the Authority shall be at Chandigarh in the State of Punjab
and the Authority shall establish its branches in all the States and Union territories at such
places as may be prescribed.

(4) The Authority shall have a Secretariat with such number of officers and employees,
with such terms and conditions of service as may be prescribed, for the efficient functioning
of the Authority.

(5) The Authority shall consist of—

(a) the Union Minister of Women and Child Development who shall be
Chairperson, ex-officio;

(b)a Deputy Chairperson preferably a woman with such qualifications as may
be prescribed to be appointed by the Central Government;

(c) five women members of Parliament of whom three shall be from the Lok
Sabha and two from the Rajya Sabha to be nominated by the respective Presiding
Officer of each House;

(व) three members representing the Union Ministries of Human Resource
Development and Social Justice and Empowerment to be appointed by the Central
Government;

(e) not more than five members to be appointed by the Central Government in
consultation with the Governments of States, by rotation in alphabetical order, to
represent the Governments of the States; and

(f) four members to be appointed by Central Government from amongst the
Non-Governmental Organizations working for destitute or neglected women.

(©Thesalary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of the service
of Deputy Chairperson and members of the Authority and officers and employees ofthe
Secretariat of the Authority shall be such, as may be prescribed.

4. (J) It shall be the duty of the Authority to promote by such measures, aS it thinks fit,
for welfare of destitute or neglected women or widows.

20

30

35

40


30

35

40

3

2 Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the Authority
shall,—

(a) maintain district-wise register of destitute or neglected women or widows
who are in need of assistance from the Authority with such details and in such manner
as may be prescribed;

(6) work out plans and formulate schemes for the welfare of destitute or neglected
women or widows covered under this Act;

(©) give wide publicity through the electronic and print media about the welfare
measures being undertaken by the Authority; and

(व) perform such other functions not inconsistent with the provisions of this
Act, as may be assigned to it by the appropriate Government from time to time.

5. The appropriate Government shall, on the recommendation of the. ‘Authority, provide
to the women covered under this Act, the following facilities, namely: —

(@) monthly allowance of two thousand and five hundred rupees, if the woman is
having any dependent children and rupees one thousand and five hundred in case she
has no dependent child, as subsistence ai, »wance;

(5) free medical assistance and free legal aid;

(c) free education including technical education to dependent children;
(d) free residential accommodation wherever necessary;

(2) gainful employment after imparting vocational education; and

(f) such other facilities, as may be necessary, for her rehabilitation, proper
development and for maintaining a respectable life in the society:

Provided that if any woman covered under this Act either gets gainful
employment or remarries, alll the facilities provided to her and to her dependent in
accordance with the provisions of this Act, shall be withdrawn from the date of gainful
employment or remarriage, as the case may be.

6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf provide adequate funds to the Authority, for carrying out the purposes of this
Act.

7. The provisions of this Act shall have effect, notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force, but save as aforesaid the
provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other law for the
time being applicable to women covered under this Act.

8. (/) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
tule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.

Facilities to be
provided by
appropriate
Government.

Central
Government to
provide Funds.

Act to have
overriding
effect.

Power to make
tules.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASON 5

In our Country, a large number of women particularly those belonging to lower and
middle income groups of the society become destitute after the death of their husbands.
Divorced women or unmarried women too are either neglected by their families or have no
means to support them. In many cases, the widows are thrown out of the households. Many
of them work as housemaids for their survival and to support their children. But even this is
not possible for the infirm, old, physically or mentally challenged women and so they lead a
miserable life and very often subsist on alms, which they get from begging. Sometimes they
are forced into flesh trade and become sex workers to avoid starvation, which makes their
lives disgraceful. The position of destitute women is more dreadful in rural areas, as being
illiterate, they are often subjected to exploitation. It is expedient to stop the exploitation of
the destitute, neglected women or widows ina welfare State like India and provide financial
assistance and other essential facilities to such women so that they live a dignified life in the
society. For this reason, a Destitute and Neglected Women Welfare Authority should be set
up to ensure that the conditions of destitute, neglected women or widows should not become
so miserable as may enable the unscrupulous elements of the society to exploit the situation.

Hence this Bill.

New शिखा: GOPAL CHINAYYA SHETTY
August 10, 2015.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Destitute and Neglected
Women Welfare Authority. Clause 4 provides for giving wide publicity through electronic
and print media about the welfare measures undertaken by the Authority. Clause 5 provides
for certain facilities to the destitute and neglected women. Clause 6 provides that Central
Government shall provide requisite funds to the Authority. The Bill, if enacted, will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees five
hundred crore would involved as recurring expenditure per annum.

A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.


UM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
s for carrying out
the delegation of

MEMORAND!

Clause 8 of the Bill emp
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate
legislative power is of normal character.

owers the Central Government to make rule:
to matters of detail only.


LOK SABHA

A

BILL
to provide for the maintenance and welfare measures to be undertaken by the State for the
destitute, neglected, old, infirm or physically challenged widow, divorcee or unmarried

women through establishment of an Authority and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.

(Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty, M.P.)

MGIPMRND—2405LS(S-3)—31.10.2015.