1
Bill No. 239 of  2018
THE MAINTENANCE  OF RELIGIOUS HARMONY BILL, 2018
By
SHRI GAURAV GOGOI, M.P.
A
BILL
to establish a National Commission for maintenance of religious harmony in the country
and for matters connected therwith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Maintenance of Religious Harmony Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title
and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Chairperson" means the Chairperson of the National Commission for Religious
Harmony constituted under section 3;
(b) "Commission" the National Commission for Religious Harmony constituted
under section 3;
(c) "member" means a Member of the Commission and includes the
member-Secretary;
(d) "National Commission for Minorities" means the National Commission for
Minorities constituted under section 3 of the National Commission for Minorities Act,
1992;
(e) "National Commission for Scheduled Castes" means the National Commission
for Scheduled Castes referred to in article 338 of the Constitution;
(f) "National Commission for Scheduled Tribes" means the National Commission
for Scheduled Tribes referred to in article 338A of the Constitution; and
(g) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
CHAPTER II
T
HE NA TIONAL COMMISSION FOR MAINTENANCE OF RELIGIOUS HARMONY
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a commission to be known as the National Commission for Maintenance of Religious
Harmony, to exercise the powers conferred on, and to perform the functions assigned to it
under this Act.
(2) The Commission shall consist of,—
(a) Chairperson, who is or has been, a Chief Justice of the Supreme Court;
(b) one member who is or has been, a Judge of Supreme Court;
(c) one member who is, or has been, the Chief Justice of a High Court;
(d) a Secretay-General, being an officer of the rank of Secretary to the
"Government of India who shall be the Chief Executive Officer of the Commission and
shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions of the Commission, except
judicial functions and the power to make regulations, as may be delegated to him by
the Commission or the Chairperson, as the case may be;
(e) a representative each who is a head of a religious institutions of the Hindu,
Muslim, Christian, Sikh, Buddhist and Parsi community;
(f) Chairperson of the National Commission for Minorities, the National
Commission for Scheduled Castes and the National Commission for the
Scheduled Tribes;
(g) two representatives from the community having expertise in public service or
community relations in India;
(h) a representative from a leading company or organisation in the field of social
media;
(i) a representative from the Indian Police Service; and
(j) a representative from the Election Commission of India,
to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
Definitions.
Constitution
of the
National
Commission
for
Maintenance
of Religious
Harmony.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(3) The headquarters of the Commission shall be at New Delhi and the
Commission may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, establish
offices at such other places in the country as may be prescribed.
4. ( 1) The Chairperson and the Members shall be appointed by the President by
warrant under his hand and seal:
Provided that every appointment under this sub-section shall be made by obtaining
the recommendations of a Committee consisting of —
(a) the Prime Minister—Chairperson;
(b) Speaker of the House of People—member;
(c) Union Ministry of Home Affairs in the Government of India—member;
(d) Leader of the Opposition in the House of People—member;
(e) Leader of the Opposition in the Council of States—member;
(f) Deputy Chairman of the Council of States—member;
Provided further, that no sitting Judge of the Supreme Court or sitting Chief Justice of
a High Court shall be appointed as a Chairperson of the Commission except after consultation
with the Chief Justice of India.
(2) The Chairperson and every member shall hold office for such period, not exceeding
five years, as may be specified by the Central Government in this behalf.
(3) The Chairperson or a member (other than the Secretary-General) who is a member of
the civil service of the Union or of an All India Service or holds a civil post under the Union
may, by writing and addressed to the Central Government, resign from the office of Chairperson
or, as the case may be, of the member at any time.
(4) The Central Government shall reserve the right to remove a person from the office
of Chairperson or a member referred to in sub-section (3), if that person -
(a) becomes an undercharged insolvent.
(b) gets convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which in the
opinion of the Central Government involves moral turpitude members.
(c) becomes of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court;
(d) refuses to act or becomes incapable of acting;
(e) is, without obtaining leave of absence from the Commission, absent from
three consecutive meetings of the Commission, or
(f) in the opinion of the Central Government has so abused their position as to
render that person's continuance in office detrimental to public interest:
Provided that no person shall be removed under this clause until that person has been
given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.
(5) A vacancy caused under sub-section (3) may be filed by fresh nomination.
5. The Central Government shall make available to the Commission:
(a) such police and investigative staff under an officer not below the rank of a
Director General of Police; and
(b) such other officers and employees as may be necessary for the efficient
performance of the functions of the Commission under this Act.
Appointment,
term of
office and
conditions of
service of
Chairpersons
and members.
Officers and
other
employees of
the
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
6. The salaries and allowances payable to the Chairperson and Members and the
administrative expenses, including salaries, allowances and pensions payable to the officers
and other employees referred to in section 5 shall be paid out of the grants referred to in
sub-section (1) of Section 10.
7. No act or proceeding of the Commission shall be questioned or shall be invalid on
the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy or defect in the Constitution of the
Commission.
8. (1) The Commission shall meet as and when necessary at such time and place as the
Chairperson may deem fit.
(2) The Commission shall regulate its own procedure.
(3)All orders and decisions of the Commission shall be authenticated by the member-
Secretary or any other officer of the Commission duly authorized by the member-Secretary in
this behalf.
CHAPTER III
F
UNCTIONS AND POWERS OF THE COMMISSION
9. (1) The Commission shall,—
(a) inquire, suo motu or on a petition presented before it by any person or on
direction or order of any court, into complaints of:
(i) causing feelings of enmity, hatred, ill-will or hostility between different
religious groups;
(ii) carrying out activities to promote a political cause, or a cause of any
political party while, or under the guise of, propagating or practising any religious
belief;
(iii) carrying out subversive activities under the guise of propagating or
practising any religious belief;
(b) review the safeguards provided by or under the Constitution or any law for
the time being in force which helps promote religious harmony and recommend
measures for their effective implementation;
(c) review the factors the inhibit an environment of religious harmony and
recommend appropriate remedial measures;
(d) present to the Central Government, annually and at such other times as the
Commission may deem fit, reports upon the working of the framework that helps
preserve religious harmony and the factors that hinder it.
(e) call for special studies or investigations into specific issues or situations that
are related to or incidental to the maintenance of religious harmony in the Nation; and
(f) any other matter which may be referred to it by the Central Government, from
time to time.
(2) The Central Government shall cause all reports referred to in clause (d) of the sub-
section (1) to be laid before each House of the Parliament along with a memorandum explaining
the action taken or proposed to be taken on such recommendations relating to the Union and
the reasons for nonacceptance, if any, of any such recommendations.
(3) Where any such report or any part thereof relates to any matter with which any
State Government is concerned, the Commission shall forward a copy of such report or part
to such State Government who shall cause it to be laid before the Legislature of the State
along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be taken on the
Salaries and
Allowances to
be paid out of
the grants.
Vacancies not
to invalidate
proceedings of
the
Commission.
Procedure to
be regulated
by the
Commission.
Functions
of the
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
recommendations relating to the State and the reasons for non-acceptance, if any, of any
such recommendations.
10. (1) The advice of the Commission shall ordinarily be binding upon the Central
Government.
(2) The Commission shall, while performing its functions under sub-section ( 1) of
Section 9, have all the powers of a civil court trying a suit and in particular, in respect of the
following matters, namely: —
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of
India and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court of office;
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and documents; and
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(3) The Commission may, for the purpose of conducting any investigation pertaining
to the inquiry, utilise the services of any officer or investigation agency of the Central
Government or any State Government with the concurrence of the Central Government or the
State Government, as the case may be.
CHAPTER IV
F
INANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
11. (1) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, provide to the Commission by the way of grants such sums of money as the
Central Government may deem fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Commission may spend such sums as it thinks fit for performing the functions
under this Act, and such sums shall be treated as expenditure payable out of the grants
referred to in sub-section (1).
12. (1) The Commission shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and
prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by the Central
Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The Accounts of the Commission shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in
connection with such audit shall be payable by the Commission to the Comptroller and
Auditor-General.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General and any person appointed by them in
connection with the audit of the accounts of the Commission under this Act shall have the
same rights and privileges and the authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller
and Auditor-General generally has in connection with the audit of the Government accounts
and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected
vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of the
Commission.
(4) The accounts of the Commission, as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General or any other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report
there on shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government by the Commission.
13. The Commission shall prepare in such form and at such time for each financial year,
as may be prescribed, its annual report, giving full account of its activities during the previous
financial year and forward a copy there of  to the Central Government.
Powers of the
Commission.
Grants by the
Central
Government.
Accounts and
Audit.
Annual
Report.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
14. The Central Government shall cause the annual report together with a memorandum
of action taken on the recommendations contained therein, in so far as they relate to the
Central Government and the reasons for non-acceptance, if any, of any of such
recommendations and the audit report to be laid as soon as may be after the reports are
received, before each House of Parliament.
CHAPTER V
M
ISCEALLANEOUS
15. The Chairperson, the members, officers and other employees of the Commission
shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of Section 21 of the Indian Penal
Code, 1860.
16. The Central Government shall consult the Commission on all major policy decisions
relating to the detection, treatment, engagement and deportation of illegal migrants.
17. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of the Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of foregoing power, such rules
may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of, the Chairperson and Members under sub-section ( 2) of section 3 and of
officers and other employees under sub-section (2) of section 5;
(b) the form in, and the time at, which the annual report shall be prepared under
section 13; and
(c) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of the Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before
the expiry of the session immediately following the session or successive sessions afore
said, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Annual report
and audit
report to be
laid before the
Parliament.
Chairperson,
Members and
staff of the
Commission
to be public
servants.
Central
Government
to consult
commission.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

7
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is a secular State, deriving its supreme source of political authority from the
Constitution of India and not popular religious mandate. However, India is home to people of
different races, languages and religions. It's diverse demographic profile often leads to
accentuated religious distinctions between the populace. Religious polarization has provided
scope for sectarian violence and tension in India for decades.
Lately, instances of religious in tolerance have been on the rise in India. As per a reply
to a question before the Lok Sabha earlier this year, it was brought to notice that instances of
communal violence or religious motivated violence have risen by 28% between the years of
2014 and 2017. India was also recently ranked 4th in a list of religiously intolerant nations
released by PEW Research Centre. It is no secret that religious groups have been involving
themselves in the political process indirectly by politicising various matters and exploiting
religious sentiments to garner political support for different parties. In light of these
considerations, it is imperative that religious institutions are not allowed to stray beyond
their boundaries by venturing into radical social action.
The Government shall strive to maintain the secular nature of our State and an important
aspect of this is to maintain religious harmony. The Government shall endeavour to remain
neutral in its relations with different religious groups in the country and not favour any of
them in preference to the others. The Government shall strive to protect each citizen's right
to choose their religion and to exercise his religious rights as long as do not infringe upon the
rights or sensitivities of other citizens of the country. The present Bill seeks to empower the
Government to effectively maintain religious harmony by ensuring followers of a religion
exercise tolerance towards other religions and strive to keep politics and religion separate
from one another.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; GAURAV GOGOI
November 28, 2018.

8
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the National Commission for
Maintenance of Religious Harmony. Clause 5 provides for appointment of officers and
employees for functioning of the Commission. Clause 6 provides for the appointment of and
payment of Chairperson, Secretary General, members, officers and any other staff as may be
necessary. Clause 11 ptcvides for the Central Government to provide adequate funds for the
smooth functioning of the Commission. The Bill therefore, if enacted, would involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, at this stage the recurring and
non-recurring expenditure cannot be estimated but has to be worked out by the Central
Government while implementing the provisions of the Bill.

9
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 17 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to establish a National Commission for maintenance of religious harmony in the country
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Gaurav Gogoi, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—2272LS(S3)—20-12-2018.