THE  CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI MAHEISH GIRRI, M.P .
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment)  Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In article 15 of the Constitution, in clause (5), the words, “,other than the minority
educational institutions referred to in clause (1) of article 30” shall be omitted.
Bill No. 239 of 2016
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Amendment of
article 15.
Short title and
commencement.
5

22
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Article 15(5) was inserted in the Constitution through the Ninety-Third Constitutional
Amendment in 2006 with an object ‘to promote the educational advancement of the socially
and educationally backward classes of citizens or of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes in matters of admission of students belonging to these categories in aided or unaided
educational institutions’. Our society has indeed benefitted by this and the Government
has provided reservation for children belonging to weaker sections and disadvantaged groups
popularly known as the economically weaker sections in all private unaided primary schools.
But, in the Ninety-Third Constitutional Amendment, minority institutions as defined
under article 30(1) were kept out of the purview of article 15(5). This is clearly against
the idea of equality as weaker sections of society for whom the provision has been enacted,
would not be able to reap the benefits of the provision of reservation. The benefits of
reservation should also be extended in admission to minority run educational institutions to
achieve the purpose of the Ninety-Third Constitutional Amendment. Moreover, in any society,
a positive step which promotes the idea of equality, any waiver must not be given to some
particular group of the society.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MAHEISH GIRRI
July 6, 2016.

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *
15.(1) * * * * * * * *
(5) Nothing in this article or in sub-clause (g) of clause (1) of article 19 shall prevent
the State from making any special provision, by law,  for the advancement of any socially
and educationally backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled
Tribes in so far as such special provisions relate to their admission to educational
institutions including private educational institutions, whether aided or unaided by the
State, other than the minority educational institutions referred to in clause (1) or
article 30.
* * * * *
Prohibition of
discrimination
on grounds of
religion, race,
caste, sex or
place of birth.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Maheish Girri, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2611(S3)—13.10.2016.