1
THE POPULATION STABILIZATION BILL, 2017
By
SHRI GAJANAN KIRTIKAR, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for promotion of family planning measures by the Central and the State
Governments for population stabilization in the country through various incentives
and disincentives so as to ensure that the population is commensurate with its
social, economic and other developments and with the ecological balance and
bridge the gap between the haves and have nots and for achieving quality of life
and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Population Stabilization Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 239 of  2017
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(c) "small family" means family having one child.
3. It is hereby declared that the provisions of this Act are for the purposes of giving
effect to the policies of the State towards securing the principles laid down in article 38 of
the Constitution of India.
4. The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the Official
Gazette, formulate a comprehensive population policy particularly for the purposes of having
one child norm for the eligible couples and other issues including economic, educational,
legal, medical, social and other incidental aspect to promote small family norms so as to
effectively control the booming population of the country in order to achieve rapid economic
progress and raise the standard of living of the masses.
5. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the employee of the Central Government or of a Public Sector enterprise under the control
of the Central Government who adopts small family norm by undergoing sterilization
operation himself or of the spouse shall be given:—
(a) one year additional salary with all allowances along with two additional
increments as incentives;
(b) plot or house site or built house from Housing Board or Development
Authority of the Government at subsidized rates;
(c) loan for construction or purchasing the House from banks or financial
institutions on nominal rate of interest;
(d) free healthcare facilities and insurance coverage to parents of single child;
(e) free Healthcare facilities to single child till he attains the age of twenty-five
years;
(f) preference to single child in admission in all educational institutions
including AIIMS, IIT and IIM.
(g) preference to single child in all government jobs; and
(h) such other benefits and incentives as may be prescribed.
6. The incentives and benefits referred to in section 5 shall be extended mutatis
mutandis to the general public in the manner provided therein.
7. Whoever in contravention of small family norm procreates more than one child, shall
be ineligible to avail  incentives and benefits provided in this Act and in addition thereto shall,—
(a) be denied the subsidies in matters of loans extended to him;
(b) not be eligible to get the benefits of Public Distribution System;
(c) not be given any loan by any bank or financial institution; and
(d) not be entitled for such other facilities as may be prescribed.
8.  Any woman having more than one living child shall be provided maternity leave
but the emolument benefit of the maternity period shall stand withdrawn:
Provided that if, such woman agrees to undergo sterilization operation after the birth
of her second child then she shall be provided with the requisite maternity facilities forthwith.
Formulation of
Comprehensive
Population
Policy.
Extention of
benefits to
general
public.
Loss of
benefits
whoever
contravenes
small family
norm.
No maternity
facilities to
be given for
those having
more than
one living
children.
Definitions.
Facilities to
Government
employees
who adopts
small family
norm.
Declaration.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
9. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any of the election laws for the time
being in force, a citizen shall be disqualified for being chosen as a member of either House
of Parliament or of the legislature of a State or of any body of the local self Government, if
such citizen has more than two living children:
Provided that this provision shall not apply in case of a citizen having more than two
living children on or before the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
no marriage shall be solemnized between a male who is less than twenty-five years of age
and a female who is less than twenty-two years of age.
(3) Every serving Government employee shall give an undertaking that he shall not
procreate more than one child:
Provided that this provision shall not apply to those Government employees who
have more than one living children on or before the date of commencement of this Act.
10. The provision of this Act shall not apply in case of birth of twins.
11. Whoever contravenes,—
(a) the provisions of sub-section ( 2) of section 9 shall be punishable with
simple imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than two years but may extend
to four years and also with a fine, which may extend to two lakh rupees.
(b) the provisions of sub-section ( 3) of section 9 shall forfeit his right to
promotion and shall not be eligible for any further increment till he is in government
service.
12. The appropriate Government shall,—
(a) implement the revised National Population Policy to achieve the goals
enumerated therein;
(b) set up maternity hospitals and centers in sufficient numbers at conspicuous
places;
(c) distribute contraceptive pills, condoms through Healthcare Centres and
Non-Governmental Organisations;
(d) organize sterilization camps from time to time;
(e) distribute iron and vitamin capsules and tablets amongst the expecting
mothers;
(f) give wide publicity to the benefits of having small families; and
(g) undertake such other measures as it may deem fit and expedient for the
purposes of this Act.
13. The Central Government shall after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act from
time to time.
14. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act as may appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the removal of the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years
from the commencement of this Act.
15. The provisions of this Act  shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
Penalty.
Duties of the
Government.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Overriding
effect.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Miscellaneous
provisions.
Act shall not
apply on birth
of twins.

4
16. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not, save as otherwise
expressly provided in this Act, in derogation of any other law for the time being in force.
17. (1) The Central Govenment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
Savings.

5
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Ours is the second most populous country after China. The booming population has
already crossed the one billion benchmark and currently, it is around one hundred and
twenty-five crores, which is increasing every moment. Having only 2.4 per cent of global
land area, we have more than sixteen per cent of the global population making it the most
densely populated nation of the world. This scenario is compelling, at least half of the
population is living in slums under squalid conditions.  Unemployment is rising rapidly
causing frustration amongst the unemployed, particularly the youth who are being lured
by anti-national elements. There is unparallel transformation of human values, social
institutions and economic structures. Agriculture land  holdings are becoming smaller and
smaller.  The housing needs are far beyond the available finances and the shortage of
housing is appalling. Educational facilities are becoming hopelessly poor. Overcrowding is
also causing environmental degradation. Trees are being felled to meet the demand for fuel,
construction, furniture and other purposes which is leading to shrink of forest cover. The
increased level of carbon-di-oxide in the environment is resulting in harmful diseases. The
healthcare facilities are far from satisfactory and if this trend continues, we can hardly
expect to achieve improved quality of life and the situation will move from bad to worse.
It is, therefore, imperative that effective steps must be taken to check the booming
population and this should be tackled at all levels. A clear message must go across the
nation that since our resources are limited, we have to opt for small families. It is very
unfortunate that despite availability of various birth control measures and several Family
Planning Programmes, the population continues to rise menacingly. The Bill seeks to promote
small family norm among citizens through various incentives and disincentives in order to
achieve population stabilisation in the country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; GAJANAN KIRTIKAR
November 27, 2017.

6
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides certain benefits to Government employees who adopt
small family norm. Clause 6 provides for extension of benefits to general public who adopt
small family norm. Clause 13 provides that the Central Government shall provide requisite
funds from time to time for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The Bill, therefore, if
enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated
that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore will be involved out of the
Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditures is likely to be involved.

7
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 17 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for promotion of family planning measures by the Central and the State
Governments for population stabilization in the country through various incentives
and disincentives so as to ensure that the population is commensurate with its
social, economic and other developments and with the ecological balance
and bridge the gap between the haves and have nots and for achieving quality of life
and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Gajanan Kirtikar, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2649LS(S3)—18-12-2017.