Bill No. 239  of  2019
THE COMPULSORY TRAINING OF CARDIOPULMONARY
RESUSCITATION (CPR) IN SCHOOLS BILL, 2019
By
DR. SHRIKANT EKNATH SHINDE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory training in cardiopulmonary resuscitation education in
schools and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Training of Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation
(CPR) in Schools Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
Short title
and
commencement.
Definitions.
5
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Constitution
of Committee
on
Compulsory
Training of
CPR.
(b) "automated external defibrillator" means a portable defibrillator designed to
be automated for use by a person without substantial medical training who responds
to a cardiac emergency;
(c) "cardiopulmonary resuscitation or CPR" means a first aid technique which is
a combination of rescue breathing and hands-only compressions of the chest for
reviving an individual whose breathing or heartbeat has stopped;
(d) "Committee" means the Committee on Compulsory Training of CPR in schools
established under section 4;
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(f) "school" means any recognized school imparting education from Class 7th till
Class 12th and includes—
(i) a school established, owned or controlled by the appropriate
Government or a local authority;
(ii) an aided school receiving aid or grants to meet whole or part of its
expenses from the appropriate Government or the local authority;
(iii) a school belonging to specified category; and
(iv) an unaided school not receiving any kind of aid or grants to meet its
expenses from the appropriate Government or the local authority.
3. (1) From such date, as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, specify, but not later than the beginning of the 2020-2021 academic session, the
Central shall,  on the recommendation of the Committee, develop a model curriculum
for mandatory training in cardiopulmonary resuscitation for school students from
class 7th to 12th.
(2) The appropriate Government shall ensure appointment of such number of teachers
with such qualifications, as may be specified, for providing Compulsory Training of CPR in
schools.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, within three months of the coming into force of
this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a Committee to be known as the
Committee on Compulsory Training of CPR in schools.
(2) The Committee shall consists of—
(i) Union Minister of Health and Family Welfare—Chairperson ex-officio;
(ii) Union Minister of State for Health and Family Welfare—Vice-Chairperson;
(iii) Secretary, Union Ministry of Health and Welfare—Member ex-officio;
(iv) Secretary, Department of School Education and Literacy, Ministry of Human
Resource Development—Member ex-officio; and
(v) One representative each to be nominated by the Central Board of Secondary
Education, Council for the Indian School Certificate Examinations and State Education
Boards for Secondary and Higher Secondary Schools of the respective
States—Members.
(vi) Such number of members having special knowledge or experience in the
fields of cardiology, medicine or CPR as the Central Government may deem fit.
(3) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and staff as it
considers necessary for the effective functioning of the Committee.
(4) The salary, allowances and terms of conditions of services of officers and staff of
the Committee shall be such as may be prescribed.
45
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(5) The Committee shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules of
procedure in regard to transaction of business at its meetings as may be prescribed:
Provided that the Committee shall meet at least once every three months.
5. (1) The Committee shall,—
(a) make recommendations to the appropriate Government on the curriculum
and syllabus for Training of CPR in schools from Class 7th to 12th;
(b) make recommendations to the appropriate Government regarding the class or
category of students or educational institutions which shall be exempt from the
provisions of this Act;
(c) recommend to the appropriate Government the qualifications of teachers to
be appointed in educational institutions for teaching CPR;
(d) recommend curriculum for the use of automated external defibrillator in schools
as a requirement within existing health or physical education courses; and
(e) co-ordinate with the appropriate Government and the school authorities with
a view to ensuring effective implementation of the provisions of this Act.
(2) The recommendations given by the Committee under sub-section ( 1) shall be
binding on the appropriate Government.
6. The appropriate Government shall de-recognize a school which does not comply
with the provisions of this Act, after giving such institution a reasonable opportunity of
being heard.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
8. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Functions of
the
Committee.
De-recogni-
tion of
educational
institutes for
non-
compliance of
the provisions
of the Act.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
In India, there has been a substantial growth in Heart diseases due to lack of physical
activity, genetic predisposition, metabolic syndrome and unhealthy dietary habits. It is
estimated that India accounts for sixty per cent of the world's heart disease burden which
result in high-prevalence of diabetes mellitus, hypertension and coronary artery heart disease
which may result in sudden cardiac arrest.
In cases of a sudden cardiac arrest, the event can be reversed if the victim is administered
cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) immediately and can double or even triple their chances
of survival. Mortality due to Sudden Cardiac Arrest is very high in India as compared to the
developed countries—4280 per 1,00,000 population in India as compared to 60—151 per
1,00,000 in the USA.
Due to lack of CPR Training, seventy per cent of victims who suffer cardiac arrest at
home die and it is estimated that ninty per cent of victims of cardiac arrest outside the
hospital die. In order to address the issue of high mortality after sudden cardiac arrest in our
country, we need to train Indian population in CPR. Every Indian citizen can save life. This
Bill seeks to conceptualize a law to make CPR training compulsory in schools so that one can
help the fellow human being in case of a sudden cardiac arrest.
CPR and first aid training are included as part of the school curriculum in England and
38 States in USA which are backed by legislation and make it mandatory to train school
students in CPR. But, India still lacks a legislation to provide mandatory training of CPR in
schools across the country. There is an imminent need to include CPR as a curriculum for
students in order to create awareness about a life-saving practice which will be a big step
towards expanding the knowledge of first aid which is currently given to students in schools.
The Bill proposes to make it mandatory on the part of the appropriate Government to
design a curriculum based on the recommendations of the Committee established under the
Act which will be included as part of the syllabus for students studying in class 7th and
onwards. The Committee will have a diverse representation from education boards and will
also consist of subject experts in order to frame a comprehensive and holistic syllabus to
impart mandatory training of CPR across schools of India.
The need is to ensure that all schools in India incorporate basic first aid and CPR
training as an integral part of their curriculum, providing high quality teaching materials on
what to do in common emergencies, as well as direct training and support for teachers to
enable them to deliver these skills in short, interactive first aid workshops.
If children and young adults are equipped with these skills at an early age and within
school, they will become lifelong advocates of first aid and make a huge difference within
their families and their local community.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SHRIKANT EKNATH SHINDE
October 31, 2019.
4

5
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for appointment of teachers for compulsory training of
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation in schools. Clause 4 provides for the appointment of officers
and staff of the Committee. Clause 7 provides for disbursing adequate funds to the
State Governments for carrying out the purposes of this Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted,
would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. At this stage, it is not
possible to give exact estimate of expenditure, both recurring and non-recurring, which will
be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India, if the Bill is enacted into a law. However, it
is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore will be involved per
annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

MGIPMRND—3098LS(S3/F)—14.11.2019.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory training in cardiopulmonary resuscitation education in schools
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde,  M.P .)