BIU. No. D tt' 1m 
THE CENTRAL SALES TAX 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, I9I7 
(As INTRODUCED IN ~ SABHA) 

Bill No. 23 of 1957 
THE CENTRAL SALES TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1957 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Central Sales Tax (Amendment) Short title. 
Act, 1957. 
5 '4 of 19'15. 2. In section 8 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 (hereinafter Amendment 
referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section (5), for the words of section 8. 
"the Central Government" and "any Union territory", the words "the 
State Government" and "the State" shall respectively be substituted. 
3. In section 14 of the principal Act, after item (ii), the following ~ir;::'t~ 
10 item shall be inserted, namely:-
IS 
"(iia) cotton yam, but not including cotton yarn waste;". 
4. For section 15 of the principal Act, the following section shall spbltitution 
be substituted, namely:- ~i:for 
section IS. 
"15. Every sales tax law of a State shall, in so far as it im- Restrictions 
h · h' 't' f t th I h and condi-poses or aut OrIses t e Imposl Ion 0 a ax on e sa e or purc ase tions in 
of declared goods, be subject to the following restrictions and regard to tax 
. ' on sale or condItions, namely:- purchase of 
declared 
(a) the tax payable under that law in respect of any sale goods 8 within . a tate. or purchase of such goods insIde the State shall be levied only 
at the last stage of sale or purchase and shall not exceed two 
per cent. of the sale or purchase price at that stage; 

2 
(b) notwithstanding anything contained in clause (CI), 
no tax shall be levied at the last stage of sale or purchase if 
the declared goods purchased are intended for sale in the 
course of inter-State trade or commerce. 
Explanation.-The expression "last .stage of sale or purchase" S 
means the stage at which a dealer registered under the sales tax 
law of the State-
(i) sells to or purchases from another such, dealer 
declared goods for use by the purchaser in the manufacture 
of goods for sale or for use by the purchaser in the execution 10 
of any contract; or 
(ii) purchases declared goods from another such dealer 
for sale to a dealer not registered under the sales tax law of 
the State or to a consumer in the State," 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AN~ REASONS 
Chapter IV of the Central S1.ik, ·J.',i;~ Act, 1956, declares certain 
commodities, which are in the nature of raw materials, to be goods of 
special importance in inter-State trade or commerce and lays down 
the restrictions and conditions as to the rate, system of levy and other 
'incidents of tax subject to which the States may impose tax on the 
sale or purchase thereof. 
2. Cotton yarn is essentially a raw material and is a staple support 
of a very important cotton industry, namely, the handloom industry. 
It satisfies the criteria laid down by the Taxation Enquiry Commission 
with regard to declaring goods to be of special importance in inter-
State trade or commerce. Clause 3 of the Bill now proposes to 
include cotton yarn in the list of declared goods. 
3. Section 15 of the Act as it now stands restricts the levy of tax 
under the State law to only one stage but leaves it to the State to 
select the point of levy. The Taxation Enquiry Commission had 
recommended that the stage of levy of tax should be the last stage 
of sale or purchase within a State. The amendment proposed in 
clause 4 seeks to give effect to that part of the recommendation and 
at the same time to provide that no tax shall be levied under the State 
law at the last stage if the goods are intended for sale in the course (If 
inter-State trade or commerce. 
4. Incidentally, section 8 (5) is also sought to be amended so as to 
enable a State Government, if it so desires, to exempt any goods or 
class of goods from inter-State sales-tax. 
T. T.K.RISHNAMACHARl. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 18th May, 1957 .. 
3 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CENTRAL SALES TAX ACT, 1956 
No. 74 OF 1956 
• • • • • 
8.(1) 
• • • • • 
llatea of tax (5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the Cen-
on sales in tral Government may, if it is satisfied that it is necessary so to do in 
:~~e~~:: of the public interest, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that 
, trade or in respect of such goods or classes of goods as may be mentioned in 
commerce. the notification and subject to such conditions as it may think fit to 
impose, no tax under this Act shall be payable by any. dealer having 
his place of business in any Union territory in respect of the sale by 
him from any such place of business of any such goods in the course 
of inter-State trade or commerce or that the tax on such sales shall 
be calculated at such lower rates than those specified in sub-section 
(1) or sub-section (2) as may be mentioned in the notification. 
• • • • • 
R.eatrictioDB 15. Notwithstanding anything contained in the sales tax law of 
~d ~Ddi- any State, the tax payable by any dealer under that law in respect 
:;d8 t!,n ~- of any sales or purchases of declared goods made by him inside the 
OD sales or State shall not exceed two per cent. of the sale price thereof, end 
:d::dl of such tax shall not be levied at more than one stage in a State. 
1JOOd.. • • • •. • 
4 
., 
1 
GIPND-LS II-III Shift-36I LS-IS-S-S7-I7So. 

LOKSABHA 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956. 
The President has, in pursuance of clauses (I) and (3) of 
article H7 and clause (I) of articl~ 274 of the Consti-
tution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha, the 
introduction and consideration of the Bill. 
GlPND-36ILS 3rd Shift-LS--18-5-57- 17S0 • 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri T. T. Krishnamacllari, 
Minister of Finance.) 