Bill No. 23-F of 1955
THE CITIZENSHIP BILL, 1955
(As pPaAsseD BY THE Houses OF PARLIAMENT)

A
BILL
to provide for the acquisition and termination of Indian citizenship.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixth Year of the Republic of

India as follows: — :
a

1. This Act may be called the Citizenship Act, 1955.

2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) “a Government in India” means the Central Government
or a State Government;

(b) “citizen”, in relation to a country specified in the First
Schedule, means a person who, under the citizenship or
nationality law for the time being in force in that country, is
a citizen or national of that country;

(c) “citizenship or nationality law”, in relation to a country
specified in the First Schedule, means an enactment of the legis-
lature of that country which, at the request of the Government
of that country, the Central Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, have declared to be an enactment making
provision for the citizenship or nationality of that country:

Provided that no such notification shall be
to the Union of South Africa except with the
of both Houses of Parliament;

issued in relation
previous approval

(d) “Indian consulate”, means the office
officer of the Government of India where
is kept, or where there is no such office
prescribed;

of any consular
a register of births
» Such office as may be

Short title.

Interpreta-
tion.


2
(e) “minor” means a person who has not attained the age of
eighteen years;

(f) “person” does not include any company or association
or body of individuals, whether incorporated or not;

(g) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this
Act;

(h) “undivided India” means India as defined in the Govern.
ment of India Act, 1935, as originally enacted.

(2) For the purposes of this Act, a person born aboard a registered
ship or aircraft, or aboard an unregistered ship or aircraft of the
Government of any country, shall be deemed to have been born in
the place in which the ship or aircraft was registered or, as the case
may be, in that country. ate

(3) Any reference in this Act to the status or description of the
father of a person at the time of that person’s birth shall, in rela-
tion to a person born after the death of his father, be construed as
a reference to the status or description of the father at the time of
the father’s death; and where that death occurred before, and the
birth occurs after, the commencement of this Act, the “status or
description which would have been applicable to the father had he
died after the commencement of this Act shal] be deemed to be the
status or description applicable to him at the time of his death.

(4) For the purposes of this Act, a person shall be deemed to be
of full age if he ‘s not a minor, and of full capacity if he is not of
unsound mind.

ACQUISITION OF CITIZENSHIP

oy oe 3. (1) Except as provided in sub-section (2) of this section, every
Person born in India on or after the 26th January, 1950, shall be
a citizen of India by birth,

(2) A person Shall not be such a citizen by virtue of this section
if at the time of his birth—

(2) his father possesses such immunity from suits and 2०२
Process as is accorded to an envoy of a foreign sovereign aoa
wae to the President of India and is not a citizen of Incl
ey Nay father is an enemy alien and the birth occurs in a

© Sam under Occupation by the enemy.



3

4. (1) A person born outside India on or after the 26th January, Sonar
1950, shall be a citizen of India by descent if his father is a citizen
of India at the time of his birth:

Provided that if the father of such a person was a citizen of India
by descent only, that person shall not be a citizen of India by virtue
of this section unless—

(a) his birth is registered at an Indian consulate within one
year of its occurrence or the commencement of this Act, which-
ever is later, or, with the permission of the Central Government,
after the expiry of the said period; or

(b) his father is, at the time of his birth, in service under a
Government in India.

(2) If the Central Government so directs, a birth shall be deemed
for the purposes of this section to have been registered with its
permission, notwithstanding that its permission was not obtained

‘ before the registration.

(3) For the purposes of the proviso to sub-section (J), any male
person born outside undivided India who was, or was deemed to be,
a citizen of India at the commencement of the Constitution shall
be deemed to be a citizen of India by descent only.

5. (1) Subject to the provisions of this section and such conditions Citizenship
and restrictions as may be prescribed, the prescribed authority may, by registra-
on application made in this behalf, register as a citizen of India any is
person who is not already such citizen by virtue of the Constitu-
tion or by virtue of any of the other provisions of this Act and

' belongs to any of the following categories :—

(a) persons of Indian origin who are ordinarily resident in
India and have been so resident for six months immediately
before making an application for registration;

(b) persons of Indian origin who are ordinarily resident in
any country or place outside undivided India:

(c) women who are, or have been, married to citizens of
India;

(d) minor children of persons who are citizens of India; and

(e) persons of full age and capacity who are citizens of a
country specified in the First Schedule:

Provided that in prescribing the conditions
subject to which persons of any such country
as citizens of India under this clause,
Shall have due regard to the conditions

and restrictions
y_ may be registered
the Central Government
subject to which citizens



|

ocd :
by naturali-
sation.

Citizenship
by incorpora-
tion of terrj-

tory,

4
of India may, by law oF practice of that country, become citi
हे ’ ci
of that country by registration. tizens
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, a pergo,
shall be deemed to be of Indian origin if he, or either of on
parents, or any of his grand-parents, was born in undivided India
(2) No person being of full age shall be registered as a citizen fon
India under sub-section (1) until he has taken the oath of allegiance
in the form specified in the Second Schedule.

(3) No person who has renounced, or has been deprived of, his
Indian citizenship, or whose Indian citizenship has terminated,

F Pe ५

tis Act shall be registered as a citizen of India under sub-

under tt
of the Central Government.

section (1) except by order

(4) The Central Government may, if satisfied that there are
special circumstances justifying such registration, cause any minor
to be registered as a citizen of India.

(5) A person registered under this section shall be a citizen of
India by. registration as from the date on which he is so registered;
and a person registered under the provisions of clause (b) (ii) of

article 6 or article 8 of the Constitution shall be deemed to be a
n as from the commencement of the

citizen of India by registratio
Constitution or the date on which he was so registered, whichever

may be later. 5

6. (1) Where an application is m
any person of full age and capacity
specified in the First Schedule for the grant of a certificate of
naturalisation to him, the Central Government may, if satisfied that
the applicant is qualified for naturalisation under the provisions of
the Third Schedule, grant to him a certificate of naturalisation :

Provided that, if in the opinion of the Central Government, the
applicant is a person who has rendered distinguished service to the
cause of science, philosophy, art, literature, world peace oF human
progress generally, it may waive all or any of the conditions -
fied in the Third Schedule.

(2) The person to whom a certificate of naturalisation is gent
under sub-section (1) shall, on taking the oath of allegiance in -
form specified in the Second Schedule, be a citizen of rial
naturalisation as from the date on which that certificate is डॉंगी :

ade in the prescribed manner by
who is not a citizen of a country

7, If any territory becomes a part of India, the Central ee
ment may, by order notified in the Official Gazette, SP nection
persons who shall be citizens of India by reason of thelr ¢ India as
with that territory; and those persons shall be ९
from the date to be specified in the order.

cify

itizens °



5
‘TERMINATION OF CITIZENSHIP

8. (1) If any citizen of India of full age po Poised se bec Lert aie
t i s in :
iti or national of another country, make: : अं

nine declaration renouncing his Indian न कर:

tion shall be registered by the prescribed authority; and, upo!

registration, that person shall cease to be a citizen of India:

i ar
Provided that if any such declaration is made during any w:
in which India may be engaged, registration thereof shall be with-
held until the Central Government otherwise directs.

| (2) Where a male person ceases to be a citizen of India under
sub-section (J), every minor child of that person shall thereupon
cease to be a citizen of India:

Provided that any such child may, within one year after attaining
full age, make a declaration that he wishes to resume Indian
citizenship and shall thereupon again become a citizen of India.

(3) For the purposes of this section, any woman who is, or has
been, married shall be deemed to be of full age.

9. (1) Any citizen of India who by naturalisation, registratien or Termination
otherwise voluntarily acquires, or has at any time between the ship.
26th January, 1950 and the commencement of this Act voluntarily
acquired, the citizenship of another country shall, upon such
acquisition or, as the case may be, such commencement, cease to
be a citizen of India: कै

Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to a citizen
of India who, during any war in which India may be engaged,
voluntarily acquires the citizenship of another country, until th :
Central Government otherwise directs. ४ "८

(2) If any question arises as to whether
has acquired the citizenship of anoth हे
: er count: i
determined by such authority, in such manner. pi सै 22४८०
such rules of evidence, as may be prescribed in this fle a ha

when or how any person

10. (1) A citizen of India who i $
or by virtue only of clause (c) of article is a by: AB snr a ore
or by registration otherwise than under clause (b) (ii) oe thi ूँ
¢ of the Constitution or clause (a) of sub-section () | f >! जन §
this Act shall cease to be a citizen of India, if he rs pce =
, ved ०

that citizenship by an order [o
zens of
ee the Central Government under

ee



6

ect to the provisions of this section, the Central Govern.

(2) Subj
by order, deprive any such citizen of Indian citizenship,
Ms हे

ment may,
if it is satisfied that—
(a) the registration or certificate of naturalisation wag

obtained by means of fraud, false representation or the con.
cealment of any material fact; or

(b) that citizen has shown himself by act or speech to be
disloyal or disaffected towards the Constitution of India as by
law established; or

(c) that citizen has, during any war in which India may be
engaged, unlawfully traded or communicated with an eneiny op
been engaged in, or associated with, any business that was to
his knowledge carried on in such manner as to assist an enemy
in that war; or

(d) that citizen has, within five years after registration or
naturalisation, been sentenced in any country to imprisonment
for a term of not less than two years; or -

(e) that citizen has been ordinarily resident out of India for
a continuous period of seven years, and during that period, has
neither been at any time a student of any educational institu-
tion ina country outside India or in the service of a Govern-
ment in India or of an international organisation of which
India is a member, nor registered annually in the prescribed
manner at an Indian consulate his intention to retain his
citizenship of India. : :
(3) The Central Government shall not deprive a person of citizen-

ship under this section unless it is satisfied that it is not conducive
“ ae good that that person should continue to be a citizen

(4) Before making an order under this section, the Central
Government shall give the person against whom the order is proposed
to be made notice in writing informing him of the ground ००
which it is proposed to be made and, if the order is proposed to be
made on any of the grounds specified in sub-section (2) other than
clause (९) thereof, of his right, upon making application therefor 19
the prescribed manner, to have his case referred to a committee of

inguiry under this section,

(5) If the order is proposed to be made against 8 Pers
ne Brounds specified in sub-section (2) other than ¢ oe
लि and that person so applies in the prescribed Manner. 1,9
ine ~ Government shall, and in any other case it may, 7 ng 3
Perso: 2 Committee of Inquiry consisting of 8 a“ er two
at 71 who has for at least ten years held a judicial office) @ pehalf.

er members appointed by the Central Government in this be

on on any
jause (2)



7
y shall, on such reference, hold the
be prescribed and submit its report
the Central Government shall
an order under this

(6) The Committee of Inquir
ch manner as may
1 Government; and
ded by such report in making

inquiry in su
to the Centra
ordinarily be gui
section.

SuppLEMENTAL
untry Common-

11, Every person who is a citizen of a Commonwealth co - ५
5k ee Fi irt “43 hip, Wealth citi-
specified in the First Schedule shall, by virtue of that citizenship, zenship,
have the status of a Commonwealth citizen in India.

12. (1) The Central Government may, by order notified in the Powerto
confer rights

Official Gazette, make provisions on a basis of reciprocity for the (ताक
conferment of all or any of the rights of a citizen of India on the 2S
citizens of any country specified in the First Schedule. certain तर
tries.
(2) Any order made under sub-section (1) shall have effect not-
withstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any law
other than the Constitution of India or this Act.

13. The Central Government may, in such cases as it thinks fit, Certificate of
certify that a person, with respect to whose citizenship of India a eae y
doubt exists, is a citizen of India; and a certificate issued under dante
this section skall, unless it is proved that it was obtained by means
of fraud, false representation or concealment of any material fact,
be conclusive evidence that that person was such a citizen on the
date thereof, but without prejudice to any evidence that he was
such a citizen at an earlier date.

14. (1) The prescribed authority or the Central Go
ane ed vernment ma’ isposal
pide 23 she oe co x refuse an application under section 5 हट pplication
z no’ ired i
pias required to assign any reasons for such tions aaa 6.

(2) Subject to the provisions of secti decisi
; हे tion 15, thy ion of the
prescribed authority .or the Central पदक दा on any : ich
su

application as aforesaid shall b
question in any court. Shon Pit wha =

15. (1) Any person aggrieved ७
है y an order mad i vision,
= Saag authority or any officer or other aithnstty emer ae ee
entral Government) may, within a period of thirt a bes a
y days from

the date of the order, m
, make an appli
ment for a revision of that order: att top 2 पी. सच



Delegation
of powers.

Offences.

Power 10
make rules.

8
satisfied that the applicant was prevented by sufficient cause fro;
making the application in time. Me

(2) On receipt of any such application under sub-section (1), the
Central Government shall, after considering the application ot the
n and any report thereon which the officer or autho.
r may submit, make such order in relation to
deems fit, and the decision of the Central

aggrieved perso
rity making the orde:
the application as it
Government shall be final.

16. The Central Government may, by order, direct that any
r which is conferred on it by any of the provisions of this
ther than those of section 10 and section 18 shall, in such
ler such conditions, if any, as may be speci-
ble also by such officer or authority

powe’
Act 0
circumstances and und
fied in the order, be exercisa’
as may be so specified.

17. Any person who, for
be done or not to be don

the purpose of procuring anything to
e under this Act, knowingly makes
any representation which is false in a material particular shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six

months, or with fine, or with both.

18. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.

lar and without prejudice to the generality of the

(2) In particu
vide for—

foregoing power, such rules may pro
or authorised

(a) the registration of anything required है
under this Act to be registered, and the conditions and restric
tions in regard to such registration;

(b) the forms to be used and the registers to be maintained

under this Act;

(c) the administration and ta’
under this Act, and the time withil
which, such oaths shall be taken an

cing of oaths of allegiance
n which, and the manner 12
d recorded;
_ (d) the giving of any notice required or authorised to be
given by any person under this Act;
0॥

__(e) the cancellation of the registration of, and the be rs
tion and amendment of certificates of naturalisation relating
persons deprived of citizenship under this Act, and the
ing up of such certificates for those purposes;

(f) the registration at Indian consulates of the
deaths of persons of any class or description born or
side India;

pirths and

dying out-

<


=. : $
) the levy and collection of fees in respect sate
५ tions, declarations and certificates under h : 2
ae of the taking of an oath of allegiance, cin = resp
the SUR of certified or other copies of See eris eee
(h) the authority to eatin aren actor 7 का कर
iti i r countr ‘
such shoot aa of 2 relating to such a ;
(i) the procedure to be followed by the erage ied
inquiry appointed under section 10 and the conferment on

committees of any of the powers, rights and privileges of civil
courts;

(j) the manner in which applications for revision may be
made and the procedure to be followed by the Central Govern-
ment in dealing with such applications; and

(k) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed
under this Act.

(3) In making any rule under this section, the Central Govern-
ment may provide that a breach thereof shall be punishable with
fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.

(4) All rules made under this section shall, as soon as may be
after they are =, be laid for not less than fourteen days before
both Houses of Parliament and shall be subject to such modifications
as Parliament may make during the session in which they are so
laid.

19. (1) The British Nationality and Status of Aliens
to 1943, are hereby repealed in their application to India.

Acts, 1914 Repeals.

(2) All laws relating to naturalisation which are in

foree in any
Part of India are hereby repealed,

THE FIRST SCHEDULE

[See sections 2(1) (b) and 5(1)(e)]

A. The following Commonwealth countries:;—
1. United Kingdom.

2. Canada,

रे, Commonwealth of Australia,

4. New Zealand.

5. Union of South Africa,

6. Pakistan,

7. Ceylon,

8. Federation of Rhode:

sia and Nyasaland.
B. The Republic of Trel

and.



10

Explanation.—In this Schedule, “United Kingdom” means th
e

United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and includ

the Channel Islands, the Isle of Man and all Colonies; and “Com,
monwealth of Australia” includes the territories of Papua and the
territory of Norfolk Island. ९

THE SECOND SCHEDULE
[See sections 5(2) and 6(2)]

OatH OF ALLEGIANCE

1:45 Bie eee abe ny ८ do solemnly affirm
(or swear) that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitu-

tion of India as by law established, and that I will faithfully observe

the laws of India and fulfil my duties as a citizen of India.

THE THIRD SCHEDULE
[See section 6(1)]

QUALIFICATIONS FOR NATURALISATION

The qualifications for naturalisation of a person who is not a
citizen of a country specified in the First Schedule are :—

(a) that he is not a subject or citizen of any country where
citizens of India are prevented by “law or practice of that
country from becoming subjects or citizens of that country by
naturalisation;

(b) that, if he is a citizen of any country, he has renounced
the citizenship of that country in accordance with the law
therein in force in that behalf and has notified such renuncia-
tion to the Central Government;

yr been in the

(c) that he has either resided in India © ly the
service of a Government in India or partly the one enn ely
other, throughout the period of twelve months imme
preceding the date of the application;

(d) that during the seven years immediately
said period of twelve months, he has either reside te the one
been in the service of a Government in India, OF i ४
and partly the other, for periods amounting beg
not less than four years;