8W No. z3 01 1954 
THE COFFEE MARKET EXPANSIQN (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1954 
(As INTRODUCED IN THE HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Coffee Market Expansion Act, 1942. 
BE it enacted 'by Parliament in the Fifth Year of our Republic as 
follows:-
I. Short title and commencement.-(l) This Act may be called the 
Coffee Market Expansion (Amendment) Act, 1954. 
(2) It shall come into force pn such date as the Central Govem- J 
ment may, by notification in the Official Gaiette, appdint. 
2. Amendment of long title and preamble, Act VII of 1942.-In the 
Coffee Market Expansion Act, 1942 (hereinafter referred to as the 
principal Act),-
(a) in the long title, for the words and figures "to continue 10 
the prdvision made under Ordinance No. XIII of 1940 for 
assistance to the coffee industry by regulating the export and 
sale cJf coffee and by other means,", the words "to provide for the 
development under Central control of the coffee industry" shall 
be substituted.; and IS 
(b) in the preamble, for the words "to continue the provision 
made under the Coffee Market Expansion Ordinance, 1940, fdr 
assistance to the coffee industry by regulating the export and 
sale of coffee and by other means,", the words "to provide for the 
development under Central control of the coffee industry" shall 20 
be substituted. 
3. Amendment of section 1, Act VII of 1942.-In sub-section (1) 
of section 1 of the principal Act, for the words "Cof!ee Marltet Ex-
pansion Act", the words "Cdffee Act" shall be substItuted. 

s 
10 
IS 
20 
2S 
~ 
4. Substitution of new section for section 2 in Act VII of IM2.-
For section 2 of the principal Act, the follawing section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"2. Declaration p.s to expediency of Union control.-It is 
hereby declared that it is expedient in the public interest that 
the Union should take under its cdntrol the coffee industry." 
5. Amendment of section 3, Act VII of IM2.-In section 3 of the 
principal Act,-
(i) in clause (a), the word 'Indian' shall be omitted; 
(ii) after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(aa) 'Chail'IIlan' means the Chairman of the Board; 
(iii) for clause (n), the following clause shall be-substituted, 
namely:-
"(n) 'year' means the period of twelve months beginning 
with the first day of August and ending with the thirty-first 
day of July next following." 
6. Amendment of section 4, Act VII of 1942.-In section 4 of the 
principal Act,-
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words 'Indian Coffee Board' the 
words 'Coffee Board' shall be substituted; 
(ii) for sub-section (2), the folldwing sub-sections shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(2) The Board shall consist of-
(i) a Chairman to be appointed by the Central 
Government; 
(ii) one person to represent the State of Coorg, to 
be nominated by the Chief Commissioner of that State; 
(iii) one person to represent the GGvemment C1f 
Mysore, to be nominated by that Government; 
(iv) one person to represent the Government C1f 
Madras, to be nominated by that Government; 
.,.. 
(v) one person io represent the Government C1f 
Travancore-Cochin, td be nominated by that Govern-
ment; 
(vi) four persons to represent the coftee growing 
industry in Coorg, to be nominated by the Chief Com-
missioner of Coorg; 
(vii) four persons to represent the coffee growing 
industry in Mysore, to be nominated by the GoVernment 
of Mysore; 
(viii) fo.ur persons to represent the coffee growing 
illdustry in Madras, to be nominated by the Government 
,of Madras; 

3 
(i,r) faur persons to represent cofte~ trade interests, 
to be nominated by the Central Government; 
(x) three persons to represent labour, to be Ilomi-
nated by the Central Government; 
• (xi) two persons to represent the interests of con- S 
sumers, to be ndminated by the Central Government; 
(xii) two persons to represent such other interests as 
in the opinion of the Central Government ought to be 
represented, to be nominated by the Central Goverrunent. 
(2A) Any officer of the Central Government when 10 
deputed by that Government in this behalf shall have the 
right to attend meetings of the Board and take part in the 
proceedings thereof but shall not be entitled to vote." 
7. Amenanteat of section 5, Act VII of 1942.-In section 5 of the IS 
principal Act, the word "Indian" shall be omitted. 
8. Amendment of section 7, Act VII of 1942.-In section 7 of the 
principal Act, sub-section (1) shall be omitted. 
9. Substitution of new sections for sections 8 and 9 in Act VB ef 
1942 ....... For sections 8 and 9 of the principal Act, the following sections 
shall. be substituted, namely:-
"8.5alary and allowances of Chairman .-The ~hairman shall 
be entitled to such salary and allowances and sue .. cen4itions of 
service in respect of leave, pension, provident fund all4 other 
matters as may, from time to time, be 6xed by the Central 
Government. 
SA. Vice-Chairman.-The Board shall elect from amongst 
its members a Vice-Chairman who shall exercise such of the 
powers and perform such of the duties of the Chairman as may 
'" prescribed or as may be delegated to him by the Chairman. 
20 
25 
9. Chief Coffee Marketing Officer, Secretary and other 30 
staJf.-(l) The Central Gdvernment shall appoint an officer to be 
caned the Chief Coffee Marketing Officer and a Secretary to the 
Board and .may appoint a Deputy Secretary to the Board and 
such number of Marketing Officers as may be necessary, to 
exercise such powers and to perform such duties under the direc- 35 
tion of the Board as may be prescribed. 
(2) The officers appointed under this section shall be entitled 
to such salaries and allowances and such conditions .of service· 
m respect of leave, pension, provident fund and other matt.e~, as 
may, from time to time, be fixed by the Central Government. 40 
10. Amendment of section 11, Ad VII of 1942.-ln seetion 11 of 
the prin,c,:ipal Act, for the wor.ds 'at the rate of one rupee per hundred-
weight or at such lower rate as tbe Central Government may on the 
recommendation of the Board, by noti6cl;ltion in the Om~ial Gazette 
PA'ovicle' the words 'at such rate not exceeding six rupees per hundred- 45 
weieht as may be fixed by the Central Government by Notification 
in the Official Gazette' shall be substituted. . 

s 
[0 
IS 
4 
11. Amendment of section 12, Act VB of lMZ.-ln section 12 of 
the principal Act,-
(i) for the words 'one rupee' the words 'six rupees' shall be 
substituted; 
(ii) the words 'on the recommendation of the Board' shall 
be omitted. 
12. Amendment of section 13, Act VB of 1942.-ln section 13 of 
the principal Act,-
(i) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be, 
substituted, namely:-
"(1) .The proceeds of the duty of customs and of the duty of 
excise and of any fees levied under this Act, (all of which shall 
form part of the Consolidated Fund of India) reduced by the 
cost of collection as determined by the Central Govemment, shall, 
if Parliament by appropriation made by law in this behalf so 
provides, be paid to the Board for being utilised for the plB'poses 
of this Act." , 
(ii) sub-section (2) shall, be omitted. 
13. Amendment of section 14, Act VII of 1942.-ln section 14 of 
20 the principal Act, in sub-section (4), for the words 'Chief Coffee 
Marketing Officer', the word 'Chairman' shall be substituted. 
14. Amendment of section 16, Act VII of 1942.-ln sub-section (1) 
of section 16 of the principal Act, the Wdrds "after consultation with 
the Board" shall be omitted. 
25 15. Amendment of section 20, Act VII of 1942.-ln section 20 of 4 
the principal Act,- ' 
35 
45 
(i) for the first proviso, the following proviso shall be 
substituted, namely:- ' 
• 
"Provided that nothing herein contained shall apply to 
coffee-
(i) shipped as stores dn board any vessel or aircraft 
in such quantity as the Collector cdnsiders reasonable, 
having regard to the number of the crew and passengers 
and the length of the voyage or journey, as the case may 
be, on which the vessel or aircraft is about td proceed, or 
(ii) carried as personal luggage of a passenger, not 
exceeding two pounds avoirdupois, or 
(iii) exported by post or by air in packages contain-
ing not more than ten pounds avoirdupois, or 
(iv) exported by sea as bona fide samples in pack-
ages containing not more than one pound avoirdupois;" 
(ii) after the first proviso as so amended, the following 
proviso shall be inserted, namely:-
"Provided further that the Central Government may, by 
order in writing, specify the quantity of coffee which shall 
be permit,ted for export during any year and where any such 
order is made, no coffee shall be exported from India in excess 
of the said quantity: ". 

S 
141. Amendment of section 25, Act VII of 1M2.-In section 25 of 
the principal Act,-
(i) to sub-section (1), the following provisos shall be added, namely:- . 
"Provided that where no internal sale quotas have been S 
allotted to estates, the Chairman may allow the owner of 
any estate to retain with himself for purposes of consump-
tion by his family and for purposes of seed, such quantity of 
coffee as the Chainnan may think reasonable: 
Provided further that where the Central Government is 10 
satisfied that it is not practicable for any class of owners 
producing coffee in any specified area to comply with the 
provisidns of this sub-section on account of the small quantity 
of coffee produced by them or on . account of their estates 
being situated in a remote locality, the Central Government IS 
may by notification in the Official Gazette exempt such class 
of owners from the provisions of this sub-section." 
(ii) in sub-section (4), the words 'with the concurrence of the 
Chief Coffee Marketing Officer' shall be <1mitted. 
17. Substitution of new section for section 31 in Act VII of 1942.- 20 
For section 31 of the principal Act, the following secti.on shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"31. General fund.-(l) To the General fund shall be credi-
~- . 
(a) all amounts paid to the Board by the Central Govern- 2S 
ment under sub-section (1) of section 13; and 
(b) any sums transferred to the General fund under the 
proviso to sub-section (2) of section 32. 
(2) The General fund shall be applied-
(a) to meet the expenses of the Board; go 
(b) to meet the cost of such measures as the Board may 
consi,der advisable to undertake for promoting agricultural 
and technological research in the interest of the coffee in-
dustry in India; and 
(c) for making such grants to coffee estates or for meet-
ing the cost of such other assistance to coffee estates as the 3S 
Board may think necessary for the development of such 
estates." 
18. Amendment of section 32, Act VII of 1942.-In section 32 of 
the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after clause (c), the following 40 
clause shall be inserted, namely:-
"(d) the cost of such measures as the Bdard considers 
advisable to undertake for promoting the sale and increasing the 
consumption in India and elsewhere of coffee produced in India." 
19. Insertion of new section 39A in Act VII of 1942.-After section 45 
39 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"39A. Offences by companies.-(l) If the person committing 
any offence under this Act is a company, every person who at the 
time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was res- 50 
ponaible to, the company for the conduct of the busineSi ot tbe 

s 
10 
IS 
20 
6 
company as weB. as the company shall be deemed to be guilty of 
the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing conta.ined in this sub-section shall 
render any !Uch persoo. liable to punishm.ent proyided in. this Act 
if he proves that the 'Offence was comtmtted WIthout hIS kno~­
!edge or that he exereisec! all due dUige'nce to prevent the com-
missiortof such offenCe. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) 
where an oftence tinder this Act has been committed by a com-
pany and it is proved that the oft'ence has been 'committed with 
the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to aI!y neglect 
on the part of, any director, managet, secretary or other officer 
ot tbecompany such director, manager, secretary or other officer 
shall also be deemed to be guilty of that oitehce and shall be 
liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
E:cplanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) "companf" meanSan~ hOOf corporate and includes a 
firm or other association of individuals; and 
(b) ''director'' ·m relation to a firm means a partner in 
the firm. 
10. ~t of !liedtoa 44, Ad VII of IM2.--In section 44 of 
the principal Act, for the words from 'Any member of the Board' 
to 'may ente!", the words 'Any person authorised in this behalf by 
2S the Central Government or by the Board or any member of the Board 
so authorised by the Chairman in writing or any officer of the Board, 
may enter at all reasonable times' shall be substituted. 
21. Amendment of aeetion 48, Ad VB of IM3.-In section 48 of 
the principal Act, for sub-Bection (2), the following sub-section shall 
30 be substituted, namely:-
3S 
4S 
1/(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
power, rules may be made providing for al1 or any of the fol-
lowing matters:-
(i) the prinCiples regulating the nomination of members 
of the Board; . 
(ii) the term of office of members of the Board, the 
circumstances in which, and the authority by which, members 
may be removed and the filling of casual vacancies in the 
Board; 
(iii) the procedure to be followed at meetings of the 
Board and at committees thereof for the conduct of business 
atl.d the tl.umber of mett1bers which shall form a quorum at 
a meeting; 
(iv) the maintenance by the Board of records of busi-
ness transacted by the Board and the submission of copies 
thereof to the Central Governlnent; 
(v) . the holding of a minimum number of meetings of 
the Board every year; 

7 
(v.i) the powers of tke Board, i t8 Chaii"ll'lan and com-
mittees thereof with respect to the iBcurring of expenditure; 
(vii) the conditions subject to which the Board may incur 
expenditure outside Ineiia; 
(Uiii) the preparation, of budget estimates of receipts S 
.nd 'expenditure of the Board and the authority by which 
. the estimates are to be sanctioned; . 
(ix) themaintehance of the aCCGUnts of income and 
ecpenditW'E! of theBbatd -and the audit of such aCCouhts; 
(or) the depqsit of the funds· of the Board in banks and 10 
the investttlent of such funds; 
. (xi) the re-app1'0priation of the estimated savin~s from 
-any budget head to any other budget head; 
(xii) the conditions subject to which the Board may 
borrow funds; . IS 
(xiii) the conditions subject to which and the manner in 
which contracts may be entered into by or on behalf of the 
Board; 
(xiv) the delegation to the committee or Chairrtlan or 
Vice-Chairman or members or officers of the Board of any 20 
of the powers and duties of the Board under this Act; 
(xv) the staff which may be employed by the Board 
and the pay and allowances and leave and other conditions 
of service of officers (other than those appointed by the 
Central Government) and other employees of the Board; 
(xvi) the travelling and other allowances of members 
of the Board and of committees thereof; 
(xvii) the maintenance of the registers and other records 
of the Board and its various committees; 
:.zs 
(xviii) the manner in which the internal sale quota of 30 
coffee estates shall be determined; 
(xix) the mann~r in which the Board shall exercise its 
powers of buying and selling coffee in the Indian Market; 
(xx) the appointment by the Board of agents; 
(xxi) the conditions to be fulfilled by a curin~ estab- 3S 
lishment before a licence to operate as such can be issued; 
(xxii) the form of, and the particulars to be contained 
in, any returns or reports to be made to the Board under 
this Act; 
(xxiii) the form of, manner of application for, fees pay- 40 
able for, procedure in granting and conditions governing, the 
licences and permits to be issued by the Board; 
(xxiv) the collection of any information or statistics in 
respect of coffee or any product of coffee; 

8 
(~) any other matter (other than any matter specified 
in section 15) which is to be or may be prescribed under this Act. . 
22. Validation of certain acts and indemnity in respect thereof.-
S All acts of executive a\lthority, proceedings and sentences which 
have been done, taken or passed with respect tOl or on account of, 
coffee during the period commencing on the 26th day of January, 
1950, and ending with the date of commencement of this Act, by the 
Government or by any officer of the Government or by any other 
10 authority in the belief or purported belief that the acts, proceedings 
or sentences were being done, taken or passed under the principal 
Act shall be as valid and operative as if they had been done, taken 
or passed in accordance with law, and no suit or other legal pro-
ceeding shall be maintained or continued against any authority 
15 whatsoever on the gr9und that any such acts, proceedings or sen-
tences were not done, taken or passed in accordance with law. 

9 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Th~ Coffe~ Market Expansion Act, 1942, was passed to meet the 
lituabon whIch confronted the coffee industry on the outbreak of 
World War II, when most of our European markets for coffee were 
lost. This resulted in a surplus of coffee in the country and a slump 
in prices. The situation today is entirely different. The internal 
consumption of coffee has increased considerably and it is of utmost 
t~portance td step up our production in order to meet the increasing 
demand of the home market, keep prices at reasonable levels and 
to meet our export requirements. The problem now is therefore one 
of the development of the industry rather than df marketing. 
2. The Indian Coffee Board also needs to be reconstituted to 
ensure better co-ordination between the Board and the Central and 
State Governments and a more equitable representation of all the 
interests concerned by altering the present method of according in-
dividual representation, by name, to various associations on the 
Board. The nature of the future work df the Board would entail 
the appointment of a whole-time Chairman, and power is therefore 
taken for Government to appoint the Chairman. 
3. There are many small-sized coffee estates whose ,eccmomic 
position being weak need some special help, for which additional 
funds are required. The present duty of customs and excise is only 
Re. 1 per cwt. It is proposed that the Central Government should 
have powers to levy a higher rate of duty subject to a maximum of 
Rs. 6 per cwt. 
4. The proposed Bill has been designed to achieve these objects. 
5. Opportunity has also been taken-
(a) to substitute a new section for section 2 of the principal 
Act in order to bring its language in confdrmity with the langu-
age of Entry 52 of List I in the Seventh Schedule to the Con-
stitution, and 
(b) to indemnify all authorities in respect of all action taken 
between the commencement of the Cdnstitution and the com-
mencement of this Act, as a doubt may be ra~sed as to whether, 
in the absence of a declaration made by ParbaII,1ent by law, the 
declaration contained in section 2 was eft~ctlve during that 
period. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 8th May, 195'. 
T. T. KRISHNAMACHARI. 

10 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Sedions li and 12 of the Coffee Ma~ Expansif1n Act, 1942, pro-
vide to!' levy of-
{os.) Q duty of custoins on -all coftee produced in India and 
ecporte'd from Inciia at the rate of Re. 1 'per cWt. or at such lower 
ra~ as the Centrill Govemrhent may, on the" recommenciation of 
the Coffee Board. by a notification in the Ofticia·l Gazette provide, 
(b) a duty o"f excise at such rate not exceeding Re. 1 per cwt. 
as may be fixed by Central Governmehton the recommendation 
of the Baatd by a notlftcation in "the "Ofti<:ial Gazette, on all coffee 
se}cl m the country. 
2. The Bill seeks to provide for raising these duties of customs 
end exeise s~ect to f1 maximum oJ as. 6 per cwt. 
3. The maxnnllm: duty of excise andcustorns may not be levied 
ii'l the beginni~. On an estimated prOduction of 25.000 tons of 
coti'ee, a duty of -excise ahd customs at the rate of lle. 1 is expected 
to yield Rs. 5,00,000. 
4. The average annual expenditure on the Board and dIl measures 
"~n for pr{)lnotmg agricultural and technological research is about 
Rs. 4 1ald1s. 1'he balance of the proceeds realised by levy of a duty 
at a higher rate will be earmarked for granting assistance to oot!ee 
estates. 

II 
DRAFT MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 21 cJf the Bill amplifies the rule-making power conferred 
upon the Central Government by section 48 of the principal Act. 
Sub-section (2) of section 48 has now been brought in line with the 
corre~onding provisions of 8Ub-secti01'1 (2) C1f section '49 of the Tea 
Act, 1:953, which was recently passed by Parliament. Section 9 of 
the principal Act which empowers the Board to make by-laws on 
certain.'l'l1a~i's 'iBbein~ omitted. It has, accordingly, become neces-
~&rY, tt!t provide for theSe matters in section 48. The rule-making 
power 'is 'generally df a routine and normal character. The neces-
sity for making rules on certain important matters is, however, ex-
plained below. 
48(2) (i). Principles regulati .. the nommatiollof meftlbers.-The 
intention is that the nominating aUJthmi.ties should cOilsult the 
representative organisations of interests concerned before nominatina 
members. It is not feasible to state in the Act what associations 
are to be consulted and what shctuld be the manner of consultation. 
M(2)(u) Dep08it lOf th~ fltldlsflf the. rteard III Batiks and invest-
__ of dcll funds.--The provisions of SeCtion 20 of the,Indian 
Trusts Act, 1882 which relate to investment of trust funds if applied 
to this case would be unduly restriCtive. Some more liberal pro-
visions are required and consistent with the safety of the funds of 
the Board, it is proposed to make such provisions in the. Rules. 
. 48(2)(xi) Conditions subject to which the Board Dlay borrow 
fun8s.-The conditions subject to which the Board may borrow funds 
cannot be visualised for all times. It is therefore expedient to 
specify such conditidns in the Rules so that they may be capable of 
being easily modified. 

12 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE COFFEE MARKET EXPANSION ACT, 1942 (VII OF 1942) 
• • • * • 
An Act to continue the provision made under Ordinance No. XIII 
of 1940 for assistance to the coffee industry by regulating the 
export and sale of coffee and by other means. 
WHEREAS it is expedient to continue the provisidn'made under the 
Coffee Market Expansion Ordinance, 1940, for assistance to the coffee 
industry by regulating the export and sale of coffee and by other 
means; 
• • • * • 
1. Short title and extent.-(l) This Act may be called the Coffee 
Market Expansion Act, 1942. 
• • * • 
2. Declaration as to expediency of Central Government's control.-
It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the public interest that 
the Central Government should take under its control the develop-
ment elf the coffee industry. 
3. Definitions.-
• • • • • 
(a) "the Board" means the Indian Coffee Board constituted 
under section 4; 
• • • * • 
(n) "year" means the period of twelve months beginning 
with the 1st day of July and ending with the 30th day of June 
following. 
4. Constitution of the 8oard.-(1) The Board constituted by the 
name of the Indian Coffee Market Expansion Board under section 4 
of the Indian Coffee Market Expansion Ordinance, 1940, shall be the 
Indian Coffee Board for the purposes df this Act. 
(2) The Board shall consist of-
(a) (i) one person representing the India Council of Agri-
cultural Research, nominated by the Central Government; 
(ii) one person representing the Ministry of Industry 
and Supply of the Central Government, nominated by that 
Government; 
(iii) one person representing Coorg, nctminated by the 
Central Government; 
(iv) one person representing the Government of 
Madras, nominated by that Government; 
(v) three persons representing the Mysdre State, 
nominated by the Government of that State; 
(vi) tWo persons representing the State of Travaneore-
Cochin, nominated by the Government of that State; 

I~ 
(b) faur persons representing the colfee trade interests, 
nominated by the Central Government; 
(c) fourteen persons representing the colfe.e growing industry, namely: - . 
(i) three persons nominated by the Government of Mysore; , 
(ii) three persons nO'minated by .the United Planters' Association of Southern India; 
'(iii) one person nominated by the Coorg Planters' Association; 
(iv) dne person no-minated by the Coorg Indian 
Planters' Association; 
(v) one person nominated by the Mysore Planters' 
Association; 
(vi) one person nominated by the Mysore -Indian 
PlaI:}ters' AssdCiation; 
(vii) one person nominated by the Nilgiri-cum-Nilgiri 
Wynaad Planters· Association; 
(viii) one person nominated by the Malabar Wynaad 
Coffee· Growers' Association; 
(ix) O'lle person nominated by the Shevaroy Planters' 
Association; 
(x) one person nominated by the Palni-Bodi-Sirumalai 
Coffee Growers' Association; 
~ 
(d) three persons representing labour, O'lle each to be 
nominated in consultation with labour organisations by the 
Government of Madras and Mysore and one to be nominated in 
consultation with labour organisations by the Chief Commis-
sioner of <;oorg. 
• • • • • 
5. Ineorporation of the Board.-The Board shall be a body cor-
porate by the name of the Indian Cdffee Board having perpetual 
succession and a common seal, with power to acquire and hold 
property, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall 
by the said name sue and be sued. 
• • • • • 
7. Chairman, Committees, staff and arents.-(1) The Chairman 
of the Board shall be elected by the Board fram among the members 
of the Board: . 
Provided that the person who is, at the commencement of this 
Act, the chairman of the Indian Coffee Market Expansion Board 
constituted under the Coffee Market Expansion Ordinance, 1940, shall 
be the first chairman of the Board. 
• • • • • 

14 
8. C~f £.ee Marketin~ Oftleer BAd D.uty Chle.€ Coffee 
Marketmg Oflicer.-(l) TIle Central Government shall appoint an 
officer, to be called. the Chief Coffee Mar~e'ing OfficeE to exercise 
such powers and perform such duties under the direction of the 
Board as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
(2) The Central Government may appoint an officer, to be called 
the Deputy Chief Caffee Marketing Officer to exercise suchpowers 
and perform such duties o~ the Chief Coftee Marketing Officer as 
may be delegated to him by the Chief Coftee Marketing Officer with 
the previous sanction of the Central Government or as may be 
prescribet! by the Central Government. 
(3)· The Chief Coffee Marketing Officer and the Deputy Chief 
Coffee M.arketing Officer may be either salaried or unsalaried: if 
salaried, they shall be paid by the Board such salaries as may be 
fixed by the Central Government. 
(4) The Board shall pay to the Chief Coffee Marketing Officer 
and the Deputy Chief Coffee Marketing Officer such allowances as 
may be fixed by the Central Government. 
• • • • 
DUTIES OF CUSTOMS AND OF EXCISE 
11. Duty of customs.-A duty of customs shall be levied on all 
coffee produced in India and exported from India at the rate of one 
rupee per hundredweight or at such lower rate as the Central 
Government may, on the recommendation of the Board by notifica-
tion in the Official Gazette provide. 
12. Duty of Excise.-A duty of excise shall be levied at such rate 
not exceeding· one rupee per hundredweight as may ,be fixed by the 
Central Government on the recommendation of the Board by noti-
fication in the Official Gazette on all coffee, except coffee sold and 
delivered before the estate became subject to the provisions of sub-
section (1) of section 14 which a registered estate is permitted by 
the internal sale quota allotted to it to sell in the Indian Market, 
whether such coffee is actually sold or not, and on all coffee released 
for sale in India by the Board from the surplus pool. 
l3. Paymell,t of ~oeoeds of duties to the Board and manner of 
~~sation by tbe Board • ......,(l) The proceeds of the duty 01 customs 
levied under section 11 and of the duty of excise levied under section 
12 shall be paid to the Board for credit to the general fund of tQ.e 
Board. . 
REGISTRATION 
14. RegistratioJ,l. of owgers of coJlee estates.-(~) 
• • • • 
(·1) If any question arises whether an owner of an estate is or is 
not required to be registered under this section, the question shall 
be decided by the Chief Coffee Marketing Offtcer subject to re\,ision 
by the. Central Government. 
• • • • 

IS 
CONTROL OF SALE, ExPoRT AND RE-IMPORT OF COFFEE 
16. Fixation of prices for sale of coffee.-(l) The Central Govern-
ment may, after consultation with the Board, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, fix the price or prices at which coffee may be sold 
wholesale or retail in the Indian market. 
• • • • 
20. Exlit0rt of eoffee.-
• • • • 
Provided that nothing herein contained shall apply to coffee dis-
patched out of India by post, or carried in a passenger's luggage 
for his personal use: 
• • • • 
. 25. Surplus coffee and surplus pool.-
• • • • 
(4) The Board shall. with the concurrence of the Chief Coffee 
Marketing Officer, from time to time prepare a differential scale for 
the valuation of coffee, and shall in accordance with that scale 
classify the coffee in each consignment delivered for inclusion in the 
surplus pool according to its kind and quality, and shall make an 
assessment of its value based on its quantity, kind and quality, 
31. GeDel'al fund.-
(l) To the general fund shall be credited all proceeds of the duty 
of customs and the duty of excise levied under section 11 and section 
12, respectively, and all receipts including receipts for licences issued 
by the Board, other than tJ;lOse to be credited under section 32 to 
the pool fund and any sums transferred to the general fund under 
the proviso to sub-section (2) of section 32. 
(2) The general fund shall be applied to meet the expenses of 
the Board. the cost of such measures as it may consider advisable 
to undertake for promoting the sale and increasing the consumption 
in India and elsewhere of coffee produced in India, or for promoting 
agricultural and technological research in the interest of the coffee 
industry in India. 
• • • • 
44. Inspection of records.-
Any member of the Board, and any officer of the Board or other 
person authorised in this behalf by the Central Government or' the 
1}oard"may enter any estate or any curing establishment ~r "any place 
where coffee is stored or exposed for sale and may reqUIre the pro-
duction for his inspection of any records kept therein, or ask for 
any information relating to the production, storage or sale of coffee. 
• • • • 

16 
• 48. Power of the Central Government to make rales.-
• • • • • 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, 
rules may be made providing for all or any of the following matters, 
namely:-
(a) the term of office of members of the Board, the circum-
stances in which and the authority by which members may be 
removed, and the filling of casual vacancies in the Board; 
(b) the conduct of business by the Board and the number of 
members which shall form a quorum at a meeting; 
(c) the maintenance by the Board of records pf business 
transacted by the Board, and the submission of copies thereof 
+,0 the Central Government; 
(d) the preparation by the Board of estimates of annual 
=eceipts and, expenditure; 
(e) the manner in which the internal sale quota df coffee 
estates shall be determined; 
(f) the manner in which the Board shall exercise its powers 
of buying and selling coffee in the Indian Market; 
(g) the appointment by the Board of agel'lts; 
(h) the conditions to be fulfilled ,by a curing establishment 
before a licence to operate ,as such can be issued; 
(i) the form of and the particulars to be contained in any 
returns or reports to be made to the Board under this Act; 
(;) the form of, manner of application for, fees payable tor, 
procedure in granting and conditions governing the licences and 
permi ts to be issued by the Board; 
. (k) any other matter except the matters referred to in 
section 15 which is to be or may be prescribed under this Act. 
• • • • 

HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE 
• 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Coffee Market, Expansion Act, 1942. 
The President has, in pursuance of clauses (I) and (3) of 
article 117 of the Constitution of India, recommended to the 
House of the People the intrOduction and consideration of the 
Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
S(cretary. 
(Shri T. T. Krishnamachari, 
klinister for Commerce and Industry.) 
OJPD-LAI - b M cf Llow---I2""4-- 1770 