As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
Bill No. 23 01 1"4. 
THE PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT (REQUIREMENT AS TO 
RESIDENCE) AMENDMENT BILL, 1964 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Public Employment (Requirement as to Residence) 
Act, 1957. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifteenth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Public Employment (Requirement Short title. 
as to Residence) Amendment Act, 1964. 
s Z. For section 4 of the Public Employment (Requirement as to Amend-
'195'7. Residence) Act, 1957 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), =u~~t 4. 
the following section shall be substituted, namely:-
"4.· Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as Parlia-
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while :~~~ 
10 it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be of rules. 
comprised in one session or in two successive sessions, and if 
before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the session 
immediately following, both Houses agree in making any modi-
fication in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should 
IS not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so how-
ever that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
toot rule.". 

Amend-
ment of 
section 5. 
Validity 
of rules 
and action 
taken 
there-
under. 
3. In section 5 of the principal Act, for the words "five years", the 
words "ten years" shall .be substituted and shall be deemed always 
to have~1!li substituted. 
4. For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that all rules 
made under section 3 of the principal Act and in force immediately 5 
before the 21st March, 1964, shall continue to be in force after that date 
until amended, varied or rescinded, as if such rules were made under 
the principal Act as amended by this Act; and any action taken (in-
cluding appointments made) in pursuance of those rules on or after 
the 21st March, 1964 and before the commencement of this Act shall 10 
be as valid and operative as if it had been taken in accordance with 
law. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Public Employment (Requirement as to Residence) Act, 1957. 
repeals all the laws in force in the States and Union territories with 
regard to requirements as to residence for purposes of any employ-
ment or appointment under the State, any local or other authority, 
but section 3 of the Act empowered the Central Government to make 
. rules prescribing requirements as to residence within Telangana area 
of Andhra Pradesh or the Union territories of Himachal Pradesh, 
Manipur or Tripura for appointments in subordinate services. Sec-
tion 5 of the Act fixed a period of five years from the commencement 
of the Act during which the domicile rules framed under section 3 
in respect of the above mentioned areas were to remain in force. 
Since) the Act came into force on the 21st March, 1959, the domicile 
rules framed under section 3 w1l1 cease to be operative with e1Iect 
from the 21st March, 1964. 
2. It is considered desirable, after consultation with the Govern-
ment of Andhra Pradesh and the Administrations of the Union 
territories concerned, that the domicile rules framed in respect of 
the areas mentioned above should be kept in force for a further 
period of five years. The Bill seeks to achieve this object. 
NEW DELHI; GULZARILAL NAND,.\. '. .~ . ., . 
fh{! Pth MaTch, 1~ 

Parlia-
mentary 
scrutin1 of rules. 
Duration 
of section 
3 and 
rulH. 
EXTRACTS FROM THE PuBLIC EMPLOYMENT (REQUIREMENT AS TO 
RESIDENCE) ACT1 1957 
(44 OF 1957) 
• • • • • 
4. All rules mode under section 3 shall, as soon as may be after 
they are made, be laid for not less than thirty days before each House 
of Parliament and shall be subject to such modifications as Parlia-
ment may make during the session in which they are so laid, or in 
the session immediately following. 
S. Section 3 and all rules made thereunder shall cease to have 
effect on the expiration of five years from the commencement of thIs 
: ' Aet, but such cesser shall not affect the validity of any aPPointment 
previously made in pursuance of the said rules. 
• • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BIu.. 
to amend the Public Employment (Requirement as to 
Residence) Act, 1957. 
(Shri GuJ.ariJal Nanda, 
MinilU/r of Home Allain.) 