Bin No. 23 or 1"0 
THE RESERVE BANK OF INDIA 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1960 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
ON 22ND, APRIL, 1960) 

a of 1934. S 
63 of 1951. 
10 
IS 
20 
BlII No 23 of I". 
THE RE,jERVE BANK OF INDIA (AMENDMENT) BILL, 
1960 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934. 
.3E it eoocted by Parliament in the Eleventh Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Reserve Bank of India (Amendment) Short title. 
Act, 1960. 
2. In section 17 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934,- Amendment 
(a) after clause (4), the following clause shall be inserted, ofsection 17. 
namely:-
"(4A) the making to any State Financial Corpomtion 
established under the State Financial Corporations Act, 1951, 
of loans and advances repayable on the expiry of fixed periods 
not exceeding eighteen months from the date of such loan or 
adwnce, against securities of the Central Government or of 
any State Government, of any maturity, or against bonds and 
debentures issued by that Corporation and guaranteed by the 
State Government concerned and maturing within a period 
not exceeding eighteen months from the date of such loan or 
advance: 
Provided that the amount of loans and advances granted 
to a State Financial Corporation under this clause shall not, 
at any time, exceed in the aggregate sixty per cent. of the 
paid-up share capital thereof;"; 
(b) existing clause (4A) shall be renumbered and relettered 
as clause (4AA); 

(c) for clause (4BB), the following clause shall be substitut-
ed, namely:-
"(4BB) the making to any financial institution notified 
by the Central Government in this behalf, of loans and 
adwnces,- S 
(a) repayable on demand or on the expiry of fixed 
periods not exceeding ninety days from the date of such 
loan or advance, against the securities of the Central 
Government or of any State Government, or 
(b) repayable on the expiry of fixed periods not 10 
exceeding eighteen months from the date of such loan or 
advance, against securities of the Central Government or 
of any State Government, of any maturity, or against 
bonds and debentures issued by that financial institution 
and guaranteed by the Central Government or any State IS 
Government, and maturing within a period not exceeding 
eighteen months from the date of such loan or advance: 
Provided that the amount of loans and advances 
granted to a financial institution under sub-clause (b) 
shall not at any time, exceed in the aggregate sixty per 20 
cent. of the paid-up share capital thereof;"; 
(d) after clause (11), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(llA) the acting as agent for the Central Government 
in guaranteeing the due performance by any small-scale 2S 
industrial concern approved by the Central Government, of 
its obligations to any bank or any other financial institution in 
respect of loans and advances made to it by such bank or 
other financial institution and the making as such agent of 
payments in connection with such auarantee j". 30 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In order to facilitate the grant of loans by commercial banks 
and certain other financial institutions to small-scale industrial units, 
a scheme for guaranteeing the loans sanctioned in favour of such 
units has been prepared and is proposed to be brought into force. 
It is intended that the Reserve Bank of India should act as an agent 
of the Central Government for implementing this scheme. The Bill 
proposes to confer on the Reserve Bank of India the necessary au-
thority to undertake this agency function. The opportunity provided 
by this amendment has also been utilised to authorise the Bank to 
extend medium-term loans to the State Financial Corporations and 
to other institutions notified by the Central Government. 
NEW DELHI; MORARJI R. DESAI. 
The 19th April, 1960. 
~ . 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Under clause (UA) as proposed to be inserted in section 17 of 
the Reserve Bank of India Act, the Bank is empowered to act as an 
agent of the Central Government for the purpose of guaranteeing 
the loans and advances made to small-scale industrial units by 
banks and other financial institutions. The amounts, if any, which 
may have to be paid in pursuance of these guarantees cannot be 
precisely estimated at this stage. As a contribution is proposed to 
be levied from the industrial units, in consideration of the guarantees 
which are being offered by or on behalf of the Central Government, 
and as recoveries are also expected to be made in the usual course 
from the borrowers, after the guarantees have been invoked, the 
ultimate loss to be borne by the Central Government may not, how-
ever, be appreciable. The guarantee scheme is experimental at the 
present stage and will, if necessary, be revised in the light of actual 
experience. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE R§ERVE BANK OF INDIA ACT, 1934 (No.2 OF 1934). 
• • • • 
17. The Bank shall be authorised to carry on and transact the Bulin ... 
several kinds of business hereinafter specified, namely:- ~~ 
• • • • 
(4BB) the making to any financial institution notified by the 
Central Government in this behalf of loans and advances repayable 
on demand or on the expiry of fixed periods not exceeding, ninety 
days from the date of such loan or advance, against securities of the 
Central Government or of any State Government; 
• • • • 
traIlIaCt. 

LOl{ sABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Reserve Bank of India Act, I934. 
The President has, in pursuance of clauses (I) and (3) of articlo 
II7 of the Cono;;titution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha, 
the introduction and consideration of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secrttary. 
(Shri Morarji Desai, Minister of Finance.) 