, ) 
, 
- ) . 
1 j • 
.. ) 
I • 
r. 
'") . 
1 
T" 
r ~ l 
----
L.-.r: 
~l r; 
:C-, [' 
' . .1.. \ ~ 
" !' ---. 
" 
. --
; l' ( 
., ~ f"· 
:.: , 
( ) 'un r; J 
, 1 
~. Il 
, .. 
~. ') 
" 
" 
t." 
'-rl " _ --.J.....:... 
~" . (~ 
_"(: ·Vi . 
'! <J ',_-~ r': .i! 
'i '[) i)· 
",-. 
r' 'I '(", 
f2l. 
l 'J c: r, -l jJ : (' 
1';1' 
~ , ::1 , 
1,' : , T' 
1', ',1' tI.; 
I:~,..:.1.. 
.l_Ll j (~ 
.:., ',:' L _ . J 
1'--,'/" 
1 .. 
1 
, 
I 
, . 
I' 
.. , 
n 
'-).1 
·1.riJ '} 
"": J ~(, ;-.~, -_._---
dL 
. -~ i : 
r Li '1 
i;c'1.(J,' r 
l 11 
. I 
) ," 
'I -I ,". '~ , " 
,I !I. ,", . " 1. [I 
1 1 
I 
L. 
I r~ " 
tc" ·ul 

1 of 1956. 
4 of 1974. 
40 of 1974. 
~~ 3 MAR .,,! 
Bill No. Z3 pi 1979 
THE KOSANGAS COMPANY (ACQUISITION OF UNDERTAKING) 
BILL, 1979 
f A 
BILL 
to provide for the acquisition, in the public interest, of the undertaking 
or the KOS4'ngtJ.s company and thereby to secure toot the ownership 
and control of the means and resources for bottling, transporting, 
marketing and distribution of liquefied petroleum gas are so dist~ 
buted as best to sub serve the commcm. good and for matte1'S 00'1\-
n~ted therewith or incidental thereto. 
WHEREAS the undertakings in India of Esso Eastern Inc., a foreign 
company, have vested in the Hindustan Pewoleum Corporation Limited 
(a Government company within the meaning of the Companies Act, 
1956) under the ESso (Acquisition of Undelltakings in India') Act, 1974; 
!S AND WHEREAS the agreement entered into hy the Esso Standard· 
Eastern Inc., on the 5th day of September, 1967, with the Kosangas 
company then a partnership' concern (whereby the former appointed 
the latter as distributors in certain areas for sale of its liquefied petro-
leum· gas; packed in cylinders, to domestic, comm.et'cial and industrial 
10 customers), as continued· by sub-section (1) ot section 13 of the Esso 
(Acquisition, Ofl' Undertakittgs in India)' Act, 19'14~ and mOdifted under 
sub-aeation (2)' W1f that seCtion; espli'ed on the 4th day of september, 
1m; 
AND WH1IIU!lAS it is expedient in the public interest to' acquire the 
15 undertaking of the said Kosangascompany; 
AND WHEREAS such acquisition is for giving. e1i'ect to the policy of the 
State towards securing the princ:iple specified in clause (b) of> article 
39 of the Constitl,ltion a~ the ownership and control. of the material 

Short 
title and 
com~ 
menee-
ment. 
Defini-
tions. 
Transfer 
and vest~ 
inginthe 
Central 
(J{)vern~ 
ment of. 
fheunder-
taking. 
2 
resourc~ of·tb, community, to wit, the means and resourees aforesaid, 
would by reason of such acquisition become 'vested in the State and 
thereby so distributed and utilized as best to subserve the common good; 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirtieth Year of the RepubUc of 
India as follows: - S 
CHAPI'ER I 
PltELIMrNARY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Kosangas Company (Acquisition 
of Undertaking) Act, 1979. 
(2) It shall come into ~orce at once. 10 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "appointed day" means the date on which this Act comes 
into foree; 
(b) "Government company" has the meaning assigned to It by IS 
secHon 617 of the Companies Act, 1956; 1 of 1958. 
(e) "Kosangas company" means the partnership firm registered 
under the Indian Partnership Act, 1932, with head oftice at 53/57, 
Lakshmi Insur:mce Building, Sir Ferozeshah Mehta Road, Bombay-I, 
as it existed immediately before its dissolution on the 5th September, 
9 of 1932. 
1977; I 20 
(d) "liquefied petroleum gas" has the same meanIng as in sub-
item (2) of Item No. l1A of the First Schedule to the Central 
Excises and Salt Act, 1944; 
(e) "the undertaking" means the undertaking in India of the 
Kosangas company the right, title and interest in which have, on the 25 
dissolution of that firm, vested in Gocul Gas Private Limited as sole 
proprietor thereof. 
CHAPI'ER II 
ACQUISTION OF THE UNDERTAKING OF KIosANGAS COMPANY 
3. (1) On the appointed day, the right, title and interest of Gocul30 
Gas Private Limited, in relation to the undertaking, shall stand trans-
ferred to, and vest in, the Central Government free from all encum-
brances. 
.(2) The undertaking referred to in sub-section (1) shall be deemed to 
include all assets, rights, leaseholds, powers, authorities and privileges 35 
and all property, movable and immovable, including lands, buildings, 
works, workshops, acoommodation, shops and godowns, projects, stores, 
gas cylinders, quota rights, facilities for bottling and filling liquefied 
petroleum gas and transport, marketing and distribution thereof in bulk 
and in cylinders, regulator,;, valves, machinery, locomotives, automo- 40 
biles, tank lorries, tank wagons, and other vehicles, liquefied petroleum 
~as in process or in stock or in transit, bank balances, cash balances, 
reserve funds, investments, book debts and all other right!! and interests 
in or arising out of such property as were, immediately before the ap-
pointed day. in the ownership, possession, power or control of Gocul Gas 45 
Private Limited in its own name or in the narpe of· Kosangas company in 
telation to or concerning the undertaking fn India, and all books of ac~ 
1 of 1944. 

eounts, regrsters, records, correspondence flIes, instruments (ine;luding 
agreements with dealers, sub-dealers and customers), assurances, maps, 
plans, sections, drawings, records of survey and all other documents of 
.whatever nature relating thereto and shall also be deemed to include the 
5 Uabilities specified in sub-section (2) Of section 4 but shall not be 
deemed to include-
(a) the trade marks of Kosangas company or designs registered 
in India in the name of Kqsangas company; 
(b) any business carried on by Kosangas company or Gocul Gas 
10 Private Limited (including the assets and stock in trade forming 
part of that business) other than that relating to the bottling, filling, 
transPl>rt, marketing and distribution of liquefied petroleum gas. 
(3) All property included as aforesaid in the undertaking which ~las 
vested in the Central Government under SUb-section (1) shall, by virtue 
IS of such vesting, be freed and discharged from any trusts, obligations, 
mortgages, charges, liens and other encumbrances affecting it, and any 
attaChment, injunction or any decree or order Of any court restricting 
the use of such property in any manner shall be deemed to have been 
withdrawn. 
20 (4) If, on the appointed day, any suit, appeal or other proceeding of 
whatever nature (which, under the provisilons of this Act, could be 
instituted by or against the Central Government) in relation to the 
undertaking which has been transferred to, and vested in, the Central 
Government, is pending, by or against Gocul Gas Private Limited or 
25 Kosangas company, the same shall not abate, be discontinued or be, in 
any way, prejudicially affected by reason of the transfer of the under-
taking or of anything contained in this Act, but the suit, appeal or 
other proceeding may be continued, prosecuted and enforced by or 
against the Central Government. 
30 4. (1) All liabilities, other than the liabilities specified in sub-section 
(2), of Gocul Gas Private Limited or of Kosangas company or its partners 
in or in relation to the undertaking in respect of any period prior to 
the appointed day shall be the liabilities of Gocul Gas Private Limited. 
'lr Of KJOSangas company or its partners, as the case may be, and shall 
35 be enforceable against it or them and not against the Central Govern-
ment. I 
(2) Any liability of the undertaking arising in. respect of-
(i) deposits collected from consumers for use of gas cylinders 
and pretlUl'e replators, and from agents, and 
(ii) provision for gratuity to officers and employees employed in 
or in connection with the undertakings, 
and current UabUitiel relating to sundry creditors and accruedj expell88S 
of the undertaking lhall, on and from the appointed day, be the UabDl-
ties of the Central Government and shall be d1scharged by the Central 
45 Government. 
(3) Thr the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that,-
(a) save as otherwise expressly p1'ovi~d in this section or m 
any other section of this Act, no liabilities other than the liabilities 
GoculGas 
Private 
Limited 
Bnd 
Kosangas 
company 
to be 
liable for 
certain 
prior lia-
bi\1ties. 

Special 
provisions 
as tocer-
tain rights 
held be-
fore the 
appointed 
day. 
,4 
$l*~ed in sup~tion (2), in r~~~:to the .~~ ~.~t 
of any ~od lK'ior to the appoin¥ day, sh8.U be enforceable 
aaainst the Central Goven:unent; ... 
(b) no award, decree or :order of any court, tribunal or other 
authority or any settlement in relation to the undertaking passed 5 
after the appointed day in respect of any matter, claim or dispute, 
in relation to any matter not refetted to in sub-section (2), which 
arose before that day, shall be enforceable against the Central 
Government; 
(c) no liability of the undertaking or of Gocul Gas Private 10 
Limited and K:osangas company or: its partners for the contraven-
tion, before the appointed day, of any provision of law for the time 
being in force, shall be enforceable against the Central Government; 
(d) no liability of Gocul Gas Private Limited or Kosangas 
company to the Directors I()f Gocul Gas Private Limited or to the 15 
partners o~ Kosangas company, and no liability for income-tax of 
Gocul Gas Private Limited, or of Kosangas company or the partners 
of Kosangas company, whether or not any such liability relates to 
the undertaking, shall be enforceable against the Central Govern-
ment. 
5. (1) Every right or interest in respect of any property (including 
20 
a right under any lease or under any right of tenancy or any right under 
any arrangement by agreement or otherwise to secure any premises or 
cylinders, regulators, valves or other goods for any purpose) held by 
Gocul Gas Private Limited immediately before the appointed day, shall, 25 
no~withstanding anything contained in any other law or any agreement 
or instrument relating to such right or interest, vest in, and be held by, 
the Central Government on and after the appointed day on the same 
terms and conditions on which Gocul Gas Private Limited would have 
held it if no negotiations had taken place for acquisition of the und~rtak- 30 
ing by the Central Government or, as the case may be, if this Act had not 
been passed. 
(2) If at any time after the 2nd day of September, 1977 (being the 
d~te on which the Central Government's policy for acquiring the UDdear-
taking was made known) and before the appointed day, Kosangaa com-
pany lOr Gocul Gas Private Limited surrendered or otherwise relinquish- 35 
ed or created any right or interest in respect of any property (ia£lud-
ing a right under any lease or under any right of tenancy or a right 
under any arrangement by agreement or otherwise to secure a~y pre-
mises or any cylinders, regulators, valves or. other goods for any pur- 4 
pose), then, for the purposes of this Act, notwithstanding any1hing con- 0 
tained in any other law or any agreement or mstrument relat41g to such 
ri~t or interest, the Central Government shall, on or after the appointed 
day, be entitled to such right or interest on the same terms and conditions 
on which Kosangas company or Gocul Gas Private Limited wouid have 
been entitled to such right or interest if it had not surrel1delled or other- 45 
wise relinquished or created such right or interest and this Act had not 
been passed: , 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to any right or 
interest surrendered or otherwise relinquished or created by Kosangas 50 
company or Gocul Gas Private Limited before the appointed day for suffi-
cient monetary cODsideration. 

(3) On the expiry of the term of any lease, tenancy or arrangement 
referred to in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), such lease or tenancy or 
arrangement shall, ii so desired by the Central Government, be renewed 
or continued so far as may be on the same terms and conditions on which 
5 the lease or tenancy or arrangement was originally granted or entered 
into. 
8. ,(1) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the pro-
visions of sections 3, 4 and 5 shall apply to the extent to which any 
property appertains to the undertaking, and to the rights and powers 
10 acquired, and to debts, liabilities and obligations incurred, and to con-
o tracts, agreements and other instruments made by Kosangas company or 
Gocul Gas Private Limited for the purpose ~ the undertaking and to 
legal proceedings relating to those matters periding in any court or tri-
bunal. 
J 5 (2) .If any question arises as to whether any property appertained, 
immediately, before the appointed day, to the undertaking or whether any 
rights, powers, debts, liabilities or obligations were acquired or incurred 
or any contract, agreement or other instrument was made by Kosangas 
company or Gocul Gas Private Limited for the purposes of the under-
20 taking or whether any documents relate to those purposes, or whether 
the prOvisions of section 5 apply in relation to any property, the question 
.shall be referred to the Central Government which shall, atter giving a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard to the persons interested in the 
matter, decide it in such manner as it may think fit. 
25 7. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 3, 4, 5 and 6, 
the Central Government may, if it is satisfied that a Government com-
pany is willing to comply, or has complied, with such terms and condi-
tions as that Government may think. fit to impose, direct, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, that the right, title and interest and the liabilities 
30 specified in sub-section (2) o£ section 4 in relation to the undertaking 
shall, instead of continuing to vest in the Central GiJvernment, vest in 
the Government company either on the date of the notification or. on 
such earlier or later date (not being a date earlier than the appointed 
day) as may be specified in the notification. 
35 (2) When the right, title and interest and the liabilities in relation to 
the undertaking vest in a Government company under sUb-section (1), 
all the rights and liabilities of the Central Government in relation to 
the undertaking shall, on and from the date 0:£ such vesting, be deemed 
to have become the rights and liabilities, respectively, of the Government 
40 company. 
(3) The pr-ovisions of sections 3, 4, 5 and sub-section (1) of section 6 
shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to such Governme~t company 
as they apply in relation to the Central Government and for this purpose 
references therein. to the "Central Government" shall be construed as 
45 ref-erences to such Government company. 
,,- CHAPTER III 
PAYJrUN'r OF AMOUNT 
8 ..• Mae traDIfer M; aDtI vesUnr iD, the Ceatral Govel'lUDeIlt, aDder 
Mett •. a, ... the UIIdeIUIdIlg, tile eeatral Gevemmeat shall pay to Goeul 
So Gas Private Limited an amount of rupees tea tb8tll8lltl. 
Removal 
of doubts. 
PowerDt 
Central 
Govern-
ment to 
direct 
vestingot 
under-
taking in 
aGovern-
ment 
company. 
Pay· 
mentof 
amount. 

Transfer 
of services 
of existing 
employees. 
Provi-
dent and 
other I. 
funds. 
& 
CHAPTER IV 
PROVISIONS RELATING TO EMPLOYEES 
9. (1) Every whole-time officer or other employee who was, imme-
diately before the appointed day, employed in or in connection with the 
undertaking shall, on the appointed day, become an oftl.cer or employee, S 
as the case may be, of the Central Government or the Government com.-
pany referred to in section 7 (hereinafter referred to as the successor 
(iQvernment company) and shall hold his office by the same tenure, at 
the same remuneration and upon the same terms anti conditions and with 
the same rights and privileges as to gratuity and other matters as would 10 
have been admissible to him, if this Act had not been passed and if there 
had been no vesting of the undertaking and shall continue to do so unless 
and until his employment under the Central Government or successor 
Government company is duly terminated or until his remuneration, 
terms and conditions of service are duly altered by the Central Govern- IS 
ment or the successor Government company, as the"""tase may be. 
(2) If Dny question arises as to whether any person was a whole-
time officer or other employee in or in connection with the undertaking 
immediately bekre the appointed day, the question shall be referred, 
within a period of one year from the appointed day, to the Central Gov- 20 
ernment which shall, after giving a reasonable opportunity of being 
heard to the person concerned in the matter, decide it in such manner 
as it thinks fit and such decision shall be final. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 1947 or any other law for the time being in force, the transf-er of 25' 14 of 
the services of any officer or other employee, employed in or in connec- 1947. 
tion with the undertaking, to the Central Government shall not entitle 
any such officer or other employee to any compensation under that Act 
or any other law and no such claim shall be entertained by any COUl't, 
tribunal or other authority. 30 
10. (1) Where Gocul Gas Private Limited or Kosangas company has 
established a provident fund, superannuation, welfare or other fund for 
the benefit of the persons employed in the undertaking, the monies 
rehtable to the ofRcers or other employees, whose services have been 
transferred by or under this Act to the Central Government or the 
successor Government company shall, out of the monies standing, 35 
on the appointed day, to the credit of such provident fund, superan-
nation, w~lfare or other fund, stand transferred to, and vest in, the 
Central Government or the successor Government company, as the case 
lOay be. 40 
(2) The monies which stand transferred under sub-section (1) to 
the Central Government or the successor Government company, as the 
case may be, shall be dealt with by that Government or successor Gov-
ernment company in accordance with sq.cb .schelOe 88 the Central Gov· 
ernment may make in thi. behaU. J I 45 

7 
11. (1) Every contract entered 'into before the appointed day between 
Gocul Gas Private Limited or Kosangas company in relation to the 
undertaking far any service, sale or supply and in force immediately 
before the appointed day, shall, unless terminated under sub-section 
S (2) within a period of two years from the appointed day, continue to be 
of full force and effect against or in favour of the Central Government 
or, as the case may be, the successor Government company. 
(2) The Central Government may, if it is satisfied that any contract 
referred to in sub-section (1) has been entered into in bad faith or is 
10 deterimental to the interests of the Central Government or the succes-
sor Government company, it may make an order terminating or modi-
fying (either unconditionally or subject to such conditions as it may 
think fit to impose for the purpose) the contract and thereafter the 
contract shall have effect accordingly: 
IS 
20 
Provided that no contract shall be terminated or modifted by the Cen-
tral Government except after giving to the parties to the cantract a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard and except after recording in 
writing its reasons for such termination or modification. 
CHAPTER V 
MISCELLANEOUS 
t2. The provisions of this Act and any notiftcation, order or rule made 
thereunder shan have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent there-
with contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any 
instrument havin~ effect by virtue of any law other than this Act or In 
~~ any decree or order of any court, tribunal or other authority. 
13. (1) Where any property appertaining to the undertaking has been 
transfierred to, and vested in, the Central Government or the successor 
Government company under this Act,-
(a) every person i~ whose possession, custody or control any 
30 such property may be, shall, on a demand by the C'entral Govern-
ment or the successor Government company, as the case may he. 
deliver the property to the Central Government or the successo~ Go-
vernment company, as the case may be, forthwith; 
(b) any person who, immed,iately before such vesting, has, in 
3S his possession, custody or control, any books, documents or' other 
papers relating to the undertaking, shalt be liable to account for the 
said books, documents and papers to the Central Government or the 
successor Government company, as the case may be, and shan deliver 
them up to the Central Government or that company or to such per-
40 son as the Central Government or that company may authorise in 
this behalf. 
'(2) Without prejudice to the other provisions contained in this section, 
it shall be lawful for the Central Government or the successor Govern-
ment company to take all necessary steps for taking possession of. all 
4S properties, which have been transferred to and vested in it under this Act. 
1«. Any person who,-
(ar having in his possession, custody or control any 'property 
forming part of the undertaking wrongfully withholds such property 
Con-
tract. 
in bad 
faith or 
detri-
mental 
to the 
interest 
of Cen-
tral Gov-
ernment 
or the 
successor 
~ern­
mentcom. 
pany to 
be ter-
minated 
or modi-
fied. 
Effect of 
.Act on 
other 
laws. 
Duty to 
deliver pos-
Hession of 
proper-
ties, etc. 
Penal-
ties. 

Offences 
by cam-
panies. 
Protec-
tion of 
action 
taken in 
good 
faith. 
Cogni-
zance of 
offences. 
8 
from the Central Government or the SUceesaof Govemmt!llt company; 
or •• 
(b) wrongfully obtains possession of, or retains, any property 
fonning part of the undertaking; or 
(c) wiUully withholds or fails to furnish to the Central Govern- 5 
ment or the successor Government company or any person authorised 
in this behal~ by the Central Government or that company, any books, 
documents or otlier papers relating to the undertaking which may be 
in his possession, custody or control; or 
(d) fails to deliver to the Central Government or the successor 10 
Government company, any assets, books of account, registers or other 
documents in his possession, custody or control relating to the under-
taking; or 
(e) wrongfully removes or destroys any property forming part 
of the undertaking; or IS 
'(n- wrongfully uses any property forming part of the under-
taking, 
shan be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
two years, Or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rUpees, or 
with both. 20 
15. (1) Where an offence under this Act has lieen committed by a CMr'l-
pany, every person who, at the time the offence was committed was in 
charge of and was resJlQnsible to, the company for the COJilduct, of the 
business of the company, as well as the company,sballbe deemed to Joe 
guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punish- 2S 
ed accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any 
such person Hable to Clny pul'lishmeot, if he proves that the offence was 
committed without his knowledge or th8t he had exercised aU due ditta 
gence to prevent the commission of, such offence. 30 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section '(I), where 
any offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is 
proved that the offence has been committP-d with the consent or connivance 
of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of. any director, manager. 3 
secretary or other officer of the comnanv, such director, manager, secre- 5 
tarv or other officer shall be deemed to be JlUittv of that offence and shall 
be liable to be proceeded against and punisbed accordingly. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) Ucompany" means any body corpora1le and includes a'iI!'ttl or 
other association of individuals; and 40 
(0) "director', in retation to a firm, means a partnerih theftrm. 
16. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shaH lie against. the 
Central Government or the successor Government company. or any ef the 
oftlcers or other employees of that Government or company for anything, 
wldch is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act. 4' 
IT. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Pro-
cedure, 1973, no court shall tak~ cognizance Of any;· o~ce against tits 2 of 1974-
Act except on a complaint, in wrlting, made by the Centl'alGovarnment 
or· an,.' officer authtnised in this behalf ily"that Government. 

18. Every officer of the Central Government and every officer or other 
employee of the successor Government company shall be indemnified by 
the Central Government or the successor Government company, as the 
case may be, against all losses and expenses incurred by him in, or in 
S relation to, the discharge of. his duties under this Act, except such as 
have been caused by his own wilful act or default. 
19. Ii any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, 
the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the provi-
sions of this Act, remove the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a 
J 0 period of two years trom the appointed day. 
20. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gaze~te, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall 
IS be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parlia-
ment, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of. the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modifica-
20 tion in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, 
the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of 
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification 
{lr annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything pre-
viously done under that rule. 
Indem-
nity. 
Power 
tore-
move di-
fftculties. 
Power to 
make 
rules. 

STATtMEN1' OF OBJECTS AND REASON'S 
Esso Stat1d~d Eastern Inc., a foreign compahf, had entered into a 
tontract with KO!lartgas corilpcU1y, then a partnership linn, for bottling, 
transporting marketing and distribution of liquefied petroleum gas pl'O-
duced in their refinery. The agreement expired on the 4th September, 
Urn. The partnetship of Kosangas company was dissolved With ef!ect 
!tom the close of business on the 5th September, 1977, and Gdetil (jas 
Private Limited has since been carrying on the bUsiness of Kosangils 
company as sole proprietor. 
2. In implementation of the policy for progressively securing that the 
ownership and control Qf the means and resources for bottling, transport-
ing, marketing and ~istribution of liquefied petroleum gas an! also veSted 
in the State and thttreby so distributed as ~st to sub'erve the COritri1on 
good, it is proposed to. acquire the Wldenaking of the Kosang~ company 
vested in Goeui das Private Limited as sole proprietor. 1he Biu, atcord-
iilgly, proVides for the acquisition, in the p'ublic interest, by t~e Central 
Govert1m~ilt 6f the said undertaking. ProviSions have also been iricluded 
et1abting the Ceflttai Govetnirt~nt to direct the vesting of the tinderlalOng 
So ~cquired itt a Qo.ernrli~t cOmpany, fot the conttnWirice ol the coott'acls 
e.ht~~~.in~ i~ r~14~io~ tdih~ ~~i~ urlae~ fOI: SPy ,~erVice~ sai~ or 
supply i11 lnd18, and fOr the traJisfer o! the services of~ting whole-tune 
employees uf the' undettaldbg to' the Cehttai dovemmeht Of the said Go-
~@nlfnent COIIipdtty.'· .' 
NEW DELHI; 
The 24th February, 19079. H. N. BAHUGUNA. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
Copy of letter No. R-30023/1/77-MC., dated the 26th February, 1979 
from Shri H. N. Bahuguna, Minister of Petroleum, Chemicals and Fertili-
zers to the Secretary, Lok Sabha.] 
The President, having been informed of the subject matter 01. the Bill 
to provide for the acquisition, in the public interest, of the undertaking 
of. the Kosangas company and thereby to secure that the ownership and 
control of the means and re~urces for bottling, transporting, marketing 
and distribution of liquefied petroleum gas are so distributed as best to 
subserve the common good and for matters connected therewith or inciden-
tal.thereto. recommends under article 117 (3) of the Omstitution of India, 
the consideration of the Bill by Lok Sabha. 
10 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that on the appointed day, the right, 
title Iftd lbtetett of GbCiUl Gas Private Littlited in relation to it, under-
taking as defined in the Bill shall stand transferred to and vest in the 
Celittil aoverttltU!ht free ~m all enctlthbi'llt1t!es. Clau~ 8 of nit! Bm 
p1'oVl8~ thlt for the iransti!r to, atld vestitlg Hi, of the fight; title In.d. 
inte1'6t tjf Qo~UI Gas Private LirtiitM. in the Centril (JOvetHritentj tina~r 
tlauiU! 3 ttUlt Obv~rnttlelit shtill pay to Gocul Gas PrivAte Liritfted iii 
amount of Rs. 10,000 (Rupees ten thousand only). THis ifiiiodnt Is pay-
able by the Central GQvemment to Gocul Gas ppvate Limited as a QIle-
time payment. 
2. Under clause 4(2) of the Bill, the liabilities of the undertaking in 
respect of deposits collected from consumers for use of gas cylinders and 
pressure regulators and from agents, provisi<m for gratuity to Qfticersand 
employees and the current liabilities relating to sundry creditors and 
accrued expenses of the undertaking (estimated at Rs. 477.60 lakha) 
become the liabilities of the Central Government in the first instance but 
would under clause 7 of the Bill stand transferred to a Government com-
pany. 
3. The Bill, if enacted, will invWve a total non-recrurring expendi'ture 
of Rs. 10,000 towards payment to Gocul Gas Private Limited. 
4. The Bill, if enacted, will not involve any other recurring or non· 
recurring expenditure. 
lJ .' 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 20 of the Bill empt>wers the Central Government generally to 
make rules to carry out the provisions of the Bill. The matters in respect 
of whreh such rules may be made are matters of detail which cannot be 
provided for in the Bill itself. The delegatiqn of legislative power ia 
of a normal character. 
r 12 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the acquisition, in the public interest, of the undertaking 
of the Kosangas company and thereby to ~ecure that the ownership 
and control of the means and resources for bottling, transporting. 
marketing and distribution of liquefied petroleum gas are SO distri-
buted as best to subserve the common good and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. 
(Shri H. N. Bahuguna, Minister Of Pe~ro~um, Chemicals and Fertilizers.) 
, ' 
I 