As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

1 JUN 1998

Bill No. 23 of 1998
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1998
By
‘Suri Monn Sincu, M.P.
A
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

| by Parliament in the Forty-ninth year of the Republic of India as

Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1998.
article 29 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—

_ “294. The State shall provide uniform, free and compulsory education upto
primary school level to all citizens.”

‘le 45 of the Constitution shall be omitted.

GABILLS\117LS

Short title.

Insertion of
article 298.

Provision of
uniform, free
and compul-
sory
education.

Omission of
article 45.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS,

Even after so many years of independence, we have not been able to provide education
to all citizens. Poor people cannot afford to send their children to school for want of means.
It should be the responsibility of the Government to provide education to all citizens atleast
upto primary school level. Although, there is a provision in the Constitution that all children
until they attain the age of fourteen years shall be provided free and compulsory education
by the State, it is not enforceable inasmuch as it is in the Directive Principles of State Policy.

Moreover, we find that there are different types of schools imparting education with
varying standards. There should be uniformity in education so that all students get equal
opportunity to pursue their career or in the matter of employment.

The Bill, accordingly, seeks to amend the Constitution with a view to including the
right to uniform, free and compulsory education upto primary school level as a Fundamental
Right. The object of the Bill will go a long way in eradicating illiteracy.

Hence this Bill.

New DeLut; MOHAN SINGH
March 31, 1998.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

»
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for uniform, free and compulsory primary education to all
To implement the provisions of the Bill, some schools have to be opened and
have to be appointed in those schools. There will be some expenditure in Tespect

es and allowances of teachers, free supply of books and stationery to students,
\s far as Union territories are concerned, the whole expenditure will be met by the Central
ernment. The State Governments will bear the expenditure from their respective
idated Funds in connection with the implementation of the provisions of the Bill
h some financial assistance may be extended by the Central Government. The Bill,

if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.

Itisestimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore is likely
involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.

A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees twenty crore is also likely to be
ved.


ANNEXURE

EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

* * * *
PART IV
DIRECTIVE: PRINCIPLES OF STATE POLICY
* * x *

45. The State shall endeavour to provide, within a period of ten years from the

Provision for
ie a commencement of this Constitution, for free and compulsory education for all children until
education for they complete the age of fourteen years.
children.

* * * *


LOK SABHA

A

BELL

further to amend the Constitution ot India.

(Shri Mohan Singh, MP)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—117LS—30-4-98,