5
As introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 23 of 2024
THE ALL INDIA INSTITUTES OF MEDICAL SCIENCES  
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024
By
Adv . Chandra Shekhar Azad, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the All India Institutes of Medical Sciences Act, 1956.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy- fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the All India Institutes of Medical Sciences Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Short title and 
commencement.

2. After section 3 of the All India Institutes of Medical Sciences Act, 1956, the following 
section shall be inserted, namely:–
“3A. (1) There shall be established an All India Institute of Medical Sciences at 
Nagina in the State of Uttar Pradesh which shall be a body corporate, to be known 
as the All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Nagina.
(2) The provision of this Act shall apply mutatis mutandis  to the All India 
Institute of Medical Sciences, Nagina established under sub-section (1).”.
5
Insertion of new 
section 3A.
2
Establishment 
of All India 
Institute of 
Medical Science 
at Nagina in the 
State of Uttar 
Pradesh.
25 of 1956.

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The State of Uttar Pradesh has been demanding for establishment of an All India Institute 
of Medical Sciences at Nagina. Health infrastructures in our State is very poor. In recent 
years the number of communicable and lifestyle diseases in the State are on the rise due 
to rapid transit of our population and heavy population density. Day-by-day our country is 
witnessing new disease. The State needs a central institute like All India Institute of Medical 
Sciences at Nagina, Uttar Pradesh to combat emerging challenges in healthcare sector. This 
will enable the State to ensure that the health of its citizens is always protected.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the All India Institutes of Medical Sciences Act, 1956 
with a view to establish an All India Institute of Medical Sciences at Nagina in the State of 
Uttar Pradesh. 
Hence this Bill.
New Delhi;                                   C H A N D R A  S H E K H A R  A Z A D  
June 26, 2024.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for establishment of an All India Institute of Medical 
Sciences at Nagina in the State of Uttar Pradesh. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an expenditure of  
about rupees one thousand crore would be incurred per annum from the Consolidated Fund 
of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees ten thousand and five hundred crore is 
likely to be involved.
4

5
ANNEXURE
[Extracts from the all India Institutes of Medical Sciences Act, 1956] 
(25 of 1956)
 * * * * *
3. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there shall be established for the purposes of this Act 
an institution to be called the All India Institute of Medical Sciences: 
Provided that the Central Government may, on and after the commencement of the  
All India Institute of Medical Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2012, establish by notification in 
the Official Gazette, such other All India Institutes of Medical Sciences at such places as it 
may specify in the said notification in addition to the existing Institute and the corresponding 
Institutes.
(2) Every Institute shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual 
succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both 
movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
 * * * * *
Establishment 
and 
incorporation of 
the Institute.

LOK SABHA
a
BILL
further to amend the All India Institutes of Medical Sciences Act, 1956.
(Adv. Chandra Shekhar Azad, M.P .) 