1
THE JUVENILE JUSTICE (CARE AND PROTECTION OF CHILDREN)
AMENDMENT BILL, 2018
By
SHRI CHANDRAKANT KHAIRE, M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of
India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children)
(Amendment) Act, 2018.
(2)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 23 of  2018
Short title and
commencement.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. After section 18 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015,
the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
"18A. Notwithstanding anything in this Act, in case of an offence of murder,
rape, sedition or terrorist activities alleged to have been committed by a child above
the age of fourteen years, trial of such child shall be conducted as an adult.".
5
Insertion of
new section
15A.
Child above
the age of
fourteen
years who
commits the
offence of
murder, rape,
sedition or
terrorist
activities to
be tried as an
adult.
2 of 2016.

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
There is a need of a strict juvenile or child crime justice system in India. From the legal
point of view, juvenile crime is an illegal act perpetrated by a child below eighteen years of
age who is presented before a Children's Court for legal action. As per the Juvenile Justice
(Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015, a child between the age of sixteen to eighteen
years is required to be tried as an adult for committing any serious or heinous offence subject
to the provisions of this Act. The rate of child crimes is increasing day by day in Indian
society. Besides, its nature is getting complex day by day. The reason behind such a
phenomenon is urbanization and industrialization which has created such an environment
wherein most of the families have become unsuccessful in controlling their children. Moral
values are shattering due to rise in personal freedom and excess of competition has forced
the children to go astray.
Juveniles are now committing grave and heinous crimes such as rape, murder etc. by
taking resort to the fact they are juveniles they go scot free and again commit such crimes.
The main culprit of Delhi's Nirbhaya case was a juvenile and the person who raped a medical
girl student of Maulana Azad Medical College of Delhi was a Juvenile. Both these incidents
are a blot on humanity and both the criminals are free today as they are juveniles and there
is a chance that they may again be ready to commit such crimes. So such crooked criminals
should not get away just for the fact that they are juveniles.
It must also be ensured that Juvenile Justice Act provides benefits to the children
wherein the methods of trial or grounds for parole are different. Children are just kept under
observation. Children are thrown into organised crimes by criminals to take benefit from it.
This misuse of the Act is done by the criminals by using children in committing crimes. The
misuse of the law will have to be stopped which has been enacted with good intent.
Even the Supreme Court Bench sought to enquire from the Central Government whether
the accused involved in such heinous crimes as murder, rape or abduction is allowed to go
free only because of the fact that he is yet to attain eighteen years of age. The apex Court also
observed that there should be a clear distinction between serious and less serious crimes
perpetrated by the juvenile. At present, Juvenile Justice Board takes action against juveniles
below eighteen years of age. However, Justice J.S. Verma Committee constituted after the
gang rape in Delhi in December 2012 rejected the suggestion of decreasing the age of
juvenile upto sixteen years.
Involvement of juveniles continuously in heinous crimes is also a significant reason.
In this context, National Crime Record Bureau data makes it clear that there has been one
hundred and fifty eight per cent. increase in such cases of rapes by minors in Delhi only. It is
surprising that as far as increase in general crimes by juvenile is concerned it is only thirty
four per cent. The more disturbing thing is that their involvement in the incidents of theft and
dacoit has increased by two hundred per cent. The juveniles involved in these crimes were
from sixteen to eighteen years of age. Recent data disclose that more than thirty three
thousand juveniles have been arrested in more than twenty five thousand incidents during
the year 2012-13. Out of which more than one thousand children were from seven to twelve
years of age, eleven thousand children were in the age group of twelve to sixteen years and
rest of the juveniles were in the age group of sixteen to eighteen years. Needless to say that
today organized crime has taken the shape of an industry due to the ineffective criminal
justice system. As a matter of fact, a need to enact a separate law to deal with juvenile crimes
was felt because the United Nations issued a Joint declaration for children rights wherein a
child up to eighteen years of age was declared as a minor.

4
Secret sources reveal that at present a notorious terrorist organisation like Lashkar-e-
Taiba has instructed its fighters to mention their age as below eighteen years if caught by
security personnel of India. It is certainly a big blot reflecting the failure of Juvenile Justice
Act of the country. Besides this, adult criminals connected with organised crimes are making
gross misuse of this law. This is the reason why the Ministry has now concentrated on the
crimes committed and their nature by juveniles not heeding to the matter of age of the
Juvenile. The important fact is that children are at present becoming grownups at a very
tender age because of influence of virtual media and cyber world. It is turning out to be very
dangerous to provide mobiles and internet facility to the children from a very early age.
If we do not seriously ponder over these issues, there is every likelihood that organised
and sexual crimes keep on flourishing. Hence, it is high time to take strict measures against
juveniles who are committing heinous crimes.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children)
Act, 2015 with a view to provide that every child above the age of fourteen years alleged to
have committed the offence of murder, sedition, rape and terrorist activities shall be tried as
an adult and be punished accordingly.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; CHANDRAKANT KHAIRE
December 8, 2017.

MGIPMRND—3710LS(S3)—24-01-2018.
LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015.
————
(Shri Chandrakant Khaire, M.P.)