1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE HIGHER EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS
(REGULATION OF FEE) BILL, 2017
By
SHRIMATI SUPRIYA SULE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for regulation of fee in higher educational institutions with a view to make
higher education accessible to all and for matters connected therewith.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Higher Educational Institutions (Regulation of Fee)
Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No.  23 of  2017
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ‘‘appropriate Government’’ means in the case of a State and Union territory
with Legislative Assembly, the State Government and the Government of the Union
territory, respectively, and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) ‘‘capitation fee’’ means any amount demanded or charged or collected, directly
or indirectly, for, or, on behalf of any institution, or paid by any person in consideration
of admitting any person as student in an institution over and above the course fee;
(c) ‘‘higher education’’ means education after senior secondary education;
(d) ‘‘Higher Educational Institution’’ means a technical educational institution
or a medical educational institution, whether unaided or aided by the appropriate
Government, or any such institution registered under the Societies Registration Act,
1860 and recognized as such by the appropriate statutory authority or a university as
defined in section 2 of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956 and includes an
institution deemed to be a university under section 3 of that Act or under any other law
for the time being in force but does not include an unaided minority educational
institution;
(e) ‘‘National Committee’’ means the National Committee for Regulation of Fee in
Higher Educational Institutions constituted under section 4;
(f) ‘‘parent’’ means biological or adoptive mother or father of a child;
(g) ‘‘prescribed’’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(h) ‘‘senior secondary education’’ means education upto class twelfth; and
(i) ‘‘State Committee’’ means the State Committee for Regulation of Fee in Higher
Educational Institutions constituted under section 6.
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, no
Higher Educational Institution shall charge capitation fee in any form for admission in such
institution.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a National Committee to be known as the National Committee for Regulation of Fee in
Higher Educational Institutions for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The National Committee shall consist of—
(a) a representative from the University Grants Commission, who shall be
Chairperson of the National Committee;
(b) a representative each from the All India Council of Technical Education
(AICTE), the Medical Council of India (MCI), the Indian Council for Agricultural
Research (ICAR), the National Council for Teacher Education (NCTE), the Dental
Council of India (DCI), the Pharmacy Council of India (PCI), the Indian Nursing Council
(INC), the Bar Council of India (BCI), the Central Council of Homoeopathy (CCH), the
Central Council for Indian Medicine (CCIM), the Council of Architecture, the Distance
Education Council (DEC), the Rehabilitation Council of India for Rural Institutes
(NCRI) and the State Councils of Higher Education (SCHE) as members; and
(c) an eminent economist and a statistician as member,
to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The term of office of the members of the National Committee shall be five years and
they shall not be eligible for re-appointment.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
eminent economist and statistician shall be such as may be prescribed.
Definitions.
Prohibition
on charging
capitation
fee.
Constitution
of the
National
Committee
for Regulation
of Fee in
Higher
Educational
Institutions.
21 of 1860.
3 of 1956.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
5. The National Committee shall ,—
(a) prescribe the fee to be charged for each of the courses run by a higher
educational institution;
(b) define the principle of  reasonable surplus' and 'non-profiteering' on the basis
of cost-fee analysis for courses run by higher educational institution; and
(c) undertake such other function as may be assigned to it by the Central
Government, from time to time.
6. (1) Every State Government shall, within three months from the date of coming into
force of this Act and in consultation with the respective State Higher Education Boards, by
notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a State Committee to be known as the State
Committee for Regulation of Fee in Higher Educational Institutions.
(2) The State Committee shall consist of such number of members representing the
State Higher Education Boards, teachers, parents and students to be appointed by the State
Government concerned in such manner as may be prescribed.
7. The State Committee shall,—
(a) ensure that the fee structure submitted by the higher educational institutions
within the State conforms to the principles of,  reasonable surplus' and 'non-profiteering'
defined by the National Committee under section 5; and
(b) undertake such other function as may be assigned to it by the Central
Government, from time to time.
8. Every Higher Educational Institution shall formulate its fee structure for the courses
run by it in consonance with the principles of 'reasonable surplus' and 'non-profiteering' as
defined by the National Committee under section 5.
9. The provisions of this Act shall not apply to unaided minority higher educational
institutions.
10. Any Higher Educational Institution which demands or accepts any fee or donation,
in any form or manner whatsoever, in violation of the provisions of this Act shall be liable to
fine which shall not be less than rupees ten lakh but which may extend upto rupees twenty
lakh.
11. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite sums to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
12. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
13. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
14. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
Functions of
the National
Committee.
Constitution
of State
Committee.
Higher
Educational
Institutions
to formulate
the fee
structure.
Act not to
apply to
unaided
minority
institutions.
Penalty.
Central
Government
to provide
necessary
funds.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both the Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that
the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form
or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is one of the few countries to have relatively younger workforce. To benefit from
this demographic dividend, it is important to invest in its youth and to make them more
productive. Imparting of higher education and the skills acquired through it are quintessential
for progress of a developing nation. Thus, commercialisation of higher education with the
motive of profiteering must be checked.
The Supreme Court of India in its various judgments has ruled in favour of regulation
of fee in Higher Educational Institutions. Any move to regulate the fee in Educational
Institutions will promote the access to higher education to all.
In TMA Pai Foundation v/s  State of Karnataka (2002), the Supreme Court ruled that the
fee charged by private unaided institutions can be limited by the State to prevent profiteering,
while allowing for 'reasonable surplus'.
In 2003 in Islamic Academy of Education v/s  State of Karnataka (2003), the Supreme
Court observed that the Educational Institutions can form their own fee structures, and the
funds must be used to provide facilities to students and to further the growth of the
educational institutions.
In line with the Supreme Court's judgment, some States did set up Committees to
monitor the fee structure of Higher Educational Institutions. But, there is no framework at the
national level prescribing the criteria for limits on fee and the definition of terms 'reasonable
surplus' and 'profiteering'. The proposed Bill aims to provide a broad framework for regulation
of fee in Higher Educational Institutions.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SUPRIYA SULE
January 2, 2017.
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for constitution of National Committee for Regulation of
Fee in Higher Educational Institutions. It also provides for appointment of an economist
and statistician to the National Committee. Clause 6 provides for constitution of State
Committee by the State Government concerned. Clause 11 provides that the Central
Government shall provide adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out the
purposes of the Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees twenty-five crores would be
involved as recurring expenditure per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore is also likely to be involved.
6

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause  14 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
7

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for regulation of fee in higher educational institutions with a view to make
higher education accessible to all and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shrimati Supriya Sule, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4149LS(S3)—08-02-2017.