Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Bill No. 23 of 2023
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023
By
Dඋ. Sൺඇඃൾൾඏ Kඎආൺඋ Sංඇ඀ൺඋං, M.P.
ൺ
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
   B ൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—  
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2023.
  ( 2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In article 312 of the Constitution, in clause (1), for the words “ an all India judicial service” 
the words “all India Judicial service and all India medical service” shall be substituted.
Short title and 
commencement.
5
Amendment of 
article 312.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In 2016, the WHO Global Strategy on “Human Resources for Health : workforce 
2030” determined that all countries need about 4.45 healthcare personnel (minimum of 
1 doctor and 3 nurses) per 1,000 population, to reach the UN’s Sustainable Development 
Goal 3 (Ensure Healthy Lives and Well-being for all at all Ages). Presently there are 13.08
allopathy doctors, 7.8 lakh AYUSH doctors, 34.33 lakh nurses and 13 lakh allied healthcare 
professionals for 141.133 crore population. 
Despite having good number of doctors and nurses, health indicators of India are far 
below the world averages. In this context, creation of an All India Medical Services along 
the lines of Indian Administrative Services and Indian Police Services, is essential for
effective administration and policy making in healthcare. Administrative staff with medical 
background can effectively handle health issues and epidemic out breaks, in a scientific way. 
Government of India’s endeavour to increase medical educational institutions is going on 
at a rapid phase, and at the same time we need to ensure that healthcare administrators are 
more effective for equitable distribution of healthcare services. 
India had an ‘Indian Medical Service’ in British-ruled India, a military medical service, 
which was abolished in 1947. Ever since, multiple committees, commissions and reports 
such as Mudaliar Committee (1959), Kartar Singh Committee (1973), the Administrative 
Staff College Report (1995) and National Commission on Macroeconomics and Health 
Report (2005) have recommended the re-introduction of Indian Medical Service. The 15th 
Finance Commission has also recommended for the establishment of an All India Medical 
and Health Service. The development of such a service for public health administration was 
discussed by the parliamentary committee on health, in March 2021. The All India Service 
Act of 1951 mentions ‘The Indian Medical and Health Service’ as an All India Service. 
However, it was never implemented. 
Currently, there is no dedicated centralised healthcare body, which can develop
infrastructure, monitor healthcare services and take policy decisions. This often leads to
improper policy response during health emergencies, as was felt during the COVID-19 
pandemic. Given the inter-State disparity in the availability of health resources, the
existence of many overlapping healthcare schemes and the need for uniformity in
implementation of schemes across, it is essential to constitute an All India Medical
Services. With a severe shortage of health administrators in the country, the Indian
Medical Service will be able to close the long-standing gap between public health
information and decision-making.
Presently, the services of bureaucrats without medical background nor the services of 
Government doctors without administrative skills, are able to understand the nuances and 
complexities of healthcare system administration. Creating good administrative officers 
with medical background, can help the nation to resolve the existing healthcare issues and 
also be ready to tackle any future pandemics.
2

To achieve these objective, this Bill seeks to incorporate a new All India Services, 
namely “Indian Medical Services” along the lines of Indian Administrative Services and 
Indian Police Services. 
Hence this Bill.
     Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;         SANJEEV KUMAR SINGARI
December 19, 2022.
3

ANNEXURE
Eඑඍඋൺർඍඌ ൿඋඈආ ඍඁൾ Cඈඇඌඍංඍඎඍංඈඇ ඈൿ Iඇൽංൺ
* * * * *
312. (1) Notwithstanding anything in Chapter VI of Part VI or Part XI, if the
Council of States has declared by resolution supported by not less than two-thirds of the
members present and voting that it is necessary or expedient in the national interest so to do,
Parliament may by law provide for the creation of one or more all India services
including an all India judicial service common to the Union and the States, and, subject 
to the other provisions of this Chapter, regulate the recruitment, and the conditions of 
service of persons appointed, to any such service.
(2) The services known at the commencement of this Constitution as the Indian 
Administrative Service and the Indian Police Service shall be deemed to be services 
created by Parliament under this article. 
(3) The all India judicial service referred to in clause (1) shall not include any post 
inferior to that of a district judge as defined in article 236. 
(4) The law providing for the creation of the all India judicial service aforesaid 
may contain such provisions for the amendment of Chapter VI of Part VI as may be
necessary for giving effect to the provisions of that law and no such law shall be deemed 
to be an amendment of this Constitution for the purposes of article 368.
* * * * *
4
All India 
services.

LOK SABHA
————
ൺ
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Dr. Sanjeev Kumar Singari, M.P .)