1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014
By
SHRI OM PRAKASH YADAV, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India .
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth  Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2014.
2. In the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution, entries 3 to 22 shall be re-numbered as
entries 4 to 23, respectively, and before entry 4 as so re-numbered, the following entry shall
be inserted, namely:—
"3. Bhojpuri.".
Bill No. 23 of  2014
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title.
Amendment
of the Eighth
Schedule.5

S3\F\BILL 2013\LS\3401LS(E)
2
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Bhojpuri language which originated in the Gangetic plains of India is a very old and
rich language having its origin in the Sanskrit language. Bhojpuri is the mother tongue of a
large number of people residing in Uttar Pradesh, Western Bihar, Jharkhand and some parts
of Madhya Pradesh as well as in several other countries. In Mauritius, this language is
spoken by a large number of people. It is estimated that around one hundred forty million
people speak Bhojpuri. Bhojpuri films are very popular in the country and abroad and have
deep impact on the Hindi film industry.
Bhojpuri language has a rich literature and cultural heritage. The great scholar
Mahapandit Rahul Sankrityayan wrote some of his work in Bhojpuri. There have been some
other eminent writers of Bhojpuri like Viveki Rai and Bhikhari Thakur, who is popularly
known as the “Shakespeare of Bhojpuri”. Some other eminent writers of Hindi such as
Bhartendu Harishchandra, Mahavir Prasad Dwivedi and Munshi Premchand were deeply
influenced by Bhojpuri literature. Bhojpuri language and its literature is gaining new heights
because of the efforts made by various scholars.
Many personalities with Bhojpuri background have achieved highest positions in the
country. Various International Conferences have been organized to promote Bhojpuri. At
present Indira Gandhi National Open University is planning to start a certificate course in
Bhojpuri language. Recently, the Bhojpuri study centre had been established in Banaras
Hindu University to propagate and develop the Bhojpuri language. In Uttar Pradesh and
Bihar, movements have been initiated to give Bhojpuri language its due place.
But it is unfortunate that the “Bhojpuri” language is yet to find a place in the Eighth
Schedule to the Constitution.
For the promotion of literacy and the development of this language, it is necessary that
this language be included in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; OM  PRAKASH  YADA V
June 9, 2014.

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
EIGHTH  SCHEDULE
[Articles 344(1) and 351]
Languages
1. Assamese.
2. Bengali.
3. Bodo.
4. Dogri.
5 Gujarati.
6. Hindi.
7. Kannada.
8. Kashmiri.
9. Konkani.
10. Maithili.
11. Malayalam.
12. Manipuri.
13. Marathi.
14. Nepali.
15. Oriya.
16. Punjabi.
17. Sanskrit.
18. Santhali.
19. Sindhi.
20. Tamil.
21. Telugu.
22. Urdu.
* * * * * *

GMGIPMRND—673LS(S3)—27.06.2014.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Om Prakash Yadav, M.P.)