AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 23 of 2022
THE  RIGHT TO ADEQUA TE HOUSING
(ONE FAMIL Y-ONE TOILET) BILL, 2022
By
SHRI GOPAL CHINAYYA SHETTY, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for adequate dwelling house free of cost or at such reasonable cost to
every homeless family living below poverty line and in slums in the country and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right to Adequate Housing (One Family-
One Toilet) Act, 2022.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
5
Short title,
extent and
commencement.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State, and in all other cases, the Central Government.
(b) “Committee” means the Monitoring and Grievance Redressal Committee
constituted under section 8;
(c) “dwelling house” means a residence consisting of at least one room, one
kitchen and one toilet with electricity, water and sanitation facilities;
(d) “families living below poverty line” means those families who are declared by
the Central Government to be living below poverty line;
(e) “Fund” means the House Building Fund constituted under section 7;
(f) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(g) “slum” includes an area consisting of unplanned and shabbily built and
overcrowded houses in unhygienic atmosphere without electricity, water
and sanitation facilities.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, from the date of commencement of this Act
and by the year 2022,  provide free of cost all- weather dwelling house to each
homeless family living below poverty line and in slums in the country:
Provided that while providing the dwelling house, the Central Government shall
take into account the number of members in such family.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the Central Government shall,  in
consultation with the concerned State Government or Union territory Administration,
as the case may be, notify  the list of all the slum dwellers and families living below
poverty line in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3)  The priority of the allotment of dwelling houses shall be determined by way
of draw of lots in such manner as may be prescribed.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, from the date of commencement of this
Act, provide dwelling house at fifty per cent. cost to each family not covered under
section 3 of the act but having an annual income of less than rupees four lakh:
Provided that while providing the dwelling house, the Central Government shall
take into account the number of members in that family.
(2) The Central Government shall, for the purposes of sub-section (1),—
(a)  in consultation with the State Government or the Union territory
Administration, as the case may be, cause to be notified a list of all
families not covered under section 3 but having an annual income of
less than rupees four lakh in each State and Union territory,  in such
manner as may be prescribed; and
(b)    provide interest free loan to the family for payment of cost of dwelling
houses, in such manner, as may be prescribed.
(3) The priority of allotment of a dwelling house in the State or Union territory,
as the case may be, shall be determined by way of draw of lots in such manner as may
be prescribed.
5. (1) The Central Government shall, after every four years, undertake the
maintenance of the dwelling houses provided under section 3 to the families living
below poverty line and in slums and charge such nominal amount for the purpose as
may be prescribed.
(2) The Central Government shall, after every four years, undertake the
maintenance of dwelling houses provided under section 4 to the families having
annual income less than rupees four lakhs and in slums and charge fifty per cent. of
the maintenance cost.
6. The Central Government shall ensure that in the case of death of head of the
family living below poverty line or having an annual income of less than rupees four
lakh, the title of that dwelling house is transferred to his spouse.
Definitions.
Central
Government
to provide
dwelling house
to families
living below
poverty line
and slums.
Central
Government
to provide
dwelling house
at fifty per
cent. of cost.
Central
Government
to maintain
dwelling
house.
Succession of
dwelling
house.
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
5
10
50
2

7. (1) The Central Government shall, by  notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute a Fund to be called the House Building Fund for the poor and families
living below poverty line for carry out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Fund shall be credited,—
(a) the sums received as grants-in-aid from the Central and State
Governments such proportion as may be prescribed;
(b) donations received from private individual and organisations;  and
(c) such other funds, as may be prescribed.
8. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
establish a Committee to be known as the Monitoring and Grievance Redressal
Committee to promote and make effective, the process of providing dwelling houses
to the poor and the families living below poverty line and redressal of their grievances.
(2) The Committee shall consist of,—
(i) retired Judge of the Supreme Court – Chairperson;
(ii) Secretary, Union Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs — member;
(iii) two renowned persons having experience in working for the poor
and below poverty line families – members;
(iv) ten Secretaries from the Housing Department of State Governments
to be nominated on rotation basis – members, to be appointed by the
Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The salary and allowance payable to and other terms and conditions of service
of the Chairperson and members of the Committee shall be such as may be prescribed.
(4) The Union Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs shall provide secretarial
assistance to the Committee.
9. The Committee shall,—
(a) suggest methods for expeditious construction of dwelling house with
one family- one toilet in a multi-storey or single storey structure to
homeless families living below poverty line and in slums;
(b)  make provision to give ratings to States to ensure that each family living
in slum and family living below poverty line gets a dwelling house with
one family- one toilet in a specified time with a view to bring competition
among different States;
(c) recommend to the Central Government to curtail and restrict funds
provided to the States which lag behind as provided in clause (b);
(d) ensure penal action against those who construct the houses in violation
of the processes of the Act;
(e) receive and redress complaints from the people regarding their right to
houses under this Act;
(f) suggest from time to time specifications that may be adopted during the
construction of houses for slum and for family living under below poverty
line; and
(g) perform such other functions, as may be prescribed.
10. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order, as published in the Official Gazette, make such
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be
necessary or expedient for removal of the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after expiry of three years from the
date of commencement of this Act.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification  in the Official Gazette make
rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.
House
Building Fund
for families
living below
poverty line.
5
10
Establishment
of Monitoring
and Grievance
Redressal
Committee.
Functions of
the
Committee.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power to make
rules.
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
3

(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both
the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however,
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of
anything previously done under that rule.
5
4

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Housing is an indispensable for ensuring human dignity.  Adequate  housing not
only means having four walls and a roof over one’s head, but it also includes other
things.  In general, housing is essential for a healthy living.  It caters to the
psychological need of privacy and personal space and physical needs for protection
and safety from inclement weather.
 Today, when many people live in luxurious bungalows or big houses, still a large
number of people do not even have shelter to live.  Housing has become out of reach
due to rising costs.  A large number of slum dwellers are still homeless in the country.
Homeless people face the uncertainties of weather, from shivering cold in winter to
heat wave during summer. Many of these homeless people die every year due to
these harsh conditions. Most of these homeless people are poor or living below
poverty line.  Proper housing is also essential for the protection of childhood as
homeless children always become victims of child abuse and crime.
Still lakhs of people, especially those living below poverty line or in the low
income group, do not have a roof over their heads and they are living in contemptuous
conditions in settlements, slums and unauthorized slums on the tracks.  Therefore, it
is felt that the Government should provide at least one housing unit free of cost to
every family living below poverty line.  Apart from this, persons under low income
group should also be provided a housing unit at fifty  per cent. of the construction
cost.  Since the low income families cannot pay the lump sum amount to buy the
house, it is proposed that they may be provided with one time interest free loan for
this purpose.
Today, there is a need to envision and expedite the process of construction of
“one family, one toilet” in multi-storey or single storey structure so that every slum
dwellers and every homeless family can get housing within a given period. There is
also a need to give rating to the States so that by competing amongst the States, the
construction work of “one family, one toilet” can be expedited. For the States which
lag behind in the rating of this process,  there is also a need to cut or stop their funds.
It is also required to ensure the provision of penal action against those persons who
construct houses in violation of the rules.
Article 25 of Universal Declaration of Human Rights recognizes as part of the
right to a reasonable standard of living. Article 11 (1) of the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR) also guarantees the right to an
adequate standard of living as part of the right to housing.  In addition, the right to
adequate housing has been recognized internationally in many other instruments as
well.  India being a party to international covenants, has an obligation to provide
adequate housing to its citizens.
It is a matter of pride for all of us countrymen that Hon’ble Prime Minister has
taken important steps to provide housing to the densely populated settlements and
slum dwellers of the country like urbanized Dharavi by the year 2022. It has also been
envisaged to provide pucca house to all by the year 2022 and  work in this direction
is also going on smoothly in a phased manner across the country. But still there is a
need to accelerate this work further, so that the ambitious plan of Hon’ble Prime
Minister to provide house to all poor people of the country by the year 2022 can be
achieved.
The corona pandemic in the country had huge impact in urban and densely
populated and slum areas. A vivid example of this is Asia’s largest slum Dharavi in
Mumbai metropolitan city of State of Maharashtra,  where corona pandemic took a
severe form in this dense settlement.
5

Hence, this Bill, not only will provide poor people living in slums with permanent
housing and necessary basic civic facilities, but also will fulfil the Commitment express
by our popular Prime Minister of providing pucca houses to all by the year 2022.
Hence this Bill.
NEW DELHI;
  December 4, 2021 GOP AL CHINA YY A   SHETTY
6

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the families living below poverty line and in
slums shall be provided a dwelling house free of cost. Clause 4 provides that families
earning below rupees four lakh shall be given a dwelling unit at fifty percent of the
cost. Clause 5 provides that Central Government shall also undertake the maintenance
of these dwelling units. Clause 7 provides that Central Government shall also contribute
to the House Building Fund. Clause 8 provides for establishment of a Monitoring and
Grievance Redressal Committee. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, at this stage it is difficult
to estimate the recurring Consolidated Fund of India expenditure that may be required
from as the same will depend on the number of eligible persons for housing and the
decision of the Central Government on the number of housing units to be constructed
every year.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to
be involved
7

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLA TION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail
only,  the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character
8

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for adequate dwelling house free of cost or at such reasonable cost to
every homeless family living below poverty line and in slums in the country
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
—————
(Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty, M.P.)