1
Bill No. 23 of  2020
THE ONLINE PLATFORM DELIVERY PERSONNEL (PROTECTION)
BILL, 2020
By
DR. KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide rights, welfare and social security to online platform delivery personnel and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Online Platform Delivery Personnel (Protection)
Act, 2020.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) "aggregator" means a digital intermediary or a market place for a buyer or
user of a service to connect with the seller or the service provider that uses delivery
personnel as an important part of its business model;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
10

(b) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(c) "online platform delivery personnel" means any person who performs the
delivery services for an aggregator for remuneration;
(d) "overtime" means working hours beyond the maximum specified working
hours;
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(f) "wages" means the remuneration given to delivery personnel for the delivery
services rendered by them.
3. Every Online Platform Delivery Personnel shall have the right to—
(a) minimum wages as fixed by the appropriate Government;
(b) social security benefits including medical insurance and life insurance as
sponsored by the aggregator;
(c) decent and safe working conditions, as may be prescribed with regular breaks
for rest, paid leave and reasonable working hours;
(d) redressal of grievances through well established mechanisms;
(e) overtime allowances for working on national, State holidays and on days
with extreme weather conditions; and
(f) form unions, associations and cooperatives to bargain collectively from the
aggregator.
4. The appropriate Government shall, after consultation with the aggregators and
online platform delivery personnel unions,—
(a) fix hourly fair minimum wages based on the economic needs for each category
of online platform delivery personnel;
(b) fix minimum wages for each category of online platform delivery personnel in
accordance with location such as tier-1, tier-2, tier-3, small towns and rural areas;
(c) fix hourly overtime allowance for each category of online platform delivery
personnel for working on State, national or weekend holidays; and
(d) fix hourly allowances for each category for working on extreme climatic
conditions and late night.
5. The appropriate Government shall convene meetings of representatives of
aggregators and online delivery personnel every six months to revise rate of allowance and
minimum wages, if required, under section 4.
6. (1) Every aggregator shall provide the following social security benefits to every
online platform delivery personnel—
(a) medical insurance for delivery personnel and his family members;
(b) life insurance cover; and
(c) fair compensation for injuries or permanent disability caused during working
hour to online platform delivery personnel.
(2) In addition to the social security benefits as mentioned under sub-section ( 1),
every aggregator shall,—
(a) provide the following equipments free of cost to online platform delivery
personnel—
Rights of
online
platform
delivery
personnel.
Responsibilities
of the
appropriate
Government.
Appropriate
Government
to convene
meetings.
Responsibilities
of the
aggregators.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
2

(i) safety equipment like helmets,  gloves, boots, goggles and armour;
(ii) illuminated and reflective safety vests;
(iii) appropriate bags and gears to carry goods;
(iv) bluetooth enabled handsfree headsets and GPS devices; and
(v) t-shirts, shirts or badges mentioning the name of the delivery personnel;
(b) reimburse vehicle maintenance and repair charges to the online platform
delivery personnel on submission of receipt in this behalf;
(c) establish offices in all the operating cities and towns to address grievances
of the online platform delivery personnel; and
(d) in coordination with local authorities, establish free parking and resting
zones for the online platform delivery personnel at appropriate places.
7. No online platform delivery personnel shall be required for allowed to work for more
than thirty hours in a week and in case any personnel opts to work for more than the
prescribed working hours he shall be entitled to overtime allowance on hourly basis.
8. An y person who verbally or physically abuses the online platform   delivery personnel
shall be liable to such  punishments as may be prescribed.
9. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Government for effective implementation
of the provisions of this Act.
10. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law or in the terms of any agreement or contract of service,
whether made before or after the commencement of this Act.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall therafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Working
hours.
Penalty for
harassment of
online
platform
delivery
personnel.
Central
Government
to provide
adequate
funds.
Overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
3

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The rise in e-commerce and transport networking companies as part of the digital
revolution in India has transformed the way in which people work. Millions of new jobs have
been created in this segment especially in urban areas. Drivers for transport networking
companies and delivery personnel for e-commerce companies or food delivery apps form the
majority of these new jobs created. These jobs popularly are referred as "gig economy jobs"
or "platform based jobs" as these are demand based jobs, have no human interface and the
remuneration is based on the amount of tasks completed.
Most of these new "jobs" are not like the regular formal jobs which have fixed contracts,
social security benefits, fixed working hours, fixed salary and overtime allowance etc. These
jobs are based on contract between the online aggregator and the worker. The worker performs
tasks based on the orders given by the aggregator through online communication devices
and are paid according to the task completed. There is no human interface between the
worker and the employer who operates the aggregator. These new kinds of jobs are not
regulated and protected by any legislation, thereby putting the labour rights at stake. The
rights given to the workers in the Constitution of India and various  Supreme Court judgements
have thus been denied.
Thus, the Bill aims to provide some basic labour rights to the online delivery personnel
who form a large part of the gig economy workers. It specifically addresses the problems
these workers face. Floating wages for tasks completed and no fixed contacts has affected
their earnings and stability of work. Lack of formal working hours and demand based work
has extended their working hours drastically and has resulted in exploitation. Due to the
demand based nature of these jobs, often delivery personnel or drivers often violate traffic
rules thus creating a dangerous situation. Lack of social security benefits like medical insurance
has increased their out of pocket expenditure and drastically reduce their incomes. This Bill
thus tries to address these grievances by providing certain rights and measures for welfare
of online platform  delivery personnel.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI
October 25, 2019

5
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 9 of the Bill provides the Central Government to provide  adequate funds for
carrying out the purposes of this Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about
rupees one hundred crore per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative powers is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide rights, welfare and social security to online platform delivery personnel
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto
————
(Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki, M.P. )
MGIPMRND—4511LS(S3)—20-01-2020.