1
THE SURROGATE ADVERTISEMENTS (PROHIBITION ) BILL, 2016
By
DR. BOORA NARSAIAH GOUD, M.P .
A
BILL
to prohibit surrogate advertisements and for matters connected therewith.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1)This Act may be called the Surrogate Advertisements (Prohibition) Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "advertisement" includes any pamphlet, writing, drawing, painting,
photograph, bill, circular, notice, label, poster, hoarding, banner or other documents
Short title and
extent.
Bill No. 20 of  2016
Definitions.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
and also includes any visible representation made through radio, television, cassettes
or slides by means of any light, sound, smoke or gas and publication in print media
such as newspapers, magazines and books;
(b) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(d) "surrogate advertisement" means an advertisement which shows a substitute
product in the guise of the real one which otherwise cannot be legally advertised
through the print and electronic media.
(2) Words and expressions used but not defined in this Act but defined in the
Cinematograph Act, 1952 and the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995 shall
have the same meanings respectively assigned to them in those Acts.
3. No person shall publish or telecast or cause to be published or telecast or arrange to
take part in the publication or telecast of surrogate advertisement.
4. The appropriate Government shall designate such agencies as it may consider
appropriate for effective implementation of the provisions of this Act.
5. Whoever contravenes the provisions of this Act  shall be punished with imprisonment
for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend upto ten years and
with fine which shall not be less than five lakh rupees but which may extend upto ten lakh
rupees.
6. Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, firm or other
association of individuals, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was
incharge of, and was responsible to the company, firm or association for the conduct of the
business of the company, firm or association, as the case may be, shall be deemed to be
guilty and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
7. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, an
offence punishable under this Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable.
8. The provision of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act.
9. (1) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the provisions of this Act
shall not apply to advertisements which are aimed at educating the general public or a
particular group.
(2) For the purpose of deciding whether an advertisement aimed at educating general
public or a particular group, the Central Government shall designate such number of officers,
not below the rank of Joint Secretary, as it may deem fit.
10. ( 1 ) The Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purpose of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
37 of 1952
7 of 1995
Prohibition to
publish or
telecast
surrogate
advertisements.
Appropriate
Government
to designate
agencies to
implement the
provisions of
the Act.
Penalty.
Offences by
companies,
firms and
other
associations.
Offences to be
cognizable and
non-bailable.
Act not in
derogation of
other laws.
Act not to
apply to
certain
advertisements.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
2 of 1974

3
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Government of India has banned product advertising for liquor and cigarette
companies under the Cable Television Network (Regulation) Act, 1995. Rule 7 of the Cable
Television Rules, 1994 also prohibits any direct or indirect promotion of such items in the
public domain. Section 6 of Chapter III of Advertising Standard Council of India (ASCI) Code
had also laid down certain basic guidelines prohibiting surrogate advertising. Section 2(1)(r)
of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 gives a comprehensive definition of unfair trade
practices. Section 5 of the Cigarettes and Other Tobacco Products (Prohibition of
Advertisement and Regulation of Trade and Commerce, Production, Supply and Distribution)
Act, 2003 (COPTA) prohibits promotion of brand of all tobacco products in all forms of
audio, visual and print media. Article 13 of the World Health Organisation Framework
Convention on Tobacco Control 2005 bans advertising, promotion and sponsorship of
tobacco. But manufacturers of liquor, cigarette, tobacco and other harmful products still
promote their products through surrogate advertisements. Surrogate advertising is a form of
promotion of products especially narcotic products, which cannot be advertised directly
under applicable Indian laws. Surrogate advertisements are not only misleading, but also
false and dishonest in many cases.
The proposed Bill seeks to put total ban on surrogate advertising of liquor, tobacco
and other harmful products to prohibit sponsorship of sports and cultural events either
directly or indirectly by these manufacturers.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BOORA NARSAIAH GOUD
February 8, 2016.

5
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to prohibit surrogate advertisements and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Boora Narsaiah Goud, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4211LS(S3)—26.02.2016.