THE INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (POWERS AND REGULATION) BILL, 2011
—————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
—————
PART I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent, application and commencement.
2. Definitions.
PART II
T
HE RESEARCH AND ANALYSIS WING
3. Research and Analysis Wing.
PART III
THE INTELLIGENCE BUREAU
4. Intelligence Bureau.
5. Director of the Intelligence Bureau.
PART IV
THE NATIONAL TECHNICAL RESEARCH ORGANISATION
6. National Technical Research Organisation.
7. Chairman of the National Technical Research Organisation.
PART V
A
UTHORISATION AND PROCEDURES
8. Authorisation of certain actions for the Research and Analysis Wing, the Inelligence
Bureau and the National Technical Research Organisation.
9. Warrants, procedure, duration for the Research and Analysis Wing, the Intelligence
Bureau and the National Technical Research Organisation.
10. Authorisation of acts outside the Indian territory for the Research and Analysis Wing
and the National Technical Research Organisation.
11. Unauthorised information.
PART VI
THE NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE
12. Establishment of National Intelligence and Security Oversight Committee.
13. Tenure of Office.
14. Procedure.
15. Access to information.
PART VII
I
NTELLIGENCE OMBUDSMAN
16. Intelligence Ombudsman.
17. Procedure.
Bill No. 23 of  2011

18. Complaints to the Ombudsman.
19. References and investigations by the Ombudsman.
20. Disposal of Complaints.
21. Remedies.
22. Research and Analysis Wing, the Intelligence Bureau and the National Technical
Research Organisation to comply with the orders of the Ombudsman.
PART VIII
N
ATIONAL INTELLIGENCE TRIBUNAL
23. National Intelligence Tribunal.
24. Constitution of the Tribunal.
25. Term of Office.
26. Resignation and removal.
27. Functions of the Chairperson.
28. Salaries and expenses.
29. Financial and Administrative Powers of the Chairperson.
30. Staff of the Tribunal.
31. Jurisdiction, powers and authority of the Tribunal.
32. Investigation of complaints.
33. Assistance of legal practitioner.
34. Relief, compensation and restitution.
35. Appeal.
36. Power to make rules.
(ii)

THE INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (POWERS AND REGULATION)
BILL, 2011
By
SHRI MANISH TEWARI, M.P.
A
BILL
to regulate the manner of the functioning and exercise of powers of Indian Intelligence
Agencies within and beyond the territory of India and to provide for the coordination,
control and oversight of such agencies.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
PART I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Intelligence Services (Powers and Regulation) Bill,
2011.
AS  INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title,
extent,
application and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. 23 of  2011
5

2
(2) This Act shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
noification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
(3) This Act extends to the whole of India and applies to:—
(a) all citizens of India, inside and outside India;
(b) persons in the service of the Government wherever they may be; and
(c) persons on ships and aircrafts registered in India wherever they may be.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) "Committee" means the National Intelligence and Security Oversight
Committee established under section 12;
(ii) "Intelligence Bureau" means the Intelligence Bureau constituted under
section 4;
(iii) "Indian territory" shall have the same meaning as is ascribed to the
territory of India under article 1 of the Constitution;
(iv) "law enforcement agency" means and includes—
(a) any Government department; and
(b) any other person charged with the duty of investigating offences or
charging offenders;
(v) "Member of the Tribunal" means the members appointed under section 24;
(vi) "National Technical Research Organisation" means the National Technical
Research Organisation constituted under section 6;
(vii) "national security" includes the sovereignty, territorial integrity, economic
stability and upholding of the Constitution;
(viii) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(ix) "Research and Analysis Wing" means the Research and Analysis Wing
constituted under section 3;
(x) "threats to national security" includes:—
(a) terrorist acts, including international terrorism;
(b) espionage directed against the country or otherwise detrimental to the
security of the country;
(c) sabotage directed against the vital national infrastructure of the country
or otherwise directed against the country;
(d) organized crime directed against the country or otherwise detrimental
to the security of the country;
(e) drug, arms and human trafficking directed against the country or
otherwise detrimental to the security of the country;
(f) illegal international proliferation of weapons of mass destruction or the
components thereof as well as materials and tools required for their production;
(g) illegal trafficking of internationally controlled products and
technologies; and
(h) organized acts of violence or intimidation against ethnic or religious
groups within the country;
(xi) "terrorist act" shall have the same meaning as ascribed to it in the Unlawful
Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967; and
Definitions.
37 of 1967.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(xii) "Tribunal" means the National Investigation Tribunal established under
section 23.
PART II
THE RESEARCH AND ANALYSIS WING
3. (1) There shall be constituted a Research and Analysis Wing (hereinafter referred
to as the R&AW) which shall function under the control of the Prime Minister.
(2) The functions of the R&AW shall be exercisable:—
(a) in the interests of National security, with particular reference to the defence,
security strategic, economic and foreign policies of the Union of India; or
(b) in aid of the neutralization of threats from external sources.
(3) The day-to-day operation of the R&AW shall be vested in an officer not below the
rank of a Secretary to the Government of India who shall be appointed by the Prime Minister
and who shall hold office for a period of two years or till he attains the age of sixty-two years,
whichever is later.
(4) It shall be the duty of the head of the R&AW to ensure that—
(a) no information is collected and used by the R&AW except what is necessary
for discharge of its functions and that no information under their custody is disclosed
by it except so far as necessary for the proper and efficacious conduct of functions
assigned to it;
(b) the R&AW does not take any action that furthers the interests of any political
party or coalition of political parties or other such interest groups; and
(c) there are appropriate arrangments for coordination with the IB, the NTRO,
Central Para-Military Organisations and other law enforcement agencies for proper
implementation of the mandate of this Act.
(5) The head of the R&AW shall submit a bi-annual report on the working of the
R&AW, including of its accounts, to the Prime Minister and may, at any time, report to the
Prime Minister on any matter relating to its work.
(6) The head of the R&AW shall not be eligible for reappointment to any post under
the State except as an Advisor to the Government of India.
PART III
T
HE INTELLIGENCE BUREAU
4. (1) There shall be constituted an Intelligence Bureau (hereinafter referred to as
the IB) which shall function under the control of the Prime Minister.
(2) It shall be the duty of the IB to work for national security in the context of internal
conflict and, in particular, provide protection against threats from espionage, terrorist acts
organized by other countries within the territory of India with the help of Indian nationals or
residents and from actions intended to subvert the Constitution of India by violent means.
(3) It shall perform the following functions:—
(i) collection and management of intelligence within the country;
(ii) safeguarding the economic well-being of the Union of India against threats
posed by the actions or intentions of any person whether Indian national or otherwise
within the country; and
(iii) acting in aid to the Central and State police agencies including Para-Military
Organisations and other law enforcement agencies.
Research and
Analysis Wing.
Intelligence
Bureau.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
5. (1) The day-to-day control of the IB shall be vested in a Director who shall be
appointed by the Prime Minister and shall hold office for a period of two years or till he
attains the age of sixty-two years, whichever is earlier.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Director to ensure that—
(a) no information is collected and used by the IB except what is necessary for
discharge of its functions and that no information under their custody is disclosed by
it except so far as necessary for the proper and efficacious conduct of functions
assigned to it;
(b) the IB does not take any action that furthers the interests of any political
party or coalition of political parties or other such interest groups; and
(c) there are appropriate arrangements for coordination with the R&AW , the
NTRO, Central Para-Military Organisations and other law enforcement agencies for
proper implementation of the mandate of this Act.
(3) The Director shall submit a bi-annual report on the working of the IB, including of
its accounts, to the Prime Minister and may, at any time, report to the Prime Minister on any
matter relating to its work.
(4) The Director shall not be eligible for reappointment to any post under the State
except as an Advisor to the Government of India.
PART IV
T
HE NATIONAL TECHNICAL RESEARCH ORGANISATION
6. (1) There shall be constituted a National Technical Research Organisation (hereinafter
referred to as the NTRO) which shall function under the control of the Prime Minister.
(2) It shall perform the following functions—
(a) to monitor and interfere with all forms of communications using such technical
equipments as it may think fit within and beyond the territorial boundaries of India and
also monitoring the uses of such equipments;
(b) to collate and provide information so collected in such form and to such
agencies as may be prescribed; and
(c) to provide advice and assistance about—
(i) languages including technical terminology used for technical matters,
and
(ii) cryptography and other matters relating to the protection of classified
information and other such material,
to the armed forces of the Union of India, to the Central Government or to any other
organisation which is determined for the purposes to this section in such manner as
may be specified by the Prime Minister.
(3) The function referred to in sub-section (2)(a) above shall be exercisable only—
(a) in the interests of national security, with particular reference to the fields of
defence, internal security and furtherance of foreign policy of the country; or
(b) in the interests of economic well-being of the country in relation to the
actions or intentions of any person whether Indian national or otherwise, inside or
outside the Indian territory; or
(c) in support of prevention, detection, interdiction or investigation of such
crimes as may be assigned to it by the Prime Minister.
(4) In this Act, the expression "NTRO" refers to the National Technical Research
Organisation and to any unit or part of a unit of the armed forces of the Union of India, which
is for the time being, required by the Prime Minister to assist the NTRO in carrying out its
functions.
Director of the
IB.
National
Technical
Research
Organisation.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
7. (1) The day-to-day operation of the NTRO shall be vested in a Chairman who shall
be appointed by the Prime Minister and who shall hold office for a period of two years or
attaining the age of sixty-two years, whichever is earlier.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Chairman to ensure that—
(a) no information is obtained by NTRO except when it is necessary for the
discharge of its functions under the Act and that no information is disclosed to any
person or agency except when it is necessary for discharge of its functions or for the
purpose of any matter connected with ensuring the security, stability and sovereignty
of the country;
(b) it does not take any action that furthers only the interests of any political
party or similar interest group.
(3) The Chairman shall submit a bi-annual report on the working of the NTRO, including
of its accounts, to the Prime Minister and may, at any time, report to the Prime Minister on
any matter relating to its work.
(4) The Chairman shall not be eligible for reappointment to any post under the State
except as an Advisor to the Government of India.
PART V
A
UTHORISATION AND PROCEDURES
8. (1) No entry on any property or interference with any form of communication
including wireless telegraphy under the Act shall be lawful unless it is authorised by a
warrant issued by the authority designated for the purpose by the Central Government:
Provided that the authority so designated shall not be an officer below the rank of a
Secretary to the Government of India (hereinafter referred to as the Designated Authority).
(2) The Designated Authority may, on an application made by the IB or the R&AW or
the NTRO, as the case may be, issue a warrant under this section authorising the taking of
such action as is specified in the warrant in respect of any property or in respect of all forms
of communication including wireless telegraphy, if the Designated Authority—
(a) deems it necessary for the action to be taken on the ground that it is likely to
be of substantial value in assisting, as the case may be,—
(i) the R&AW in carrying out any of its functions under section 3; or
(ii) the IB in carrying out any of its functions under section 4; or
(iii) the NTRO in carrying out any function which falls within section 6;
(b) is satisfied that the objective cannot reasonably be achieved by any other
means; and
(c) is satisfied that adequate arrangements are in force with respect to the
disclosure of information obtained under this section and that any information obtained
under the warrant shall be subject to those arrangements.
(3) A warrant authorising action for prevention or detection or interdiction of any
terrorist act may also include action outside the country in such manner as may be prescribed.
(4) The IB may make an application under sub-section (2) for a warrant to be issued
authorising the IB (or a person acting on its behalf) to take such action as is specified in the
warrant on behalf of the R&AW or the NTRO and, where such a warrant is issued, the
functions of IB shall include the carrying out of the action so specified, whether or not it
would otherwise be within its functions :
Chairman of
the NTRO.
Authorisation
of certain
actions for the
R&AW, the IB
and the
NTRO.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

6
Provided that no application shall be made for a warrant by virtue of sub-section (4)
above except where the action proposed to be authorised by the warrant—
(a) is an action in respect of which the R&AW or the NTRO, as the case may be,
could make such an application; or
(b) is to be taken otherwise than in support of preservation of national security.
9. (1) A warrant shall not be issued except—
(a) under the hand of the Designated Authority; or
(b) in an urgent case where the Prime Minister has expressly authorised its issue
and a statement of that fact is endorsed on it, under the hand of the Director of IB or the
Secretary of the R&AW or the Chairman of the NTRO, as the case may be.
(2) A warrant shall, unless renewed under sub-section (3), cease to have effect,—
(a) if the warrant had been issued under the hand of the Designated Authority,
at the expiry of the period of three months from the date on which it was issued; and
(b) in any other case, at the expiry of the period ending with the second working
day following the day on which it was issued.
(3) If, at any time before the day on which a warrant would cease to have effect, the
Designated Authority considers it necessary for the warrant to continue to have effect for
the purpose for which it was issued, he may, by an instrument, under his hand, renew it for a
further period of three months beginning with the day it would otherwise have ceased to be
effective.
(4) The Designated Authority may cancel a warrant if he is satisfied that the action
authorised by it is no longer necessary.
10. (1) If, except in so far as provided for in this Part, a person is liable to the Union of
India for any act done outside the Indian territory, he shall not be so liable if the act is one
which is authorised to be done by virtue of an authorisation given by the Designated
Authority under this section.
(2) the Designated Authority shall not give an authorisation under this section unless
he is satisfied—
(a) that any act which may be done in reliance on the authorisation or, as the
case may be, the operation in the course of which the acts may be done will be
necessary for the proper discharge of a function of the R&AW and the NTRO, as the
case may be; and
(b) that satisfactory arrangements are in force to ensure—
(i) that nothing is done in reliance on the authorisation beyond what is
necessary for the proper discharge of a function of the R&AW or the NTRO, as
the case may be;
(ii) that, in so far as any act may be done in reliance on the authorisation,
their nature and likely consequences will be reasonable, having regard to the
purposes for which they are carried out; and
(c) that satisfactory arrangements are in force with respect to the disclosure of
information obtained by virtue of this section and that any information obtained by
virtue of anything done in reliance on the authorisation will be subject to those
arrangements.
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of the power of the Designated Authority to
give an authorisation under this section, such an authorisation—
(a) may relate to a particular act or acts, of a description specified in the
authorisation or to acts undertaken in the course of an operation so specified;
Warrants,
procedure,
duration for
the R&AW,
the IB and
the NTRO.
Authorisation
of the acts
outside the
Indian
territory for
the R&AW
and the
NTRO.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
(b) may be limited to a particular person or persons of a description so specified;
and
(c) may be subject to such conditions as may be specified.
(4) An authorization shall not be given under this section except—
(a) under the hand of the designated authority; or
(b) in an urgent case where the Prime Minister has expressly authorized its issue
and a statement of that fact is endorsed on it, under the hand of the Director of IB or the
head of the R&AW or the Chairman of the NTRO, as the case may be.
(5) An authorization shall, unless renewed under sub-section (6) below, cease to have
effect—
(a) if the authorization was given under the hand of the Designated Authority, at
the expiry of the period of three months from the date of its issue;
(b) in any other case, at the expiry of the period ending with the second working
day following the day on which it was given.
(6) If, at any time before the day on which a warrant would cease to have effect, the
Designated Authority considers it necessary for the authorization to continue to have effect
for the purpose for which it was issued, he may, by an instrument, under his hand, renew it for
a further period of three months beginning with the day it would otherwise have ceased to be
effective.
(7) The Designated Authority shall cancel an authorization if he is satisfied that any
act authorized by it is no longer necessary.
11. (1) Any information obtained by the R&AW, the IB and the NTRO without a
specific warrant or authorization under section 9 or 10, shall not be used to take action
against individuals to whom this information relates to.
(2) Such information obtained without specific warrant may only be used for the
limited purpose of authorizing fresh warrants.
(3) The R&AW , the IB and the NTRO, as the case may be, shall apply for fresh
warrants in accordance with section 9 and 10 herein within forty-eight hours of obtaining
any such information in the event of any such information being relevant to the discharge of
functions and duties of the R&AW, the IB and the NTRO, as applicable.
PART VI
T
HE NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE
12. (1) There shall be constituted a Committee, to be known as the National Intelligence
and Security Oversight Committee (hereinafter referred to as the Committee) to examine
the administration and compliance of policy laid down under this Act.
(2) The Committee shall, unless it is necessary to perform the functions assigned to it
under the Act, not go into the operational aspects and sources of intelligence of the functioning
of the R&AW, the IB and the NTRO, as the case may be.
(3) The Committee shall consist of the following:—
(a) the Chairman of the Council of States, Chairperson;
(b) the Speaker of the House of the People, Member;
(c) the Prime Minister, Member;
(d) the Minister of Home Affairs, Member;
(e) the Leader of Opposition in the House of the People, Member;
(f) the Leader of Opposition in the Council of States, Member; and
Unauthorised
information.
Establishment
of National
Intelligence
and Security
Oversight
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

8
(g) one member each from the House of the People and the Council of States to
be nominated by the presiding officers of the respective Houses, as members.
(4) The Cabinet Secretary shall be the Secretary to the Committee, ex-officio.
(5) The Committee shall submit an annual report on their functioning to the
Prime Minister and may at any time report to him on any matter relating to discharge of those
functions.
(6) If it appears to the Prime Minister, after consultation with the Committee, that the
publication of any matter in a report would be prejudicial to the discharge of the functions of
the R&AW , the IB or the NTRO, the Prime Minister may exclude that matter from the annual
report.
(7) The Prime Minister shall lay on the table of each House of Parliament a copy of each
annual report submitted by the Committee under sub-section (5) together with a statement as
to whether any matter has been excluded.
13. (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, a member of the Committee shall hold
office for the duration of his membership of the House to which he has been elected.
(2) A member of the Committee shall vacate office—
(a) if he ceases to be the Speaker of the House of the People or a member of the
House of the People;
(b) if he ceases to be the Chairperson of the Council of States or a member of the
Council of States;
(c) if he ceases to be the Leader of Opposition in the Council of States or the
House of the People;
(d) by resigning at any time through a notice to the Chairperson of the Committee.
14. (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, the Committee may determine their
own procedure.
(2) If on any matter there is an equality of voting among the members of the Committee,
the Chairperson shall have and exercise the casting vote.
(3) The Chairperson may appoint one of the members of the Committee to act, in his
absence, as the Chairman at any meeting of the Committee, but the person acting as such
shall not have a casting vote.
(4) The quorum for a sitting of the Committee shall be three.
15. (1) If the Director of the IB or the head of the R&AW or the Chairman of the NTRO
is asked by the Committee to disclose any information under their custody, then as to the
whole or part of the information which is sought, he shall either—
(a) arrange for it to be made available to the Committee subject to and in
accordance with arrangements approved by the Cabinet Secretary; or
(b) inform the Committee that it cannot be disclosed because—
(i) it is sensitive information which, in his opinion, may not be made
available; or
(ii) the Prime Minister has certified that it should not be disclosed.
(2) The fact that any particular information is sensitive shall not prevent its disclosure,
if the Director, IB or the head of the R&AW or the Chairman, NTRO, as the case may be,
consider it safe to disclose.
(3) Any information which has not been disclosed to the Committee on the ground that
it is a sensitive information, shall be disclosed to them if the Cabinet Secretary certifies in the
prescribed manner that it is fit to be disclosed in public interest.
Tenure of
Office.
Procedure.
Access to
information.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

9
(4) The disclosure of information to the Committee in accordance with the provisions
of this section shall be regarded for the purposes of this Act as necessary for the proper
discharge of the functions of the R&AW , the IB and the NTRO.
Explanation. In this section the expression 'sensitive information' shall include—
(a) an information which might lead to the identification of, or provide details of
the sources of information or operational methods used by the R&AW , the IB and the
NTRO;
(b) information about specific operations which have been, are being or are
proposed to be undertaken in pursuance of any of the functions of those bodies; and
(c) information provided by the Government or an agency of any other country
which does not consent to the disclosure of the information.
PART VII
I
NTELLIGENCE OMBUDSMAN
16. (1) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the National Intelligence
and Security Oversight Committee, appoint an Intelligence Ombudsman (hereinafter
referred to as the "Ombudsman") from amongst persons having special knowledge in the
field of intelligence to address the grievance of the members of staff and officers of the
R&AW, the IB and the NTRO:
Provided that no person shall be appointed as an Ombudsman who has served as the
head of the R&AW; the Director, IB or the Chairman, NTRO.
(2) The administrative control of the Ombudsman shall be vested in the Cabinet
Secretary.
(3) The Ombudsman shall be appointed for a tenure of three years from the date of his
appointment or till he attains the age of sixty-eight years, whichever is earlier.
(4) The Ombudsman shall perform the following functions:—
(i) resolve grievances of members of staff or officers of the R&AW, the IB and
the NTRO, as the case may be;
(ii) suggest changes in the administrative practices of the R&AW, the IB and the
NTRO, as the case may be, to mitigate the problems of the members of staff or officers
of the R&AW, the IB and the NTRO, as the case may be.
(5) Not later than thirty-first day of March of each calendar year, the Ombudsman shall
prepare and submit a report of its functioning to the Prime Minister.
(6) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the report shall
contain—
(a) the recommendations of the Ombudsman for improving functioning of the
R&AW, the IB and the NTRO;
(b) a summary of the problems of the members of staff or officers with the
R&AW, the IB  and the NTRO, as the case may be, including a description of the nature
of such problems;
(c) a summary of,—
(i) action taken in matters enumerated in clauses (a) and (b);
(ii) the result of such action;
(iii) the matters where no action was taken and the period for which the
matter has been pending;
Intelligence
Ombudsman.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

10
(iv) the reasons why no action was taken alongwith the persons responsible
for such non-action;
(v) the recommendations with a view to solve the problems of the members
of the R&AW , the IB  and the NTRO; and
(d) such other information as the Ombudsman may deem necessary.
(7) The Ombudsman may consult the heads of the R&AW , the IB and the NTRO, as the
case may be, in carrying out the Ombudsman's responsibilities under this section.
17. (1) The orders of the Ombudsman in relation to any complaint by a member of staff
or officer of the R&AW , the IB  and the NTRO, as the case may be, shall be implemented by
the Government in such manner as it may specify.
(2) It shall be the duty of every member of the R&AW , the IB or the NTRO to disclose
or to give to the Ombudsman such documents or information as may be required for the
purpose of enabling him to carry out his functions under this Act.
(3) The Ombudsman shall carry out his functions in such a way as to ensure that no
document or information disclosed or given to him by any person is disclosed without the
consent of such person to any complainant or to any person holding office under the Union
of India or to any other person; and accordingly the Ombudsman shall not, except in its
reports under sub-section (1) of section 22, give any reasons for a determination notified by
them to a complainant.
(4) Subject to sub-section (3), the Ombudsman may determine his own procedure.
18. Any complaint by a member or ex-member of the IB, the R&AW or the NTRO, as the
case may be, in relation to his service and, unless the Ombudsman consider that the complaint
is frivolous, vexatious or without any valid basis, shall be dealt with accordance with this
Part.
19. (1) After the submission of the complaint, if the Ombudsman is prima facie satisfied,
a copy of such complaint shall be forwarded to the persons heading the IB, the R&AW and
the NTRO, as the case may be, for their reply and comments on the allegations or grievances
reported in the application by the complainant.
(2) The R&AW , the IB and the NTRO shall submit their replies or comments, as the
case may be, within three weeks of receipt of the complaint from the Ombudsman.
(3) The Ombudsman shall give its decision within forty-five days of the receipt of the
complaint.
20. Where the Ombudsman determines that the R&AW, the IB and the NTRO, as the
case may be, did not have reasonable grounds for their actions or inactions, they shall—
(a) give notice to the complainant that they have made a determination in his
favour; and
(b) send a recommendation of their findings to the persons heading the R&AW,
the IB and the NTRO, as the case may be.
21. Where the Ombudsman passes a finding or an order, the Ombudsman may do all or
any of the following, namely,—
(a) direct that any action by which the complainant is so aggrieved be reversed
or if the act cannot be reversed, give such relief including compensation to the
complainant as it may determine;
Procedure.
Complaints
to the
Ombudsman.
References and
investigations
by the
Ombudsman.
Disposal of the
complaints.
Remedies.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

11
(b) direct the persons heading the R&A W, the IB or the NTRO, as the case may
be, to pay to the complainant such sums by way of compensation as may be specified by
the Ombudsman.
22. The Director of IB or the head of the R&AW or the Chairman of the NTRO, as the
case may be, shall establish procedures, requiring a formal response to all complaints received
from the Ombudsman and comply with the findings, orders or recommendations of the
Ombudsman within three weeks of the receipt of the order of the Ombudsman.
PART VIII
N
ATIONAL INTELLIGENCE TRIBUNAL
23. The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish a
tribunal to be known as the National Intelligence Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as the
Tribunal), for the purpose of investigating complaints against the R&AW, the IB or the
NTRO.
24. The Tribunal shall consist of:—
(i) a Chairperson who shall be a sitting or a retired judge of the Supreme Court,
to be appointed by the Central Government in consultation with the Chief Justice of
the Supreme Court;
(ii) one member who is or has been a judge of the High Court to be appointed by
the Central Government in consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court
concerned; and
(iii) one member who shall be appointed from amongst persons who have been
the head of the IB or the R&AW , to be appointed from the two services alternately.
25. The Chairperson or members of the Tribunal shall hold office for a term of
five years from the date on which they enter upon office and shall not be eligible for
reappointment.
26. (1) The Chairperson or a member of the Tribunal may, by notice in writing under his
hand, addressed to the President, resign his office:
Provided that the Chairperson or a member shall, unless permitted by the President to
relinquish office sooner, continue to hold office until the expiry of three months from the date
of receipt of such notice or until a person duly appointed as his successor enters upon his
office or until the expiry of his terms of office, whichever is earlier.
(2) The Chairperson or a member other than a sitting Judge of the Supreme Court or a
High Court, as the case may be, of the Tribunal shall not be removed from office except by an
order made by the President on the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity after an
inquiry made by a sitting Judge of the Supreme Court in which such Chairperson or other
member had been informed of the charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of
being heard in respect of those charges.
(3) The Central Government may, by rules to be prescribed, regulate the procedure for
the investigation of misbehaviour or incapacity of the Chairperson or other members referred
to in sub-section (2).
27. (1) The Chairperson shall have the power to review the exercise by the State of its
powers of issuing authorizations or warrants under sections 8, 9, 10 and 11 of this Act.
(2) The Tribunal shall submit a bi-annual report on their functioning to the Prime
Minister.
R&AW, the IB
and NTRO to
comply with
the orders of
the Ombuds-
man.
National
Intelligence
Tribunal.
Constitution
of the
Tribunal.
Term of
Office.
Resignation
and removal.
Functions
of the
Chairperson.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

12
(3) The Prime Minister shall cause to lay before each House of Parliament a copy of
each bi-annual report submitted by the Committee under sub-section ( 2) together with a
statement as to whether any matter has been excluded from that report in pursuance of sub-
section (4).
(4) If it appears to the Prime Minister, after consultation with the Chairman of the
Tribunal, that the publication of any matter in a report would be prejudicial to the discharge
of the functions of the R&AW , the IB or the NTRO, as the case may be, he may exclude that
matter from the bi-annual report laid before each House of Parliament.
(5) The Prime Minister may, in consultation with the Chairperson provide the Tribunal
with such staff and infrastructure facilities as the Chairperson thinks necessary for the
discharge of his functions.
28. The Chairperson and members shall hold office in accordance with the terms of
their appointment and they shall be paid such salary and allowances equivalent to their last
drawn salary and allowances.
29. The Chairperson shall exercise such financial and administrative powers over the
Tribunal as may be prescribed:
Provided that the Chairperson shall have the authority to delegate such of his financial and
administrative powers as he may think fit to any other member or any officer of the Tribunal,
subject to the conditions that such member or officer shall, while exercising such delegated
powers, continue to act under the direction, control and supervision of the Chairperson.
30. (1) The Central Government shall determine the nature and categories of the
officers and other employees required to assist the Tribunal in the discharge of its functions
and provide the tribunal with such officer and other employees as it may think fit.
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of the officers and other employees of the Tribunal shall be such as may be prescribed.
(3) The officers and other employees of the Tribunal shall discharge their functions
under the general superintendence of the Chairperson.
31. (1) It shall be the duty of the Government or any of its agencies to implement the
orders of the tribunal.
(2) It shall be the duty of the R&AW, the IB or the NTRO to disclose or give to the
Tribunal such documents or information as it may require for the purpose of carrying out its
functions under this Act.
(3) The Tribunal shall carry out its functions under this Act in such a way as to ensure
that no document, or information disclosed or given to the Tribunal by any person is disclosed
without the consent of such person to the complainant or to any person holding office under
the Union of India or to any other person; and accordingly the Tribunal may not give any
reason for their decision notified to a complainant.
(4)  Subject to sub-section (3) the Tribunal may determine its own procedure.
(5) For the purpose of investigating and adjudicating a complaint under this Act, the
Tribunal shall have the same powers as are vested in a Civil Court under the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him
on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) subject to the provisions of sections 123 and 124 of the Indian Evidence
Act, 1872, requisitioning any public record or document or copy of such record or
document from any office;
Salaries and
expenses.
Financial and
Administrative
Powers of the
Chairperson.
Staff of the
Tribunal.
Jurisdiction,
powers and
authority of
the Tribunal.
1 of 1872.
5 of 1908.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

13
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents; and
(f) reviewing its decisions.
(6) The Tribunal shall have the power to decide both questions of interpretation of
provisions of this Act and facts that may be raised before it.
32. (1) Any person may complain to the Tribunal if he is aggrieved by anything which
he believes the R&AW or the IB or the NTRO, as the case may be, has wrongfully done in
relation to him or to his property.
(2) On receipt of a complaint by any person aggrieved by the actions of the R&AW or
the IB or the NTRO, as the case may be, if the Tribunal, after such inquiry, as it may deem
necessary, is satisfied that it is fit for adjudication by it, admit such complaint; but where the
Tribunal is not satisfied, it may dismiss the application after recording its reasons in writing.
(3) In so far as the complaint alleges that anything has been done wrongfully in
relation to any property of the complainant, the Tribunal shall investigate—
(a) whether the R&AW or the IB or the NTRO, as the case may be, had obtained
or provided information or performed any other tasks in relation to the submissions of
the complainant; and
(b) if so, whether the R&AW or the IB or the NTRO, as the case may be, had
reasonable grounds for taking that action.
(4) If, in the course of the investigation of a complaint by the Tribunal, if the Tribunal
consider it necessary to establish whether a warrant and/or an authorization was issued/
given to the R&AW or the IB or the NTRO, as the case may be, under sections 9 and/or 11 of
this Act for the commission of any act, it shall refer so much of the complaint as relates to the
doing of that act to the Designated Authority for validation of the actions.
(5) If the Tribunals hold that a valid warrant was issued or a valid authorization was
given, it shall determine whether the Designated Authority was acting properly in issuing or
renewing the warrant or, as the case may be, in giving or renewing the authorization.
(6) The Tribunal shall make a determination within forty-five days of the receipt of the
complaint.
(7) All proceedings before the Tribunal shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings for
the purposes of sections 193, 219, 228 and 196 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 and the
Tribunal shall be deemed to be a court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
(8) The decision of the Tribunal shall be taken by majority and it shall be binding on all
parties.
33. (1) A person making a complaint to the Tribunal may either appear in person or take
the assistance of a legal practitioner before the tribunal.
(2) The Central Government or the competent authority, as may be prescribed, may
authorize one or more legal practitioners or any of its law officers to act as counsel and every
person so authorized by it may present its case with respect to any complaint before the
Tribunal.
34. Where the Tribunal determines under section 32 that the R&AW or the IB or the
NTRO, as the case may be, did not have reasonable grounds for its actions or inactions, the
Tribunal may, by an order, direct—
(a) that the obtaining and providing of information in relation to the complainant
or, as the case may be, the conduct of other activities in relation to him or to any
property of his shall cease and that any records relating to such information so
obtained or provided shall be destroyed in such manner as to render them unusable
henceforth and such activities shall be stopped forthwith;
Investigation
of complaints.
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.
Assistance
of legal
practitioner.
Relief,
compensation
and restitution.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

14
(b) payment of compensation to the person who has been aggrieved by the
actions of the R&AW or the IB or the NTRO, as the case may be;
(c) restitution of property damaged by such actions;
(d) quashing of any warrant or authorization which the Tribunal has found to
have been improperly issued, renewed or given;
(e) institution of proceedings under the relevant statutes and applicable laws
against the persons responsible for that.
35.  Any person, aggrieved by an order made by the National Intelligence Tribunal,
may prefer an appeal to the Supreme Court within a period of ninety days from the date of
such order.
36. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Appeal.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Intelligence agencies are responsible for maintaining internal security and combating
external threats to the sovereignty and integrity of the nation. These responsibilities range
from counter-terrorism measures tackling separatist movements to critical infrastructure
protection. These agencies  are operating without an appropriate statutory basis delineating
their functioning and operations. This tends to, among other things, compromise operational
efficiency and weakens the professional fabric of these agencies. It also results in intelligence
officers not having due protection when performing their duties.
Assessments and gathering of information by intelligence agencies are catalysts for
law enforcement units to act, necessitating that these be reliable, accurate and in accordance
with law. This kind of efficiency has been hindered by obscured responsibilities that have
plagued the functioning of the agencies.
Article 21 of the Constitution provides that no person shall be deprived of his life and
personal liberty except according to the procedure established by law. The Supreme Court of
India has carved a right to privacy from the right to life and personal liberty. Such rights to
privacy are compromised when agencies undertake surveillance operations. In Re: Peoples
Union of Civil Liberties vs. Union of India, the Supreme Court issued detailed guidelines
regarding telephone tapping. A proper legal framework is required to regulate surveillance of
other forms, using different technologies, as well. There is an urgent need to balance the
demands of security and privacy of individuals, by ensuring safeguards against the misuse
of surveillance powers of intelligence agencies. Therefore, legislation is imperative to regulate
the possible infringement of privacy of citizens, while giving credence to security concerns.
In view of the reasons stated, the Bill seeks to enact a legislation pursuant to Entry 8
of List I of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India to provide:—
(a) A legislative and regulatory framework for the Intelligence Bureau, the
Research and Analysis Wing and the National Technical Research Organisation;
(b) Designated Authority regarding authorization procedure and system of
warrants for operations by these agencies;
(c) A National Intelligence Tribunal for the investigation of complaints against
these agencies;
(d) A National Intelligence and Security Oversight Committee for an effective
oversight mechanism of these agencies; and
(e) An Intelligence Ombudsman for efficient functioning of the agencies and for
matters connected therewith.
The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objectives.
N
EW DELHI; MANISH TEWARI
March 4, 2011
15

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a Research and Analysis Wing
under the control of the Prime Minister. Clause 4 provides for the establishment of an
Intelligence Bureau under the control of the Prime Minister. Clause 5 provides for appointment
of a Director for day-to-day operation of the IB. Clause 6 provides for the establishment of a
National Technical Research Organisation under the control of the Prime Minister. Clause 7
provides for appointment of a Chairman in whom shall be vested the day-to-day operations
of the NTRO. Clause 12 provides for the constitution of a National Intelligence and Security
Oversight Committee to examine and administer and ensure compliance of the policies laid
down under the Act. Clause 16 provides that an Intelligence Ombudsman shall be appointed
by the Central Government. Clause 21 provides for remedies including compensation to the
persons aggrieved by the actions of the intelligence agencies. Clause 23 provides that a
National Intelligence Tribunal shall be established by the Central Government. Clause 24
provides for the appointment of the Chairperson and members of the Tribunal. Clause 28
provides for salaries and other expenses of the chairperson and members of the Tribunal.
Clause 30 provides for the staff for the effective functioning of the Tribunal. Clause 34
provides for the payment of compensation to the persons who have suffered loss by any
action of the R&AW or the IB or the NTRO.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees ten thousand crore will be involved as recurring
expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be
incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India.
16

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 36 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
17

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to regulate the manner of the functioning and exercise of powers of Indian Intelligence
Agencies within and beyond the territory of India and to provide for the coordination,
control and oversight of such agencies.
————
(Shri Manish Tewari, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—7185LS(S3)—18-03-2011.