1
THE CLIMATE CHANGE BILL, 2015
By
SHRI KALIKESH NARAYAN SINGH DEO, M.P.
A
BILL
to set a target for the reduction of targeted greenhouse gas emissions; to establish a
National Committee on Climate Change; to provide for carbon budgeting and carbon
trading schemes and to encourage other such activities to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER  I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Climate Change Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of  India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Bill No. 23 of  2015
AS  INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title,
extent and
commencement.5

2
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “annual range for the net carbon account” means a cap on the net Carbon
Account for that year set by the Central Government;
(b) “baseline” implies net emissions of carbon dioxide and other targeted
greenhouse gases in India during a particular year against which the emission in other
years is to be measured;
(c) “budgetary period” means a period of five years set by the Central Government
for which a carbon budget applies;
(d) “carbon budget” means a cap set by the Central Government on the amount
of net Carbon Account for a specific budgetary period;
(e) “carbon unit” means a unit specified by the Central Government for the
purpose of measuring addition or reduction of any greenhouse gas in the atmosphere;
(f) “Energy Intensity Index of GDP” implies the quantity of energy used per unit
of  GDP;
(g) “National Committee” means the National Committee on Climate Change
constituted under section 11;
(h) “net carbon account” means net emissions of targeted greenhouse gases for
any particular budgetary period reduced by the amount of carbon units credited and
increased by the amount of carbon units debited;
[Carbon Account = Net Emissions-carbon units credited + carbon units debited];
(i) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(j) “targeted greenhouse gases” means carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide,
hydro fluorocarbons, per fluorocarbons, sulphur hexafluoride and includes any other
gas as the Central Government may specify.
CHAPTER  II
C
ARBON TARGET SETTING
3. (1) The Central Government shall, within one year from the commencement of the
Climate Change Act, 2015,—
(a) prescribe a target of Net Carbon Account for the year 2050 in accordance
with international obligations, if any, agreed to by India;
(b) specify a baseline year for absolute reduction of carbon emission and the
proportion of reduction of Carbon emission during each year following the baseline
year; and
(c) create an Energy Intensity Index of GDP and set a target for the same.
(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, change the
targets laid down under sub-section (1) on the advice of the National Committee.
(3) Every notification issued under sub-section (2) shall be laid before each House of
Parliament during the session immediately following the issue of notification.
CHAPTER   III
C
ARBON  BUDGETING
4. (1) It shall be the duty of the Central Government to prescribe Carbon budget for
budgetary periods commencing from the budgetary period for the years from 2015-2020 and
to ensure that the prescribed net carbon account for a budgetary period does not exceed cap
fixed under the carbon budget for that budgetary period.
Definitions.
Central
Government
to ensure
Carbon target
and its
amendment.
Carbon
budgets and
budgetary
periods.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(2) The carbon budget for each budgetary period shall be set with a view to achieving
the target of Net Carbon Account for the year 2050 to be prescribed by the Central Government
under sub-section (1) of section 3.
(3) The Central Government may carry over targets of carbon budget set to a budgetary
period to the next budgetary period in consultation with the National Committee and such
other agencies as may be prescribed.
5. While taking a decision on setting the target of carbon budget under section 4, the
Central Government shall take the following into account:—
(i) scientific knowledge and technology relevant to climate change;
(ii) impact of the decision on the economy and the competitiveness of various
sectors of the economy;
(iii) impact of the decision on fiscal scenario, in particular, on taxation, public
spending and public borrowing;
(iv) social situation;
(v) likely impact of the decision on energy supplies and the carbon and energy
intensity of the economy;
(vi) climate change issues at regional and international level; and
(vii) such other matters as the Central Government may consider necessary.
6. The Central Government shall, in consultation with the National Committee and
such other agencies as it may deem necessary, implement such proposals and policies as are
necessary for meeting carbon budgets.
7. The Central Government shall lay, at such intervals as it may deem necessary, before
each House of Parliament:—
(i) a Report setting out an annual range for the Net Carbon Account for each
year within a budgetary period, as soon as the carbon budget has been set for that
particular budgetary period; and
(ii) a Report setting out proposals and policies for meeting carbon budgets for
the current and future periods.
8. The Central Government shall lay before each House of Parliament an annual
monitoring statement giving the following details:—
(i) amounts of emissions and removals and net amounts of each of the
greenhouse gases and the overall aggregate; the methods used to calculate these
amounts; and a comparative statistics with respect to previous years;
(ii) details of the carbon units credited or debited from India’s Carbon Account;
and
(iii) Energy Intensity Index of GDP statistics of various sectors and States.
9. The Central Government shall make following provisions for the Net Carbon
Account:—
(i) the circumstances under which carbon units are to be credited or debited to
the Net Carbon Account; and
(ii) the manner in which such crediting or debiting is to be done.
V arious
aspects under
carbon
budgeting.
Central
Government
to implement
proposals and
policies for
meeting
carbon
budgets.
Laying of
Reports
relating to
Net Carbon
Account and
proposals and
policies for
meeting
carbon
budgets.
Laying of
annual
monitoring
statement.
Net Carbon
Account.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
10. The Central Government shall ensure that the carbon units credited to  the Net
Carbon Account for a period are not used to offset other emissions  within or outside the
country.
CHAPTER  IV
N
ATIONAL COMMITTEE ON  CLIMA TE CHANGE
11. The Central Government shall, within three months of the coming into force of
the Climate Change Act, 2015, constitute a Committee to be known as the National
Committee on Climate Change for the purpose of advising the Government on all matters
related to Climate Change including those referred to in or arising from the implementation
of this Act.
12. (1) The National Committee shall consist of:—
(i) a Chairperson who shall be a person having special knowledge in the field of
environment and climate change;
(ii) one person representing the National Green Tribunal constituted under the
National Green Tribunal Act, 2010 —Member;
(iii) not less than two persons having judicial background to be  nominated by
the Central Government —Members;
(iv) one person to be nominated by the Central Government representing the
Union Ministry of Environment and Forests —Member;
(v) one person to be nominated by the Central Government representing the
Bureau of Energy Efficiency —Member; and
(vi) not less than two persons representing the non-Governmental Organizations
working in the field of climate change, to be nominated by the Central Government in
such manner as may be prescribed —Members.
(2) The Central Government may, if it considers necessary, appoint one or more
persons having specialized knowledge and experience in the field of climate change as
ad hoc members of the National Committee.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of
the Chairperson and members of the National Committee shall be such as may be prescribed.
13. The National Committee shall advise the Central Government on the following
matters:—
(i) modification to be made in the limit of carbon target/emission level specified
in sub-section (1) of section 3;
(ii) integration, reconciliation and consolidation into the Climate Change Act,
2015 of such laws and policies as are related to protection of  environment or climate
change including the following, namely:—
(a) the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986;
(b) the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981;
(c) the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988;
(d) the Indian Forests Act, 1927;
(e) the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980;
(f) the Energy Conservation Act, 2001; and
(g) the Climate Change Action Plan;
Restrictions
on carbon
offsetting.
Constitution
of a National
Committee
on Climate
Change.
Composition
of the
National
Committee.
Advice to the
Government.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

5
(iii) the manner in which the emission of green house gases from different
sectors such as industry, transport and power are to be tackled; and
(iv) increased and sustainable use of renewable energy and energy efficiency.
14. The National Committee shall, on a request made to it by any agency,  authority or
institution, give its advice or provide information or analysis or any other details related to
climate change or in connection with any functions mentioned under this Act to that agency,
authority or institution.
15.  (1) The National Committee shall prepare in such form and at such time, as may be
prescribed, an annual report giving a true and full account of its activities during the previous
year and forward it to the Central Government, which shall cause the report to be laid before
each House of Parliament within one month of its receipt.
(2) Without prejudice to generality of the foregoing provision, the annual report
referred to in sub-section (1) shall also contain:—
(i) progress that has been made towards meeting the carbon budgets;
(ii) manner in which the budget for a period was met;
(iii) the reasons due to which the budget for a period was not met;
(iv) further action that is needed to meet the budgets and targets; and
(v) whether budgets and targets for a period are likely to be met.
16. The Central Government shall, within three months of the receipt of the report from
the National Committee, lay before each House of Parliament, an  action taken report on the
annual report submitted by the National Committee.
CHAPTER V
C
ARBON TRADING SCHEME
17. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be after the coming into force
of this Act, establish a Carbon Trading Authority for the purpose of formulating the Carbon
Trading Scheme.
(2) The Authority shall cease to exist after the Carbon Trading Scheme under section
18 is formulated and approved by the Central Government.
Explanation.—In this section, “Carbon Trading Scheme” means a scheme that operates
by—
(a) limiting activities that consist of emission of greenhouse gas or that cause or
contribute, directly or indirectly, to such emissions; or
(b) encouraging activities that consist of, or that cause or contribute, directly or
indirectly, to reductions in greenhouse gas emissions or the removal of greenhouse
gas from the atmosphere.
18. (1) The Carbon Trading Authority shall, within one year from the date of its
establishment, formulate a scheme to be known as the Carbon Trading Scheme.
(2) While formulating the Carbon Trading Scheme, the Authority may consult  the
National Committee or such other stakeholders as it may consider necessary.
(3) While formulating the Carbon Trading Scheme, the Carbon Trading Authority may
take into account the following matters:—
(a) the application of the scheme on various sectors or institutions;
(b) the activities to which the scheme shall apply;
(c) the manner in which carbon credits shall be distributed to the participants;
Annual
Report.
Advice to
other
national
bodies.
Action taken
reports.
Establishment
of a Carbon
Trading
Authority.
Carbon
Trading
Scheme.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

6
6
(d) the rules governing the buying and selling of carbon credits;
(e) issue of carbon certificates to companies and other participants;
(f) the duration of the Carbon Trading Scheme;
(g) issues relating to definition of offences and suggested penalties; and
(h) the implementation of the scheme at the State level.
(4) Nothing contained in section 13 shall restrict the Carbon Trading Authority from
taking into account the matters which it is required to take under this section.
CHAPTER VI
MISCELLANEOUS
19. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India’s rapid economic growth and its efforts for holistic development need should not
be in conflict with an ecologically sustainable development. India is the fifth largest emitter
of green house gases in the world quantity-wise, although, India’s per capita emissions are
still substantially below the world average per capita emissions. Hence, it is important for
India to take a proactive step in order to mitigate the emissions and to improve energy
efficiency.
India has been identified as a key player at the international climate change negotiations.
Hence, taking higher caps on emissions domestically (though without any legally binding
international agreement) would set India as an example for other countries, thereby, inducing
the other countries to take similar steps for a better global environment.
Further, although there are multiple laws for mitigating emissions from various sectors,
there is no comprehensive law which clearly defines the emission reduction targets, provides
steps to be taken for reducing the emissions and sets a clear cut timeline. Even the National
Action Plan on Climate Change does not suffice. Therefore, there is a need for establishment
of a proper institutional framework for implementation and monitoring of various existing
missions and to take up new challenges.
Climate change is not the concern of just the Ministry of Environment, Forests and
Climate Change but of each and every Ministry. It is the duty of the Government to integrate
and coordinate the efforts of the various Ministries and properly channelize them to attain
the ultimate target of reducing Green House Gas emissions and to contribute India’s part in
fighting the global warming and other climate change phenomena. This Bill has been proposed
to address the above mentioned issues.
N
EW DELHI; KALIKESH NARAYAN SINGH DEO
November 27, 2014.
7

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 11 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall constitute a National
Committee on Climate Change for the purpose of advising the Government on matters related
to climate change. Clause 12 provides for appointment of Chairperson and members of the
Committee and also salaries and allowances payable to them. Clause 17 provides for the
establishment of a Carbon Trading Authority for the purpose of formulating the Carbon
Trading Scheme. At this stage, it is not possible to give the exact amount to be incurred on
this account. However, the expenditure, whether recurring or non-recurring, will be met out
of the Consolidated Fund of India. It is expected that a recurring expenditure of about rupees
one thousand crore will be involved annually.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
8

MEMORANDUM   REGARDING   DELEGATED   LEGISLATION
Clause 19 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
9

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to set a target for the reduction of targeted greenhouse gas emissions; to establish a National
Committee on Climate Change; to provide for carbon budgeting and carbon trading
schemes and to encourage other such activities to reduce greenhouse gas emissions
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Kalikesh Narayan Singh Deo, M.P .)
GMMGIPMRND—4367LS—19-02-2015.