Short title, 
extent and 
commencement.
5
As introduced in Lok Sabha
 Bill No. 23 of 2025
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR ECONOMICALLY WEAKER 
SECTIONS OF CITIZENS BILL, 2025
By
Shri Rao Rajendra Singh, M.P.
A
BILL
to constitute a National Commission for Economically Weaker Sections  of Citizens other 
than the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes  
and for matters connected therewith  
or incidental thereto.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India as  
follows:–
CHAPTER I 
Preliminary
1.(1) This Act may be called the National Commission for Economically Weaker 
Sections of Citizens Act, 2025.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,–
(a) “Economically Weaker Sections of Citizens “ means such Economically 
Weaker Sections of Citizens other than the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and 
Other Backward Classes may be specified by the Central Government in the lists; 
(b) “Commission” means the National Commission for Economically Weaker 
Sections of Citizens as constituted under section 3; 
(c) “lists” means lists prepared by the Government of India from time to time for 
purposes of making provision for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of 
Economically Weaker Sections of Citizens which, in the opinion of that Government, 
are not adequately represented in the services under the Government of India and 
any local or other authority within the territory of India or under the control of the 
Government of India;
(d) “Member” means a Member of the Commission and includes the Chairperson; 
and 
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by the rules made under this Act.
CHAPTER II
The National Commission for Economically Weaker Sections of Citizens
3. ( 1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute a body to be known as the National Commission for Economically Weaker 
Sections of citizens to exercise the powers conferred on, and to perform the functions 
as signed to, it under this Act. 
(2) The Commission shall consist of the following Members nominated by the 
Central Government:– 
(a) Chairperson, who is or has been a Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High 
Court; 
(b) one social scientist; 
(c) two persons, who have special knowledge in matters relating to economically 
weaker sections of citizens; and 
(d) a Member-Secretary, who is or has been an officer of the Central 
Government in the rank of a Secretary to the Government of India.
4. (1) The Chairperson and every Member shall hold office for a term of three years 
from the date he assumes office. 
(2) The Chairperson or a member may, by writing under his hand addressed to the 
Central Government, resign from the office of Chairperson or, as the case may be, of 
Member at any time. 
(3) The Central Government shall remove a person from the office of Chairperson or a 
member if that person– 
(a) becomes an un-discharged insolvent; 
(b) is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which, in the opinion 
of the Central Government, involves moral turpitude; 
(c) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; 
(d) refuses to act or becomes incapable of acting; 
(e) without obtaining leave of absence from the Commission, absent from three 
consecutive meetings of the Commission; or 
(f) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, so abused the position of 
Chairperson or Member as to render that person’s continuance in office detrimental to 
the interests of Economically Weaker Sections or the public interest: 
Provided that no person shall be removed under this clause until that person 
has been given an opportunity of being heard in the matter. 
Definitions. 
Constitution 
of National 
Commission for 
Economically 
Weaker Sections 
of Citizens.
30
40
45
10
Term of office 
and conditions 
of service of 
Chairperson and 
Members.
5
15
20
25
35

(4) A vacancy caused under sub-section (2) or otherwise shall be filled by fresh 
nomination. 
(5) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service 
of, the Chairperson and Members shall be such as may be prescribed.
5. (1) The Central Government shall provide the Commission with such officers 
and employees as may be necessary for the efficient performance of the functions of 
the Commission. 
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions 
of service of, the officers and other employees appointed for the purpose of the 
Commission shall be such as may be prescribed.
6. The salaries and allowances payable to the Chairperson and Members and the 
administrative expenses, including salaries, allowances and pensions payable to the 
officers and other employees referred to in section 5, shall be paid out of the grants 
referred to in sub-section (1) of section 12.
7. No act or proceeding of the Commission shall be invalid on the ground merely of the 
existence of any vacancy or defect in the constitution of the Commission.
8. (1) The Commission shall meet as and when necessary at such time and place as the 
Chairperson may think fit. 
(2) The Commission shall regulate its own procedure. 
(3) All orders and decisions of the Commission shall be authenticated by the Member-
Secretary or any other officer of the Commission duly authorized by the Member-Secretary 
in this behalf.
CHAPTER III
Functions and Powers of the Commission 
9. ( 1) The Commission shall analyse suo-moto and examine requests relating to 
modification of criteria for inclusion of any section of citizen(s) under the Economically 
Weaker Section of Citizens list and hear complaints of over-inclusion or non-inclusion of 
any citizen and tender such advice to the Central Government as it deems appropriate. 
(2) The advice of the Commission shall ordinarily be binding upon the Central 
Government.
10. The Commission shall, while performing its functions under sub-section (1) of 
section 9, have all the powers of a civil court trying a suit and in particular, in respect of the 
following matters, namely:– 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of India 
and examining him on oath; 
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office; 
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and documents; and 
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.
11. (1) The Central Government may at anytime, and shall, at the expiration of ten years 
from the coming into force of this Act and every succeeding period of ten years thereafter, 
undertake revision of the criteria to be used to identify the Economically Weaker Sections 
of Citizens. 
(2) The Central Government shall, while undertaking any revision referred to in  
sub-section (1), consult the Commission.
Officers and 
other employees 
of the 
Commission.
Salaries and 
allowances to 
be paid out of 
grants.
Vacancies, etc., 
not to invalidate 
proceedings of 
the Commission.
Procedure to be 
regulated by the 
Commission.
3
Functions of the 
Commission.
Powers of the 
Commission.
Periodic revision 
of criteria by 
the Central 
Government.
30
40
45
10
5
15
20
25
35

CHAPTER IV
Finance, Accounts and Audit 
12. (1) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament 
by law in this behalf, pay to the Commission by way of grants such sums of money as 
the Central Government may think fit for being utilized for the purposes of this Act. 
(2) The Commission may spend such sums as it thinks fit for performing the functions 
under this Act, and such sums shall be treated as expenditure payable out of the grants 
referred to in sub-section (1).
13. (1) The Commission shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and 
prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
(2) The accounts of the Commission shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in 
connection with such audit shall be payable by the Commission to the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General. 
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General and any person appointed by him in 
connection with the audit of the accounts of the Commission under this Act shall have 
the same rights and privileges and the authority in connection with such audit as the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General generally has in connection with the audit of Government 
accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, 
connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of the 
Commission.
14. The Commission shall prepare, in such form and at such time, for each financial 
year, as may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of its activities during the 
previous financial year and forward a copy thereof to the Central Government.
15. The Central Government shall cause the annual report, together with a memorandum 
of action taken on the advice tendered by the Commission under section 9 and the reasons 
for the non-acceptance, if any, of any such advice, and the audit report to be laid as soon as 
may be after they are received before each House of Parliament.
CHAPTER V
Miscellaneous 
16. The Chairperson, Members and employees of the Commission shall be deemed to 
be public servants within the meaning of section 2(28) of the Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
17. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such 
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service 
of, the Chairperson and Members under sub-section (5) of section 4 and the officers and 
other employees under sub-section (2) of section 5; 
(b) the form in which the annual statement of accounts shall be prepared under 
sub-section (1) of section13; 
(c) the form in, and the time at, which the annual report shall be prepared under 
section 14; and
(d) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
Grants by 
the Central 
Government.
Accounts and 
audit.
Annual report.
Annual report 
and audit report 
to be laid before 
Parliament.
Chairperson, 
Members and 
employees of the 
Commission to be 
public servants.
Power to make 
rules.
4
45 of 2023.
30
40
45
10
5
15
20
25
35

expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both the Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that 
the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form 
or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
18. ( 1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make provisions, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient, for 
removing the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from 
the date of commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid 
before each House of Parliament.
 
Power to remove 
difficulties.
5
10
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The 103rd Constitutional Amendment enabled reservations for the EWS category, 
however, the absence of uniform eligibility criteria across States has led to administrative 
inconsistencies and public confusion. These disparities in EWS eligibility standards have 
prompted repeated judicial scrutiny to address, varying interpretations and applicability. 
The Bill proposes to establish a National Commission for Economically Weaker Sections 
in order to safeguard the interests of Economically Weaker Sections more effectively. The 
Commission will work as a body to oversee and frame guidelines for EWS reservation in an 
effective manner. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
Hence this Bill.
New Delhi ;                                                 RAO RAJENDRA SINGH  
November 12, 2024
6

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for establishment of National Commission for 
Economically Weaker Sections by the Central Government. Clause 5 stipulates that the 
Central Government shall provide officers and staff to the Commission. Clause 12 provides 
for grants to be paid to the Commission by the Central Government. The Bill, therefore, if 
enacted will involve expenditure from the consolidated fund of India. It is estimated that 
a recurring expenditure of about rupees four crore per annum would be involved from the 
Consolidated fund of India. 
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore is also likely to be involved. 
7

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
 Clause 17 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 
8

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to constitute a National Commission for Economically Weaker Sections of citizens other 
than the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes  
and for matters connected therewith  
or incidental thereto.
_______ 
(Shri Rao Rajendra Singh, M.P .) 