AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

11 MAR 2005

Bill No. 23 of 2005

THE PREVENTION OF INSULTS TO NATIONAL HONOUR
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005
| by
SHRI R. SAMBASIVA RAO, M.P.
ै 5
: — BILL
___ further to amend the Prevention of Insults to National Honour Act, 1971
। 3 BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows: —

1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Insults to National Honour Short title
mendment) Act, 2005 । | and extent.

(2) It extends to the whoie of India

2. After section 3A of the Prevention of Insults to National Honour Act. 1971. the Insertion of

blowing section shall be inserted, namely: — | rie Section

__ “4, Whoever intentionally, 2
(9 hoists the National Flag of any other country atop any Government building _ national

or any individual house or at any public place ु leaders ete.


ve

(ii) passes disparaging and insulting remarks against any national leader in any q
public place or public view or publishes or causes to be published such remarks
through press or any other media; or x a |

(tii) burns, distorts, mutilates, defaces, defiles, disfigures, destroys, tramples
upon the statue of any national leader installed in a public place

shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine, or _
with both

Explanation—For the purposes of this section, the expression “national leader”
means any leader or martyr who inspired the national struggle for freedom of the -
country.”


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Alongside the celebrations of the fifty-seventh anniversary of our Independence, we
are also witnessing the denigration and utterances of highly derogatory and disparaging
remarks about our national leaders who inspired the country to freedom, after making enormous
sacrifices and even laying down their lives for the cause. Such derogatory acts to these
leaders are done through public statements, press and electronic media. Even the statues
and images of such national heroes and martyrs installed in prominent public places are
disfigured, damaged and even dismantled and removed with impunity. This not only
- constitutes denigration and insult to individual leaders concerned but also insult to the
nation. 7

It is, therefore, proposed to amend the Prevention of Insults to National Honour
_ Act, 1971, by enlarging its scope to include such acts of denigration of national leaders and
to prescribe appropriate punishment for such insult.

Hence this Bill.

- New DELHI; Pe है: SAMBASIVA RAO
February 1, 2005.


3 “a Les LOK SABHA

|
1
|
i

4 | A
| BILL |
further to amend the Prevention of Insults to National Honour Act, 1971.

(Shri R. Sambasiva Rao, M.P.)
| | aa . |

MGIPMRND—4253LS—19.02.2005.

i