1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
By
SHRI OM PRAKASH YADAV, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called  the Constitution  (Amendment)  Act, 2018.
2. After article 30 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,
namely:—
Bill No. 240 of 2018
Short title.
Insertion of
new article
31.5
AS  INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
“31. Every citizen who lives below poverty line shall have the right to—
(i) adequate healthcare;
(ii) shelter;
(iii) education upto the level of graduation;
(iv) guaranteed employment; and
(v) essential items of daily use at concessional rates.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this article,—
(i) “person living below poverty line” means such person whose monthly
income from all sources is such as may be determined by the Union from time to time
after taking into consideration all relevant factors as it may deem fit:
Provided that different criterion may be fixed for different classes of persons in
various States and Union territories.
(ii) “guaranteed employment” means employment for a minimum period of two
hundred and forty days in a year;
(iii) “essential items of daily use” includes fuel, items of groceries, vegetables,
milk and other edible items necessary for a decent living.”.
Basic facilities
to   citizens
living   below
poverty line.
5
10
15

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In our country a huge number of people are living below poverty line. Despite several
measures to improve their lot, their standard of living has not shown any significant
improvement. The people living below poverty line live in slums under miserable and
unhygienic conditions. For want of adequate healthcare, many of them die in their early ages.
They mostly remain illiterate. It is the duty of the Government to take care of the those
sections of the society. The people living below poverty line should be given some basic
facilities in order to enable them to lead a reasonably decent life. Therefore, it is proposed to
amend the Constitution with a view to making it mandatory on the part of the State to provide
certain facilities to persons living below poverty line.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; OM PRAKASH YADA V
November 28, 2018.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for certain facilities like education, health care, shelter and
employment, etc. to people living below poverty line. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely that an annual recurring
expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore will be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees one thousand crore is also likely to
be involved.
4

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Om Prakash Yadav, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—2087LS(S3)—20-12-2018.