Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 240 of  2017
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE BAN ON COW SLAUGHTER BILL, 2017
By
SHRI GAJANAN KIRTIKAR, M.P.
A
BILL
to prohibit the slaughter of cow and its progeny and for matters connected therewith.
WHEREAS article 48 of the Constitution enjoins on the State to organize agricultural and
animal husbandry on modern and scientific lines and in particular to take steps for
preserving and improving the breeds and prohibiting the slaughter of cow and its
progeny
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Ban on Cow Slaughter Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.5

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, “cow” includes a bull, bullock, ox,
heifer or calf.
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force or
any usage or custom to the contrary, no person shall slaughter or offer or cause to be offered
for slaughter of any cow in any place.
4. No person shall sell or offer for sale or cause to be sold beef products in any form for
any purpose.
5. (1) Any person who slaughters a cow or sells beef or beef products shall be punished
with imprisonment for a term which may extend upto ten years or with fine which may extend
upto rupees ten lakh or with both.
(2) In case a person convicted of an offence under this Act fails to pay the fine, the
term of imprisonment of such person shall extend for a further period of five years.
2
Definitions.
Ban on cow
slaughter.
Ban on sale of
beef.
Punishments.
5
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The cow protection was a symbol of animal rights and of non-violence against all life
forms for Gandhi. He venerated cows, and suggested ending cow slaughter to be the first
step to stopping violence against all animals. He said: “I worship it and I shall defend its
worship against the whole world”, and stated that “the central fact of Hinduism is cow
protection”.
Article 48 of the Constitution enjoins on the State to organize agricultural and animal
husbandry on modern and scientific lines and in particular to take steps for preserving and
improving the breeds and prohibiting the slaughter of cow and its progeny. In view of the
consideration that the cow and its entire progeny must be saved to provide milk, as well as
manure, it becomes imperative to impose complete ban on the cow slaughter.
Various researchers and practical observations have revealed that even after stoppage
of milk, the products out of cow dung and urine are being manufactured to such an extent
that it is becoming economically beneficial to maintain and nourish them.
Though some States have imposed the ban, lakhs of cows and its progeny are being
carried from these States to the States where the ban has not been imposed and even to other
countries. India is the third biggest beef exporter in world.
The demand for complete stoppage of cow slaughter has come from eminent persons
of all religions, Supreme Court has also upheld cow ban in the State of Gujarat.
People from all walks of life have undertaken Vishwa Mangal Gau Gram Yatra throughout
the country to educate masses. Vishwa Mangal Gau Gram Yatra is the largest ever cow
protection movement in India. The yatra (journey) began on 30 September, 2009 from
Kurukshetra in the State of Haryana and ended on 17 January 2010 at Nagpur, covering
20,000 kilometres (12,000 miles) in these 108 days.
Thus from constitutional and other angles, it is necessary to ban slaughter of cow and
its progeny through a central law.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; GAJANAN KIRTIKAR
November 27, 2017.
3

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to prohibit the slaughter of cow and its progeny and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Gajanan Kirtikar, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2652LS(S3)—19.12.2017.