1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI JAYADEV GALLA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2016.
2. After article 21A of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
“21B. (1) Every citizen shall have the right to skill education in such manner as
Parliament may, by law, determine.
Bill No. 240 of  2016
Short title.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Right to skill
education.
Insertion of
new article
21B.
5

2
(2) Nothing in clause ( 1) shall prevent the State from making any provision fixing
eligibility criteria for providing skill education to citizens.
(3) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any special provisions or
programmes for physically challenged persons, persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes,
the Scheduled Tribes or the Other Backward Classes, divorced women and other weaker
sections of the society.”.
5

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
We are one of the few countries in the world where the working age population will be
far in excess of those dependent on them and, as per the World Bank, this will continue for at
least three decades till 2040. This has increasingly been recognized as a potential source of
significant strength for the national economy, provided we are able to equip and continuously
upgrade skills of the population in the working age group.
Hon'ble Prime Minister has rightly said from the Ramparts of Red Fort that we are a
youthful nation and our youth is our strength and we want youngsters to be job creators.
And, it is also correctly said "Hunar Hai Toh Kadar Hai", i.e., "Skill commands respect".
There is no doubt that the Government of India has adopted skill development as
a national priority over the next ten years. The Eleventh Five Year Plan detailed a road-map
for skill development in India and favoured the formation of Skill Development Missions,
both at the National and State Levels. But, nothing tangible has been done so far. We require
330 lakh skilled labour force in building and industry; 140 lakh skilled labour force in real
estate services; 350 lakh skilled labour force in auto and auto components sector; 1030 lakh
skilled labour force in the infrastructure sector; 127 lakh in healthcare sector and 177 lakh in
transport and logistics sector by the year 2020.
We have schemes like National   Skill  Mission, Deen Dayal Upadhyay Gramin Kaushal
Yojana. Moreover, Ministry of Human Resource Development have already proposed to
make vocational education an integral part of university system.
But, if one looks at the global scenario vis-a-vis India's position in skilled workforce,
we are nowhere. China has 47 per cent. skilled workforce; Australia has 60 per cent. UK has
68 per cent; Germany has 74 per cent. Japan has 84 per cent. and Korea has 96 per cent. But,
in India with 1.2 billion population, we have only just 2 per cent. skilled workforce in spite of
having 356 million young population of 10-24 years when compared to China's 269 million as
per United Nation World Population Report.
So, unless and until we capitalize on the demographic dividend, it is very difficult to
achieve the goal of getting 7-8 per cent growth and making India as Skill Captain of the
World. Secondly, we are getting people with degree and diplomas, but their employability is
very limited. We are getting quantity, but without quality. We require both quality and
quantity. So, we should lay emphasis in providing skills to youth with emphasis on
employability and entrepreneurship. If Skill Education is made as a Fundamental Right on the
lines of Right to Education, the objectives of skilling India, making to develop entrepreneurial
skills, making India the skill capital of the world, solving the employment problem, giving
filling to Make in India campaign, apart from other things, can be achieved.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; JAY ADEV GALLA
July  12, 2016.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for incorporation of right to skill education in the
Fundamental Rights of the citizens. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. At this stage, it is not possible to give an exact amount
of expenditure to be involved. However, it is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure
about rupees One thousand crores is likely to be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees One thousand crores is also likely to be
involved.
4

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Jayadev Galla, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2604LS(S3)—13.10.2016.