Bill No.  240 of  2019
THE RESERV ATION OF POSTS IN GOVERNMENT
ESTABLISHMENTS OF ANDAMAN AND
NICOBAR ISLANDS BILL, 2019
By
SHRI KULDEEP RAI SHARMA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for reservation in Government establishments in Andaman and Nicobar
Islands for residents of Andaman and Nicobar Islands to improve their standard
of living through employment and for matters connected or incidental thereto.
WHEREAS clause (3) of article 16 of the Constitution enables the Parliament to make
any law prescribing the requirement of residence within a State or Union territory in regard
to a class or classes of employment or appointment or appointment to an office under the
Government of, or any local or other authority within, a State or Union territory.
A
ND WHEREAS and clause (1) of article 38 of the Constitution, the State shall strive to
promote the welfare of the people by securing and protecting as effectively as it may, a social
order in which justice, social, economic and political, shall inform all the institutions of the
national life.
As 
INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.(1) This Act may be called the Reservation of Posts in Government Establishments
of Andaman and Nicobar Islands Act, 2019.
(2) It extend to the whole of Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "government establishment" means an establishment located in Andaman
and Nicobar Islands which is owned, established, controlled, managed or financed by
the Central Government and includes—
(i) a Ministry or department or subordinate office or attached office of the
Central Government;
(ii) a public sector undertaking or statutory authority constituted under
any Central Act;
(iii) a corporation in which not less than fifty-one per cent. of the paid-up
share capital is held by the Central Government;
(iv) a Government company as defined under clause (45) of section 2 of
the Companies Act, 2013; and
(v) a department functioning under the control of the Andaman and Nicobar
Administration.
(b) "local candidate" means a candidate who belongs to the Scheduled Tribes or
the Other Backward Class of the Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands, any
other who has resided in the Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands for at
least ten years and holds a valid domicile certificate prior to the commencement of this
Act; and
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, decree or reservation
order of any court or other authority and having regard to the inadequate representation of
local candidates residing in Andaman and Nicobar Islands who constitute the majority of the
total population of the Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands, the reservation for
appointment or posts in government establishments for the local candidates shall be hundred
per cent.:
Provided that where qualified or suitable local candidates are not available, the
Government establishment shall, within three years, take appropriate steps to train and
engage local candidates in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) Every vacancy reserved for local candidates under sub-section (1) shall be filled
only be local candidates in such manner as may be prescribed.
4. (1) Every Government establishment shall designate an officer of such rank, as may
be prescribed, to function as a liaison officer for the purpose of ensuring that the provisions
of this Act or the rules made thereunder are not contravened.
(2) The liaison officer shall, from time to time, inspect and verify the documents,
records and reports with respect to appointment of local candidates made by the appointing
authority by direct recruitment or promotion.
(3) Where the liaison officer is satisfied that any establishment has contravened the
provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder or any directon or instruction issued, he
shall submit a report of such contravention to the head of the establishment.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
Reservation
for
appointment
or posts in
Government
Establishments
for the Local
Candidates of
Andaman and
Nicobar
Islands.
Liaison Officer
to ensure
implementations
of the Act.
5
10
15
20
25
35
40
30
45

3
(4) On receipt of the report of contravention under sub-section ( 3), the head of
establishment shall take such disciplinary action against the person responsible for such
contravention as may be prescribed.
5. Every Government establishment, shall maintain documents and records, and furnish
every year a report on the appointments of the local candidates made by direct recruitment
and promotion to the Central Government in such manner and at such time, as may be
prescribed.
6. (1) Whoever intentionally,—
(i) makes a false claim that he is a local candidate; or
(ii) issue a false domicile certificate during the recruitment process;
shall be liable for punishment for a term, which may extend to three years.
(2) Where the Liaison Officer designated under section 4 intentionally breaches any of
the provisions of this Act, he shall be liable for disciplinary action under the appropriate
service rules.
7. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or anything contained in any
judgment of any court of law contrary to it including judgment regarding ceiling on reservation.
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
Maintenance
of records.
Penalty.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The aspect of job reservation relies upon Government intervention into the labour
relations area in order to promote the rights of some particular portion of the population. The
original reservation was contemplated for twenty years and it is still going strong. The whole
basis of reservation is an affirmative action i.e. to treat people who are fundamentally unequals
as equals. Such an action is necessary for SCs, STs, OBCs, on the basis of thousands of
years of discrimination they faced, but it should become a way to fulfil employment assurances
of the local people.
There are currently 8000 to 10000 vacancies in Government post in Andaman &
Nicobar Administration. The current process of recruitment to Government post in Andaman
& Nicobar Islands Administration is done through online method. However because of poor
internet and broadband connectivity in the islands, the locals are unable to participate in the
process and the same is taken by residents of other States. Unemployment is on the rise in
Andaman & Nicobar Islands as due to lack of reservation for locals & online recruitment, the
residents are unable to secure employment under Government establishment.
The Bill proposes to reserve hundred percent jobs for local candidates which include
a candidate who belongs to the Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Class (OBC) of the
Union Territory of Andaman or any other who has resided in the Union Territory of Andaman
& Nicobar Islands for at least ten years and holds a valid domicile certificate before the
commencement of this Act. The Bill intends to provide legislative backing to residence
based reservations for locals of Andaman & Nicobar Islands who have resided in the islands
for at least ten years.
The rationale behind this Bill is to tackle the menace of unemployment which has seen
a rise due to implementation of online recruitment. Through 100 percent reservation for local
candidates, the rising unemployment can be addressed as the locals will be entitled to post
under the Government as per his qualification. The Bill also has penal provisions to regulate
any wrong doing through fake certificates and claims for availing reservations meant for
deserving local candidates. Further, it also has a provision to designate a liaison officer in
every Government establishment who shall be responsible for ensuring that the provisions
of the act are administered as per rules and in a fair manner.
The Bill seeks to provide adequate opportunities to locals of Andaman and Nicobar
Islands who don't have sufficient representation in Government establishments. This Bill
will encourage the residents of Andaman and Nicobar Islands to apply for recruitments in
Government post and it will facilitate the development of the islands as reservation for locals
will aid in increasing the standard of living of the local candidates.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KULDEEP RAI SHARMA
October 31, 2019.
4

5
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that where qualified or suitable local candidates are not
available, the Government establishment within three years shall take appropriate steps to
train and engage local candidates. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about
rupees ten crore will be involved per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recuring expenditure of about rupees twenty crore is also likely to be involved.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the vacancy reserved for local candidates shall be
filled in such manner as may be prescribed by rules. Clause 4 provides that on receipt of the
report of contravention under sub-section ( 3), the head of establishment shall take such
disciplinary action against the person responsible for such contravention as may be prescribed
by rules. Clause 5 provides appointing authority, shall maintain documents and records, and
furnish every year a report on the appointments of the local candidates made by direct
recruitment and promotion to the appropriate Government in such manner and at such time,
as may be prescribed. Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.

MGIPMRND—3094LS(S3/F)—14.11.2019.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for reservation in Government establishments in Andaman and Nicobar Islands
for residents of Andaman and Nicobar Islands to improve their standard of living
through employment and for matters connected or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Kuldeep Rai Sharma,  M.P .)