     AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
                                                              Bill No. 241 of 2022
THE MAINTENANCE AND WELFARE OF PARENTS AND
SENIOR CITIZENS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
DR. HEENA VIJAYKUMAR GA VIT, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and
Senior Citizens Act, 2007.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and
Senior Citizens (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title
and
commencement.
5

2. In section 21 of the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens
Act, 2007 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), after clause (iii), the following
clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(iv) every senior citizen  with an annual income of less than rupees
twelve lakhs shall be entitled to a fixed pension amount not exceeding rupees
thirty-five thousand per month from the Senior Citizen Welfare Fund,
established under the Finance Act, 2015, in such manner as may be
prescribed.”.
3. In section 22 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following
sub-section shall be inserted, namely,—
“(3) The State Government shall prescribe a comprehensive action plan with
regard to digital and financial protection and wellbeing of senior citizen with
respect to cyber frauds, identity theft, online banking frauds and take fast track
action in that behalf.”.
4. In section 32 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after clause (f), the
following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
 “(fa) a comprehensive action plan for providing protection against offenses
like identity theft, financial fraud and cybercrime with regards to senior citizens
under sub-section (3) of section 22.”.
5
2
Amendment of
section 21.
15
10
Amendment of
section 22.
Amendment of
section 32.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007 was
enacted on 29th December, 2007 to ensure need-based maintenance for parents
and senior citizens and their welfare. It’s been more than a decade now that the
Act is in place, serving the needy parents and senior citizens, with the active
co-operation of the State Governments and Union Territory Administrations.
With the gradual breakdown of joint family system in the society, number of
cases of neglect, crime, exploitation and abandonment of parents and senior citizens
are in the rise. Various High Courts have also issued orders directing the Government
to review provisions of the Act.
Pensions are an assurance of continuation of consumption levels required for
dignified living in the face of reduction in income due to physiological atrophy and
comparatively restricted income-generating opportunities. Amendment to section 21
seeks to provide universal pension for the elderly with an income of less than twelve
lakhs. Currently the Union Government contributes Rs. 200 per month, which is less
than (or less than US$3). Over the next 33 years, by 2050, 324 million Indians, or 
20 percent of the population, will be above 60 years of age. If pension continues to
cover only 35 percent of senior citizens as it does today, 200 million, or 61.7 percent
of India’s elderly population, will be without any income security by 2050. Given
this fact, it is imperative that the Government active measures to ensure universal
pension for the elderly. Therefore, the amendment.
To ensure online safety of senior citizens amendment to section 22 of the act
places responsibility on the State Governments to spread awareness and improve
standards of digital literacy among the elderly in order to protect them from high
cases of cybercrime, identity theft, financial fraud and money laundering. Through
amendment to section 32, the State Government has been empowered to create rules
for a comprehensive action plan for providing protection against offences like,
cybercrime, identity theft, financial fraud and money laundering.
Hence this Bill.
    NEW DELHI;       HEENA VIJAYKUMAR GA VIT
23 November, 2022.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE MAINTENANCE AND WELFARE OF PARENTS
AND SENIOR CITIZENS ACT, 2007
(ACT NO. 56 OF 2007)
* * * *                         *
21. The State Government shall, take all measures to ensure that—
(i) the provisions of this Act are given wide publicity through public media
including the television, radio and the print, at regular intervals;
(ii) the Central Government and State Government Officers, including the police
officers and the members of the judicial service, are given periodic sensitization and
awareness training on the issues relating to this Act;
(iii) effective co-ordination between the services provided by the concerned
Ministries or Departments dealing with law, home affairs, health and welfare, to address
the issues relating to the welfare of the senior citizens and periodical review of the
same is conducted.
* * * *                         *
22. (1) The State Government may, confer such powers and impose such duties
on a District Magistrate as may be necessary, to ensure that the provisions of this Act
are properly carried out and the District Magistrate may specify the officer, subordinate
to him, who shall exercise all or any of the powers, and perform all or any of the
duties, so conferred or imposed and the local limits within which such powers or
duties shall be carried out by the officer as may be prescribed.
(2) The State Government shall prescribe a comprehensive action plan for
providing protection of life and property of senior citizens.
* *        *             *                         *
32. (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules
may provide for—
(a) the manner of holding inquiry under section 5 subject to such
rules as may be prescribed under sub-section (1) of section 8;
(b) the power and procedure of the Tribunal for other purposes under
sub-section (2) of section 8;
(c) the maximum maintenance allowance which may be ordered by
the Tribunal under sub-section (2) of section 9;
(d) the scheme for management of old age homes, including the
standards and various types of services to be provided by them which are
necessary for medical care and means of entertainment to the inhabitants
of such homes under sub-section (2) of section 19;
(e) the powers and duties of the authorities for implementing the
provisions of this Act, under sub-section (1) of section 22;
Measures for
publicity,
awareness, etc.,
for welfare of
senior citizens.
Authorities who
may be
specified for
implementing
the provisions
of this Act.
Power of State
Government to
make rules.
4

(f) a comprehensive action plan for providing protection of life and
property of senior citizens under sub-section (2) of section 22;
(g) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed.
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it
is made, before each House of State Legislature, where it consists of two Houses or
where such legislature consists of one House, before that House.
*  *         *    *      *
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for payment of fix pension amount not exceeding
rupees thirty-five thousand to every senior citizen with an annual income of less
than rupees twelve lakhs from the Senior Citizen Welfare Fund. The Bill, therefore,
if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.  It
is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore per
annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely
to be involved.
6

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
further to amend the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and
Senior Citizens Act, 2007.
————
(Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit, M.P .)