1
Short title
and com-
mencement.
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR WELFARE OF FARMERS 
BILL,  2019
By
SHRI SHYAM SINGH YADAV, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a National Commission for Welfare of Farmers to
improve the conditions of farmers and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called The National Commission for Welfare of Farmers
Bill,  2019.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
Definitions.
Bill  No. 241 of  2019
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
(b) "farmer" means an Indian citizen who undertakes cultivation in his own land
or in any other land on sharing basis or on lease or performs any other livelihood work
related to agriculture;
(c) "National Commission" means the National Commission for Welfare of Farmers
established under section 3; and
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish
a Commission to be known as the National Commission for Welfare of Farmers to improve
the conditions of farmers in the country.
(2) The Commission shall consist of —
(a) a Chairperson;
(b) a Deputy Chairperson; and
(c) three members
to be appointed by the President by warrant under his signature and seal from amongst
the persons having special knowledge in the field of agriculture.
(3) The Central Government may appoint such number of officers and staff including
experts to the Commission as may be required for its efficient functioning.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of
the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson, members, officers, staff and experts of the
Commission shall be such as may be prescribed.
(5) The National Commission shall have the power to regulate its own procedure.
4. (1) It shall be the duty of the National Commission to take such steps, as it may deem
appropriate, for the welfare and development of farmers and their dependant family members.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the National
Commission shall ensure the following provisions for the benefit and welfare of farmers,
namely:—
(a) negotiating all cases related to the safeguards provided to farmers and carry
out the monitoring and improvement of such safeguards;
(b) investigate complaints of the farmers related to deprivation of their rights
and safeguards;
(c) participate in the planning process of socio-economic development of farmers;
(d) advice the appropriate Government to enhance pace of development of farmers
under its jurisdiction;
(e) submit reports to the President regarding the working of safeguards on an
annual basis or at such intervals as it thinks fit including measures for protection,
welfare and social development of farmers; and
(f) undertake all other functions for the protection, welfare and development of
farmers, as specified by the President.
5. (1) The President shall cause to be laid before each House of Parliament all the
reports submitted to him under clause ( e) of sub-section ( 2) of section 4 along with a
memorandum explaining the reasons for not accepting any of the recommendations made
thereto.
(2) Where the report, or any of its part is related to any of the issue connected with
the State Government, a copy of such report shall be forwarded to the Governor of that State,
who shall in turn, along with an explanatory memorandum concerned with the action taken or
Establishment
of a National
Commission
for Farmers
Welfare and
Development.
Functions of
the National
Commission.
President to
lay report.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
proposed to be taken on the recommendations related to the State, if any, and reasons for not
accepting any of the recommendations, cause to be laid such report before the State
legislature.
6. The National Commission shall, while investigating any matter referred to in
clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 4, have all the powers of a Civil Court trying a suit
and, in particular in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of
India and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office;
(e) issuing commission for the examination of witnesses and documents; and
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.
7. The appropriate Government shall consult the National Commission on all policies
affecting interests of the farmers.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the National Commission for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
9. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act, as may appear to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
10. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5
10
15
20
25
30
Commission
to have
powers of
Civil Court.
Appropriate
Government
to consult
Commission.
Central
Government
to provide
adequate
funds to the
National
Commission.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
35

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
More than half of country's population is engaged in agriculture and its allied activities,
but the financial condition of farmers is still in a pitiable state. There are many schemes and
special provisions for the welfare of farmers in the country, inspite of which no significant
change can be observed in their social-economic conditions. Neither their financial condition
has improved as expected nor their complaints are resolved. In such a scenario, in order to
end their exploitation and to ensure their holistic development, need for a better and
empowered institutional mechanism has long been felt. There is an urgent need for
establishment of a National Commission for Welfare of Farmers on the lines of the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes Commissions.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI;
SHYAM SINGH YADAV 
October 23, 2019.

5
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of National Commission for Farmers
Welfare and Development. It also provides for appointment of a Chairperson, Deputy
Chairperson, members, officers, staff and experts to the Commission. Clause 8 provides for
the Central Government to provide adequate funds for the functioning of the Commission.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of Rupees five hundred crore will be
involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about Rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a National Commission for Welfare of Farmers to
improve the conditions of farmers and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Shyam Singh Yadav, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—3065LS(S3)—14-11-2019.