THE ALIGARH MUSLIM UNIVERSITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI E.T. MOHAMMED BASHEER, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Aligarh Muslim University Act, 1920.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Aligarh Muslim University (Amendment) Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 12 of the Aligarh Muslim University Act, 1920, after sub-section (2), the
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
"(3) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (1), the University may also, with
the sanction of the Visitor and subject to the Statutes and the Ordinances, establish
and maintain schools from primary to higher secondary level in the Special Centres,
Specialised Laboratories and such other institutions, as are referred to in sub-
section (2).".
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of section 12.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 241 of  2015
40 of 1920
10
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In the light of Sachar Committee Report, the Special Centres of Aligarh Muslim
University were proposed in 2007 with a view to focus on educational upliftment of the
minorities. The proposal was to establish five centres at Katihar (Bihar), Pune (Maharashtra)
Malappuram (Kerala), Murshidabad (West Bengal) and Bhopal (Madhya Pradesh) and this
proposal was unanimously approved by Executive Council of the University on 17th January,
2008. As a result, the Special Centres of Aligarh Muslim University were established in
Malappuram District of Kerala and Murshidabad District of West Bengal in the year 2010.
These Centres were proposed with a vision to get enrolled more number of minority
students in higher learning institutions run by the Aligarh Muslim University. In Aligarh
Muslim University, 50% of the students, who learn from the feeder school run by the Aligarh
Muslim University, directly get admission in the higher learning courses.
As per the present Aligarh Muslim University Act, 1920, the University can establish
and maintain educational institutions within a radius of fifteen miles from the University
Mosque. However, due to this provision, the Special Centres, Specialised Laboratories or
such other institutions established by the University are not in a position to open schools.
Hence, in order to do away with this situation, an amendment is required in the Act to
empower the University to establish schools in the Special Centres, Specialised Laboratories
and other institutions of the University.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; E.T. MOHAMMED BASHEER
August 8, 2015.
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT  FROM  THE ALIGARH MUSLIM UNIVERSITY ACT, 1920
(40 OF 1920)
* * * * * *
12. (1) The University shall, subject to the Statutes have power to establish and
maintain High Schools within a radius of fifteen miles from the University Mosque.
(2) The University may also, with the sanction of the Visitor and subject to the Statutes
and the Ordinances, establish and maintain such Special Centres, Specialised laboratories or
such other institutions for research or instructions as are necessary for the furtherance of its
objects either on its own or in co-operation or collaboration with any other institution.
* * * * * *
Power to
establish and
maintain High
Schools and
other
Institutions.
3

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Aligarh Muslim University Act, 1920.
————
(Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer , M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2466LS(S3)—05-11-2015.