1
THE DEATH PENALTY (ABOLITION) BILL, 2017
By
DR. SHASHI THAROOR, M.P.
A
Bill
to abolish the death penalty in India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Death Penalty (Abolition) Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India, except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. Notwithstanding anything in the Indian Penal Code, 1860 or any other law for the
time being in force, no person convicted of any offence shall be punishable with the sentence
of death.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 241 of 2017
Abolition of
death penalty.
5
45 of 1860.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything in the Indian Penal Code, 1860 or any other law for
the time being in force at the time of commencement, the offences punishable with death
sentence shall be read and interpreted as ‘Imprisonment for life’.
Explanation:—For the purposes of this section, the term ‘Imprisonment for life’ shall
mean imprisonment till the end of the natural life of the convict subject to provisions of
section 433 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 (2 of 1974).
Substitution of
death sentence
with Life
Imprisonment.
5
45 of 1860.

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The death penalty is a dated form of retributive justice that is untenable with our
historic traditions of non-violence and has no place in an India of the 21st century. On the
contrary, it is a distraction from the needed strengthening of preventive and reformative
models of our judicial systems.
Article 21 of the Constitution of India guarantees every person the right to life and
personal liberty, which cannot be deprived except through a procedure established by law,
that is just, fair and reasonable. The sentencing of death is measured through the doctrine of
'the rarest of rare.'
Yet, the very nature of this doctrine lends itself to human bias and in turn, stands in
stark contradiction with the previous tenet of a judgment beyond the scope of reasonable
doubt. This has been noted on occasion by both the Supreme Court itself, as well as the Law
Commission which concluded in its analysis of the death penalty in India, that the exercise
of mercy powers under articles 72 and 161 of the Constitution, have failed to act as a bulwark
against the miscarriage of justice in the imposition of the death penalty. The fact that lower
courts award a significant number of death sentences, of which, only a fraction of these are
confirmed by the Supreme Court, lends credence to the belief that the 'rarest of rare' doctrine
has not been applied in spirit by lower courts.
That a significant percentage of individuals who have been given this sentence hail
from socio-economically vulnerable groups illustrate the larger implications of such bias.
Further, the utility of capital punishment as a 'deterrent' to crime and terror stands effectively
diminished given that comprehensive studies have statistically denied any correlation between
rate of crime and death penalty. The existence of such a punishment also renders implausible
any scope for reformation of a convict.
The death penalty is untenable to the concept of a just and reasonable legal procedure,
as the ends of justice in deterring criminal activity, is not served by the death penalty, more
than the punishment of life imprisonment. The penological justifications for the death penalty
are no longer valid, in light of the evolving jurisprudence and criminology, in favour of
restorative justice, rather than justice motivated by retribution.
Therefore, the death penalty remains an aberration in a healthy democracy and has in
effect failed to fulfil the purpose it was designed to. Instead, it has reduced the State, the
moral safeguard and gatekeeper of justice for the common citizen to a position of weakness,
ignoring Mahatma Gandhi's prescient warning that an 'eye for an eye will make the world
blind'. Therefore, in the spirit of justice, fairness and immeasurable value of human life, this
Bill seeks to abolish the sentence of death.
Therefore this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SHASHI THAROOR
November 27, 2017

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to abolish the death penalty in India
————
(Dr. Shashi Tharoor, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2621LS(S3)—19.12.2017.