1
THE COMPULSORY SPORTS EDUCATION AND BASIC
INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT IN SCHOOLS
BILL, 2017
By
SHRI DHANANJAY B. MAHADIK, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory sports education from primary to senior secondary level and
provision of requisite basic infrastructure in all Government and
private schools and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of  India  as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Sports Education and Basic Infrastructure
Development in Schools Bill, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 242 of  2017
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires.—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "basic infrastructure" means requisite resources such as play ground, articles
of sports, sports instructor and requisite environment as are required for sports in the
school;
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(d) "school" means any Government school or a Government aided school or a
private school, which imparts education from primary to senior secondary school level.
3. (1) As soon as may be, the Central Government shall formulate a national policy for
providing sports education and ensuring requisite infrastructure development in all schools
of the country.
(2) The national policy referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall include the following
provisions:—
(i) encouraging sports and sports education and creating awareness of
importance of sports;
(ii) providing free and compulsory sports education in the schools to all the
students;
(iii) ensuring the availability of sports instructor in all the schools;
(iv) providing adequate financial assistance for infrastructure development for
sports education in all the schools;
(v) seeking assistance of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment
Guarantee Scheme for basic infrastructure development in the schools;
(vi) preparing standard and qualitative syllabus for sports education as per age
and physical capacity under the guidance of experts and universalisation thereof;
(vii) incorporating sports as a compulsory subject in the schools;
(viii) providing sports scholarship/stipend to the students with outstanding
performance in sports;
(ix) providing weightage to marks obtained in sports for admission in institutions
of higher education like institution of national importance, IITs, IIMs and AIIMS; and
(x) according preference to the outstanding sports persons in direct recruitment
to posts under the Central and the State Government services.
4. (1) It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to implement the national
policy formulated under section 3.
(2) The appropriate Government shall review the progress and quality of sports
education being provided by the schools, from time to time, in such manner, as may be
prescribed.
5. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Fund to be known as National Sports Education and Infrastructure Development Fund for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute to the Fund
in such ratio as may be prescribed.
6. Where a school violates the provision of this Act, the appropriate Government may
take such punitive action, including withdrawal of recognition of the school, in such manner,
as may be prescribed.
Definitions.
Formulation
of a national
policy for
providing
sports
education and
infrastructure
development
in schools.
Implementation
of the national
policy by the
appropriate
Government.
Constitution
of a National
Sports
Education and
Infrastructure
Development
Fund.
Punishment
for violation
of provision
of the Act.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to
make rules.
5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is a country having the highest number of youth. In the coming time, crores of
children shall become youth and these children will be the real future of the country from
demographic dividend point of view. The responsibility of overall development of children
lies on society and the Government. The ancient civilization and culture of India has been
very rich and the importance of sports in various forms and structures is evident since time
immemorial.
In the recent phase of human and social development, this assumes all the more
significance. In this context, some constructive initiatives to espouse sports as an important
factor in the overall development of children is required. Today sports are played through
the length and breadth of the country in an unstructured way. There is no dearth of talent in
various sports in the country. The only shortcoming is that they seldom get proper resources
and training. In a bid to identify real talent, requisite environment needs to be created for
children at the school itself. Positive initiative in this regard may be made by making sports
education compulsory in schools. Increase in the number of the youth having positive and
vibrant energy will provide pace and momentum to the development of the country and will
assist in prevention of socially disruptive activities. Sports stills a sense of community
feeling, discipline and zeal to be organized. Compulsory sports education in schools will
identify talent and make India excel in the global sport and competitions. Therefore, it is
necessary that compulsory sports education be made at the school level.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; DHANANJAY B. MAHADIK
November 28, 2017.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the formulation of a national policy for providing
sports education and infrastructure development in schools. It also provides for creating
awareness of sports among students, free and compulsory sports education, availability of
sports instructor, financial assistance for infrastructure development, scholarship/stipend
to students in schools. Clause 5 provides for constitution of a National Sports Education
and Infrastructure Development Fund. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. At this stage, it is difficult to give an exact estimate of
the actual expenditure to be incurred on it. However, it is estimated that a recurring expenditure
of rupees fifteen thousand crore will be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India per
annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees hundred crore is also likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory sports education from primary to senior secondary level and
provision of requisite basic infrastructure in all Government and private schools and
for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri  Dhananjay B. Mahadik, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2644LS(S3)—19-12-2017.