1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill  No. 242 of  2018
THE WOMEN (DEVELOPMENT AND WELFARE)
AUTHORITY BILL, 2018
By
SHRI RAJEEV SATAV, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for constitution of the Women Development and Welfare Authority to
formulate schemes and recommend to the appropriate Government about
measures for women empowerment and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows :—
1.  ( 1) This Act may be called the Women (Development and Welfare) Authority,
Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
5
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "annual report" means a report giving the details of developmental activities
taken up over the year by the Authority and detailing about targets set and achieved;
(b) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(c) "Authority" means the Women (Development and Welfare) Authority
constituted under section 3;
(d) "domestic worker" means a woman employed to do work in or for a private
household(s) including cooking, cleaning, gardening, childcare, and old-age care;
(e) "health certificate" means a document signed by a competent health authority
providing proof that a person is non-alcoholic;
(f) "placement agency" means any agency or contractor, whether registered or
otherwise, engaged in the placement of domestic workers with prospective employers;
and
(g) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette specify, there shall be constituted an Authority, to be known as the
Women (Development and Welfare) Authority for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Authority shall consist of:—
(a) Union Minister, Ministry of Women and Child Development—Chairperson,
ex-officio;
(b) a Deputy Chairperson, preferably a woman with such qualifications and
experience, as may be prescribed, to be appointed by the Central Government;
(c) Chairperson, National Commission for Women—member, ex-officio;
(d) Director General of Health Services, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare—
member, ex-officio;
(e) one member representing single women with such qualification, as may be
prescribed, to be appointed by the Central Government;
(f) seven women Members of Parliament of whom four shall be from the House of
the People and three from the Council of States, to be nominated by the respective
Presiding Officers of each House;
(g) five members representing Union Ministries of Home Affairs, Human Resource
Development, Health and Family Welfare, Finance and Social Justice and Empowerment;
(h) not more than four members to be appointed by the Central Government in
consultation with the Government of the States, by rotation in alphabetical order, to
represent the Government of the States;
(i) three members to be appointed by the Central Government from amongst the
registered Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs) working in the field of women
empowerment and welfare and having an experience of at least ten years in the field of
protection of women rights.
(3) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and staff as it
considers necessary for the efficient functioning of the Authority under this Act.
(4) The qualifications and experience, salary and allowances payable to and other
terms and conditions of services of officers and staff of the Authority shall be such, as may
be prescribed.
Definitions.
Constitution
of Women
(Development
and Welfare)
Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(5) The Authority shall follow such procedure for holding its meetings and the quorum
for such meetings shall be such, as may be prescribed.
(6) The Authority shall have a Secretariat consisting of a Member Secretary and
such number of officers, employees and establishments with such conditions of service,
emoluments and perks, as may be prescribed or determined, from time to time, for the
efficient functioning of the Authority.
4. (1) Subject to the guidelines issued by the Central Government under the provisions
of this Act, the Authority shall formulate a comprehensive policy within one year of its
constitution to achieve the objectives of this Act and perform such functions as may be
necessary to ensure empowerment of women.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section (1), the functions of
the Authority shall include but not limited to:—
(a) work out plans and formulate schemes for the overall welfare and rehabilitation
of abandoned, disowned or distressed widows and single women covered under this
Act and implement such measures in right earnest;
(b) provide funds to encourage micro credit for young women entrepreneurs;
(c) frame guidelines regarding mobile health care facilities and social security
cover to the women agricultural labour to be followed by agricultural land owners;
(d) recommend to the appropriate Government on free legal aid to women;
(e) recommend to the appropriate Government the penalties to be imposed for
harassment of domestic women workers;
(f) establish a separate Widow Welfare Board to collect data of widows and
formulating rehabilitation schemes for them;
(g) provide guidelines to the appropriate Government for establishing all woman
police stations, banks and courts at district levels within specific timelines;
(h) undertake, promote and publish studies relating to the importance of women
empowerment;
(i) including in school curriculum the subject of creating awareness about women
empowerment among general public; and
(j) recommend for setting up of such number of Women Employment Centres in
every district as may be prescribed to provide assistance to women for employment or
self-employment;
(k) frame guidelines to provide scholarships to girl students;
(l) recommend to the Central Government to prepare a special savings schemes
for woman with higher rates of interest;
(m) recommend to the appropriate Government for formulating stringent
regulations for private placement agencies and regulations for domestic workers; and
(n) undertake such other activities as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.
(3) The Authority shall disseminate necessary knowledge and information collected,
to the respective departments of the Central and the State Governments.
5. The Authority shall prepare once in every year, in such form and at such time as may
be prescribed, an annual report giving the summary of its activities including schemes it has
undertaken and recommended to the Central Government during the year and it shall contain
statements of annual accounts of the Authority.
Functions of
the Authority.
Annual Report.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
6. The Central Government shall cause the annual Report and the audit report, together
with a memorandum of action taken thereon of the Authority to be laid before each House of
Parliament.
7. The Central Government, shall from time to time provide, after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
8. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government in consultation with the State Governments may make such order or give such
direction not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or
expedient for the removal of any difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
9. (1) The Central Government, in consultation with the State Governments, made by
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this  Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before    the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Annual
Report and
audit report
to be laid
before
Parliament.
Central
Government
to provide
requisite
funds.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
We are a nation of one hundred and thiry-two crores people out of which 64.3 crores
are women. To emphasise the urgency and importance of women empowerment, the revered
Swami Vivekananda said— ‘There is no chance for the welfare of the world unless the
condition of women is improved. It is not possible for a bird to fly on only one wing.... .’ It
is true that we have come a far way in these seven decades as a nation, in realising this dream
where men and women are on equal footing given any social, economic or cultural indicator.
But at the same time, it is an undeniable truth that it is a dream that is yet  to be fully realised.
While decades of policies, laws and welfare schemes have aimed at bridging this gap, we can
still do a lot better as a society and a young country. An aim of constant improvement in the
sphere of women empowerment should be at every citizen's heart. Only then will be in the
right direction of realising our fullest potential as a country and an evolved society.
Purely economic indicator, which the Government very proudly cites to assert success,
present a very fallacious picture. They often mask low gender inclusivity and pitiable state of
social indicators for women that India suffers from. An encompassing policy which secures
fundamentals like equitable proportion of women in the workforce as entrepreneurs, scientists,
policy experts, healthcare workers and skilled labour force in factories should be the primary
step. Gender quality and equity in the best educational institutions and skill development
centres will further accelerate the achievement of this goal.
The creation of a Women (Development and Welfare) Authority to orchestrate policy
changes that can pave way for empowerment in the truest sense is the need of the hour. The
Authority shall devise special saving schemes for women in every household with higher
rates of interest and annual bonuses if husband produces a non-alcoholic certificate from
Government hospital. Special fund would be created to provide for micro credit to women
entrepreneurs to set up their start-ups after education. Mobile health care facilities and
social security cover would also be provided for agricultural labourers. It will regulate
placements by organizing domestic workers under a newly formed body to safeguard their
rights. A separate Widows Welfare Board is required to be set-up for maintaining data on
widowed women in the country and to formulate subsistence schemes for the needy.
This need is also to create a conducive and just social and economic environment for
the what of this country. We should realise that women must be the sole authority to choose
what the best is for them. The Government shall uphold and create equality, liberty and
freedom in every sphere of life whenever necessary. The constitution of an inclusive Authority
specifically dedicated for effective implementation of the policies of women empowerment is
also required.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAJEEV SATA V
November 27, 2018
5

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the Women (Development and
Welfare) Authority. It also provides for appointment of a Deputy Chairperson, members,
officers and staffs to the Authority for its effective functioning. It further provides for a
constitution of a Secretariat to the Authority. Clause 4 provides for the provision of funds to
young entrepreneurs, and establishment of Window Welfare Board. Clause 7 makes it
obligatory for the Central Government to provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes
of this Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about three thousand crore
rupees per annum would involve from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees three hundred crore is also likely to
be involved.
6

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of normal character.
7

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for constitution of the Women Development and Welfare Authority to
formulate schemes and recommend to the appropriate Government about
measures for women empowerment and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Rajeev Satav, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—2191LS(S3)—20-12-2018.