1
THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED CASTES) ORDER 1950
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI E.T. MOHAMMED BASHEER, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order 1950.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order (Amendment)
Act, 2015.
2. In paragraph 3 of the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950, for the
words "or the Buddhist", the words "the Buddhist or the Islam" shall be substituted.
Short title.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 242 of  2015
5
Amendment of
paragraph 3.

2
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950 as originally enacted gave the
Scheduled Castes status to persons belonging to certain castes of the Hindu religion only.
However, it was later opened to persons of certain groups in Buddhist and Sikh religion
also. The Muslims and other minorities are still excluded from its purview.
The Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950 was one of the terms of reference to
the National Commission for Religious and Linguistic Minorities headed by Former
Chief Justice of India Shri Ranganath Mishra. The Commission had recommended for giving
the status of the Scheduled Castes to certain groups and classes of persons from amongst the
Muslims whose counterparts amongst the Hindu, Sikh or Buddhist religions have already
been included in the lists of the Scheduled Castes.
Moreover, Gopal Singh panel in 1983 had also maintained that there was a "sense of
discrimination prevailing among the Minorities" and that it "must be eliminated, root and
branch, if we want the Minorities to form an effective part of mainstream.".
The Sachar Committee Report has further highlighted the necessity of providing legal
mechanism for the development of Muslim minorities in the light of ground realities of
Muslim minorities pointed out by 1983 Gopal Singh panel.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the paragraph 3 of the Constitution (Scheduled
Castes) Order, 1950 with a view to providing all benefits, as are available to the
Scheduled Castes of the Hindu, the Sikh or the Buddhist  religion, to the persons belonging
to certain groups or communities of Islam religion.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; E.T. MOHAMMED BASHEER
August 12, 2015.

3
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to include persons belonging to certain groups and classes
of Islam religion under the purview of the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950 to
confer them the status of the Scheduled Castes as has been done on persons belonging to
certain castes in the Hindu, Sikh and Buddhist religion. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would
involve recurring and non-recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India on
account of benefits to be provided to the Muslims under the ongoing Central Schemes meant
for development of the Scheduled Castes.
At this stage, it is not possible to give the exact amount to be incurred on this account.
However, the expenditure, whether recurring or non-recurring, will be met out of the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is expected that a recurring expenditure of about rupees three
hundred crore will be involved annually.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

4
ANNEXURE
THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED CASTES) ORDER, 1950
(C.O. 19)
* * * * * * *
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in paragraph 2, no person who profess a religion
different from the Hindu, the Sikh or the Buddhist religion shall be deemed to be a member
of a Scheduled Caste.
* * * * * * *

GMGIPMRND—2465LS(S3)—05-11-2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order 1950.
————
(Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer, M.P.)