To 8६ INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

Bill No. 243 of 2015

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
4 ay
Surt 5.1. MoHammen Baseer, M.P.
A
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows: —
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2015. Short tite.

2. In article 15 of the Constitution, after clause (5), the following proviso shall be added Amendment
at the end, namely:— of article 15.

“Provided that the reservation in favour of persons belonging to the socially
and educationally backward minorities in admission to higher educational institutions


2

including private educational institutions,

whether aided or unaided by the State,
other than minority educational institutions,

shall be in proportion to their population.”.
3. In article 16 of the Constituti

ution, clauses (4A) and (4B) shall be renumbered as
clauses (4B) and (4C), respectively, and before clause (4B) as so renumbered, the following
clause shall be inserted, namely:—

Amendment
of article 16.

“(4A) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision
for reservation of appointments or

Posts in favour of persons belonging to socially
and educationally backward minorities in Proportion to their population in services
under the State.”,


STATEMENT OF OBJECTSAND REASONS

In the Preamble to the Constitution we have resolved to secure to all citizens “Social,
Economic and Political Justice” and “Equality of Status and Opportunity”. Article 14 of the
Constitution guarantees to every citizen the right to equality before law. Article 46 lays down
as a Directive Principle of State Policy that the State shall promote with special care the
educational and economic interests of the weaker sections of the society. While Article 15
prohibits “discriminaion on grounds of religion”.

Article 15(4) and 16(4) of our Constitution are mere enabling provisions. They do not
impose any obligation on the part of the Government. It is left to the discretion of the
Governments to make special provisions for advancement of socially and educationally
backward classes and/or make any provision for reservation in education and employment.

In the absence of sub-quota, the introduction of 4.5% reservation for the socially and
educationally backward minorities in the 27% reservation earmarked for socially and
educationally backward classes have not achieved the desired goal.

The reports of Sachar Committee, Kundu Committee, Ranga Nath Mishra Commission,
etc. have categorically pointed out that reservation of socially and educationally backward
minority communities in accordance with their population is required in the field of education
and work participation of our country.

In order to ensure justice to the most educationally and socially backward minorities in
accordance with their population, reservation in admission to higher educational institutions
including private educational institutions, whether aided or unaided by the State, other than
minority educational institutions and in appointments or posts under the State is inevitable.

Hence this Bill.

New Deut; E.T. MOHAMMED BASHEER
August 12,2015 ः ह


Prohibition of
discrimination
on grounds of
religion, race,
caste, sex or
place of birth.

Equality of
opportunity in
matters of
public
employment.

ANNEXURE

EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

5. (0) * नि ‘ +
(2)* हि + '
0)* ' + '
* + * *

(5) Nothing in this article or in sub-clause (9) of clause (1) of article 19 shall prevent the
State from making any special provision, by law, for the advancement of any socially and
educationally backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled
Tribes in so far as such special provisions relate to their admission to educational institutions
including private educational institutions, whether aided or unaided by the State, other than
the minority educational institutions referred to in clause (1) of article 30.

16. (1) * * ‘ *
(2)* + * *
(3) * + « *

(4) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision for the
reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of citizens which, in
the opinion of the State, is not adequately represented in the services under the State.

(4A) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision for
reservation in matters of promotion, with consequential seniority, to any class or
classes of posts in the services under the State in favour of the Scheduled Castes and
the Scheduled Tribes which, in the opinion of the State, are not adequately represented
in the services under the State.

(4B) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from considering any unfilled
vacancies of'a year which are reserved for being filled up in that year in accordance
with any provision for reservation made under clause (4) or clause (4A) as a separate
class of vacancies to be filled up in any succeeding year or years and such class of
vacancies shall not be considered together with the vacancies of the year in which
they are being filled up for determining the ceiling of fifty per cent reservation on total
number of vacancies of that year. .

“+ * + * *


LOK SABHA

A

BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri & 7 Mohammed Basheer, M.P.)

GMGIPMRND—2463LS(S3)—05- 11-2015.