     AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
                                                              Bill No. 243 of 2022
THE ARBITRA TION AND CONCILIA TION
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
SHRI HANUMAN BENIW AL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment)
Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 20 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, in sub-section (1),
the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that in all cases related to property loans or vehicle loans, the place
of arbitration shall be in the district where the borrower usually resides.”.
Short title
and
commencement.
10
Amendment of
section 20.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
There have been many problems with regard to agreement between
the parties under the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996. In fact, a lot of
provisions have been made to ease the process of arbitration under the Act, but the
lending companies are misusing them by getting the borrowers to sign the
agreements to the benefit of the companies.
Section 20(1) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 provides that “the
parties are free to agree on the place of arbitration.”  The same Section 20(1) of the
Act is being misused by the lending companies, and in case of a dispute among the
parties, these companies do not fail to harass the borrower by determining the place
of arbitration thousands of kilometers away from where the borrower resides.
Under the Act, there is a provision to refer the case to the arbitrator in case of
any dispute among the parties. At this juncture, the lending company decides the
place of appointment of the arbitrator to be included in the terms of the loan agreement
as per its own convenience.
Often, it happens that under the guise of Section 20(1) of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996, the lending companies choose the place of appointment of
arbitrator at their own convenience, which becomes a hardship to the borrower. Due
to this, in case of a dispute, the borrower has to travel to other States far from his
residence to present his case before the arbitrator.
The place of arbitration being chosen far away, the debtor is neither able to
appear before the arbitrator nor present his case. This leads to ex-parte decision being
passed by the arbitrator which is equivalent to a decree of a civil court.
In view of the above, it is necessary to amend the Arbitration and Conciliation
Act, 1996, with a view to provide that in the cases related to property loan or vehicle
loan, the place of arbitration shall be in the district, where the borrower usually resides.
    NEW DELHI;                HANUMAN BENIWAL
23 November, 2022.
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE ARBITRATION AND CONCILIATION ACT, 1996
(ACT NO. 26 OF 1996)
* * * *                   *
20. (1) The parties are free to agree on the place of arbitration.
(2) Failing any agreement referred to in sub-section (1), the place of
arbitration shall be determined by the arbitral tribunal having regard to the
circumstances of the case, including the convenience of the parties.
(3)  Notwithstanding sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), the arbitral tribunal
may, unless otherwise agreed by the parties, meet at any place it considers appropriate
for consultation among its members, for hearing witnesses, experts or the parties, or
for inspection of documents, goods or other property.
* * * *                   *
3
Place of
arbitration.

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
further to amend the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.
————(Shri Hanuman Beniwal, M.P.)