THE HINDU MINORITY AND GUARDIANSHIP
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
DR. DHARAM VIRA GANDHI,  M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Hindu Minority and Guardianship (Amendment) Act,
2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 6 of the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956 (hereinafter referred
to as the principal Act),—
(i) in clause (a), for the words "the father, and after him, the mother", the words
"the father and the mother" shall be substituted; and
Bill No. 243 of 2016
Short title
and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Amendment
of section 6.
32 of 1956.
5
10

(ii) in clause (b), for the words "the mother, and after her, the father", the words "the
mother and the father" shall be substituted.
3. In section 7 of the principal Act, the words "after him" shall be omitted.Amendment
of section 7.
2

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956 was enacted as a supplement to the
Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 and deals with natural guardians and testamentary guardians
incidentally abolishing the de facto guardians. The Act, however, does not treat men and
women equally which needs to be amended. The Act provides for the father to be the natural
guardian of a Hindu minor boy or an unmarried girl and only after him the mother attains the
position of a natural guardian.
The various courts have since interpreted the expression "after him" occurring in
clause (a) of section 6 of the Act in a broad manner to include the absence of the father as
well. However, when the father is not absent, only he is subjected to the test of being
a guardian for a minor and not the mother, however capable she might be for the same.
Therefore, the provisions are required to be amended to provide for the equal treatment of
both the parents i.e. father and mother of a minor for the purposes of minority and guardianship
among the Hindus.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; DHARAM VIRA GANDHI
July 20, 2016.

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE HINDU MINORITY AND GUARDIANSHIP ACT, 1956
(32 OF 1956)
* * * * *
6. The natural guardians of a Hindu minor, in respect of the minor's person as well as in
respect of the minor's property (excluding his or her undivided interest in joint family property),
are—
(a) in the case of a boy or an unmarried girl — the father, and after him, the
mother: provided that the custody of a minor who has not completed the age of five
years shall ordinarily be with the mother;
(b) in the case of an illegitimate boy or an illegitimate unmarried girl — the
mother, and after her, the father;
* * * * *
7. The natural guardianship of an adopted son who is a minor passes, on adoption, to
the adoptive father and after him to the adoptive mother.
* * * * *
Natural
guardians of a
Hindu minor.
Natural
guardianship
of adopted
son.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956.
————
(Dr. Dharam Vira Gandhi, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2595LS(S3)—19-10-2016.