THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
SHRI JAGDAMBIKA PAL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2017. Short title.
Bill  No. 244 of 2017
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Amendment
of article 324.
2. In article 324 of the Constitution, in clause (5),—
(a) the words ‘‘the Election Commissioners and’’ shall be omitted;
(b) in the first proviso for the words ‘‘the Chief Election Commissioner’’ at
both the places, the words ‘‘Chief Election Commissioner and any other Election
Commissioner’’ shall be substituted; and
(c) in the second proviso the words ‘‘other Election Commissioner or a’’ shall be
omitted.
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Article 324(5) of the Constitution intends to ensure the independence of the Election
Commission of India (ECI) and free it from external or political interference and thus expressly
provides that the removal of the Chief Election Commission (CEC) from office shall be on
‘‘like manner and on the like grounds as a Judge of the Supreme Court". Nevertheless, a
similar impeachment procedure is not prescribed for the other Election Commissioners
under article 324(5), and they are treated on par with the Regional Commissioners.
The ECI in its 2004 Report expressly opined that the current wording of article 324(5)
was ‘‘inadequate’’ and required an amendment to bring the removal procedures of Election
Commissioners at part with the Chief Election Commission (CEC), and to provide them with
the ‘‘same protection and safeguard(s)" as are available to the Chief Election Commission
(CEC). The proposed amendment is on the same lines as provided in Background Paper on
Electoral Reforms prepared by the Legislative Department of the Law Ministry in 2010.
Equating the removal procedures of the two Election Commissioners with that of the
CEC is also in line with the legislative intent of the Parliament. In 1991, the Chief Election
Commissioner and other Election Commissioners (Conditions of Service) Act, 1991 was
enacted whereby the retirement age of the CEC was fixed at sixty five years, with a salary
and other perquisites equal to that of a Supreme Court Judge. Whereas the retirement age
of the other Election Commissioners was fixed at sixty-two years with benefits equivalent to
a High Court Judge. However, in 1993, the above Act was amended and the CEC and other
Election Commissioners were placed at par in the matters of retirement age, salaries and
other benefits. Section 10 of the Act provides for all three members to have an equal say in
the decision making process, with any difference in opinion being resolved ‘‘according to
the opinion of the majority".
It is thus clear that the CEC is at the same position as the other Election Commissioners
except that CEC enjoys the status of first amongst equals. Moreover, the Election
Commissioners are clearly superior to the Regional Commissioners. Given that the removal
(impeachment) procedure of the Judges of the High Court and Supreme Court is also the
same, the removal procedures CEC under article 324(5) should also be extended to the other
Election Commissioners.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; JAGDAMBIKA  PAL
November 27, 2017.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *
PART XV
324. (1) * * * * *
(5) Subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament, the conditions of service
and tenure of office of the Election Commissioners and the Regional Commissioners shall
be such as the President may by rule determine:
Provided that the Chief Election Commissioner shall not be removed from his office
except in like manner and on the like grounds as a Judge of the Supreme Court and the
conditions of service of the Chief Election Commissioner shall not be varied to his
disadvantage aftet his appointment:
Provided further that any other Election Commissioner or a Regional Commissioner
shall not be removed from office except on the recommendation of the Chief Election
Commissioner.
* * * * *
Superintendence,
direction and
control of
elections to be
vested in an
Election
Commission.
4

LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
—————
(Shri Jagdambika Pal, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2679LS(S3)—19-12-2017.