Short title and 
commencement.
As introduced in Lok Sabha
 Bill No. 244 of 2024
THE ENVIRONMENT (PROTECTION) AMENDMENT BILL, 2024
By
Shri Arun Bharti, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as  
follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Environment (Protection) Amendment Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.5

2. In section 2 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 (hereinafter referred to as 
principal Act), existing clause (a) shall be renumbered as clause (ab), and before clause (ab) 
so as re-numbered, the following clauses shall be inserted, namely: 
“(a) “circular economy” means an economic model and the policies and practices 
which give effect to—
(i) production and distribution processes in respect of goods, products and 
materials are designed so as to minimise the consumption of raw materials 
associated with the production and use of those goods, products and materials;
(ii) the delivery of services is designed so as to reduce the consumption of raw 
materials;
(iii) goods, products and materials are kept in use for as long as possible 
thereby further reducing the consumption of raw materials and impacts harmful to 
the environment;
(iv) the maximum economic value is extracted from goods, products, and 
materials by the persons using them; and
(v) goods, products and materials are reused and recycled at the end of their 
useful life; and
“(aa) “circular economy strategy” means policies of circular economy based 
on—
(i) reductions in material resource consumption and the use of non-
recyclable materials;
(ii) increases in the use of re-usable products and materials;
(iii) increased levels of repair and re-use of products and materials; and
(iv) improved maintenance and optimised use of goods, products and 
materials, which are applicable in the construction, agriculture, retails, 
packaging, textiles and electronic equipment sector;”.
3. In section 3 of the principal act, in sub-section (2) after clauses (xiii), the following 
clause shall be inserted, namely —
“(xiiia) planning and execution of the circular economy strategy.”
4. The existing sections 16A and 16B of the provisions shall be renumbered as 16B and 
16C, respectively and before the section 16B so as renumbered the following section shall 
be inserted, namely:
“16A— ( 1) The Central Government shall by notification in the official 
Gazette, constitute a Fund to be known as the Fund for Promotion of Circular 
Economy.
(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute to the Fund in 
such ratio as may be prescribed.
(3) The Fund for promotion of Circular Economy shall be applied for undertaking 
circular economy strategy.
(4) The Central Government shall notify the administration for the administration of the 
Fund and other matters connected therewith and incidental thereto in such manner as may 
be prescribed.”.
5. In section 16B and section 16C so as renumbered for the words “Environment 
Protection Fund” wherever they occur, the words “Environment Protection Fund and the 
Fund for Promotion of Circular Economy” shall be substituted.
.
Definitions. 
2
Amendment of 
section 3.
5
Insertion of new 
Chapter III-A.
Constitution of 
Circular Economy 
Fund.
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Amendment of 
section 16B and 
16C.
29 of 1986.
45

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Environment Protection Act of 1986 is a crucial piece of legislation in India that 
provides the legal framework for environmental protection and the conservation of natural 
resources. It establishes the regulatory authority of the Government to control and prevent 
pollution, protect the environment, and manage hazardous substances.
The concept of a circular economy is a sustainable approach to resource management 
and economic development that aims to minimize waste and environmental impact while 
maximizing the efficient use of resources. It is a stark departure from the traditional 
linear economy, where products are made, used, and then discarded as waste. In a circular 
economy, products, materials, and resources are designed, produced, and consumed in a 
way that ensures they are reused, refurbished, remanufactured, and recycled as much as 
possible. The ultimate goal is to create a closed-loop system that reduces the need for new 
resource extraction and minimizes the generation of waste. For India, circular economy has 
the potential to be upwards of $45 Billion by 2030 and the private sector stands to gain a 
first-mover advantage to secure green investments for applying circular economy in their 
operations.
Circularity is not a maiden concept in India — it is intrinsic to the fabric of Indian society, 
rooted in age-old practices and cultural values that prioritise resourcefulness and waste 
reduction. However, with the nation experiencing rapid economic growth, the challenges 
of swift urbanisation and industrialisation have escalated, and per capita consumption of 
resources, particularly the non-renewables have increased, resulting in the widespread and 
prevalent adoption of the take-make-dispose model in the country today.
Incorporating the circular economy concept into the Environment Protection Act of 1986 
is essential for India to address its pressing environmental challenges, promote sustainable 
development, and create a framework for businesses and industries to transition towards 
more eco-friendly and resource-efficient practices. It not only protects the environment but 
also promotes economic growth, aligns with international standards, and enhances India’s 
global standing in the context of environmental responsibility. Furthermore, by including 
circular economy principles, the Government can enforce and monitor sustainable practices, 
ensuring businesses comply with environmental protection laws. This regulatory framework 
can promote a culture of environmental responsibility.
The amendment proposes the insertion of two new definitions of ‘circular economy’ and 
‘circular economy strategy’ which will serve as a foundation for the Central Government 
to establish rules while including the circular economic model. Furthermore, Section 3 of 
the Principal Act are amended to the effect of including the power to lay down policies and 
procedures in the furtherance of circular economy strategy. 
Hence this Bill.
New Delhi ;                                                              A R U N  B H A R T I  
November 12, 2024
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 5 provides for constitution of a Fund for Promotion of Circular Economy. The 
Bill, therefore, if enacted, is likely to involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of 
India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred fifty 
crore will be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be 
involved.
4

ANNEXURE
[The Environment (Protection) Act, 1986]
(Act No. 29 of 1986)
*  *  *  *  *      *
*  *  *  *  *      *
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “environment” includes water, air and land and the inter-relationship which exists 
among and between water, air and land, and human beings, other living creatures, plants, 
micro-organism and property; 
3. (1) *  *  *  *  *
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of  
sub-section ( 1), such measures may include measures with respect to all or any of the 
following matters, namely:—
*  *  *  *  *            *
(xiii) preparation of manuals, codes or guides relating to the prevention, control and 
abatement of environmental pollution;
*  *  *  *  *            *
16A. (1) The Central Government shall maintain separate accounts and other relevant 
records in relation to the Environmental Protection Fund and prepare an annual statement 
of accounts in such form, as may be prescribed, in consultation with the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India
(2) The accounts of the Fund shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General 
of India at such intervals as may be specified by him and such audited accounts together 
with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government.
*  *  *  *  *            *
16B. The Central Government shall prepare its annual report in relation to Environmental 
Protection Fund giving a full account of its activities defined under this Act in such form, as 
may be prescribed, for each financial year during the previous financial year, and shall be 
laid before each House of Parliament along with audit report given by the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India.
*  *  *  *  *      *
Definitions.
5
Power of Central 
Government to 
take measures 
to protect 
and improve 
environment.
Accounts and 
audit of Fund.
Annual report.

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
further to amend the Environment Protection Act, 1986.
_______ 
(Shri Arun Bharti, M.P .) 