THE SUICIDE PREVENTION IN YOUTH BILL, 2018
By
SHRI ANURAG SINGH THAKUR, M.P.
A
BILL
to address the increasing prevalence of suicide especially amongst the youth of the
country with a community-based approach focusing on timely intervention and
removal of stigma associated with reporting of mental illness and increasing
lines of communication and for matters connected therewith.
WHEREAS the Convention on Rights of Persons with Disabilities and its Optional
Protocol was adopted on the 13th December, 2006 at United Nations Headquarters in
New York and came into force on the 3rd May, 2018;
A
ND WHEREAS India has signed and ratified the said Convention on the 1st day of
October, 2007;
AND WHEREAS it is necessary to align and harmonize the existing laws with the said
Convention.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of  the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Suicide Prevention in Youth Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 244 of 2018
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Agency" means the Y outh Mental Health Agency established under section 4;
(b) "annual report" means a report giving the details of developmental activities
taken up over the year by the Agency and detailing about targets set and achieved;
(c) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(d) "counseling" means the application of mental health, psychological or human
development principles through cognitive, effective, behavioral or systemic
interventions and strategies to address wellness, personal growth, or career
development as well as pathology;
(e) "educational institution" means —
(i) a middle or a secondary or a senior secondary level school imparting
education to children, or any college owned by the appropriate Government,
local authority or non-Governmental Organization, institute or university
imparting higher education recognized by the Government or established under
an Act of the Central Government or a State Government or run by a non-
Governmental Organization, by whatever name such institution is called; and
(ii) schools and colleges managed by a private entity, society or a trust
which impart education at secondary, senior secondary level and university
level;
(f) "employee" means a person employed at a workplace for any work on regular,
temporary, ad hoc or daily wage basis, either directly or through an agent, including a
contractor with or without the knowledge of the principal employer, whether for
remuneration or not, or working on a voluntary basis or otherwise, whether the terms
of employment are express or implied and includes a co-worker, a contract worker,
probationer, trainee, apprentice or called by any other such name but does not include
domestic worker working at home;
(g) "mental health promotion" refers to activities that optimize the creation of
individual, social and environmental conditions that enable optimal psychological and
psycho physiological development of a person;
(h) "media" includes print, electronic, online and digital platforms for
communication;
(i) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(j) "psychiatrist" means a medical practitioner possessing a post-graduate degree
or diploma in psychiatry awarded by an university recognized by the University Grants
Commission established under the University Grants Commission Act, 1956, or awarded
or recognised by the National Board of Examinations and included in the First Schedule
to the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956, or recognised by the Medical Council of
India, constituted under the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 and includes, in relation
to any State, any medical officer who having regard to his knowledge and experience
in psychiatry, has been declared by the Government of that to be a psychiatrist for the
purposes of this Act;
(k) "workplace" includes —
(i) office of any department, organization, undertaking, establishment,
enterprise, institution, office, branch or unit which is established, owned,
controlled or wholly or substantially financed by funds provided directly or
indirectly by the appropriate Government or the local authority or a Government
company or a corporation or a co-operative society;
Definitions.
3 of 1956.
102 of 1956.
102 of 1956.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(ii) office of any private sector organization or a private venture,
undertaking, enterprise, institution, establishment, society, trust, non-
governmental organization, unit or service provider carrying on commercial,
professional, vocational, educational, entertainment, industrial, health services
or financial activities including production, supply, sale, distribution or service;
and
(iii) hospitals or nursing homes.
(l) "youth" means a person who has attained the age of fifteen years but below
the age of thirty years.
3. The appropriate Government shall, within one year of the commencement of this
Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, formulate a comprehensive National Suicide
Prevention Strategy for prevention of suicides particularly among youth in the country.
4. The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but within one year of the
commencement of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute an Agency to
be known as the Youth Mental Health Agency to monitor, advise and supervise the provisions
of this Act.
5. The Agency shall,—
(a) develop the coordination and cooperation between concerned Ministries of
the appropriate Government and stakeholders based on the guidelines of the National
Suicide Prevention Strategy formulated under section 3;
(b) compile and disseminate knowledge and guidance in collaboration with
relevant agencies and stakeholders;
(c) strengthen knowledge-building and develop new knowledge in collaboration
with agencies and relevant stakeholders and provide support to such development
work;
(d) develop monitoring of the suicide preventative activities in collaboration
with relevant agencies and stakeholders; and
(e) publish annual reports on the development of the area based on its role as a
coordinating agency.
6. The appropriate Government shall ensure that Counselling Centres consisting of
professionally trained counsellors are set up in every State to provide services to students,
research scholars and faculties including non-teaching staff in such manner as may be
prescribed.
7. The appropriate Government shall direct all educational institutions and workplaces
to constitute a Mental Health Committee for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
8. The Mental Health Committees constituted under section 7 shall,—
(a) undertake mental health promotion through creating awareness about
mental health issues and stress management in the educational institution through
regular talks, seminars, discussions on a routine basis;
(b) ensure that every educational institution set up a Counselling Cell where
students, faculty, non-teaching staff and employees including faculty members may
Formulation
of National
Suicide
Prevention
Strategy.
Constitution
a Youth
Mental
Health
Agency.
Functions of
the Agency.
Setting up of
Counselling
Centres.
Constitution
of Mental
Health
Committees
in all
educational
institutions
and work
places.
Functions of
the Mental
Health
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
access a professionally trained psychological counsellor free of cost in case of any
mental distress;
(c) ensure that there is at least one psychiatrist to provide mental healthcare
counselling in every Counselling cell; and
(d) submit an annual report stating the year-round activities undertaken by it to
the Agency.
9. (1) The appropriate Government shall provide mental healthcare counselling in
every Government school in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The appropriate Government shall appoint adequate number of psychiatrists to
provide mental healthcare counselling in Government schools in such manner, as may be
prescribed.
10. (1) The appropriate Government shall ensure that every educational institution
and workplace disseminate and provide opportunities to discuss suicide prevention awareness
information to all employees and students.
(2) The information dissemination and suicide prevention information under sub-
section (1) shall include but not limited to the following:—
(a) providing information on all crises intervention tools such as National and
local helpline numbers, self-help groups, availability of psychologists; and
(b) providing information about depression and suicide prevention resources
available to students.
(3) The information provided to students under sub-section (2) shall pertain to mental
health services and other support services, including student-run organizations for
individuals at risk of or affected by tendencies of suicide.
11. (1) The appropriate Government shall ensure that teaching and non-teaching staff
in educational institutions undergo training focused on measures to be taken for prevention
of suicide, identify possible signs and patterns of depression, suicide and self-harm.
(2) The appropriate Government shall ensure that all employees at workplaces
undergone training for taking preventive measures and checking tendencies of suicide among
their family members and colleagues.
(3) The training under sub-section ( 1) and ( 2) shall be undertaken by experienced
psychiatrists, counsellors and medical practitioners at least once a year.
12. The appropriate Government shall set up a toll-free 24/7 National Suicide
Prevention Lifeline Number.
13. The appropriate Government shall take necessary measures to ensure—
(a) restriction on access to information on the internet and other sources for
availing unauthorized psychological services;
(b) promotion of methods to check tendencies of suicide and self-harm and
prevention of indulging in online games that endorse harmful behaviour;
(c) development of a system of alert and restriction on online sites that endorse
harmful behaviour such as self-harm; and
(d) improve parental control on online sites that advertise content which actively
encourages or glorifies suicides or self-harm.
Mental
Healthcare
Counselling
in
Government
Schools.
Information
dissemination
and awareness
building.
Mandatory
suicide
preventive
training in
educational
institutions
and
workplaces.
Creation of a
toll-free
National
suicide
prevention
lifeline
number.
Appropriate
Government
to take
measures to
curb spread of
harmful online
material.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

5
14. The appropriate Government shall take measures to ensure that media reporting of
mental health issues is carried out in an appropriate manner with caution.
15. The appropriate Government shall take all measures to ensure that,—
(a) the provisions of this Act are given wide publicity through public media
including television, radio, print and online media at regular intervals;
(b) to reduce stigma associated with mental illness are planned, designed, funded
and implemented in an effective manner; and
(c) the appropriate Government officials including police officers and other officers
of the appropriate Government are given periodic sensitization and awareness training
on the issues under this Act.
16. (1) If any  difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after expiry of two years from the date of
commencement of this act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid
before each House of Parliament.
17. The Provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law, for the time being in force.
18. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions, aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have affect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Media
reporting on
Mental
Health issues.
Creating
awareness
about mental
health illness.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Suicide is the second leading cause of death among fifteen to twenty-nine years old
youth globally. Albeit, it is often cited as the most preventive form of death. According to
data from the National Health Profile, 2018, the rates of suicide in India have increased in the
last ten years. The internationally acclaimed medical journal Lancet has reported that in the
year 2016 alone, an estimated 230,300 Indians committed suicide, a forty per cent. increase
from the year 1990. Further, India accounted for thirty per cent. of all suicides reported
globally for women and twenty-six per cent. for men.
At risk for suicide are generally the adolescents and young adults. According to
National Mental Health Survey 2016, nearly 9.8 million of young Indians aged between 13-17
years are in need of active interventions of mental healthcare due to some form of mental
disorder. The student suicide rate in the country has also seen a rise in the last three years.
Stigma associated with reporting of mental health disorders may mean that the number is
much higher.
In a technological saturated world there is a plethora of harmful content that can
influence young minds. The age bracket has additional pressures to excel in school and
workplaces. Additionally, hormonal and bodily changes in adolescents can further put
pressure on the young mind. Shift towards nuclear family structures often result in reduction
of interaction time with parents and family members. While acknowledging that suicide is a
complex phenomenon that occurs due to a multitude of factors, rather than a specific cause,
timely intervention can save millions of lives. The first step in reduction of suicide in the
country is through reducing the stigma attached to mental health issues. Stigma contributes
to the huge burden of mental morbidity, being a road-block to treatment seeking. A community-
based response has been recommended by the World Health Organization as a way to open
lines of communications and reduce stigma. The school becomes an important place of
intervention as adolescents and young adults spend a majority of their time there. Suicide
prevention training for faculty and teachers can help in early identification of signs of mental
distress.
The high suicide rate in India warrant a swift and serious policy response. This mental
health intervention may help to provide a ray of hope towards a dignified life for millions of
adolescent and young adults.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; ANURAG SINGH THAKUR
November 19, 2018.
6

7
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall establish a Youth
Mental Health Agency. Clause 6 provides that the appropriate Government shall establish
counselling centres in every State. Clause 7 provides that the Educational institutions and
workplaces shall establish Mental Health Committees. Clause 8 provides for the functions
of the Mental Health Committee. Clause 9 provides for mental healthcare counselling in
every Government school. It also provides for appointment of adequate number of
psychiatrists. Clause 12 provides that the appropriate Government shall create a National
Suicide Prevention 24/7 toll-free help-line number. Clause 15 provides for wide publicity
through public media including television, radio, print and online media at regular intervals
about the provisions of this Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about
rupees one hundred crore is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non- recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

8
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 18 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to address the increasing prevalence of suicide especially amongst the youth of the
country with a community-based approach focusing on timely intervention and
removal of stigma associated with reporting of mental illness and increasing
lines of communication and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Anurag Singh Thakur, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—2076LS(S-3)—20-12-2018.