THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
PROF. (DR.) SUGATA BOSE,  M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After section 32 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, the following section
shall be inserted, namely:—
" 32A. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time
being in force, every political party shall, at every general election to the House of the
People and the Legislative Assemblies of States, allocate at least, forty per cent. of the
total seats being contested by it to female candidates and forty per cent. of such seats
to male candidates:
Bill No.  244 of 2016
Short title
and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Insertion of
new section
32A.
Political
Party to
allocate forty
per cent.
female and
forty per
cent. male
candidates to
contest
elections.
5
10
43 of 1951.

Provided that in the case of general election to the House of the People, every
political party shall also ensure to allocate, at least forty per cent. of the total
parliamentary seats being contested by it in any State to female candidates and forty
per cent. of such seats to male candidates.".
2

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In the interest of gender equity, there is an urgent need to provide just representation
to women in the House of People and the State Legislatures. The need is to empower women
to join politics, encourage and ensure their active participation for upholding the true essence
of democracy and political representation of the People. The best way to do so is to make a
gender-neutral one-line amendment to the Representation of the People Act, 1951 requiring,
registered and recognized political parties to nominate at least forty per cent, male and forty
per cent. female candidates to contest elections to the House of People and the State
Legislative Assemblies. There is overwhelming evidence from across the world that women's
representation has increased only when political parties have maintained something close to
gender parity on their nomination lists. The amendment obviates the need to rotate
constituencies that reservation of seats would require and avoids the unhealthy prospect of
women contesting against women within the secluded walls of reserved seats.
Hence this Bill.
New Delhi; SUGATA  BOSE
July 22, 2016

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
————
(Prof. (Dr.) Sugata Bose, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2633LS(S3)—20-10-2016.