1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRIMATI JAYSHREEBEN K. PATEL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2015.
2. After article 16 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,
namely:—
"16A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Part, the State may make
provision for reservation in favour of women in posts and services under the State:
Provided that the percentage of reservation shall not exceed thirty-three
per cent.
Short title.
Bill No. 245 of 2015
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
Insertion of
new article
16A.
Reservation
for women in
posts and
services.

2
(2) The provisions of clause (1) shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained
to the contrary in any judgment, decree, direction or order of any Court of Law or Tribunal
or Authority having judicial powers.".
3. After article 29 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
‘‘29A. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Part, the State may make
provision for reservation in admission in favour of women in educational institutions
under the State:
Provided that the percentage of reservation shall not exceed thirty-three
per cent.".
5
Insertion of
new article
29A.
Reservation
for women in
educational
institutions.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Women constitute nearly half of the population of the country. However, they are not
adequately represented in the services under the State. One of the basic reasons for under
representation in Government services is lack of education particularly higher education.
Women representation in IIT's and IIM's and other technical institutions is very less.
The Bill seeks to amend the Constitution with a view to providing thirty-three per cent.
reservation in favour of women in the services under the State and admission in all educational
institutions.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; JAYSHREEBEN K. PA TEL
August 12, 2015.
3

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shrimati Jayshreeben K. Patel, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2406LS(S3)—05-11-2015.