Bill No. 245 of  2017
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
SHRI RAJIV PRATAP RUDY,  M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Y ear of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2017.
2. In article 172 of the Constitution, after clause (1), the following clauses shall be
inserted, namely:—
"(1A) Subject to the provisions of clause (1), Parliament may, by law, extend or
curtail  the duration of the term of the Legislative Assembly of a State so that elections
to all the State Legislative Assemblies may coincide with the General Elections to the
House of the People by the year 2024.
(1B) For the purposes of clause (1A), the Central Government shall, within six
months from the date of coming into force the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2017, in
consultation with the Election Commission, determine the manner of extending or
Short title.
Amendment
of article 172.5
10

curtailing the duration of the term of the State Legislative Assemblies so that the
elections to the State Legislative Assemblies are held simultaneously with the General
Elections to the House of the People by the year 2024.".
3. For article 326 of the Constitution, the following article shall be substituted, namely:—
"326. The elections to the House of the People and to the Legislative Assembly
of every State shall be held simultaneously on the basis of adult suffrage; that is to
say, every person who is a citizen of India and who is not less than eighteen years of
age on such date as may be fixed in that behalf by or under any law made by the
appropriate Legislature and is not otherwise disqualified under this Constitution or
any law made by the appropriate Legislature on the ground of non-residence,
unsoundness of mind, crime or corrupt or illegal practice, shall be entitled to be
registered as a voter at any such election.".
Substitution
of new article
for article
326.
Elections to
the House of
the People
and to the
Legislative
Assemblies of
States to be
held
simultaneously
on the basis
of adult
suffrage.
2
5
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Constitution of India has vested the Election Commission of India the
superintendence, direction and control of the entire process for conduct of elections to
Parliament and Legislature of every State. However, frequent elections across the country
have placed Indian polity perennially in an election mode. This will hamper long-term policy
making because every decision of the State or Central Government is seen as a reason for
votes.
On an average the country witnesses, elections to about five to seven State Assemblies
every year. Adding to it is the elections to the third tier of Government i.e. Panchayati Raj
Institutions and Municipal bodies in rural and urban areas respectively, bye-elections etc.
This has substantially increased the number of elections in any given year. With multiple
elections, the model code of conduct is in force for most of the time which prevents the
Government from initiating new projects and ultimately slow down development work. It
affects stability and economic development.
Besides the Lok Sabha elections in 2014, elections were held to about fifteen States
Assemblies during March 2014-May 2016. In 2014 alone, elections were held in March-May
(Lok Sabha, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Odisha and Sikkim), September-October (Haryana,
Maharashtra) and State Assemblies were announced within a month of concluding elections
to other State Assemblies. This would not only end up negatively impacting administrative
and developmental activities in the poll bound States/regions but also substantially increase
the cost of conducting elections to the largest democracy in the world.
In lieu of this, the Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and
Justice submitted its report on the "Feasibility of Holding Simultaneous Elections to the
House of People (Lok Sabha) and State Legislative Assemblies" in December 2015.
The Committee Report suggested that the holding of simultaneous elections to
Lok Sabha and State Assemblies would reduce—
(1) The massive expenditure that is currently incurred for the conduct of separate
elections;
(2) the policy paralysis that results from the imposition of the model code of conduct
during elections time;
(3) impact on delivery of essential services; and
(4) burden on crucial manpower that is deployed during election time.
The Election Commission is of the view that simultaneous elections will give enough
time for the elected incumbent Government to formulate policies and implement programs
continuously for a longer period without any interruption caused by imposition of model
code of conduct. In fact, the Election Commission has favored holding simultaneous elections
to the Lok Sabha and State Assemblies. However, it is for all the political parties to come
together on board for hold such synchronized elections of India.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Constitution with a view to curtail or extend the
duration of Legislative Assemblies of States so as to ensure that the elections to the State
Legislative Assemblies are held simultaneously with the general elections to the House of
the people by the year 2024.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAJIV PRATAP RUDY
November 27, 2017
3

ANNEXURE
[EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA]
*  * * * * *
172. (1) Every Legislative Assembly of every State, unless sooner dissolved, shall
continue for five years from the date appointed for its first meeting and no longer and the
expiration of the said period of five years shall operate as a dissolution of the Assembly:
Provided that the said period may, while a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation,
be extended by Parliament by law for a period not exceeding one year at a time and not
extending in any case beyond a period of six months after the Proclamation has ceased to
operate.
(2) The Legislative Council of a State shall not be subject to dissolution, but as
nearly as possible one-third of the members thereof shall retire as soon as may be on the
expiration of every second year in accordance with the provisions made in that behalf by
Parliament by law.
*  * * * * *
326. The elections to the House of the People and to the Legislative Assembly of
every State shall be on the basis of adult suffrage; that is to say, every person who is a
citizen of India and who is not less than eighteen years of age on such date as may be fixed
in that behalf by or under any law made by the appropriate Legislature and is not othewise
disqualified under this Constitution or any law made by the appropriate Legislature on the
ground of non-residence, unsoundness of mind, crime or corrupt or illegal practice, shall be
entitled to be registered as a voter at any such election.
*  * * * * *
Duration of
State
Legislatures.
Elections to
the House of
the People
and to the
Legislative
Assemblies of
States to be
on the basis
of adult
suffrage.
4

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2647LS(S3)—19-12-2017.