Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE WITNESS PROTECTION PROGRAM  BILL, 2016
By
SHRI BAIJAY ANT PANDA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the protection of witnesses in criminal proceedings and to
enhance the ability of a witness to give testimony in a judicial
proceeding or to cooperate with law enforcement without
fear of intimidation or reprisal.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Witness Protection Program  Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 245 of 2016
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "competent authority" means Member-Secretary of the National Legal
Services Authority or the State Legal Services Authority, as the case may be;
(c) "family member" includes parents, spouse, siblings, children and grand
children of the witness;
(d) "in-camera proceeding" means proceeding wherein the public and press are
not allowed to participate;
(e) "National Legal Service Authority" means the National Legal Services
Authority constituted under the Legal Services Authority Act, 1987;
(f) "State Legal Service Authority" means the State Legal Services Authority
constituted under the Legal Services Authority Act, 1987;
(g) "threat analysis report" means a detailed report prepared by designated
police officers of the District/Unit investigating the case reflecting the seriousness
and credibility of the threat perception to a witness or his family members containing
specific details about the nature of threats faced by the witness or his family members
to their life, reputation or property;
(h) "witness" means any person, who possesses information or document about
any crime regarded by the competent authority as being material to any criminal
proceeding and who has made a statement or who has given or agreed to give evidence
in relation to such proceeding;
(i) "witness protection application" means an application moved by the witness
in the prescribed form before a competent authority for seeking Witness Protection
Order; and
(j) "witness proteciton order" means an order passed by the competent authority
detailing the steps to be taken for ensuring the safety of life, reputation or property of
witness and his family members and shall include an interim order, if any, passed
during the pendency of witness protection application.
3. For the purposes of this Act, the witnesses shall be classified into the following
groups:—
(a) Group A—Where the threat extends to life of the witness or his family members;
(b) Group B—Where the threat extends to safety, reputation or property of the
witness or his family members; and
(c) Group C—Where the threat is moderate and extends to harassment and
intimidation of the witness or his family member's reputation or property, during the
investigation process.
4. (1) Every witness seeking protection shall, during the course of investigation of any
offence, file a witness protection application for witness protection order at the court in
which the proceedings are being heard or before the competent authority, as the case may
be, in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The court or the competent authority, as the case may be, shall, upon receipt of an
application under sub-section (1), call for the threat analysis report and, shall, upon receipt
of report, evaluate the threat to the life, reputation or property of the witness or his family
members or any other person, which it deems fit, to ascertain whether there is necessity to
pass a witness protection order or not.
5. (1) It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to formulate measures to
protect the witness.
Definition.
2
Process of
availing
protection.
Classification
of witnesses.
Appropriate
Government
to protect the
witness.
39 of 1987.
39 of 1987.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(2) Without generality of the foregoing provisions, the witness protection measures
shall be proportional to the threat and shall include—
(a) concealment of identity of the witness by referring to him with the changed
name or alphabet;
(b) close protection and regular patrolling around the witness's place of residence;
(c) holding of in-camera trials, if necessary;
(d) avoidance of face-to-face contact between witness and accused during
investigation or trial;
(e) allowing a support person to remain present during recording of statement
and deposition of witness;
(f) provision of emergency contact persons for the witness;
(g) monitoring of mail and telephone calls of witness;
(h) installation of security devices such as security doors, Close Circuit
Television (CCTV), alarms and fencing at the witness's place of residence;
(i) temporary change of residence of witness during investigation or trial;
(j) ensuring expeditious recording of deposition during trial on day-to-day basis
without adjournments;
(k) awarding periodical financial aids or grants to the witness for the purpose
of re-location and sustenance; and
(l) any other measure considered necessary and specifically those requested by
the witness.
6.  It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to ensure that the witness is
made aware of his rights under this Act and ascertain that he may decide to exercise or not
exercise the provisions and protections available to him under this Act.
7. (1) The protections under this Act shall be void and terminated if the Court establishes
that the protectee gave false testimonies or deliberately misled the authorities and the court.
(2) If the protection of a protectee is terminated under sub-section ( 1),  he shall be
liable to be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend up to six months and
also fine which may extend up to two thousand rupees.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite sums to the appropriate Governments for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
9. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after expiry of two years from the date
of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid
before each House of Parliament.
10. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law, for the time being in force.
3
Duty to
inform the
witness of his
rights.
Termination
of protection
under this
Act.
Central
Government
to provide
requisite fund.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Act not in
derogation of
other laws.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following  the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to
make rules.
5
10

5
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In recent years crime has grown considerably. Criminal elements are much more
becoming stronger and diverse. They are engaging more and much frequently in systematic
forms of cooperation designed to further their criminal activities. In the investigation and
prosecution of crime, particularly the more serious and complex forms of organized crime, it
is essential that witnesses, the cornerstones for successful investigation and prosecution,
have trust in criminal justice systems. Witnesses need to have the confidence to come
forward to assist law enforcement and prosecutorial authorities. They need to be assured
that they will receive support and protection from intimidation and the harm that criminal
groups may seek to inflict upon them in attempts to discourage or punish them from
cooperating. The Supreme Court as well as the Law Commission have emphasized on the
need for legislative measures for protection of witnesses.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BAIJAYANT PANDA
July 5, 2016.

6
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for installation of security devices like Closed Circuit
Television Security doors alarms and fencing at winess' place of residence. It also provides
for awarding periodical financial aids or grants to the witnesses. Clause 8 provides that the
Central Government shall provide adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying
out the purposes of the Act. The expenditure relating to States shall be borne out of the
Consolidated Funds of respective States. The expenditure relating to Union territory shall
be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring
expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore per annum would be involved from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
A Non-recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore is also likely to be involved.

7
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Act. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the protection of witnesses in criminal proceedings and to
enhance the ability of a witness to give testimony in a judicial
proceeding or to cooperate with law enforcement without
fear of intimidation or reprisal
————
(Shri Baijayant Panda, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2613LS(S3)—20.10.2016.