1
THE  SUPREME COURT OF INDIA (ESTABLISHMENT OF A
PERMANENT BENCH AT AHMEDABAD)
BILL, 2015
By
SHRIMATI JAYSHREEBEN K. PATEL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a permanent Bench of the
Supreme Court of India at Ahmedabad.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1)  This  Act  may  be  called  the  Supreme  Court  of  India  (Establishment  of   a
Permanent Bench at Ahmedabad)  Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date  as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title
and
commencement.
Bill No.   246  of  2015
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. There shall be established a permanent Bench of the Supreme Court of India at
Ahmedabad and such number of Judges of the Supreme Court of India, being not less than
nine, as the Chief Justice of India may, from time to time, with the approval of the President,
nominate, shall sit at Ahmedabad in order to exercise the jurisdiction and power for the
time being vested in the Supreme Court of India in respect of cases arising in the States of
Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Goa, Rajasthan and the Union Territory of Dadra
and Nagar Haveli and such other territories as may be notified by the Central Government,
from time to time, with approval of the Chief Justice of India.
Establishment
of a
permanent
Bench of
Supreme
Court of India
at
Ahmedabad.
5

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
India is the seventh largest country in the world in terms of area. It is the second most
populous country next to China. However, the seat of the Supreme Court of India at Delhi is
to decide cases arising in whole of the country. Article 130 of the Constitution provides that
the Supreme Court of India shall sit in Delhi or in such other place or places, as the Chief
Justice of India, may, with the approval of the President, from time to time, appoint. The
language of article 130 clearly indicates that the intention of the founding fathers of the
Constitution was to have more than one seat of the Supreme Court. But so far no thought has
been given to the idea of having another Bench of the apex court despite the fact that the
population of the country which was around thirty-six crore at the time of independence has
now swollen to over one hundred and twenty-eight crore and there is proportionate increase
in the cases in the Supreme Court. Litigant public has to travel thousands of kilometers to
follow-up their cases in the Supreme Court which is seated in Delhi. This not only adds to
their financial burden but also results in wastage of a lot of time in travelling and staying in
Delhi. The litigants in northern and central part of the country find it inconvenient and
expensive. Therefore, it is high time that a Bench of the Supreme Court of India be established
for the convenience of the public at large for which Ahmedabad is the most appropriate
place.
Geographically, Ahmedabad is the most ideal place for setting up of the Bench of the
apex court. A Bench of the Supreme Court at Ahmedabad will provide a big relief to the
litigant public residing in the States of Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Goa, Rajasthan
and Union Territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and other adjoining States of the country and
will provide them convenient and affordable justice.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; JAYSHREEBEN K. PA TEL
August 13, 2015.
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 117(1) AND 117(3)
OF THE CONSTITUTION
[Copy of letter No. 15019/12/2015-US dated 29 September, 2015 from Shri D.V . Sadananda
Gowda, Minister of Law and Justice to the Secretary General, Lok Sabha].
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Supreme Court of
India (Establishment of a Permanent Bench at Ahmedabad) Bill, 2015 by Shrimati Jayshreeben
K. Patel, M.P., recommends the introduction of the Bill under article 117(1) and consideration
under article 117(3) of the Constitution, in Lok Sabha.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a permanent Bench of the Supreme
Court of India at Ahmedabad. The Bill, therefore, if enacted and brought into operation,
would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is not possible to estimate,
at this stage, the exact amount of expenditure that will be involved.
However, a recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore is likely to be involved per
annum for the purpose of payment of allowances to the Judges of the Bench and payment of
salaries to the Court servants.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is likely to be involved for the
construction of building of the Court, etc. and appointment of staff members.
4

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a permanent Bench of the
Supreme Court of India at Ahmedabad.
————
(Shrimati Jayshreeben K. Patel, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2641LS(S3)—05-11-2015.