Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 246 of  2017
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
SHRI RAJIV PRA TAP RUDY, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution  (Amendment) Act, 2017.
(2)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. For article 48A of the Constitution, the following article shall be substituted, namely:—
“48A. (1) The State shall endeavour to protect and improve the environment so
as to ensure a pollution-free environment for its citizens and to safeguard the forests
and wild life of the country.
(2) The State shall, through such enforcement agencies as it consider necessary,
strive hard to ensure that forty per cent. of the total geographical area of the country
be covered under forest or tree.”.
3. In article 51A of the Constitution, for clause (g), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:—
“(g) to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes,
rivers and wild life, and to have compassion for living creatures and to actively participate
in the State’s endeavour to promote the forest cover of the country to forty per cent. of
the total geographical area.”
Substitution of
new article for
article 48A.
Protection
and
improvement
of
environment
and
safeguarding
of forests and
wild life.
Amendment
of article
51A.
5
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Forests are key to all forms of life. They provide for the continuity of the world’s
biodiversity which is necessary for economic development, human livelihood, medical
discoveries, and to provide environmental adaptive responses. Forests are also important
because they stabilize climate, prevent soil erosion, watershed protection and provides
habitat to thousands of life forms. Despite our dependence on forests, we are still allowing
them to disappear.
India accounts for about 2.4 per cent. of the total geographical area of the world and is
also home to 17 per cent. of the world population. India is one of the richest countries in the
world in terms of biodiversity making it one of the Mega-diverse countries accounting for
nearly 8 per cent. of the species of the world. It is estimated that nearly 1/3rd of Indian plants
are endemic, being found nowhere else in the world.
To promote this diversity and economic growth the National Forest Policy, 1952
emphasized on the extension of forest and tree cover by proposing that 33% of the total
geographical area should be under forest tree cover. The National Forest Policy, 1988 which
was formulated four years before the Earth Summit 1992 embodies the principles of sustainable
forest management and mandated an increase in the forest/tree cover in the country to 33 per
cent. of the land area. However, according to the India State of Forest Report (ISFR) 2015, the
total forest and tree cover is 79.42 million hectare, which is only 24.16 of the total geographical
area of the country.
The Bill proposes to conserve the natural heritage of the country by preserving the
remaining natural forests and at the same time also promote the increase in the forest cover
with the vast variety of flora and fauna by ensuring that the State with active participation of
the citizens will be able to preserve and promote the remarkable biological diversity and
genetic resources of the country. It also enable the country to meet our climate change
targets without any binding obligations.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAJIV PRATAP RUDY
November 27, 2017.
3

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA, 1950
* * * * *
48A. The State shall endeavour to protect and improve the  and to safeguard the
forests and wild life of the country.
* * * * *
51A. It shall be the duty of every citizen of India—
* * * * *
(g) To protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes, rivers
and wild life and to have compassion for living creatures;
* * * * *
Protection
and
improvement
of
environment
and
safeguarding
of forests
and wild life.
Fundamental
duties.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2643LS(S3)—19.12.2017.