1
THE WHISTLE BLOWERS PROTECTION (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2016
By
SHRI BAIJAYANT PANDA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Whistle Blowers Protection Act, 2011.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Whistle Blowers Protection (Amendment) Act, 2016.
 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No.  246 of  2016
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In section 3 of the Whistle Blowers Protection Act, 2011 (hereinafter  referred to as
the principal Act),—
(i) after clause (f), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(fa) "injury" in relation to an employee of a company means any
disadvantage including dismissal of an employee, alteration of an employee's
position to his detriment or discrimination with an employee;"; and
(ii) after clause (k), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
"(l) "State Vigilance Commission" means the Commission established by
a resolution of the respective State Government; and
(m) "witness" means any person, who possesses information or document
about any crime regarded by the competent authority as being material to any
criminal proceeding.".
3. In section 8 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after clause (b), the following
clause shall be added, namely:—
"(c) as might involve the disclosure of' the proceedings in a legal professional
agreement between an advocate and a client.".
4. In section 12 of the principal Act, the words ", or witnesses," and the words “or the
witnesses" shall be omitted.
5. In the principal Act, after Chapter V , the following Chapter and sections thereunder
shall be inserted, namely:—
"CHAPTER V A
W
HISTLE BLOWER WITNESS PROTECTION AND PROTECTION AGAINST INJURY
14A. For the purposes of this Act, the witnesses shall be classified into following
groups—
(a) Group A—where the threat extends to life of the witness or his family members.
(b) Group B—where the threat extends to safety, reputation or property of the
witness or his family members.
(c) Group C—where the threat is moderate and extends to harassment and
intimidation of the witness or his family member's reputation or property, during the
investigation process.
14B. (1)  It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to formulate measures to
protect the witness.
(2) Without generality of the foregoing provisions, the witness protection measures
shall be proportional to the threat and shall include—
(a) concealment of identity of the witness by referring to him with the changed
name or alphabet;
(b) close protection and regular patrolling around the witness's place of residence;
(c) holding of in-camera trials, if necessary;
(d) avoidance of face-to-face contact between witness and accused during
investigation or trial;
(e) allowing a support person to remain present during recording of statement of
deposition of witness; and
(f) such other measures as may be necessary to ensure safety of the witness.
Amendment
of section 3.
17 of 2014.
Amendment
of section 8.
Amendment
of section 12.
Insertion of
new Chapter
VA .
Classification
of witnesses.
Appropriate
Government
to protect the
witness.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
14C. The Competent Authority, at any time after the making of disclosure by the
complainant, if it is of the opinion that a company or a person has caused any injury to the
person making the disclosure or to the complainant, shall —
(a) make an order requiring the company to compensate the complainant for
loss, damage or injury caused as a result of reprisal or threat; or
(b) make an order requiring the company to reinstate the complainant in that
position or a position at a comparable level; or
(c) make an order imposing a penalty not exceeding five lakh rupees and
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend upto fifteen years or as may
be applicable under any law for the time being in force.
14D. For the purposes of sections 14B and 14C, the Central Government shall, by
notification, establish a tribunal, to be known as the Public Interest Disclosure Protection
Tribunal to exercise such powers and authority as may be conferred on it by law made by
Parliament in this behalf.
14E. For the purposes of sections 14B and 14C, the Central Government shall, by
notification, constitute a Fund to be known as the Witness Protection Fund to which shall be
credited funds from the Central Government, fines deposited in courts and donations or
contributions from institutions and private individuals .".
Protection
against injury
of
complainant.
Establishment
of Public
Interest
Disclosure
Protection
Tribunal.
Constitution
of Witness
Protection
Fund.
5
10
15

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Whistle Blowers Protection Act, 2011 (17 of 2014) was enacted to provide protection
from harassment to persons making disclosure of corruption, willful misuse of power or
arbitrary use of discretion of any power by any public servant, besides keeping the identity
of the whistle-blowers secure. However, the Act lacks specific provisions and administrative
set-up to protect whistle-blowers witnesses against physical attacks and any other reprisals.
Further, the compulsory identification of the complainant is causing a detriment to many.
Thus, it has become necessary to amend the parent Act to address the above shortcomings.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BAIJAYANT PANDA
July 5, 2016.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides that Central Government shall establish Public Interest
Disclosure Protection Tribunal to protect the whistle-blowers witnesses and settle the disputes
between employee and a company at the earliest. It also provides that Central Government
shall constitute the Witness Protection Fund to release funds to protect the whistle-blower
witnesses. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees three hundred crore would be involved as
recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

6
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE WHISTLE BLOWERS PROTECTION ACT, 2011.
(17 OF 2014)
* * * * * *
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(f) "Government company" means a company referred to in section 617 of the
Companies Act, 1956;
* * * * * *
(k) "regulations" means the regulations made by the Competent Authority under this
Act.
* * * * * *
8. (1) * * * * * *
(a) * * * * * *
(b) as might involve the disclosure of proceedings of the Cabinet of the State
Government or any Committee of that Cabinet,
and for the purpose of this sub-section, a certificate issued by the Secretary to the Government
of India or the Secretary to the State Government, as the case may be, or, any authority so
authorised by the Central or State Government certifying that any information, answer or
portion of a document is of the nature specified in clause (a) or clause (b), shall be binding
and conclusive.
* * * * * *
12. If the competent Authority either on the application of the complainant, or witnesses,
or on the basis of information gathered, is of the opinion that either the complainant or public
servant or the witnesses or any person rendering assistance for inquiry under this Act need
protection, the Competent Authority shall issue appropriate directions to the concerned
Government authorities (including police) which shall take necessary steps, through its
agencies, to protect such complainant or public servant or persons concerned.
* * * * * *
Definitions.
Certain
matters
exempt from
disclosure.
Protection of
witnesses and
other
persons.

GMGIPMRND—2701LS(S3)—20.10.2016.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Whistle Blowers Protection Act, 2011.
————
(Shri Baijayant Panda, M.P .)