1
THE MUSLIM WOMEN (PROTECTION OF RIGHTS ON MARRIAGE)
BILL, 2017
A
BILL
to protect the rights of married Muslim women and to prohibit divorce by pronouncing
talaq by their husbands and to provide for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of  the Republic of  India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on Marriage)
Act, 2017.
(2) It shall extend to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
AS PASSED BY  LOK SABHA
ON 28.12.2017
Bill No. 247-C of 2017
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "electronic form" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause (r)
of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000;
(b) "talaq" means talaq-e-biddat  or any other similar form of talaq having
the effect of instantaneous and irrevocable divorce pronounced by a Muslim
husband; and
(c) "Magistrate" means a Magistrate of the First Class exercising jurisdiction
under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, in the area where a married Muslim woman
resides.
CHAPTER II
D
ECLARA TION OF TALAQ TO BE VOID AND ILLEGAL
3. Any pronouncement of talaq by a person upon his wife, by words, either spoken
or written or in electronic form or in any other manner whatsoever, shall be void and illegal.
4. Whoever pronounces talaq referred to in section 3 upon his wife shall be punished
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and fine.
CHAPTER III
PROTECTION OF RIGHTS OF MARRIED MUSLIM WOMEN
5. Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in any other law for
the time being in force, a married Muslim woman upon whom talaq is pronounced, shall be
entitled to receive from her husband such amount of subsistence allowance for her and
dependent children as may be determined by the Magistrate.
6. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, a
married Muslim woman shall be entitled to custody of her minor children in the event of
pronouncement of talaq by her husband, in such manner as may be determined by the
Magistrate.
7. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, an
offence punishable under this Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable within the meaning
of the said Code.
Definitions.
21 of 2000.
Talaq to be
void and
illegal.
Punishment
for
pronouncing
talaq.
Custody of
minor
children.
Subsistence
allowance.
Offences to
be cognizable
and non-
bailable.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to protect the rights of married Muslim women and to prohibit divorce by pronouncing
talaq by their husbands and to provide for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
————
(As passed by Lok Sabha)
GMGIPMRND—3264LS(S3)—28-12-2017.