1
THE PREVENTION OF BRIBERY IN PRIV ATE SECTOR
 BILL, 2016
By
SHRIMA TI RAMA DEVI, M.P.
A
BILL
to establish bribery as a criminal offence and to promote effective practices to prevent
bribery in private  sector and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1)  This Act may be called the Prevention of Bribery in Private Sector  Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "bribe" includes facilitation payments, directly or through third parties, gift,
hospitality and expenses which may or perceive to affect the outcome of business
transactions, which are not reasonable and bonafide;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 247 of  2016
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Definitions.
5

2
Explanation.—The term 'bribe' shall become extortion when the demand of bribe is
accompanied by threats that endanger the personal integrity or the life of the person involved,
or forced payment of bribe to protect legitimate right or the speed money, for expediting
approvals and for providing or not withholding services;
(b) "commercial entity" means—
(i) a body incorporated under the laws of India which carries on business
in India or outside India; or
(ii) any other body corporate, wherever incorporated, which carries on
business, or part of a business, in India; or
(iii) a partnership formed under the law in India which carries on business
in India or outside India; or
(iv) any other partnership, wherever formed, which carries on business, or
part of a business, in India:
Explanation.—The term 'business' includes any trade, profession, commerce or
manufacture;
(c) 'confiscation' means the permanent deprivation of property by order of a
court or other competent authority and also includes forfeiture;
(d) 'foreign public official' means any person holding a legislative, executive,
administrative or judicial office of a foreign country, whether appointed or elected as
permanent or temporary, paid or unpaid or any person performing a public function or
a public service for a foreign country;
(e) 'non-governmental organisation' means a body incorporated under the laws
in India or any other body corporate, wherever incorporated which carries on its
charitable or religious activities in India, any society registered under the Societies
Registration Act, 1860; a trust registered under the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 or association
of persons which carries on its charitable or religious activities in India and includes
community based organisations;
Explanation.—The term 'charitable or religious activities' means activities as
defined in sub-section (15) of section 2 of the Income Tax Act, 1961:
(f) 'person' includes—
(i) an individual;
(ii) a company;
(iii) a firm;
(iv) a society;
(v) a trust;
(vi) a Hindu Undivided Family (HUF);
(vii) an association of persons or a body of individuals, whether
incorporated or not;
(viii) limited liability partnership;
(ix) every artificial juridical person not falling within any of the preceding
sub-clauses; and
(x) any agency, office or branch owned or controlled by such person;
(g) 'prescribed' means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(h) 'proceeds of crime' means any property derived or obtained, directly or
indirectly through the commission of offence under this Act; and
21 of 1860.
2 of 1882.
43 of 1961.
5
10
15
20
30
35
40
45
25

3
(i) 'property' means assets of every kind, whether corporeal or incorporeal,
movable or immovable, tangible or intangible, and legal documents or instruments
evidencing title to or interest in such assets.
3. (1) A person shall be guilty of committing an offence of giving bribe, when committed
intentionally in the course of economic, financial or commercial activities when it is established
that there is a promise, offering or giving, directly or indirectly, of an undue advantage to any
person who directs or works, in any capacity, for a commercial entity, for the person himself
or for another person, in order that he in breach of his duties, acts or refrains from acting in
certain matters.
(2) A person shall be guilty of committing an offence of receiving bribe, when committed
intentionally in the course of economic, financial or commercial activities when it is established
that there is solicitation or acceptance, directly or indirectly, of an undue advantage by any
person who directs or works, in any capacity, for a commercial entity, for the person himself
or for another person, in order that he in breach of his duties, acts or refrains from acting in
certain matters.
4. A person shall be guilty of committing an offence of bribery to a foreign public
officials, when committed intentionally in the conduct of international business, when it is
established that there is an offer, promise or giving any undue pecuniary or other advantage,
whether directly or through an intermediary, to a foreign public official, for that official or for
a third party, in order that the official acts or refrains from acting in relation to the performance
of official duties, in order to obtain or retain business or other improper advantage.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, offence of bribery of foreign public
officials includes complicity, incitement, aiding, abetting and authorization of an act of bribery
of a foreign public official or an attempt and conspiracy to bribe a foreign public official.
5. (1) Any person, who in any capacity abets or aids or instigates another person to
commit an offence under sections 3 or 4 shall be deemed to be guilty of offence under that
section.
(2) Any person, who attempts to commit an offence under sections 3 or 4 shall be
deemed to be guilty of an offence under that section.
6. A commercial entity shall be guilty of committing an offence under this section if a
person associated with it, bribes another person intending—
(i) to obtain or retain business for the commercial entity, or
(ii) to obtain or retain an advantage in the conduct of business for the commercial
entity:
Provided that the commercial entity may in defence prove that it has in place adequate
procedures, as may be prescribed, designed to prevent persons associated with it from
undertaking such conduct.
7. A non-governmental organisation shall be guilty of committing an offence under
this section if a person associated with it, bribes another person intending—
(i) to obtain or retain assets, grants for the non-governmental organization; or
(ii) to obtain or retain an advantage in the conduct of its charitable activities:
Provided that the commercial entity may in defence prove that it has in place adequate
procedures, as may be prescribed, designed to prevent persons associated with it from
undertaking such conduct.
8. (1) Where a company contravenes any provision of this Act, every person who, at
the time when contravention was committed, was in charge of or was responsible to, the
company for the conduct of the business of the company as well as the company, shall be
deemed to be guilty of offence and be punished accordingly:
Bribery in the
private sector.
Offence of
Bribery of
foreign public
officials.
Abet, aid or
instigate
another
person to
commit an
offence of
bribery.
Offence of
Bribing by
commercial
entity.
Offence of
bribery by
non-
governmental
organisation.
Offence of
bribery by
company.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person
liable to punishment if he proves that the contrvention took place without his knowledge or
that he exercised due diligence to prevent such contravention.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where any contravention
has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with
the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of any director,
manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other
officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of committing contravention and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
(i) 'company' means anybody corporate and includes a firm, society, trust, limited
liability partnership or other association of persons; and
(ii) 'director' in relation to a firm means a partner of the firm and in relation to a
trust means trustee of the trust.
9. (1) An individual guilty of an offence under sections 3 or 4 shall be liable on the first
offence, for imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years or to a fine not exceeding
rupees three lakh or both and for second or subsequent contravention, for imprisonment for
a term not exceeding ten years or to a fine not less than rupees five lakh or both.
(2) any other person guilty of an offence under sections 3 or 4 shall be liable on the
first offence, to a fine not exceeding rupees two lakh and for second or subsequent
contravention, to a fine not less than rupees three lakh.
(3) A person guilty of an offence under section 5 is liable on conviction to a fine not
more than rupees one lakh.
10. (1) On conviction of a person the proceeds of crime derived from or involved in
offences under sections 3 or 4, or the property the value of which corresponds to that of
such proceeds shall be confiscated.
(2) If proceeds of crime have been transformed or converted, by the person in part or
in full, into other property, such property shall be liable to be confiscated.
(3) If proceeds of crime have been intermingled by the person with property acquired
from legitimate sources, such property shall be liable to be confiscated up to the assessed
value of the intermingled proceeds.
(4) Income or other benefits derived by any person from such proceeds of crime, from
property into which such proceeds of crime have been transformed or converted or from
property with which such proceeds of crime have been intermingled shall also be liable to
confiscated in the same manner and to the same extent as proceeds of crime.
(5) For the purpose of this section, notwithstanding any rights or privilege provided
through any other Act or by an agreement between the parties, the adjudicating authority
shall have authority to order any bank, financial institution, financial intermediary or
commercial entity to provide information, seize or produce records, freeze accounts and remit
the proceeds of crime to the designated account.
(6) The proceeds of crime confiscated under this Act shall vest in the Central
Government.
11. (1) The Central Government  shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint
such number of Special Judges as may be necessary to try the offences punishable under
this Act.
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Special Judge under this Act
unless he is or has been a Sessions Judge or an Additional Sessions Judge under the Code
of Criminal Procedures, 1973.
Penalties.
Confiscation
of proceeds of
crime.
Power to
appoint
Special Judges.
2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
(3) A Special Judge shall follow the procedure prescribed by the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 for the trial.
(4) A Special Judge, while trying an offence punishable under this Act shall exercise
all the powers and functions exercisable by a District Judge.
12. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the High Court may exercise, so far as
applicable, all the powers of appeal and revision conferred by the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973 on  a High Court as if the Court of Special Judge was a Court of Session trying cases
within the local limits of the High Court.
13. (1) The Central Government shall take appropriate steps to provide effective
protection from potential retaliation or intimidation to witnesses, reporting persons and
experts who give testimony concerning offences established under the Act and to their
relatives.
(2) The Central Government shall establish procedures for the physical protection of
such witnesses and reporting persons and for non-disclosure or limitations on the disclosure
of information concerning the identity and whereabouts of such persons.
(3) The provisions of the sub-sections (1) and (2) shall also apply to victims in so far
as they are witnesses.
(4) In cases of extortion bribe, if the bribe giver files a complaint, he shall be protected
under this clause as a whistleblower:
Provided that this protection shall not be made available in case of speed money.
14. (1) The commercial entities shall make adequate procedures, as may be prescribed,
designed to prevent persons associated with it from undertaking bribery.
(2) The procedures shall provide for commercial entities to establish and ensure the
effectiveness of internal controls, ethics and compliance measures for preventing and
detecting bribery and shall inter alia, include,—
(i) a clearly articulated and visible policy prohibiting bribery;
(ii) instructions for strict compliance with the policy at all levels of the entity;
(iii) appropriate disciplinary procedures to address violation of the procedures
at all levels of the entity;
(iv) setting up of independent monitoring body;
(v) oversight of ethics and compliance measures and reporting to the
independent monitoring body;
(vi) ensuring applicability of the policy and procedures to third parties such as
agents, intermediaries, consultants, representatives, distributors, partners, contractors,
advisors, suppliers, associates, subsidiaries and joint venture partners and seeking
commitment from such third parties to adhere to policy prohibiting bribery;
(vii) measures for periodic communication and training at all levels of the entity
of laws against bribery and entity's policy against bribery; and
(viii) putting in place an appropriate whistleblower mechanism including rewards
for reporting and protection of the whistleblowers.
15. (1) The banks, financial institutions and other financial intermediaries shall take
reasonable steps to determine the identity of beneficial owners of funds deposited into the
accounts of such customers in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The banks, financial institutions and other financial intermediaries shall maintain
record of beneficial owners under sub-section (1) and shall provide such information as
and when required by the adjudication authorities.
2 of 1974.
Appeal and
revision.
Protection of
witnesses and
reporting
persons.
Prevention of
bribery by
commercial
entity.
Prevention
and detection
of proceeds
of crime.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
2 of 1974.

6
16. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force in relation to any of the matters provided under this Act.
17. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule make under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case  may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Provision of
the Act not in
derogation of
any other law
for the time
being in force.
Power to
make rules.
5
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The problem of bribery has assumed alarming proportions. It is estimated that a
significant proportion of our Gross Domestic Product is lost on account of this widespread
corruption in offices of public and private sector. Therefore, bribery not only hurts the
psyche of the people but it also hurts the economic growth. Moreover, the problem is more
hurting  to the poor as they are the most vulnerable section of the society.
Bribery by the Government officials is only one part of the issue. Bribery is also
rampant in private sector. There is dearth of laws to address the issue of bribery in private
sector. The Bill seeks to provide a legislative framework to resolve the issue. The Bill also
seeks to provide for a witness protection programme to be implemented by the Government.
Hence  this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAMA DEVI
July 8, 2016.
7

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 11 of the Bill provides  that Central Government shall  appoint Special Judges to
try the offences under this Act. The Bill, therefore if enacted, will involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India. It is  estimated  that  an annual recurring expenditure of
about rupees one hundred crore would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees  forty crore is also likely to be involved.
8

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 17 of the Bill empowers the Central Government  to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. As  the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislation power is of a normal character.
9

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to establish bribery as a criminal offence and to promote effective practices to prevent
bribery in private  sector and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shrimati Rama Devi, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2563LS(S3)—20.10.2016.