1
THE STATE OF TELANGANA (SPECIAL CATEGORY STATUS AND
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE)  BILL, 2015
By
SHRI VINOD KUMAR BOIANAPALLI, M.P.
A
BILL
to confer special category status to the State of Telangana, provide for special financial
assistance to the State for the purposes of promoting the welfare of the Scheduled
Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward Sections of citizens,
development of backward districts and exploitation and proper utilization
of its resources and for matters connected therewith.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the State of Telangana (Special Category Status and
Financial Assistance) Act, 2015.
Bill No. 247 of 2015
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title
and
commencement.

2
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. (1) On and from the date of commencement of this Act, the State of Telangana shall
have the status of a Special Category State.
(2) The Special Category Status to the State of Telangana shall entitle the State with
such benefits as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify.
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the State of
Telangana shall be entitled to the following benefits:—
(a) special Central financial assistance through grants or loans on the basis of
90:10 ratio with 90 per cent. to be contributed by the Central Government and
10 per cent. to be contributed by the State Government;
(b) such fiscal incentives and concessions in excise and custom duties, income
tax rates and corporate tax rates, as may be deemed necessary,  to promote
industrialization and economic growth; and
(c) allocation of adequate funds for specific development projects.
3. There shall be paid such sums of money out of the Consolidated Fund of India, every
year, as Parliament may by due appropriation by law provide, as special financial assistance
to the State of Telangana to meet the costs of such schemes of development, as may be
undertaken by the State with the approval of the Union Government, for the purpose
of—
(i) promoting the welfare of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, the
minorities and the Other Backward Classes of citizens;
(ii) development and proper utilization of the resources in the State; and
(iii) development of backward areas including expansion of social and physical
infrastructure.
4. Notwithstanding anything contained in any recommendations or guidelines of the
Central Government fixing a limit on the net proceeds of borrowings by the State
Governments, the Government of the State of Telangana may raise resources through
borrowing upto 3.49 per cent. of its Gross State Domestic Product to eliminate revenue
deficit.
5. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
Special
financial
assistance.
Special
Category
Status to the
State of
Telangana.
Raising the
ceiling on
borrowings.
Act not in
derogation of
other laws.
5
10
15
20
25
30

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The new State of Telangana breathed life on June 2, 2014 after more than half a century
of struggle and owing to the results of a democratic movement that has been unrivalled in
modern India. The historical injustice and exploitation faced by the region has compelled it to
begin its existence in a highly backward condition. Nine out of ten districts of the State of
Telangana were identified by the Centre as backward and were under the Backward Regions
Grant Fund (BRGF). The Telangana region in the undivided Andhra Pradesh faced severe
infrastructural and development deficits, incidents of drought, water and electricity shortages
and suicide by farmers.
In order to address these challenges, financial assistance in various forms is required
from the Centre, particularly under the Backward Regions Grant Fund, which has since been
discontinued. With nine out of ten districts being officially designated as backward, the
State of Telangana should be accorded a Special Category Status State.
Sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 94 of the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014
provides that the Centre shall support both Andhra Pradesh and Telangana States in their
development endeavour through various measures, including tax incentives. The special
package which has been provided to the State of Andhra Pradesh should therefore be
extended to the State of Telangana also. As conditions being faced by the people of the State
of Telangana are similar to those being faced by the people in certain parts of Odisha,
Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh, it becomes necessary that special plans like the
Koraput-Bolangir-Kalahandi (KBK) special plan of Odisha and the Bundelkhand plan for
Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh should also be implemented in the State of Telangana.
As all these efforts require increased amounts of expenditure, the Fiscal Responsibility
Budget Management guidelines for raising resources through borrowings for the State of
Telangana should be upto 3.49 per cent. of Gross State Domestic Product. Such a step of
providing Financial assistance to the State of Telangana would go a long way in building a
stronger nation.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; VINOD  KUMAR  BOIANAPALLI
6th  May, 2015
————
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 117(1), 274(1) AND 117(3)
OF THE CONSTITUTION
[Copy of letter No. 42(4) PF-I/2015 dated 23 July, 2015 from Shri Jayant Sinha, Minister
of State in the Ministry of Finance to the Secretary General, Lok Sabha].
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the State of Telangana
(Special Category Status and Financial Assistance) Bill, 2015 by Shri Vinod Kumar Boianapalli,
M.P., recommends introduction and consideration of the Bill in Lok Sabha under articles
117(1), 274(1) and 117(3), respectively, of the Constitution.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for according Special Category Status to the State of
Telangana. It further provides that the Central Government shall extend special financial
assistance through grants, loans, fiscal incentives and concessions in excise and custom
duties, income tax rates, corporate tax rates for industrialisation and economic growth and
allocation of funds for specific development projects. Clause 3 provides that there shall be
paid such sums of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India every year, as Parliament
may by due appropriation by law provide, as special financial assistance to the State of
Telangana to meet the costs of such schemes of development, as may be undertaken by the
State with the approval of the Union Government.
The Bill, therefore, on enactment, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. As the sums of money which will be given to the State of Telangana as special
financial assistance will be known only after the welfare schemes to be implemented by the
State Government with the approval of Union Government are identified, it is not possible to
give at this stage the estimates of recurring expenditure, which would be involved out of the
Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved out of the Consolidated Fund of
India.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to confer special category status to the State of Telangana, provide for special financial
assistance to the State for  the purposes of promoting the welfare of the Scheduled
Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward Sections of citizens,
development of backward districts and exploitation and proper utilization
of its resources and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Vinod Kumar Boianapalli, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2731LS(S3)—26-11-2015.