THE COMPULSORY VOTING BILL, 2019
By
SHRI KRUPAL TUMANE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory voting by the electorate in the country and for matters
connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory V oting Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. (1) On and from the date of commencement of this Act, it shall be compulsory for
every citizen, who is eligible to vote at an election, to exercise his right to vote at an election
when called for by the Election Commission:
Bill No. 247 of  2019
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Voting to be
compulsory
for all
citizens.
5
AS INTRODUCED  IN LOK SABHA

2
Provided that a citizen may be exempted from exercising his right to vote—
(a) if he is physically incapacitated due to old age or an illness of a serious
nature and produces  a medical certificate from a registered medical practitioner certifying
such incapacity; or
(b) if he is physically challenged and is unable to go to a polling booth on his
own; or
(c) if she is a pregnant woman and not in a position to withstand the physical
strain; or
(d) if he, in the opinion of the Election Commission, suffers from a disability or
infirmity of a nature, which makes him incapable of going to the polling booth on his
own; or
(e) if he is undergoing indoor treatment in a hospital.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (1), the Election Commission may allow
a suitable attendant to aid or  facilitate a citizen, exempted from exercising his right to vote, to
exercise his right, if he makes a request to the Election Commission to this effect.
3. (1) It shall be the duty of the Election Commission to set up adequate number of
polling booths at convenient locations, in every Assembly and Parliamentary constituency.
(2) The polling booths shall be set up in such a way that the distance between two
polling booths does not exceed one kilometre:
Provided that in hilly, forest or desert regions, the Election Commission may set up
mobile polling booths according to geographical convenience and density of population.
4. Subject to such rules as may be prescribed, any citizen who is eligible to vote at an
election and exercises his right to vote shall be provided with the following facilities:—
(a) foodgrains and other consumable items at subsidized rates through the
public distribution system;
(b) social security benefits including old age pension, disability pension and
healthcare facilities;
5. (1) The Election Commission shall cause to be prepared a list of names of all eligible
citizens, who have not cast their votes, and submit it to the Central Government or the State
Government, as the case may be.
(2) Any citizen, who fails to cast his vote shall—
(i) be liable to a fine of rupees five hundred for first failure and rupees ten
thousand for each subsequent failure;
(ii) be rendered ineligible to contest any election for a period of ten years
from the date he failed to cast his vote;
(iii) be not eligible for any service under the Government;
(iv) be not eligible for any housing scheme launched by the Government;
(v) be not eligible to draw any foodgrain from public distribution system;
and
(vi) be not eligible to subsidy in any form by the Government.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Adequate
number of
polling
booths.
Facilities to
be provided
to persons
who cast
their vote.
Punishment.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
35
40
30

3
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately  following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both
the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.
5

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is the largest democracy in the world. It has  a strong Parliamentary System.
Since 1951, free and fair elections to the Houses of Parliament, State Legislatures and
local  bodies have been held at  regular intervals. Indian  elections are a benchmark for
many other countries.
At present a candidate is declared as elected even if he secures one vote more
than the votes polled to his nearest candidate. Though he has won the seat, yet he may
not have the support of even half of the electors. In the true sense, he is not representing
the constituency from which he has been elected.
The percentage of votes polled at every election is decreasing which shows that
people are not willing to participate in the election process. Sometimes in some of the
constituencies, as low as thirty per cent. of the total votes are polled.
Therefore, it is proposed to make voting compulsory so that the people can
participate in a large number. It is also proposed to provide certain incentives to those
voters who exercise their right to vote in elections to the House of the People or State
Legislatures. It is also proposed to provide certain punitive measures to those who do
not exercise their right to vote.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KRUPAL TUMANE
October  25, 2019.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for setting up of adequate number of polling booths
in every constituency during election. Clause 4 provides for certain facilities to those
voters who cast their votes at an election. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring
expenditure of about rupees two hundred crore is likely to be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to
be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. Since the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory voting by the electorate in the country and for matters
connected therewith.
————
(Shri Krupal Tumane, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—3024LS(S3)—14.11.2019.