     AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
                                                              Bill No. 247 of 2022
THE SEXUAL HARASSMENT A T WORKPLACE
(PREVENTION, PROHIBITION AND
REDRESSAL) BILL, 2022
By
SHRI LA VU SRI KRISHNA DEV ARAYALU, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide protection against sexual harassment at workplace to people of all
genders including women, men and other genders and for the prevention
and redressal of complaints of sexual harassment and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Sexual Harassment at Workplace (Prevention,
Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2022.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5

(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “aggrieved person” means—
(i) in relation to a workplace, a person, of any age whether employed or
not which includes employees and customer, client, visitor, patient or any such
person, who allege to have been subjected to any act of sexual harassment by
the respondent;
(ii) in relation to dwelling place or house, a person of any age who is
employed in such a dwelling place or house;
(b) “appropriate Government” means—
(i) in relation to a workplace which is established, owned, controlled or
wholly or substantially financed by funds provided directly or indirectly—
(A) by the Central Government or the Union territory administration,
the Central Government;
(B) by the State Government, the State Government;
(ii) in relation to any workplace not covered under sub-clause (i) and falling
within its territory, the State Government;
(c) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Local Committee nominated
under sub-section (1) of section 7;
(d) “District Officer” means an officer notified under section 5;
(e) “domestic worker” means a person who is employed to do the household
work in any household for remuneration whether in cash or kind, either directly or
through any agency on a temporary, permanent, part time or full time basis, but does
not include any member of the family of the employer;
(f) “employee” means a person employed at a workplace for any work on
regular, temporary, ad hoc or daily wage basis, either directly or through an agent,
including a contractor and gig workers  with or, without the knowledge of the principal
employer, whether for remuneration or not, or working on a voluntary basis or
otherwise, whether the terms of employment are express or implied and includes a
co-worker, a contract worker, probationer, trainee, apprentice or called by any other
such name;
(g) “gig worker” means a person who performs work or participates in a work
arrangement and earns from such activities outside of traditional employer-employee
relationship;
(h) “employer” means—
(i) in relation to any department, organisation, undertaking, establishment,
enterprise, institution, office, branch or unit of the appropriate Government or
a local authority, the head of that department, organisation, undertaking,
establishment, enterprise, institution, office, branch or unit or such other officer
as the appropriate Government or the local authority, as the case may be, may
by an order specify in this behalf;
(ii) in any workplace not covered under sub-clause (i), any person
responsible for the management, supervision and control of the workplace.
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
2
45

Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub-clause “management” includes
the person or board or committee responsible for formulation and administration
of police  for such organisation;
(iii)in relation to workplace covered under sub-clauses (i) and (ii), the
person discharging contractual obligations with respect to his or her employees;
(iv) in relation to a dwelling place or house, a person or a household who
employs or benefits from the employment of domestic worker, irrespective of
the number, time period or type of such worker employed, or the nature of the
employment or activities performed by the domestic worker;
(i) “Internal Committee” means an Internal Committee constituted under
section 4;
(j) “Local Committee” means the Local Committee constituted under
section 6;
(k) “Member” means a Member of the Internal Committee or the Local
Committee, as the case may be;
(l) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(m)”Presiding Officer” means the Presiding Officer of the Internal Complaints
Committee nominated under sub-section (2) of section 4;
(n) “respondent’ means a person against whom the aggrieved person has made
a complaint under section 9;
(o) “sexual harassment” includes any one or more of the following unwelcome
acts or behavior (whether directly or by implication) namely:—
(i) physical contact and advances; or
(ii) a demand or request for sexual favours; or
(iii)making sexually coloured remarks; or
(iv) showing pornography; or
(v) any other unwelcome physical, verbal or non-verbal conduct of sexual
nature;
(p) “workplace” includes—
(i) any department, organisation, undertaking, establishment, enterprise,
institution, office, branch or unit which is established, owned, controlled or
wholly or substantially financed by funds provided directly or indirectly by
the appropriate Government or the local authority or a Government company
or a corporation or a co-operative society;
(ii) any private sector organisation or a private venture, undertaking,
enterprise, institution, establishment, society, trust, non-governmental
organisation, unit or service provider carrying on commercial, professional,
vocational, educational, entertainmental, industrial, health services or financial
activities including production, supply, sale, distribution or service;
(iii)hospitals or nursing homes;
(iv) any sports institute, stadium, sports complex or competition or games
venue, whether residential or not used for training, sports or other activities
relating thereto;
3
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

(v) any place visited by the employee arising out of or during the course of
employment including transportation by the employer for undertaking such
journey;
(vi) a dwelling place or a house;
(q) “unorganised sector” in relation to a workplace means an enterprise owned
by individuals or self-employed workers and engaged in the production or sale of
goods or providing service of any kind whatsoever, and where the enterprise employs
workers, the number of such workers is less than ten.
3. (1) No person shall be subjected to sexual harassment at any workplace.
(2) The following circumstances, among other circumstances, if it occurs, or
is present in relation to or connected with any act or behavior of sexual harassment
may amount to sexual harassment:—
(i) implied or explicit promise of preferential treatment in their
employment; or
(ii) implied or explicit threat of detrimental treatment in their employ-
ment; or
(iii) implied or explicit threat about their present or future employment
status; or
(iv) interference with their work or creating an intimidating or offensive
or hostile work environment for them; or
(v) humiliating treatment likely to affect their health or safety.
CHAPTER II
CONSTITUTION OF INTERNAL COMPLAINTS COMMITTEE
4. (1) Every employer of a workplace shall, by an order in writing, constitute a
Committee to be known as the “Internal Committee”:
Provided that where the offices or administrative units of the workplace are
located at different places or divisional or sub-divisional level, the Internal Committee
shall be constituted at all administrative units or offices.
(2) The Internal Committees shall consist of the following members to be
nominated by the employer, namely:—
(a) a Presiding Officer who shall be a woman employed at a senior level
at workplace from amongst the employees:
Provided that in case a senior level woman employee is not available,
the Presiding Officer shall  be nominated from other offices or administrative
units of the workplace referred to in sub-section (1):
Provided further that in case the other offices or administrative units of
the workplace do not have  a senior level woman employee, the Presiding
Officer shall be nominated from any other workplace of the same employer
or other department or organisation;
(b) not less than two Members from amongst employees preferably
committed to the cause of prevention of sexual harassment or who have had
experience in social work or have legal knowledge;
4
5
10
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Prevention of
sexual
harassment.
Constitution of
Internal
Committee.

5
(c) one member from amongst non-governmental organisations or
associations committed to the cause of prevention of sexual harassment or a
person familiar with the issues relating to sexual harassment:
Provided that at least one-half of the total Members so nominated shall
be women.
(3) The Presiding Officer and every Member of the Internal Committee shall
hold office for such period, not exceeding three years, from the date of their nomination
as may be specified by the employer.
(4) The Member appointed from amongst the non-governmental organisations
or associations shall be paid such fees or allowances for holding the proceedings of
the Internal Committee, by the employer, as may be prescribed.
(5) Where the Presiding Officer or any Member of the Internal Committee, —
(a) contravenes the provisions of section 16; or
(b) has been convicted for an offence or an inquiry into an offence under
any law for the time being in force is pending against him; or
(c) has been found guilty in any disciplinary proceedings or a disciplinary
proceeding is pending against them; or
(d) has so abused their position as to render their continuance in office
prejudicial to the public interest,
such Presiding Officer or Member, as the case may be, shall be removed
from the Internal Committee and the vacancy so created or any casual vacancy
shall be filled by fresh nomination in accordance with the provisions of this
section.
CHAPTER III
CONSTITUTION OF LOCAL COMMITTEE
5. (1) The appropriate Government may notify a District Magistrate or Additional
District Magistrate or the Collector or Deputy Collector as a District Officer for
every District to exercise powers or discharge functions under this Act.
(2) The appropriate Government shall publish the notified list of District Officers
on the portal of the Labour Department of each State.
6. (1) Every District Officer shall constitute in the district concerned, a committee
to be known as the Local Committee to receive complaints of sexual harassment
from establishments where the Internal Committee has not been constituted due to
having less than ten workers or if the complaint is against the employer himself.
(2) The District Officer shall designate one nodal officer in every block,
taluka and tehsil in rural or tribal area and ward or municipality in the urban
area, to receive complaints and forward the same to the concerned Local
Committee within a period of seven days.
(3) The jurisdiction of the Local Committee shall extend to the areas of the
district where it is constituted.
(4) The District Officer shall publish the details of the nodal officer on the
portal of the Labour Department of each State.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Notification of
District Officer.
Constitution
and jurisdiction
of Local
Committee.

6
7. (1) The Local Committee shall consist of the following members to be
nominated by the District Officer, namely:—
(a) a Chairperson to be nominated from amongst the eminent women in the
field of social work  and committed to the cause of women;
(b) one Member to be nominated  from  amongst the  women working  in
block, taluka or tehsil or ward or municipality in the district;
(c) two Members, of whom at least one shall be a woman, to be nominated
from amongst such non-governmental organisations or associations committed
to the cause of women or a person familiar with the issues  relating to  sexual
harassment, which may be prescribed:
Provided that at least one of the nominees should, preferably, have a
background in law or legal knowledge:
Provided further that at least one of the nominees shall be a woman
belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes or the Other
Backward Classes or minority community notified by the Central Government,
from time to time;
(d) the concerned  officer  dealing with the  social  welfare or  women and
child development in the district, shall be a member ex officio.
(2) The Chairperson and every Member of the Local Committee shall hold
office for such period, not exceeding five years, from the date of their appointment as
may be specified by the District Officer.
(3) Where the Chairperson or any Member of the Local Committee—
(a) contravenes the provisions of section 16; or
(b) has been convicted for an offence or an inquiry into an offence under
any law for the time being in force is pending against them; or
(c) has beenfound guilty in any disciplinary proceedings or a disciplinary
proceeding is pending against them; or
d) has  so  abused their  position  as to render their continuance in  office
prejudicial to the public interest, such Chairperson or Member, as the case
may be, shall be removed from the Committee and the vacancy so  created or
any  casual  vacancy  shall be  filled by fresh  nomination in  accordance with
the  provisions of this section.
(4) The Chairperson or Members of the Local Committee other than the
Members nominated under clauses (b) and (d) of sub-section (1) shall be entitled
to such fees or allowances for holding the proceedings of the Local Committee
as may be prescribed.
8. (1) The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament
by law in this behalf, make to the State Government grants of such sums of money as
the Central Government may think fit, for being utilised for the payment of fees or
allowances referred to in sub- section (4) of section 7.
(2) The State Government may set up an agency and transfer the grants made
under sub-section (1) to that agency.
(3) The agency shall pay to the District Officer, such sums as may be required
for the payment of fees or allowances referred to in sub-section (4) of section 7.
10
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Grants and
audit.
Composition,
tenure and other
terms and
condition of
Local Committee.

7
(4) The accounts of the agency referred to in sub-section (2) shall be maintained
and audited in such manner as may, in consultation  with the  Accountant General  of
the  State,  be  prescribed and the person holding the custody of the accounts of the
agency shall furnish, to the State Government, before such date, as may be prescribed,
its audited copy of accounts together with auditors’ report thereon.
CHAPTER IV
COMPLAINT
9. (1) Any aggrieved person may make, in writing, a complaint of sexual
harassment at workplace to the Internal Committee if so constituted, or the Local
Committee, in  case it is not so constituted, within a period of three months from the
date of incident and in case of a series of incidents, within a period of three months
from the date of last incident:
Provided that where such complaint cannot be made in writing, the Presiding
Officer or any Member of the Internal Committee or the Chairperson or any Member
of the Local Committee, as the case may be, shall render all reasonable assistance to
the aggrieved person for making the complaint in writing:
Provided further that the Internal Committee or, as the case may be, the Local
Committee may, for the reasons to be recorded in writing, extend the time limit not
exceeding three months, if it is satisfied that the circumstances were such which
prevented the aggrieved person from filing a complaint within the said period.
(2) Where the aggrieved person is unable to make a complaint on account of
their physical or mental incapacity or death or otherwise, their legal heir or such
other person as may be prescribed may make a complaint under this section.
(3) Where the respondent is not an employee in the workplace at which the
incident of sexual harassment took place, and if the aggrieved person so desires, the
Internal Committee if so constituted, or the Local Committee, in case it is not so
constituted, shall initiate action under the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) or any
other law for the time being in force, against the respondent.
10. (1) The Internal Committee or, as the case may be, the Local Committee,
may, before initiating an inquiry under section 11 and at the request of the aggrieved
person take steps to settle the matter between the aggrieved person and the respondent
through conciliation:
Provided that no monetary settlement shall be made as a basis of conciliation.
(2) Where settlement has been arrived at under sub-section (1), the Internal
Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be, shall record the settlement so
arrived and forward the same to the employer or the District Officer to take action as
specified in the recommendation.
(3) The Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be,
shall provide the copies of the settlement as recorded under sub-section (2) to the
aggrieved person and the respondent.
(4) Where a settlement is arrived at under sub-section (1), no further inquiry
shall be conducted by the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case
may be.
11. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 10, the Internal Committee or the
Local Committee, as the case may be, shall, where the respondent is an employee,
proceed to make inquiry into the complaint in accordance with the provisions of the
service rules applicable to the respondent and where no such rules exist, in such
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Complaint of
sexual
harassment.
Conciliation.
Inquiry into
complaint.

5
10
8
manner as may be prescribed or in case of a domestic worker, the Local Committee
shall, if prima facie case exist, forward the complaint to the police, within a period
of seven days for registering the case under section 509 of the Indian Penal Code
(45 of 1860), and any other relevant provisions of the said Code where applicable:
Provided that where the aggrieved person informs the Internal Committee or the
Local Committee, as the case may be, that any term or condition of the settlement
arrived at under sub-section (2) of section 10 has not been complied with by the
respondent, the Internal Committee or the Local Committee shall proceed to make an
inquiry into the complaint or, as the case may be, forward the complaint to the police:
Provided further that where both the parties are employees, the parties shall,
during the course of inquiry, be given an opportunity of being heard and a copy of the
findings shall be made available to both the parties enabling them to make
representation against the findings before the Committee.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 509 of the Indian Penal
Code (45 of 1860), the court may, when the respondent is convicted of the offence,
order payment of such sums as it may consider appropriate, to the aggrieved person
by the respondent, having regard to the provisions of section 15.
(3) For the purpose of making an inquiry under sub-section (1), the Internal
Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be, shall have the same powers
as are vested in a civil court the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) when
trying a suit in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and
examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents; and
(c) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(4) The inquiry under sub-section (1) shall be completed within a period of
ninety days.
CHAPTER V
INQUIRY INTO COMPLAINT
12. (1) During the pendency of an inquiry on a written request made by the
aggrieved person, the Internal Committee or the local Committee, as the case may
be, may recommend to the employer to—
(a) transfer  the  aggrieved  person  or  the  respondent  to  any  other
workplace; or
(b) grant leave to the aggrieved person up to a period of three
months; or
(c) grant such other relief to the aggrieved person as may be prescribed.
(2) The leave granted to the aggrieved person under this section shall be in
addition to the leave they would be otherwise entitled.
(3) On the recommendation of the Internal Committee or the Local
Committee, as the case may be, under sub-section (1), the employer shall implement
the recommendations made under sub-section (1) and send the report of such
implementation to the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case
may be.
15
20
25
30
35
40
Action during
pendency of
inquiry.

9
13.  (1) On the completion of an inquiry under this Act, the Internal Committee
or the Local Committee, as the case may be, shall provide a report of its findings to
the employer, or as the case may be, the District Officer within a period of ten days
from the date of completion of the inquiry and such report be made available to the
concerned parties.
(2) Where the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may
be, arrives at the conclusion that the allegation against the respondent has not been
proved, it shall recommend to the employer and the District Officer that no action is
required to be taken in the matter.
(3) Where the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may
be, arrives at the conclusion that the allegation against the respondent has been proved,
it shall recommend to the employer or the District Officer, as the case may be—
(i) to take action for sexual harassment as a misconduct in accordance
with the provisions of the service rules applicable to the respondent or
where no such service rules have been made, in such manner as may be
prescribed; and
(ii) to deduct, notwithstanding anything in the service rules applicable
to the respondent, from the salary or wages of the respondent such sum as it
may consider appropriate to be paid to the aggrieved person or to their legal
heirs, as it may determine, in accordance with the provisions of section 15:
Provided that in case the employer is unable to make such deduction from
the salary of the respondent due to absence from duty or cessation of employment it
may direct to the respondent to pay such sum to the aggrieved person:
Provided further that in case the respondent fails to pay the sum referred to
in clause (ii), the Internal Committee or as, the case may be, the Local Committee
may forward the order for recovery of the sum as an arrear of land revenue to the
concerned District Officer.
(4) The employer or the District Officer shall act upon the recommendation
within sixty days of its receipt by him.
14. (1) Where the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may
be, arrives at a conclusion that the allegation against the respondent is malicious or
the aggrieved person or any other person making the complaint has made the complaint
knowing it to be false or the aggrieved person or any other person making the complaint
has produced any forged or misleading document, it may recommend to the employer
or the District Officer, as the case may be, to take action against the said person or
the person who has made the complaint under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of
section 9, as the case may be, in accordance with the provisions of the service rules
applicable to her or him or where no such service rules exist, in such manner as may
be prescribed:
Provided that a mere inability to substantiate a complaint or provide adequate
proof need not attract action against the complainant under this section:
Provided further that the malicious intent on part of the complainant shall
be established after an inquiry in accordance with the procedure prescribed, before
any action is recommended.
(2) Where the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may
be, arrives at a conclusion that during the inquiry any witness has given false evidence
or produced any forged or misleading document, it may recommend to the employer
of the witness or the District Officer, as the case may be, to take action in accordance
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Punishment for
false or
malicious
complaint and
false evidence.
Inquiry report.

10
with the provisions of the service rules applicable to the said witness or where no
such service rules exist, in such manner as may be prescribed.
15.For the purpose of determining the sums to be paid to the aggrieved person
under clause (ii) of sub-section (3) of section 13, the Internal Committee or the Local
Committee, as the case may be, shall have regard to—
(a) the mental trauma, pain, suffering and emotional distress caused to the
aggrieved person;
(b) the loss in the career opportunity due to the incident of sexual harassment;
(c) medical expenses incurred by the victim for physical or
psychiatric treatment;
(d) the income and financial status of the respondent; and
(e) feasibility of such payment in lump sum or in instalments.
16.Notwithstanding anything contained in the Right to Information Act, 2005
(22 of 2005),  the contents of the complaint made under section 9, the identity and
addresses of the aggrieved person, respondent and witnesses, any information relating
to conciliation and inquiry proceedings, recommendations of the Internal Committee
or the Local Committee, as the case may be, and the action taken by the employer or
the District Officer under the provisions of this Act shall not be published,
communicated or made known to the public, press and media in any manner:
Provided that information may be disseminated regarding the justice secured to
any victim of sexual harassment under this Act without disclosing the name, address,
identity or any other particulars calculated to lead to the identification of the aggrieved
person and witnesses.
17. Where any person entrusted with the duty to handle or deal with the complaint,
inquiry or any recommendations or action to be taken under the provisions of this
Act, contravenes the provisions of section 16, the person shall be liable for penalty in
accordance with the provisions of the service rules applicable to the said person or
where no such service rules exist, in such manner as may be prescribed.
18. (1) Any person aggrieved from the recommendations made under
sub-section (2) of section 13 or under clause (i) or clause (ii) of sub-section (3) of
section 13 or sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 14 or section 17 or
non-implementation of such recommendations may prefer an appeal to the court or
tribunal in accordance with the provisions of the service rules applicable to the said
person or where no such service rules exist then, without prejudice to provisions
contained in any other law for the time being in force, the person aggrieved may
prefer an appeal in such manner as  may  be prescribed.
(2) The appropriate Government shall maintain an online repository on each
State’s Labour Department website where details of the appellate authority to whom
appeal may be preferred under the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act,
1946 shall be published.
(3) The appeal under sub-section (1) shall be preferred within a period of
ninety days of the recommendations.
CHAPTER VI
DUTIES OF EMPLOYER
19.Every employer shall—
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Prohibition of
publication or
making known
contents of
complaint and
inquiry
proceedings.
Penalty for
publication or
making known
contents of
complaint and
inquiry
proceedings.
Duties of
employer.
Appeal.
Determination of
compensation.

11
(a) provide a safe working environment at the workplace which shall include
safety from the persons coming into contact at the workplace;
(b) display at any conspicuous place in the workplace, the penal consequences
of sexual harassments; and the order constituting, the Internal Committee under
sub-section (1) of section 4;
(c) organise workshops and awareness programmes at least once every
calendar year, by a legal professional having experience/practice in the relevant
laws or any professional/group certified in conducting trainings pertaining to
prevention of sexual harassment, for sensitising the employees with the provisions
of the Act and training programmes for the members of the Internal Committee
to redress complaints in compliance with the provisions of the Act;
(d) file Annual Compliance Reports along with the details of the training
which shall include details of the trainer who facilitated, number of employees
and Internal Committee members who attended the training sessions and such
other information;
(e) provide necessary facilities to the Internal Committee or the Local
Committee, as the case may be, for dealing with the complaint and conducting
an inquiry;
(f) assist in securing the attendance of respondent and witnesses before the
Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be;
(g) make available such information to the Internal Committee or the Local
Committee, as the case be, as it may require having regard to the complaint
made under sub-section (1) of section 9;
(h) provide assistance to the person if he/she/they so chooses to file a
complaint in relation to the offence under the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) or
any other law for the time being in force;
(i) treat sexual harassment as a misconduct under the service rules and
initiate action for such misconduct; and
(j) monitor the timely submission of reports by the Internal Committee.
CHAPTER VII
DUTIES AND POWERS OF DISTRICT OFFICER
20. The District Officer shall,—
(a) monitor the timely submission of report furnished by the Local
Committee; and
(b) take such measures as may be necessary for engaging non-governmental
organisations for creation of awareness on sexual harassment.
CHAPTER VIII
MISCELLANEOUS
21. (1) The Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be,
shall in each calendar year prepare, in such form and at such time as may be prescribed,
an annual report and submit the same to the employer and the District Officer.
(2) The District Officer shall forward a brief report on the annual reports
received under sub-section (1) to the State Government.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Duties and
powers of
District Officer.
Committee to
submit annual
report.40

12
22. The employer shall include in its report the number of cases filed, if any,
and their disposal under this Act in the annual report of his organisation or where no
such report is required to be prepared, intimate such number of cases, if any, to the
District Officer.
23.The appropriate Government shall monitor the implementation of this Act
and maintain date on the number of cases filed and disposed of in respect of all cases
of sexual harassment at workplace.
24.The appropriate Government may, subject to the availability of financial
and other resources,—
(a) develop relevant information, education, communication and training
materials, and organise awareness programmes, to advance the understanding of the
public of the provisions of this Act  providing for protection of people against sexual
harassment at workplace; and
(b) formulate orientation and training programmes for the members of the Local
Committee.
25. (1) The appropriate Government, on being satisfied that it is necessary in the
public interest or in the interest of employees at a workplace to do so, by order in
writing,—
(a) call upon any employer or District Officer to furnish in writing such
information relating to sexual harassment as it may require; and
(b) authorise any officer to  make  inspection of  the records and work-
place in relation to sexual harassment,  who shall submit a  report  of  such
inspection to it within such period as may be specified in the order.
(2) Every employer and District Officer shall produce on demand before
the officer making the inspection all information, records and other documents in his
custody having a bearing on the subject matter of such inspection.
26. (1) Where the employer fails to—
(a) constitute an Internal Committee under sub-section (1) of
section 4;
(b) take action under sections 13, 14 and 22; and
(c) contravenes  or  attempts  to  contravene or abets contravention of
other provisions of this Act or any rules made thereunder, the employer
shall be punishable with fine which may be equivalent to 2% of the annual
global turnover of the entity and could go upto 4% of the annual global
turnover or fifty thousand rupees, whichever is higher.
(2) If any employer, after having been previously convicted of an offence
punishable under this Act subsequently commits and is convicted of the same offence,
the said employer shall be liable to—
(i) twice the punishment, which  might have  been  imposed on  a  first
conviction, subject to the punishment being maximum provided for the same
offence:
Provided that in case a higher punishment is prescribed under any other law
for the time being in force, for the offence for which the accused is being prosecuted,
the court shall take due cognizance of the same while awarding the punishment;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Appropriate
Government to
take measures
to publicise the
Act.
Power to call for
information and
inspection of
records.
Penalty for non-
compliance
with provisions
of Act.
Appropriate
Government to
monitor
implementation
and maintain
data.
Employer to
include
information in
annual report.

(ii) cancellation,  of their  licence  or  withdrawal, or non-renewal,  or
approval, or cancellation  of  the registration,  as  the  case  may be, by the
Government  or  local  authority required for carrying on their business
or activity.
27. (1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act
or any rules made thereunder, save on a complaint made by the aggrieved person
authorised by the Internal Committee or Local Committee in this behalf.
(2) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial
Magistrate of the first class  shall try any offence punishable under this Act.
(3) Every offence under this Act shall be non-cognizable.
28. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
power, such rules may  provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the fees or allowances to be paid to the Members under sub-
section (4) of section 4;
(b) nomination of members under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of
section 7;
(c) the fees or allowances to be paid to the Chairperson, and Members
under sub-section (4) of section 7;
(d) the person who may make complaint under sub-section (2) of
section 9;
(e) the manner of inquiry under sub-section (1) of section 11;
(f) the powers for making an inquiry under clause (c) of sub-section (2)
of section 11;
(g) the relief to be recommended under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of
section 12;
(h) the manner of action to be taken under clause (i) of sub-section (3)
of section 13;
(i) the manner  of action  to be taken under sub-sections (1) and (2) of
section 14;
(j) the manner of action to be taken under section 17;
(k) the manner of appeal under sub-section (1) of section 18;
(l) the  manner of  organising workshops,  awareness  programmes for
sensitising the employees and orientation programmes  for the members of
the Internal Committee under clause (c) of section 19; and
(m) the  form  and  time for  preparation of  annual  report by  Internal
Committee and the Local Committee under sub-section (1) of section 21.
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid
as soon as may be after it  is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in
session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in
two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making
any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made,
Power of
appropriate
Government to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
13
Cognizance of
offence by
courts.

the rule shall thereafter  have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as
the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
(4) Any rule made under sub-section (4) of section 8 by the State
Government shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of
the State Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or where such Legislature
consists of one House, before that House.
29. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such
provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be
necessary for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry
of a period of two years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be
after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
30. (1) The  Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition
and Redressal) Act, 2013 [Act No. 14 of 2013] shall stand repealed on and from the
dates the notification referred to in sub-section (2) of section 1 is issued.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under
the Act so repealed under sub-section (1), shall be deemed to have been done or
taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.
Power to remove
difficulties.
Repeal and
Savings.
14
5
10
15
20

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Sexual harassment at a workplace is considered to violate a person’s
fundamental right to  equality, life and liberty. It creates an insecure and hostile
work environment for employees, thereby adversely affecting their social and
economic empowerment and the goal of inclusive growth.
The Supreme Court of India in the case of Vishaka vs. State of Rajasthan,
(1997) 7 SCC 323, affirmed that sexual harassment at workplace is a form of
discrimination against women and recognised that it violates the constitutional right
to equality and provided guidelines to address this issue pending the enactment of a
suitable legislation. Based on these guidelines, a legislation to provide safe, secure
and enabling environment to every woman, irrespective of her age or employment
status was enacted by way of the Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace
(Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013.
The Constitution of India embodies the concept of equality under articles 14
and 15 and prohibits discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste, sex, or place
of birth or any of them. Article 19(1)(g) gives the fundamental right to all citizens to
practise any profession, or to carry on any occupation, trade, or business. This right
pre-supposes the availability of an enabling environment for employees of all genders,
which is egalitarian, safe, and secure in every aspect. Article 21, which relates to the
right to life and personal liberty, includes the right to live with dignity, hence all
employees irrespective of their  gender must be treated with due respect, decency,
and dignity at the workplace.
The Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 2019 has provided formal
and legal recognition to the transgender community. Hence, it has become imperative
to ensure legislation on prevention of sexual harassment cuts across genders and
is more inclusive. According to a study  conducted by the National Human Rights
Commission in 2018, about 6% of transgenders are employed in private sectors
and NGOs. Besides this, a significant number of transgenders work in the
unorganized sector.
Hence, to ensure an enabling working environment which safeguards and
protects every  individual in the workplace without any discrimination based on their
gender, in both organised and unorganised sectors against all kinds of harassment,
the proposed legislation contains provisions to protect every individual, irrespective
of their gender, rank or position from any act of sexual harassment in workplace.
It is thus, proposed to amend this comprehensive legislation to make it more
inclusive in nature by not limiting the scope of this legislation only to women, and to
validate that the possibility of such sexual harassment incidents occurs even amongst
other genders who are not included within the ambit of this legislation and ensure to
provide due protection and safeguard their fundamental rights guaranteed under the
Constitution of India.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
    NEW DELHI; LA VU SRI KRISHNA DEV ARAYALU
November 21, 2022.
15

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Sub-clause (1) of clause 6 of the Bill empower every District Officer to
constitute a Local Committee in the District concerned and sub-clause (2) provides
for additional Local Committees  at Block, Taluk or Tehsil in rural or tribal areas and
ward or municipality in urban area, wherever required. Sub-clause (4) of clause 7
provides for payment of fees or allowances to the Chairperson and Members of the
Local Committee for conducting the proceedings of the Committee.
2. Sub-clause (1) of clause 8 of the Bill provides that the Central Government
may, after due appropriation made by Parliament, by law in this behalf, make to the
State Government  grant  of  such sum of money as the Central Government may
think fit for being utilised for the payment of fees   and allowances to the Chairperson
and Members of the Local Committee.
3. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. However, it is not possible at present to give the estimates
of recurring expenditure and non-recurring expenditure, which would be involved
out of the Consolidated Fund of India at this stage.
16

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Sub-clause (1) of clause 28 of the Bill provides that the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions
of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) specifies the matters in respect of which
such rules may be made. These matters, inter alia, include —
(a) the fees or allowances to be paid to the Presiding Officer and Members
under sub-clause (4) of clause 4;
(b) the fees or allowances to be paid to the Chairperson, and Members
under sub-clause (4) of clause 7;
(c) the person who may make complaint under sub-clause (2) of
clause 9;
(d) the manner of enquiry under sub-clause (1) of clause 11;
(e) the powers for making enquiry under item (c) of sub-clause (2) of
clause 11;
(f) the relief to be recommended under item (c) of sub-clause (1) of
clause 12;
(g) the manner of action to be taken under item (i) of sub-clause (3) of
clause 13;
(h) the manner of action to be taken under sub-clauses (1) and (2) of
clause 14;
(i) the manner of action to be taken under clause 17;
(j) the manner of appeal under sub-clause (1) of clause 18; and
(k) the form and time for preparation of annual report by Internal
Committee and the Local Committee under sub-clause (1) of clause 21.
2. Sub-clause (3) of clause 28 provides that every rule made by the Central
Government shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of
Parliament. Sub-clause (4) of that clause provides that any rule made by the State
Government shall be laid before each House of the State Legislature where it consists
of two Houses, or where such Legislature consists of one House, before that House.
3. The matters in respect of which the Central Government may make rules
are matters of procedure and administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide
for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a
normal character.
17

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
 to provide protection against sexual harassment at workplace to people of all
genders including women, men and other genders and for the prevention
and redressal of complaints of sexual harassment and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu, M.P .)