 
Bill No. 247 of 2024 
 
 
 
THE DOMESTIC WORKERS (REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT & CONDITIONS AT 
WORK) BILL, 2024 
_______________ 
 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
 
           ______________ 
 
CLAUSES  
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
 
1. Short title, extent, application and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Rights of Domestic Workers. 
4. Prohibition of Employment of Domestic Workers without agreement. 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
REGISTRATION 
 
5. Registration of domestic workers, employers and service providers.  
6. Compulsory registration of service provider.  
7. Compulsory registration of employer.  
8. Compulsory Registration of domestic workers.  
9. Effect of non-registration  
10. Renewal of registration certificate.  
11. Effect of non-renewal.  
12. Payment of Annual Contribution 
13. Effect of Non-payment of Contribution 
14. Beneficiaries of the Fund.  
15. Identity cards.  
 
 
CHAPTER III 
IMPLEMENTING AUTHORITIES UNDER THE ACT 
 
16. Constitution of Central Advisory Committee.  
17. Functions of the Central Advisory Committee.  
18. Constitution of State Social Security Boards.  
19. Functions of the State Boards.  
20. Central Government to provide adequate funds. 
21. Budget.  
22. Accounts and Audit.  
23. Establishment of District Domestic Workers Regulation of Work and Social Security Board.  
24. Functions of the District Board. 
25. Workers facilitation centres. 
 
 

-2- 
 
CHAPTER IV 
ESTABLISHMENT OF FUND 
 
 
26. Domestic Workers Social Security and Welfare Fund.  
 
 
CHAPTER V 
REGULATION OF THE WORKING CONDITIONS 
 
 
27. Duties of the employer and placement agency.  
28. Working hours.  
29. Minimum wages. 
30. Payment of wages. 
31. Leave. 
32. Termination from employment.  
33. Basic amenities 
34. Accommodation for live in workers. 
35. Protection against crime.  
36. No discrimination at work place.  
37. Employment of a Child.  
 
 
CHAPTER VI 
GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL AND DISPUTE RESOLUTION 
 
38. Grievance redressal mechanism and dispute resolution. 
39. Conciliation Officers. 
40. Domestic workers Tribunal. 
41. Bi- partite settlement of disputes. 
 
CHAPTER VII 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 
 
42.Offences and penalties.  
43. Emergency aid, medium term assistance and legal aid.  
 
 
CHAPTER VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
 
 
44. Effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with the Act.  
45. Protection of Action Taken under the Act. 
46. Act not in derogation of other laws.  
47. Power to make rules. 
 
  

AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
 Bill No. 247  of  2024 
THE DOMESTIC WORKERS (REGULATION OF EMPLOYMET AND 
CONDITIONS AT WORK) BILL, 2024 
BY 
DR. T. SUMATHY (A) THAMIZHACHI THANGAPANDIAN, M.P. 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the welfare, protection and security of domestic workers 
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth  Year of the R epublic 
of India as follows:- 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Domestic Workers (Regulation of
Work and Social Security) Act, 2024. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India
(3) It shall not apply to domestic workers migrating for employment
to any other country. 
(4) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Short title extent, 
application and 
commencement. 

-2- 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—  
(a) “Appropriate Government" means in the case of a State or a 
Union Territory having legislature, the concerned State Government or 
the Union Territory Government, as the case may be, and in all other 
cases, the Central Government;  
(b) “Child” means a person who has not attained eighteen years of 
age;  
(c) "Domestic Work" means work performed in or for a private 
household(s) and includes cooking, cleaning, housekeeping, driving, 
gardening, childcare, and old-age care, but does not include work 
related to businesses run from private households;  
(d) "Domestic Worker" means any person engaged in domestic 
work in exchange of remuneration, whether in cash or in kind, within 
an employment relationship, either directly or indirectly, through 
conventional mode or digital medium, irrespective of the period of 
their employment;  
Provided that a domestic worker shall include "Replacement 
worker" who is working as a replacement for the main workers for a 
short and specific period of time as agreed with the main Worker and 
the Employer;  
(e) "Discrimination" means any form of differential treatment on 
the basis of caste, race, region, language, colour, sex, gender, creed 
and religion, disabilities, nature of work or age, at the place of work;  
(f) “Dispute” means any dispute or difference between employer(s) 
and employer(s), or between employer(s) and domestic worker(s), or 
between domestic worker(s) and domestic worker(s), or between 
placement agency or employer, or placement agency or placement 
agency, or placement agency or domestic worker(s) which is 
connected with the employment or non-employment or the terms of 
employment or with the conditions of work under this Act; 
(g) “District Board” means the District Domestic Workers Welfare 
Board established under Section 24 of the Act;  
 
 
 
Definitions. 

-3- 
(h) “Employer” means a person living in a private household, who 
has employed a domestic worker, either directly or otherwise for 
remuneration for doing domestic work,  
(i) "Employment Agreement" means an agreement that lays down 
terms and conditions of employment, non-employment and conditions 
of work between the employer and domestic worker and duly agreed 
upon between the parties, as prescribed therein;  
(j) "Forced Labour" includes any or all of the following activities: 
(i) compelling a person to offer his/ her/ their services as a Domestic 
Worker against his/ her/ their will or consent; (ii) non-payment of 
minimum wages by the employer; (iii) compelling a person for 
domestic work without wages in lieu of repayment of a debt. (iv) 
Compelling the domestic worker to forgo weekly leaves and public 
holidays; (v) Compelling the domestic worker to work on public 
holidays without their consent and adequate compensation as 
prescribed; (vi) Any other activity as determined by the appropriate 
government.  
(k) "Full Time Worker" means a person who is employed as a 
domestic worker in a single household for working hours as specified 
in Section 28 (2) of the Act;  
(l) “Fund” means Domestic Workers Social Security Fund 
established under Chapter IV of the Act;  
(m) “Labour Department” means the Labour Department of the 
Appropriate Government; 
(n) "Live-in domestic worker” means a domestic worker employed 
to perform domestic work by residing in the employer’s premises that 
includes an outhouse, servant quarter or similar space owned or rented 
by the employer that may or may not be adjacent to the concerned 
household; 
(o) "Notification" means a notification published in the Official 
Gazette; (p) "Part Time Worker" means a person who is employed as a 
domestic worker for less than prescribed daily working hours of that of 
a full-time worker, whether or not employed in single or multiple 
households;  
 

-4- 
(q) "Placement Agency" means any agency or bureau or contractor 
or person(s) or association, whether registered or otherwise, engaged 
in the placement of domestic workers with prospective employers and 
includes such agency or person offering such services through any 
print, electronic or any form of communication;  
(r) "Prescribed" means Rules prescribed under the Act by the 
appropriate government as the case may be;  
(s) “Replacement worker” means a domestic worker hired, directly 
or indirectly, as a replacement of the main worker for a short period of 
time/ on a temporary basis.  
(t) “State Board” means the State Domestic Workers Welfare 
Board established under Section 19 of this Act;  
(u) "Trafficking" means to recruit, transport, transfer, harbour, or 
receive a person by means of abuse of power or taking advantage of 
his/ her/ their position of vulnerability by threat or use of force or 
coercion, abduction, fraud, deception; and includes giving or receiving 
of payments or benefits to achieve the consent of such person having 
control over another person. Provided that it can also include 
deducting any amount or taking commission from the employer, from 
the salary of the domestic worker without her consent. Further 
provided that Placement without registration by the placement 
agencies would amount to Trafficking for the purpose of this Section. 
(v) "Workplace" means any household such as house, bungalow, 
flat, villa, farm house or such other premises or a place including 
vehicles where a Domestic Worker works as per the terms of the 
employment agreement. 
(w) "Wages" means all remuneration which are earned by an 
employee while on duty or on leave in accordance with the terms and 
conditions of his/ her/ their employment and which are paid or are 
payable to him/her through cash, via bank transfer and includes 
dearness allowance, but does not include any bonus, commission, 
house rent allowance, overtime wages and any other allowance. 
 
 
 

-5- 
 
3. (1) Every domestic worker shall have the right to—  
(a) work and earn livelihood, free from all forms of forced labour;  
(b) earn such minimum wages, as may be prescribed, including 
allowances for overtime;- 
(c) such decent working and living conditions, as may be 
prescribed, including reasonable working hours, periods of rest, annual 
paid leave and maternity leave, as the case may be;  
(d) access to benefits under social security schemes of the 
appropriate Government;  
(e) redressal of grievances through such appropriate mechanism as 
may be prescribed; 
 
Rights of Domestic 
Workers 
4. (1) No Domestic Worker shall be employed without an agreement in 
writing entered into between the employer and the worker.  
(2) Such an agreement shall follow the minimum labour standards laid 
down in the Model Employment Agreement prescribed under the Rules.  
(3) The Model Employment Agreement shall specify the name and 
other particulars, nature of assignment of the employee, hours of work, 
the wages and other benefits to which the worker is entitled, including the 
mode of payment of such wages and other contributions. 
 
Prohibition of 
employment of 
Domestic Worker 
without agreement. 
5. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in 
derogation of the provisions of any other law, for the time being in force. 
 
Act not in derogation 
of other laws. 
CHAPTER II 
REGISTRATION 
 
6. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time 
being in force, all Domestic Workers, employers or placement agencies 
shall be registered as per procedure herein after prescribed. Provided that 
only Indian citizens above eighteen years of age shall be allowed to 
register as domestic workers with the Board.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Registration of 
Domestic Workers, 
Employers and 
Placement agencies. 

-6- 
 
(2) An application for registration shall be made in such form, 
accompanied by such documents together with such fee as may be 
prescribed, to the District Board on this behalf.  
(3)A domestic worker may submit an application for registration to the 
District Board, accompanied by the prescribed registration fee, and the 
District Board shall register the applicant if it is satisfied that the applicant 
has complied with the relevant provisions of the Act.  
(4) Any person aggrieved by the District Board's decision may appeal 
to the State Board within thirty days, with the State Board’s decision 
being final, though it may allow an appeal after the deadline if satisfied 
that a sufficient cause prevented timely filing.  
(5) Registration certificates will be issued to the respective domestic 
workers, employers and placement agencies. 
 
7. Every placement agency shall, prior to the process of recruitment or 
engagement of domestic workers at workplace, register themselves with 
the District Board, through an application along with the prescribed fee, 
providing such details as prescribed. 
 
Compulsory 
Registration of 
placement agency. 
8. Every employer, within one month of the commencement of the 
employment of a domestic worker, shall submit to the District Board, an 
application along with prescribed fee for registration, providing such 
details as prescribed. 
 
Compulsory 
Registration of 
Employer. 
9. (1) A placement agency engaging a domestic worker shall ensure 
the worker's registration with the District Board within one month of the 
commencement of work, submitting an application with the prescribed fee 
paid by the worker and providing required details.  
(2) An employer directly engaging a domestic worker, or multiple 
employers for part-time work, shall ensure the worker’s registration with 
the District Board within one month of work commencement, with the 
prescribed fee paid by the worker; failure to comply shall incur liability 
on all employers as specified under Chapter VII of the Act. 
 
Compulsory 
Registration of 
Domestic Worker 

-7- 
10. (1) Subject to Section 8 (1), if the employer or placement agency 
fails to register themselves under the Act and continue to employ or 
engage domestic worker, then the penalties prescribed under Section 43 
(1) of this Act shall apply.  
(2) If the employer or service provides fails in their duty to register 
domestic worker under this Act and continue to employ unregistered 
domestic worker, then the penalties under Section 43 (1) shall apply. 
 
Effect of 
nonregistration 
11. (1) A registration certificate shall be renewed at an interval of One 
year, on the payment of fee as may be prescribed.  
(2) Renewal of registration shall be carried out by placement agencies, 
employers and domestic workers, to continue with their status. 
 
Renewal of registration 
certificate. 
12. If the employer or placement agency fails to renew their 
registration or domestic worker’s registration employed under them, 
penalties prescribed in Section 43 (1) and 43 (3) under this Act shall 
apply. 
 
Effect of nonrenewal. 
13. (1) The employer and the placement agency shall pay a Cess 
amount as may be prescribed, as annual contribution towards the Fund. 
This shall be paid at the time of registration and further at renewal of 
registration annually. 
(2) The Domestic Worker shall pay a nominal amount as annual 
contribution as may be prescribed, till she continues to renew her 
registration or till she retires as Domestic Worker. 
 
Payment of annual 
contribution. 
14. (1) In case of failure to pay annual contribution to the District 
Board along with registration or renewal fees, the penalties mentioned 
under Section 43 (2) and 43 (3) shall apply.  
(2) On failure to pay annual contribution by the domestic worker 
during employment, the worker ceases to be beneficiary of the welfare 
Fund under the Act. The status of the beneficiary will be restored on the 
payment of the pending contribution at any time. 
 
 
Effect of Nonpayment 
of annual contribution. 

-8- 
 
15. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, every Domestic Worker 
above the age of eighteen years, registered with the District Board under 
this Act, shall be entitled to the benefits provided by the District Board 
from its Domestic Workers’ Social Security and Welfare Fund (Fund) 
under this Act.  
(2) Every Domestic Worker above the age of sixty years shall continue 
to be beneficiary under this Act, for the purposes of Pension and other 
welfare benefits. 
 
Beneficiaries of the 
Fund. 
16. (1)The District Board shall issue an identity card, with the 
beneficiary’s photograph, upon registration and payment of the annual 
contribution, and the beneficiary shall produce the card upon request by 
any Government officer, District Board official, employer, or placement 
agency for inspection. 
 
Identity cards. 
CHAPTER III 
IMPLEMENTING AUTHORITIES UNDER THE ACT 
 
17. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Committee to be 
called the Central Committee to advise the Central Government on 
such matters arising out of the administration of this Act as may be 
referred to it and to carry out other functions assigned to it under this 
Act.  
(2) The tenure of the Committee shall be three years and 
proportionate representation shall be ensured from Government, 
Civil Society Organizations/Trade Unions, Domestic Workers and 
employers.  
(3) The Central Committee shall consist of such number of 
members and staff to be appointed by the appropriate Government in 
such manner as may be prescribed.  
(4) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and 
conditions of service of members of the Central Committee shall be 
such as may be prescribed.  
 
 
 
 
 
Central Committee. 

-9- 
 
(5) The members of the Central Committee shall meet once every 
six months to review the working of the Act. 
 
18. (1) The Central Committee shall perform the following functions:  
(a) Review and monitor the implementation of the Act and its rules, 
recommending changes to the Central and State Governments/Union 
Territories, and prepare an annual report on its administration; 
(b) Oversee the implementation of the Act across all States and Union 
Territories;  
(c) Advise State Boards on schemes related to social security, health, 
education, and welfare for Domestic Workers and their families;  
(d) Prescribe minimum standards for decent work conditions, in 
consultation with State Boards, and recommend strategies for the 
elimination of trafficking, forced, bonded, and child labor. 
 
Functions of the 
Central Committee. 
19. (1) The State Government shall, with effect from such date as it 
may, by notification, appoint and constitute a State Board to be 
known as the State Domestic Workers Welfare Board to exercise the 
powers conferred on, and perform the functions assigned to it under 
this Act.  
(2) The State Board shall be a body corporate by the name 
aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a common seal and shall 
by the said name sue and be sued.  
(3) The Chairperson of the State Board shall be a person 
appointed by the State Government,  
(4)The State Board shall consist of such number of members and 
staff to be appointed by the appropriate Government in such manner 
as may be prescribed.  
(5) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and 
conditions of service of members of the State Board shall be such as 
may be prescribed. 
 
 
 
Constitution of State 
Domestic Workers 
Board. 

-10- 
 
20. The State Board shall:  
(1) Make regulations with the prior approval of the State 
Government, consistent with this Act and the State rules, for matters 
provided under this Act;  
(2) Constitute and administer the Fund as specified in Section 27 of 
this Act;  
(3) Appoint a Secretary, officers, and employees as necessary for 
efficient discharge of its functions under this Act; 
(4) Constitute the District Boards as prescribed in Section 25 of this 
Act; (5) Facilitate the online presence of the District and State Boards 
for administrative transparency;  
(6) Review and monitor the functioning of District Boards, 
ensuring proper and effective implementation of the Act; 
(7) Frame Social Security and Welfare Schemes for distribution to 
beneficiaries by the District Boards; 
 
Functions of the State 
Boards. 
21. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made 
by Parliament by law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the 
State Government for effective implementation of the provisions of 
this Act. 
 
Central Government to 
provide adequate funds. 
22. The State Board shall prepare, in such form and at such time each 
financial year, as may be prescribed, its budget for the next financial year, 
showing the estimated receipts and expenditure of the Board and forward 
the same to the State Government and the Central Government. 
 
Budget 
23. (1)Maintain proper accounts and relevant records, preparing an 
annual statement of accounts in the prescribed form;  
(2) Ensure the accounts are audited annually by the Controller and 
Auditor General of the State Government;  
(3) Grant the auditor access to books, records, and documents, and 
provide explanations or information as required for the audit;  
(4) Submit the audited accounts and report to the State Government by 
the prescribed date;  
Accounts and audit. 

-11- 
 
(5) Comply with any directions issued by the State Government 
following review of the auditor's report, with audit costs to be borne by 
the State Board.  
(6) The State Government shall cause the annual report and auditor's 
report to be laid, as soon as may be after they are received, before the 
State Legislature. 
 
24. (1)The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, constitute a District Board in each of the districts, to be 
known as "District Domestic Workers Welfare Board", for carrying out 
the purposes of this Act:  
(2) The District Board shall consist of such number of members and 
staff to be appointed by the appropriate Government in such manner as 
may be prescribed. Provided that the Board shall include an equal number 
of members representing the State Government, Civil Society 
Organisations/ Trade Unions (working on domestic workers)/Domestic 
Workers and employers and that at least more than two-third members of 
the Board shall be women.  
(3) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and 
conditions of service of members and staff of the District Board shall be 
such as may be prescribed.  
(4) The procedure to be followed by the District Board in the discharge 
of its functions and the manner of filling up of vacancies shall be such as 
may be prescribed. 
 
District Domestic 
Workers  Welfare 
Board 
25. (1) The District Boards shall perform the following functions:  
(a) The Board shall carry out or cause to carry out the registration of 
domestic workers, employers and placement agencies / placement agency 
as per the procedure prescribed under the Act, in the name and Account of 
State Board either directly or through the Workers’ Facilitation Centres 
and maintain records and registration of domestic workers as beneficiaries 
under the Act;  
 
 
Functions of the 
District Domestic 
Workers Welfare 
Board. 

-12- 
 
(b) The District Board shall collect cess in the name and account of the 
State Board from placement agencies and employers at the time of 
registration as prescribed;  
(c) The District Board shall implement and disburse social security and 
welfare benefits framed by the State Board under Section 20 of the Act; 
(d) The District Board shall undertake the responsibility of Renewal of 
registration certificate and collection of annual contribution.  
(e) The District Board shall issue of identity card for the beneficiary 
with details of the employer. 
(f) The District Board shall authorise the members of the Workers’ 
Facilitation Centre to carry out surprise visits to the working place of the 
Domestic Workers and check the implementation of the Act.  
(g) provide a helpline number for use of domestic workers for 
registering instance of contraventions of the provisions of this Act. 
 
26. (1) The Appropriate Government may set up such Workers' 
facilitation centres, subject to such rules and in such specific areas, as may 
be prescribed, from time to time to perform the following functions, 
namely:-  
(a) Disseminate information on available social security and welfare 
benefits for domestic workers;  
(b) Facilitate the filling, processing, and forwarding of registration 
applications and annual contributions for employers, placement agencies, 
and domestic workers;  
(c) Assist domestic workers in obtaining registration from the District 
Board, enrolling in social security schemes, and accessing welfare 
benefits. 
 
Workers’ facilitation 
centres. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

-13- 
 
CHAPTER IV 
ESTABLISHMENT OF FUND 
 
27. (1) There shall be formed a Fund, to be called the Domestic 
Workers Social Security and Welfare Fund, and credited thereto-  
(a) 1% of House Tax collected by the local bodies shall be contributed 
towards Social Security and Welfare benefits of Domestic Workers and 
credited to Domestic Workers Welfare Fund every year;  
(b) Any grants made to the Fund by the appropriate Government or 
any other person or organisation;  
(c) Any income from investments made in or through any Nationalised 
Bank of the amounts in the Fund  
(d) All fines collected under this Act. 
(e) All other sums received by the Board from any other sources.  
(2) The Fund allocated to the District Board shall be used for:  
(a) Expenditures on welfare measures or facilities for the benefit of 
domestic workers as decided by the State Board;  
(b) Sanctioning money for welfare schemes, including family welfare, 
education, insurance, and other welfare measures;  
(c) Meeting costs necessary for promoting social security and welfare 
of domestic workers. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Domestic Workers 
Social Security and 
Welfare Fund. 
CHPATER V 
REGULATION OF THE WORKING CONDITIONS 
 
28. (1)Every employer and placement agency shall:  
(a) ensure registration with the appropriate Government and obtain 
a registration certificate, in such form as may be prescribed;  
(b) provide for the registration of the employment agreement, 
engaged through the agency, to the appropriate Government, in such 
form as may be prescribed;  
(c) ensure that fees charged on registration, etc. is not deducted 
from the remuneration of domestic workers; and  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Duties of the employer 
and placement agency. 

-14- 
 
(d) maintain proper registers and records of domestic workers, 
placements of domestic workers, payments and terms of employment.  
(2) Every employer and placement agency shall:  
(a) ensure decent living conditions of the domestic workers;  
(b) provide for of such minimum wages, as may be prescribed, 
including allowances for overtime, to the domestic worker;  
(c) engage the domestic worker for such work hours, as may be 
prescribed; 
(d) provide for education of children of resident domestic workers;  
(e) provide for payment of compensation for any injury caused to a 
domestic worker by an accident arising out of and in course of his/her 
employment; and  
(f) provide for registration of the employment agreement with 
domestic workers engaged directly to the appropriate government in 
such manner as may be prescribed. 
 
29. (1) No Domestic Worker shall be required or allowed to work in 
any household for more than nine hours in any day or for more than forty-
eight hours in any week; Working hours are to be defined as per the 
nature of work and taking eight hours as maximum, with sufficient 
periods of rest and food for full-time workers; provided that the work span 
should not be more than twelve hours for live-in (with three to four hours 
of rest in between), and similarly, full-time live-out workers, the work 
span should not be more than eight hours. Provided that any adult 
employee may be allowed to work in such household premises for any 
period in excess of the limit fixed under this section, subject to the 
payment of overtime wages, if the period of work exceeds forty-eight 
hours a week and, including overtime work, does not exceed ten hours in 
any day and, in the aggregate, fifty hours in any week.  
(2) Weekly holidays – Every employee irrespective of being a full- 
time, part-time, live-in, night-shift employee will be entitled to a paid 
weekly day off.  
 
 
Working Hours. 

-15- 
 
(3) Restriction on overtime- The total hours of work in any day shall 
not exceed 10 hours in a day. The overtime work in a week, if any, shall 
not exceed Twelve hours in the aggregate.  
(4) Wages for overtime work – Where a domestic worker works for 
more than the maximum working hours as prescribed in Section 29(1), 
s/he shall, in respect of the overtime work, be entitled to wages at the rate 
of twice his ordinary rate of wages.  
(5) Interval for rest – The periods of work of an employee each day 
shall be so fixed that no period shall exceed five hours and that no 
employee shall work for more than five hours before he has had an 
interval for rest of at least half an hour. 
 
30. (1) The appropriate Government shall by notification –  
(a) fix the minimum rates of wages payable to the Domestic 
Workers.  
(b) Review minimum wages at such intervals as it may think fit. 
Such intervals shall not exceed five years.  
(2) The appropriate Government may fix-  
(a) minimum rate of wages for time work (hereinafter referred to as 
'a minimum time rate');  
(b) a minimum rate of wages for piece work (hereinafter referred to 
as 'minimum piece rate'); and  
(c) Minimum rates of wages may be fixed by any one or more of 
the following wage- periods, namely:- i. by the hour, or ii. by the day, 
or iii. by the month; 
 
Minimum Wages. 
31. (1) The employer shall directly pay the wages to the bank account 
of the employee within the first five days of the month; (2) The wage 
period shall not exceed one month. 
 
Payment of Wages. 
32. (1) Sick Leave- In addition to the weekly holiday under Section 29 
of this Act, every employee shall be entitled to a paid leave on the account 
of being sick, provided that the number of days for sick leave shall not 
exceed fifteen days.  
 
Leave 

-16- 
 
(2) Annual Leave - Every employee who has worked for a period of 
Two hundred and forty days or more in a household shall be entitled to 
fifteen days of paid leave. This period shall not include the weekly 
holidays or sick leave. 
 
33. The employer shall provide one month notice to the employee 
before termination of employment and provide wages worth fifteen days 
of employment. 
 
Termination 
34. The employer shall provide the employee with basic amenities like 
safe drinking water, food, first aid and washrooms. 
 
Basic Amenities. 
35. The employer shall provide a live-in employee with private and 
decent accommodations for rest and dressing. 
 
Accommodation for 
live-in workers. 
36. No domestic worker shall be subjected to the offence of sexual, 
physical or verbal assault, violence, trafficking, wrongful confinement 
and bonded/forced labour by any employer or a member of his household. 
In case of report of such offences, the police shall take appropriate 
criminal action under respective penal provisions of the Bharatiya Nyaya 
Sanhita and other special laws against the employer or placement agency 
forthwith. 
 
Protection against 
Crimes. 
37. (1) No employer registered under this Act shall discriminate on the 
basis of gender, caste, race, region, language, colour, sex, creed or 
religion, in matters such as recruitment, conditions of employment, 
payment of wages etc.  
(2) No voluntary association or agency shall discriminate on the 
aforesaid grounds in rehabilitation, recruitment and placement and 
payment on these grounds, nor shall it cause an employer to do so. 
Explanation- There shall be equal payment for equal work requiring the 
same amount of work, skill set, and effort. 
 
 
No discrimination at 
place of work. 

-17- 
38. No child shall be employed as a Domestic Worker or for any such 
incidental or ancillary work which is prohibited under any law for the 
time being in force. 
 
Employment of a child. 
CHAPTER VI 
GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL MECHANISM AND DISPUTE 
RESOLUTION 
 
39. (1)The appropriate Government shall Constitute Grievance 
Redressal Committees (GRCs) in the State for addressing grievances of 
domestic workers, employers, and placement agencies;  
(2) Ensure that each District has one or more GRCs to resolve disputes 
arising from individual grievances;  
(3) Ensure the GRCs work to promote amity and good relations 
between employers, workers, and placement agencies, and to mediate 
disputes related to employment, non-employment, and terms of 
employment of domestic workers; 
(4) Ensure that the Chairperson of the GRC is selected on a rotational 
basis, alternating between the employer and worker each year, with the 
total number of members not exceeding ten, and ensuring adequate 
representation of women workers, not less than half of the total members;    
(5) Provide for the filing of disputes within one year from the cause of 
action, with provisions for assistance to workers who cannot file 
complaints in writing, and for legal heirs or designated persons to file on 
behalf of incapacitated workers. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Grievance Redressal 
Mechanism and 
Dispute Resolution 
40. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification, appoint such 
number of persons, as it thinks fit to be conciliation officers, charged with 
the duty of mediating in and promoting the settlement of disputes.  
(2) A conciliation officer may be appointed for a specified area and 
either permanently or for a limited period. 
 
Conciliation Officers 
41.The appropriate Government may, by notification, 
designate/constitute one or more Domestic Workers’ Tribunals for the 
adjudication of disputes and for performing such other functions, 
following the procedure as prescribed, as may be assigned to them. 
Domestic Workers’ 
Tribunal. 

-18- 
42. A settlement arrived at by agreement between the employer and 
worker otherwise than in the course of conciliation proceeding shall be 
binding on the parties to the agreement. A copy of it shall be sent to the 
appropriate Government. 
 
Bi-partite settlement of 
disputes. 
CHAPTER VII 
OFFECES AND PENALTIES 
 
43. (1) Any unregistered placement agency or employer, or one failing 
to register a domestic worker or renew the certificate, shall face 
imprisonment up to three months and a fine of Five thousand rupees; for 
repeat offences, the penalty may extend to three months’ imprisonment 
and a fine of Twenty thousand rupees, or both. 
(2) Any placement agency or employer who violates the Act or its 
rules shall be punishable with up to three months’ imprisonment and a 
fine up to Thirty thousand rupees, or both; for ongoing violations, an 
additional fine of One hundred rupees per day may apply.  
(3) A person convicted under (2) for a similar offence shall, on a 
subsequent conviction, face up to six months’ imprisonment and a fine 
between Forty thousand rupees and Fifty thousand rupees, or both.  
(4) Employers who fail to pay a domestic worker or pay below the 
minimum wage must pay the due amount with interest; they may be 
punished with up to six months’ imprisonment or a fine up to Twenty 
thousand rupees, or both.  
(5) Anyone obstructing an authorised inspector or refusing access for 
inspection shall face up to three months’ imprisonment and a fine up to 
Twenty thousand rupees, or both.  
(6) Anyone who refuses to produce required documents or prevents an 
inspection shall face up to three months’ imprisonment or a fine up to 
Twenty thousand rupees, or both.  
(7) Any person who –  
(i) Knowingly sends, directs or takes any girl or woman to any 
place for immoral purposes or to a place where she is likely to be 
morally corrupted or,  
 
 
 
 
 
Offences and Penalties. 

-19- 
 
(ii) In any manner sexually exploits or trafficking of such woman 
or child or,  
(iii) If found ill-treating or discriminating any Domestic Worker 
on the basis of caste, sex, class, race, physical or mental ability or 
religion or region or,  
(iv) In any manner abuses or illegally confines any domestic 
worker or,  
(v) Compels any person to render any forced labour or,  
(vi) Provides any child as Domestic Workers shall be subjected to 
imprisonment for not less than three years and which may extend up to 
a period of seven years or fine up to/ Fifty Thousand or both. 
 
44. For the victims of forced labour, sexual exploitation, 
discrimination, illegal confinement or any kind of abuse, the District 
Board or placement agency shall provide with emergency aid, medium 
term assistance and legal aid in conduct of the legal proceedings and 
admit the victim to rehabilitation homes. 
 
Emergency Aid, 
Medium Term 
Assistance and Legal 
Aid. 
CHAPTER VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
 
45. (1) The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law or in the terms 
of any agreement or contract of service, whether made before or after the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed as precluding any 
domestic worker of from entering into an agreement with the employer as 
the case may be, for granting them rights or privileges in respect of any 
matter which are more favourable to them than those to which they would 
be entitled under this Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Effect of laws and 
agreements inconsistent 
with the Act. 

-20- 
 
46. (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against 
any member of the District Board or any non-Governmental organization 
for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in 
pursuance of this Act.  
(2) No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Government 
for any damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in 
good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act. 
 
Protection of action 
taken under Act 
47. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the official 
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provided for all or any of the following 
matters, namely—  
(a) the form and manner of notification of the minimum rate of 
wages, overtime rate, maximum work hours, periods of work and rest, 
paid leave and maternity leave applicable to a Domestic Worker;  
(b) criteria for determining the amount of compensation for any 
personal injury caused to a Domestic Worker by accident arising out of 
and in course of his/her employment; 
(c) the form and manner in which wages shall be paid to the 
Domestic Worker;  
(d) establishment and regulation of Workers' Facilitation Centres;  
(e) the manner and form of an employment agreement and its 
verification at the Workers' Facilitation Centres;  
(f) the manner and form of registration of a Placement Agency 
including issuance of registration certificates and renewal of 
registration;  
(g) the powers which may be conferred on the District Board, the 
Dispute Resolution Council, and the Inspector under the terms of this 
Act;  
 
 
 
 
Power of the 
appropriate 
Government to make 
rules. 

-21- 
 
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be 
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament 
while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule.  
(4) Every rule made by a State Government or a Union territory 
Government shall be laid, as soon as may be, after it is made, before the 
State Legislature. 
 
  

 
STATEMENT  OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 
There has been insufficient focus on recognizing domestic work as a formal 
occupational category and acknowledging domestic workers as legitimate employees, despite 
their collective demands dating back to the 1950s. The increasing demand for domestic 
employment highlights the growth of this sector and the rising number of women workers. 
However, the issues of vulnerability, informality, and job precarity remain largely unaddressed, 
leading to significant challenges in their work-life balance. Domestic workers are advocating for 
protection against violence, exploitation, and discrimination, as well as for better working 
conditions, social security, and welfare benefits to ensure a dignified livelihood. The 
undervaluation of domestic work, often performed by migrant women and girls from 
marginalized communities, exposes these workers to serious abuses such as trafficking, forced 
labor, child labor, sexual violence, and even murder. In response, the International Labour 
Organization adopted the Domestic Workers Convention (No. 189) in 2011 to promote the 
formal recognition of this workforce, ensuring dignity at work, freedom of association, and the 
elimination of discrimination, forced labor, and child labor. This Convention calls for 
standardization of employment contracts for domestic workers. As a founding member of the 
ILO with a large domestic workforce, India has a responsibility, both internationally and 
domestically, to address the issues faced by these workers. The lack of legal protections has 
denied domestic workers fair wages and often forces them to endure excessive working hours. 
Constitutional provisions, including Articles 39, 41, 42, 43, and 43-A, entitle workers to decent 
working conditions, a living wage, and protections against unemployment, sickness, old age, 
maternity, and workplace abuse. The judiciary has repeatedly affirmed the rights to minimum 
wages, workplace dignity, and protections against exploitative practices, including trafficking 
and the lack of legal recognition for domestic workers (as seen in cases like Bachpan Bachao & 
Ors. vs. Union of India and Shramjeevi Mahila Samiti vs. Govt. of NCT & Anr.). To uphold 
international standards, constitutional rights, and judicial directives aimed at recognizing and 
protecting domestic workers, comprehensive legislation tailored to the specific working and 
living conditions of domestic workers in the country must be enacted to combat their 
exploitation. 
  
Hence this Bill. 
 NEW DELHI;         T. SUMATHY(A) THAMIZHACHI THANGAPANDIAN 
     November 13, 2024. 
  

 
 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM  
 
 
Clauses 17, 19, 21of the Bill provide respectively for constitution of Central Committee, 
establishment of State Social Security Boardsand loans by the Central Government to the State 
Boards. Clauses 24and 27 of the Bill provide respectively for establishment of District Domestic 
Workers Welfare Board, and establishment of Domestic Workers Social Security and Welfare 
Fund. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of 
India. It is, however, difficult of assess the expenditure, both recurring and non-recurring, that is 
likely to be involved.  
  

 
 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION  
 
 
Clause 47 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying 
out the provisions of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matter of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of normal character.   

LOK  SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
------------  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 
 
BILL 
 
 
to provide for the welfare, protection and security of domestic workers and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
 
------------  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Dr. T. Sumathy(A) Thamizhachi Thangapandian,  M.P.) 