1
THE NATIONAL  ROAD  TRANSPORT  SAFETY AND
MISCELLANEOUS  PROVISIONS  BILL, 2015
By
SHRI RABINDRA KUMAR JENA, M.P.
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
CHAPTER  I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Declaration.
3. Definitions.
4. Guiding Principles to be followed in the administration of the Act.
CHAPTER  II
ROAD SAFETY, TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT AND RELATED OFFENCES
5. National Unified Information System.
6. Electronic Road Crash and Offences System.
7. Universal Road Crash Emergency Access Telephone Number.
8. Unified Driving Licensing System.
9. Grant of Driving License.
10. Offences related to driving license.
11. Electronic enforcement of traffic regulations.
12. Bicyclist Safety—Protective Headgear and Conspicuity Requirement.
13. Motorcyclist Safety—Protective Headgear and Conspicuity Requirement.
14. Unauthorized sale of protective and conspicuity gear.
15. Three-wheeled Vehicles—Safety and conspicuity Requirements.
16. Light Motor Vehicles: Safety and conspicuity Requirements.
17. Safety and Conspicuity Requirements for stationary vehicles.
18. Restriction of carriage of person by non-motorised transport.
19. Restriction of carriage of person on motor cycles.
20. Restriction of carriage of person in three-wheeled vehicles.
21. Seat belts for Adults in motor vehicle.
22. Seat belts and seating requirements for Children in motor vehicles.
23. Child Restraint Systems in Vehicle.
24. Requirement to notify Bus passengers to wear seat belts.
25. Prohibition of parking or abandoning of motor vehicles in certain places.
26. Prohibition of driving in certain places.
27. Duty to obey Child zones.
28. Speed limits on roads other than restricted roads.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No.  248 of  2015

CLAUSES
29. Offence of driving at excessive speed.
30. Offence of driving at excessive speed on restricted roads.
31. Speed management signs.
32. Right of way to Emergency Vehicles.
33. Maintenance of safe distance from Pedestrians and Non-Motorized Transport.
34. Driving which causes threat to public safety.
35. Prohibition on driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs.
36. Causing danger to road users.
37. Leaving vehicles in dangerous position.
38. Tampering with vehicles.
39. Holding or getting on to a vehicle in order to be towed or carried.
40. Offence of disrupting flow of traffic, etc.
41. Overloading.
42. Powers regarding vehicles suspected of overloading.
43. Powers to restrict use of vehicles in certain cases.
44. Power to place traffic signs.
45. Duty of driver in case of a crash and injury to a person.
46. Duty of driver to take certain precautions at unguarded railway level crossings.
47. Using vehicle in unsafe conditions.
48. Failure to comply with standards for road design, construction and maintenance.
49. Offences relating to certain communication devices.
CHAPTER  III
G
ENERAL OFFENCES AND INVESTIGATION PROVISIONS
50. General provisions regarding penalties.
51. General provisions for driver penalty points scheme.
52. Driving uninsured vehicles.
53. Punishment for offences relating to a crash.
54. Punishment for abetment of certain offences.
55. Offences by Companies.
56. Power to arrest without warrant.
57. Power to impound documents.
58. Disobedience of orders, obstruction or causing death or injury of a person enforcing
the Act.
59. Impairment Test.
60. Breath Test.
61. Clinical Test.
62. Presumption of Unfitness to drive.
63. Penalty for offence committed by an enforcing authority.
64. Compounding of certain offences.
65. Summary disposal of cases.
66. Power of National Road Safety Authority to amend Schedules.
(ii)

CHAPTER  IV
NA TIONAL ROAD SAFETY AUTHORITY
CLAUSES
67. Constitution of National Road Safety Authority.
68. Appointment of Chairperson and Other Members.
69. Conditions of Service of Chairperson and Other Members.
70. Resignation and removal of Chairperson and Other Members.
71. Restrictions on employment.
72. Officers and employees of the National Road Safety Authority.
73. Term of Office of Chairperson and Members.
74. Members to act as Chairperson or to Discharge his functions in Certain Circumstances.
75. Vacancies etc. not to invalidate the proceedings of the National Road Safety Authority.
76. Objectives and Duties of the National Road Safety Authority.
77. Regulations and other functions of the National Road Safety Authority.
78. Proceedings of the National Road Safety Authority.
79. Process of making regulations.
80. Emergency Regulations making.
81. Functions of the Chairperson.
82. Technical Working Groups.
83. Procedure for appointing Technical Working Groups.
84. Delegation of Powers of the National Road Safety Authority.
85. Constitution of National Road Crash Victim Compensation Fund.
86. Central Government to provide requisite sums.
87. Maintenance of Accounts.
88. Budget.
89. Annual and Special Reports.
CHAPTER  V
S
TATE ROAD SAFETY AUTHORITY
90. Constitution of State Road Safety Authority.
91. Composition of State Road Safety Authority.
92. Appointment of Chairperson and other Members.
93. Conditions of service of Chairperson and members.
94. Resignation and removal of Chairperson and members.
95. Restrictions on employment.
96. Officers and employees of the State Road Safety Authority.
97. Term of office of Chairperson  and Members.
98. Member to act as Chairperson or to Discharge his Functions in Certain Circumstances.
99. Vacancies, etc., not to Invalidate the Proceedings of the Authority.
100. Functions of State Safety Authority.
101. National Road Safety Authority to perform functions in certain cases.
102. Power of National Road Safety Authority to issue directions.
(iii)

CLAUSES
103. Constitution of State Road Safety Fund.
104. Maintenance of accounts by State Authorities.
105. Budget of the State Authorities.
106. Annual and Special Reports of State Authorities.
CHAPTER  VI
MISCELLANEOUS
107. Act to have overriding effect.
108. Application of certain laws.
109. Power of Central Government to make rules.
110. Power to remove difficulties.
(iv)

Bill No. 248  of 2015
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE NATIONAL ROAD TRANSPORT SAFETY AND
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS BILL, 2015
By
SHRI RABINDRA KUMAR JENA, M.P.
A
BILL
to significantly reduce the high number of road accidents resulting in deaths and injuries
by establishing a protective framework for all class of road users, including vulnerable
road users; fixing accountability on and establishing minimum safety
standards for road users, owners and vehicle manufacturers;
enhancing enforcement and improving over-all road
discipline and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
WHEREAS the Constitution of India guarantees right to life with dignity to all people;
AND WHEREAS approximately 1.4 lakh people are killed on Indian roads every year;
AND WHEREAS it is necessary to safeguard the health and prosperity of innocent civilians
by establishing a safe system where the number of fatalities and serious injuries caused by
accidents are significantly reduced in the long term.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER  I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This act may be called the National Road Transport Safety and Miscellaneous
Provisions Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5

2
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the official Gazette, appoint.
2. It is hereby declared that it is expedient in public interest that Union should take
road transport under its control.
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "ambulance" means a vehicle specially designed, constructed or modified
and equipped and intended to be used for emergency transportation of persons who
are sick, injured, wounded or otherwise incapacitated;
(b) "certificate of registration" means the certificate issued under the Motor
Vehicles Act, 1988 by a competent authority to the effect that a motor vehicle has been
duly registered in accordance with the said Act;
(c) "company" means a company incorporated under the Companies Act, 2013
or under any previous company law;
(d) "community service" means a requirement of unpaid work under such terms
as may be specified by the National Road Safety Authority imposed on a person who
has committed an offence under this Act;
(e) "driver" means any person who drives or steers a motor vehicle;
(f) "driving licence" means the licence issued under the Motor Vehicles Act,
1988 authorizing a person to drive, otherwise than as a learner, a motor vehicle or a
motor vehicle of any specified type or class;
(g) "drug" includes any intoxicant other than alcohol, natural or synthetic, or
any natural material or any salt or preparation of such substance or material as specified
by the National Road Safety Authority;
(h) "emergency vehicle" means a transport vehicle used solely for police, fire
brigade or ambulance purposes;
(i) "goods" means any kind of movable property and includes livestock but
does not include persons and their personal effects;
Explanation.—Motor vehicles being transported on another motor vehicle shall
also be considered as goods.
(j) "gross vehicle weight", in respect of any vehicle, means the maximum weight
of the vehicle in laden condition as specified by the manufacturer and certified by the
type approving authority;
(k) "heavy motor vehicle" means any motor vehicle the gross vehicle weight of
which exceeds twelve thousand kilograms or as specified by the National Road Safety
Authority;
(l) "licensing authority" means an authority empowered by the National Road
Safety Authority to issue licences under this Act;
(m) "light motor vehicle" means a motor vehicle, the gross vehicle weight of
which does not exceed seven thousand five hundred kilograms or as specified by the
National Road Safety Authority;
(n) "manufacturer" means a person who is engaged in the manufacture of motor
vehicles;
(o) "mobile machinery" means heavy equipment or construction equipment or
earth moving equipment except shop or hand tools, which is self-propelled, towed, or
hauled and used primarily in construction and maintenance of roads, bridges, ditches,
buildings and land reclamation or as specified by the National Road Safety Authority;
(p) "motor cycle" means a two-wheeled motor vehicle,  including a sidecar with
an extra wheel which may be attached;
Declaration.
Definitions. 5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(q) "motor vehicle" or "vehicle" means any mechanically propelled vehicle used
in any place whether the power of propulsion is transmitted thereto from an external or
internal source and includes a chassis to which a body has not been attached and a
trailer or a semi-trailer or mobile machinery; but does not include a vehicle running
upon fixed rails or a vehicle of a special type adapted for use only in a factory or in any
other enclosed premises or such vehicles as may be notified by the National Road
Safety Authority from time to time;
(r) "National Road Safety Authority" means the National Road Safety Authority
established under section 67;
(s) "non-motorised transport" means any mode of transport that is propelled or
powered by muscular power of either human beings or animals and excludes pedestrians;
(t) "owner" in relation to a motor vehicle means the person in whose name a
motor vehicle stands registered and where such person is a minor, the guardian of
such minor; and in relation to a motor vehicle which is the subject of a hire-purchase
agreement, or an agreement of lease or an agreement of hypothecation, the person in
possession of the vehicle under that agreement; or in respect of an unregistered
vehicle, the person in possession or control of the vehicle; or a vehicle manufacturer
or dealer or importer till such time the vehicle is registered;
(u) "passenger" is a person who travels in a vehicle but bears little or no
responsibility for the tasks required for that vehicle to arrive at its destination or
otherwise operate the vehicle;
(v) "passenger vehicle" means any motor vehicle constructed or adapted for use
for the carriage of passengers and their personal luggage;
(w) "permit" means a document issued under this Act authorizing the use of
motor vehicles as a transport vehicle;
(x) "private service vehicle" means a motor vehicle constructed or adapted to
carry passengers and ordinarily used by or on behalf of the owner of such vehicle for
the purpose of carrying persons for, or in connection with, his trade or business
otherwise than for hire or reward but does not include a motor vehicle used for public
transportation;
(y) "property" includes goods carried in the motor vehicle, personal effects of
passengers, as well as roads, bridges, culverts, causeways, trees, posts and milestones;
(z) "protective headgear" includes any equipment or device, including helmets,
primarily intended to protect the wearer's head against impact in the event of a collision;
(za) "public place" means a road, street, way or other place, whether a
thoroughfare or not, to which the public have a right of access, and includes any place
or stand at which passengers are picked up or set down;
(zb) "road safety" means the set of practices which identify those problems that
contribute to crashes or injuries and includes methods and measures for reducing the
risk of a road crash death or injuries sustained in a crash in a public place including but
not limited to driver education regarding responsible road sharing and protection of
vulnerable road users, enforcement of traffic laws, manufacture of vehicles with inbuilt
high safety standards, construction of safe roads and provision of emergency road
services;
(zc) "restricted road" includes a road on which a speed limit applies or has a
restriction on the types of vehicles which may ply on that road or has been notified by
the appropriate authority to be a restricted road;
(zd) "road crash death" means the death of any person who dies within thirty
days or such time period as may be specified by the National Road Safety Authority, as
a result of injuries sustained due to a crash caused by a motor vehicle in a public place;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

4
(ze) "semi-trailer" includes a vehicle without motive power designed to be drawn
by a motor vehicle or truck tractor or a prime mover and so constructed that an
appreciable part of its weight and that of its load rests on and is carried by the motor
vehicle or truck tractor, and a pole trailer;
(zf) "State Road Safety Authority" means the State Road Safety Authority
established under Section 90;
(zg) "Technical Working Groups" means the working groups established under
Section 82;
(zh) "three-wheeled vehicle" means a motor vehicle having three wheels designed,
constructed or adopted for the carriage of persons and/or goods, but does not include
a two-wheeler attached with a sidecar or a two-wheeler adapted for use by differently
abled persons;
(zi) "traffic" on roads includes motor vehicles, pedestrians, non-motorized
transport and other vehicles, either singly or together;
(zj) "traffic signs" includes all signals including manual signals, warning sign
posts, direction posts, markings on the road or other devices for providing information,
guidance or direction to any user of the road;
(zk) "trailer" includes, a vehicle without motive power designed to be drawn by
or used in conjunction with a motor vehicle except—
(a) a boat, horse, snowmobile, automobile or motorcycle trailer that is not
used for business purposes or financial gain;
(b)  an implement of animal husbandry;
(c) a sidecar attached to a motorcycle; and
(d) a disabled motor vehicle that is towed by a tow car.
(zl) "transport vehicle" means a motor vehicle used for carriage of passengers
for hire or reward or a goods vehicles or a trailer or a semi-trailer or mobile machinery
but does not include a private service vehicle;
(zm) "two-wheeler" means a two wheeled motor vehicle with or without a
detachable sidecar with one or more wheels and includes a two-wheeler adapted for
use by differently-abled person;
(zn) "unladen weight" means the weight of a vehicle or a trailer including all
equipment ordinarily used with the vehicle or trailer when working, but excluding the
weight of a driver or attendant; and where alternative parts or bodies are used the
unladen weight of the vehicle means the weight of the vehicle with the heaviest such
alternative part or body;
(zo) "weight" means the total weight transmitted for the time being by the wheels
of a vehicle to the surface on which the vehicle rests.
4. The Central Government, the State Governments, the National Road Safety Authority,
the State Safety Authorities and other agencies, as the case may be, while implementing the
provisions of this Act shall be guided by the following principles, namely:—
(a) the desirability to facilitate the seamless movement of people, goods and
services by way of motor vehicles throughout the territory of India;
(b) the advantages offered to the public by the development of road transport
and systems of public transportation;
(c) the development of technology, its adoption, and innovation in motor vehicles
and road transport;
Guiding
principles, to
be followed in
administration
of the Act.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
(d) the necessity to ensure public safety;
(e) the necessity to protect public health;
(f) the desirability of reducing the incidence and severity of road trauma;
(g) the desirability of preventing the deterioration of the road network;
(h) the desirability to foster transparency and eliminate corrupt practices.
CHAPTER II
ROAD SAFETY, TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT AND RELATED OFFENCES
5. (1) A National Unified Information System shall be developed and maintained by the
National Road Safety Authority for the entire country for ensuring road safety.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the National Unified
Information System shall include information relating to—
(a) the registration of motor vehicles and the renewals of such registrations;
(b) the information of manufacturers, including chassis number and engine number
of motor vehicles either manufactured in India or registered in Indiá;
(c) the details of insurance policies of motor vehicles registered in India;
(d) the certificates of fitness and pollution under control certificates;
(e) the issuance and renewal of driving licences;
(f) traffic offences committed along with penalties imposed on the holders of
driving licences and registered motor vehicles;
(g) road crashes involving motor vehicles.
(3) The system shall be developed to ensure that the payment of monies and the
distribution of revenue to the States and the local Government is facilitated in a seamless
manner and protects against revenue leakage.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, the National Road Safety
Authority shall have the power to call for information from any person in possession, control
or ownership of such information, including the State Governments, competent licensing
authorities, competent registering authorities, motor vehicle manufacturers and such person
shall be obliged to submit the said information forthwith.
(5) Every motor vehicle manufacturer shall be obliged to provide details including the
unique chassis number assigned by it to each vehicle it manufactures to the National Road
Safety Authority for the purpose of developing and maintaining the National Unified
Information System and in such format and manner as may be specified by the National Road
Safety Authority.
(6) Whoever fails to provide information to the National Road Safety Authority shall
be committing an offence under this Act which shall attract penalty in accordance with
Schedule II.
6. (1) An Electronic Road Crash and Offences System shall be designed and developed
by the National Road Safety Authority within two years from the date of the commencement
of this Act and shall be implemented within one year of its development.
(2) The Electronic Road Crash and Offences System shall be designed to—
(a) enable the submission of data on road crashes and offences either
electronically or at any police station in the country; and
(b) facilitate the collection of uniform standardized information regarding road
crashes and offences.
National
Unified
Information
System.
Electronic
Road Crash
and Offences
System.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
50

6
7. (1) The National Road Safety Authority shall establish a toll-free Nation-wide Road
Crash Emergency Access Telephone Number for the entire country to enable persons involved
in a road crash or any other person to alert and access first-response emergency services
that shall provide emergency services including golden-hour trauma care.
(2) The Central Government, State Government and State Safety Authority shall ensure,
through appropriate regulations or orders or directives, that all emergency services are
coordinated in their response to road crashes via the said Nation-wide Road Crash Emergency
Access Telephone Number.
(3) The National Road Safety Authority shall make regulations specifying the form and
manner in which such Nation-wide Road Crash Emergency Access Telephone Number is
established and operated.
8. (1) A Unified Driving Licensing System shall be designed and developed by the
National Road Safety Authority within six months from the date of the commencement of this
Act and shall be implemented within one year of its development.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the above provision, the Unified Driving
Licensing System shall—
(a) enable the submission of applications for different types of driving licences
from anywhere in the country both electronically or before any competent licensing
authority in the country;
(b) facilitates collection of uniform standardized information including biometric
or any other equivalent unique identification technology identified by the National
Road Safety Authority;
(c) facilitate collection of such information as may be necessary to verify whether
the applicant for a driving licence has a valid and operating bank account;
(d) facilitates grant of licence in a transparent and time bound manner; and
(e) enable electronic payment of the fees as prescribed by the National Road
Safety Authority in consultation with the Central and the State Government for issuance
of driving licence.
(3) The National Road Safety Authority in consultation with the State Safety Authorities
shall establish licence Seva Kendras in all the States to deliver licence services to citizens in
a timely, transparent, more accessible and reliable manner and in a comfortable environment
through streamlined processes and trained workforce.
9. (1) The National Authority shall lay down the detailed requirements for the issuance
of driving licence, including mandatory driver training and competence tests.
(2) Notwithstanding the generality of the provision under sub-section (1), no person
shall be granted a driving licence unless—
(a) that person is medically fit to hold that category of licence and the criteria for
fitness shall be as prescribed by the National Road Safety Authority;
(b) that person has undergone mandatory driver's training in the manner and at
an institution as prescribed by the National Road Safety Authority; and
(c) that at some time in the three months prior to the date of application, that
person has passed the specified tests of competence to drive:
Provided that the National Authority shall also prescribe the procedure for renewal of
driving licence.
10. (1) Any person who, while holding any valid driving licence, attempts to obtain
any other driving licence except as provided under this Act, shall be punishable in accordance
with Schedule II.
Universal
Road Crash
Emergency
Access
Telephone
Number.
Unified
Driving
Licensing
System.
Grant of
Driving
Licence.
Offences
related to
driving
licence.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
(2) Any person who, while holding any valid driving license, obtains any other driving
license except as provided under this Act, then both such licenses issued to that person
shall be deemed to be invalid.
(3) Any person who, while holding any valid driving license, holds any other driving
license except as provided under this Act shall be punishable in accordance with Schedule II.
(4) Any person who, being disqualified under this Act for holding or obtaining a
driving license, drives a motor vehicle in any place, or applies for or obtains a driving license,
shall be punishable in accordance with Schedule II.
(5) Any person who, not being entitled to have a driving license issued to such person
free of endorsement, applies for or obtains a driving license without disclosing the
endorsement made on a driving license previously held by such person, shall be punishable
in accordance with Schedule II and may have to undergo compulsory refresher training.
(6) Whoever, being the owner or the driver of a motor vehicle, or the person under
whose instructions the driver of a motor vehicle, knowingly causes or permits a minor to
drive that vehicle shall be punishable in accordance with Schedule II.
11. (1) The State Government shall prescribe electronic enforcement of road safety and
traffic regulations for any urban city within the State, which has a population above the limit
prescribed by the Central Government.
(2) For the purposes of this Section, the National Road Safety Authority shall make
regulations for electronic monitoring and enforcement for road safety, which may include
speed cameras, CCTV cameras, speed guns and other similar, progressive technology that
achieves the objectives specified by the National Road Safety Authority.
12. (1) The National Road Safety Authority shall make regulations specifying the
protective gear and conspicuity requirements including types of helmets, reflector material
and jackets, required for affording protection to persons on bicycles from death or injury in
the event of a crash.
(2) A person who is riding a bicycle without wearing protective headgear or in
contravention of regulations under this section shall be guilty of an offence under this Act
and be punished in accordance with Schedule II.
(3) In case the offence under sub-section (2) is committed by a driver, the person shall
be awarded penalty points in accordance with Schedule I.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section and section 13, "helmet" includes any
head-dress as specified by the National Road Safety Authority.
(4) The Central Government shall ensure that adequate financial assistance is provided
to the manufacturers of protective headgear and conspicuity requirements for bicycles so as
to make such gear affordable to bicycle users.
13. (1) The National Road Safety Authority shall make regulations specifying the
protective gear and conspicuity requirements, including types of helmets, daytime running
lights, reflectorizing material, reflector, jackets and visors, required to afford protection to
persons on motor cycles of all classes, from death or injury in the event of a crash.
(2) A person who drives or rides a motor cycle without protective gear or in contravention
of regulations under this section shall be guilty of an offence under this Act and be punished
in accordance with Schedule II:
Provided that if the person actually committing the contravention is a child under the
age of sixteen years, the owner shall be held guilty of the offence:
Provided further that the requirement for protective headgear imposed by regulations
under this section shall not apply to any follower of the Sikh religion.
Electronic
Enforcement
of Traffic
Regulations.
Bicyclist
Safety-
Protective
headgear and
conspicuity
requirements.
Motorcyclist
Safety-
Protective
headgear and
conspicuity
requirements.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

8
(3) In case the offence under sub-section ( 2) has been committed by the driver, the
person shall be awarded penalty points in accordance with Schedule I.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section "Daytime Running Lights" include
headlamps or lights switched on during the day in order to increase visibility and conspicuity
of the vehicle.
14. If a person sells, or offers for sale, any protective or conspicuity gear, as specified
by the National Road Safety Authority (by reference to shape, construction or any other
quality) in sections 12 and 13 for affording such protection and the gear is not—
(a) of a type specified under sections 11 and 12; or
(b) of a type authorized under regulations made under sections 12 and 13 such
person shall be guilty of an offence and shall be punished in accordance with
Schedule II:
Provided a person shall not be convicted of an offence under this section in respect of
the sale or offer for sale of any protective or conspicuity gear if that person proves that such
protective or conspicuity gear was sold or offered for sale solely for export purposes.
15. (1) The National Road Safety Authority shall make such regulations specifying
the safety and conspicuity requirements including fog lights and tail lights, retro-reflective
material, or other requirements for poor or dense weather conditions, as may be required to
afford protection to persons on or in three wheeled vehicles of different classes, from death
or injury in the event of crash.
(2) Whoever, while driving a three wheeled vehicle contravenes the provisions of sub-
section (1) shall be punished in accordance with Schedule II, and shall be awarded penalty
points in accordance with Schedule I.
16. (1) The National Road Safety Authority shall make such regulations specifying (by
reference to shape, construction or any other quality) the safety and conspicuity requirements
including air-bags, daytime running lights and reflectorizing material as may be necessary to
afford protection to persons on or in Light Motor Vehicles of different classes, from death or
injury in the event of a collision.
(2) Whoever, while driving a light motor vehicle contravenes the provisions of
sub-section (1) shall be punished in accordance with Schedule II, and shall be awarded
penalty points in accordance with Schedule I.
17. (1) The National Road Safety Authority shall make such regulations specifying (by
reference to shape, construction or any other quality) the safety and conspicuity requirements
including, but not limited to daytime running lights, tail lights or fog lights, retro-reflective
material and barricading requirements in case of vehicles being stationary on the road, as
may require to afford protection to persons on or in, or from transport vehicles of different
classes, from death or injury in the event of a crash.
(2) Whoever, while driving a transport vehicle contravenes the provisions of
sub-section (1) shall be punished in accordance with Schedule II, and shall be awarded
penalty points in accordance with Schedule I.
18. (1) No person shall conduct carriage on a road or riding of or carriage in non-
motorized transport of persons more than such number as may be specified by the National
Road Safety Authority.
(2) If a person is carried on or in non-motorised transport in contravention of sub-
section (1), the driver shall be guilty of an offence under this Act and punished in accordance
with Schedule II.
Unauthorized
sale of
protective
and
conspicuity
gear.
Three
wheeled
vehicles
Safety and
conspicuity
requirements.
Light Motor
Vehicles:
Safety and
Conspicuity
Requirements.
Safety and
Conspicuity
Requirements
for Stationary
Vehicle.
Restriction of
carriage of
persons on
non-
motorized
transport.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

9
19. (1) Not more than one person in addition to the driver shall be carried on a motor
cycle.
(2) No person or animal in addition to the driver may be carried on a motor cycle
otherwise than sitting on a proper seat securely fixed to the motor cycle either being behind
the driver's seat or being a combined seat.
(3) If a person or animal is carried on a motor cycle in contravention of this section, the
driver of the motor cycle shall be guilty of an offence under this Act and shall be punished in
accordance with Schedule II and shall be awarded penalty points in accordance with
Schedule I.
20. (1) Not more than the specified number of persons as may be provided by the
National Road Safety Authority shall be carried on a road in a three-wheeled vehicle.
(2) If a person is carried in a three-wheeled vehicle in contravention of sub-section (1),
the owner and the driver of the three-wheeled vehicle shall be guilty of an offence under this
Act.
Explanation.—In this section, references to a person carried in a three-wheeled vehicle
includes references to persons driving the  three-wheeled vehicle.
21. (1) A person who drives or rides in a motor vehicle without wearing a seat belt or in
contravention of regulations under this section shall be guilty of an offence under this Act
and shall be punished in accordance with Sechedule II:
Provided that no person other than the person actually committing the contravention
shall be guilty of an offence by reason of the contravention.
(2) In case the offence under sub-section (1) is committed by a driver, the person shall
also be awarded penalty points in accordance with Schedule I.
(3) The National Road Safety Authority may by regulations specify:
(a) the description of seat belts to be worn;
(b) different requirements in relation to different classes of vehicles, different
descriptions of persons, including those with disabilities or with special heatlh
requirements, and different circumstances; and
(c) any exceptions to sub-section ( 1), and  may require persons seeking such
exception to obtain a certificate, which, in certain cases, may be issued for a specified fee.
(4) If the holder of a certificate under clause ( c) of sub-section (3) is informed by a
police officer that the person may be prosecuted for an offence under sub-section ( 1), the
person shall not be entitled to rely on the exception afforded by the certificate in proceedings
for that offence unless:
(a) the certificate is shown to the police officer at the time that person is so
informed; or
(b) the certificate is produced—
(i) to the police officer within seven days after the date on which the
person is so informed; or
(ii) as soon as reasonably practicable, at such police station as the person
may have specified to the police officer; or
(c) the person proves before the day on which the proceedings commence that
it was not reasonably practicable for him to produce the certificate within the time
specified on  a day.
Restriction of
carriage of
persons on
Motor
Cycles.
Restriction of
carriage of
persons in
three-wheeled
vehicles.
Seat belts for
Adults in a
motor
vehicle.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

10
(5) For the purposes of sub-section ( 4), the service of the complaint on the accused
shall be treated as the commencement of the proceedings.
22. (1) Except as provided by regulations, a parent or guardian of the child, or in the
absence of such parent or guardian, the driver of the motor vehicle shall not allow a child
below the age of eight years to occupy the front seat of a motor vehicle when the vehicle is
in motion. In case of contravention, the driver shall be punished in accordance with
Schedule II and shall be awarded penalty points in accordance with Schedule I.
(2) Except as provided by regulations, where a child  above the age of eight years
occupies the front seat of a motor vehicle, a person shall  not drive the vehicle on a road
unless the child is wearing a seat belt or child restraint system in conformity with regulations.
In case of contravention, the driver shall be punished in accordance with Schedule II and
shall be awarded penalty points in accordance with Schedule I.
(3) Except as provided by regulations, where a child under the age of fourteen years is
in the rear of a motor vehicle, a person shall not drive the vehicle on a road unless the child
is wearing a seat belt or child restraint system in conformity with regulations. In case of
contravention, the driver shall be punished in accordance with Schedule II and shall be
awarded penalty points in accordance with Schedule I.
(4) Except as  provided by regulations, a person shall not drive the passenger car on a
road in cases where a child of the specified description is in the rear of the passenger car
when:
(a) no seat belt is fitted in the rear of the passenger car; and
(b) a seat in the front of the passenger car is provided with a seat belt but is not
occupied by any person.
(5) Regulations made for the purposes of sub-section (2) or (3) above shall include an
exemption for any child holding a valid certificate signed by a medical practitioner, in the form
and manner specified by the National Road Safety Authority, to the effect that it is not
advisasble on medical grounds for that child to wear a seat belt.
(6) If the driver of a motor vehicle is informed by a police officer that the person may be
prosecuted for an offence under this section, the person is not entitled to rely on an exception
afforded to a child by a certificate referred to in sub-section ( 5) in proceedings for that
offence unless:
(a) the certificate is shown to the police officer at the time such person is so
informed; or
(b) the certificate is produced to the police officer within seven days after the
date on which such person is so informed; or
(c) the person proves before the day on which the proceedings commence that
it was not reasonably practicable for him to produce the certificate within the time
specified on a day.
(7) For the purposes of sub-section ( 6), the service of the complaint on the accused
shall be treated as the commencement of the proceedings.
23. (1) The National Road Safety Authority shall make regulations specifying the
types of equipment of any description to which this section applies that are required as
conducive to the safety, in the event of a collision or a sudden stop, for specified categories
of children in specified classes of motor vehicles.
(2) Regulations under this section may specify types of child restraint systems required
for children under a certain weight and height.
Seat belts and
seating
requirements
for children
in motor
vehicles.
Child
restraint
systems in
vehicles.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

11
(3) Regulations under this section may make provision for securing that when equipment
of a type specified by the regulations is sold or offered for sale, as equipment which is so
conducive,—
(a) appropriate information is provided in relation to it in such manner as may be
specified; and
(b) inappropriate information is not provided in relation to it.
(4) Except in such circumstances as may be specified, if a person sells, or offers for
sale, equipment of any description for which a type is specified under this section as equipment
which is so conducive and that equipment:
(a) is not of a type so specified; or
(b) is sold or offered for sale in contravention of regulations under this section,
 that person shall be, subject to sub-section (6), guilty of an offence and punished
in accordance with Schedule II.
(5) Except in such circumstances as may be specified, if a person sells, or offers for
sale, equipment of any description for which a type is specified in this section as equipment
conductive to the safety, in the event of a crash,—
(a) of children not a category specified in relation to equipment of that type; or
(b) of children in motor vehicles not of a category specified in relation to
equipment of that type;
that person shall be, subject to sub-section ( 6), guilty of an offence and punished in
accordance with Schedule II.
(6) A person shall not be guilty of an offence under this section in respect of the sale
or offer for sale of equipment if the person proves that it was sold or, as the case may be
offered for sale for export.
(7) Regulations under this section may make different provisions  in relation to different
circumstances.
Explanation .—References in this section to selling or offering for sale include
references to letting on hire and offering to let on hire.
24. (1) The operator of a bus in which any of the passenger seats are equipped with
seat belts shall take all reasonable steps to ensure that every passenger is notified of the
requirement to wear a seat belt at all times when—
(a) the passenger is in a seat equipped with a seat belt; and
(b) the bus is in motion.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), a passenger may be notified by means of an
official announcement or an audio-visual presentation or pictorial symbol of the form as
specified.
(3) An operator who fails to comply with provisions of sub-section (1) shall be guilty
of an offence and punished in accordance with Schedule II.
(4) Where an offence under sub-section ( 3) is committed by a company and it is
proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is
attributable to any neglect on the part of, a director, manager, secretary or other similar officer
of the body corporate, or any person who was purporting to act in such a capacity, that
person as well as the company shall be guilty of the offence and liable to be proceeded
against and punished accordingly.
(5) Sub-section (1) shall not apply in relation to a bus:
Requirement
to notify bus
passengers to
wear seat
belts.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

12
(a) which is being used to provide a local service in a built-up area; or
(b) which is constructed or adapted for the carriage of standing passengers and
on which the operator permits standing as per the regulations specified by National
Road Safety Authority.
(6) For the purposes of clause (a) of sub-section (5), a local service is provided in a
built-up area if the entire route used by that service consists of restricted roads.
25. ( 1) A person shall be guilty of an offence and punished in accordance with
Schedule II, along with being awarded penalty points in accordance with Schedule I if such
person parks or abandons a motor vehicles (as specified in regulations made by the National
Road Safety Authority) on any road including:—
(a) on the verge of a road; or
(b) on any land situated between two carriageways and which is not a footpath
or a cycle track; or
(c) on a footpath; or
(d) on a cycle track:
Provided that a person shall not be convicted of an offence under this section in
respect of a vehicle if that person proves to the satisfaction of the court that—
(a) it was parked or abandoned in accordance with permission given by an
authorized person; or
(b) it was parked or abandoned in contravention of this section for the purpose
of saving life or extinguishing fire or meeting any other like emergency; or
(c) the vehicle was owned or operated by a highway authority or by a person
discharging functions on behalf of a highway authority and was driven in contravention
of that sub-section in connection with the carrying out by or on behalf of that authority
of any of the following, that is—
(i) cleaning, maintenance or improvement; or
(ii) maintenance or alteration of any structure or other work situated in,
the cycle track or path or their verges; or
(iii) preventing or removing of obstructions to the cycle track or the
footpath; or
(iv) preventing or abating in any other way of nuisances or other
interferences with the cycle track or footpath.
(d) it was parked or abandoned in contravention of this section but the following
conditions were satisfied—
(i) that the vehicle was parked on the verge of a road or on a footpath for
the purpose of loading or unloading with adequate warning signs, barricading
and other safety measures as specified by the National Road Safety Authority;
(ii) that the loading or unloading of the vehicle could not have been
satisfactorily performed if it had not been parked on the footpath or verge; or
(iii) that the vehicle was not left unattended at any time while it was so
parked and had adequate warning signs, barricading and other safety measures
as specified by the National Road Safety Authority.
26. (1) Any person who, without lawful authority, drives a motor vehicle wholly or
partly on a cycle track or a footpath shall be guilty of an offence and punished in accordance
with Schedule II along with being awarded penalties in accordance with Schedule I.
Prohibition
of parking or
abandoning of
Motor
Vehicles in
certain
places.
Prohibition
of driving in
certain
places.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

13
(2) A person shall not be convicted of an offence under sub-section (1) with respect to
a vehicle if the person proves to the satisfaction of the court that—
(a) the vehicle was driven in contravention of that sub-section for the purpose
of saving life, or extinguishing fire or meeting any other like emergency; or
(b) that the vehicle was owned or operated by a highway authority or by a
person discharging functions on behalf of a highway authority and was driven in
contravention of that sub-section in connection with the carrying out by or on behalf
of that authority of any of the following, that is,
(i) cleaning, maintenance or improvement; or
(ii) maintenance or alteration of any structure or other work situated in,
the cycle track or footpath or their verges; or
(iii) preventing or removing of obstructions to the cycle track or the
footpath; or
(iv) the preventing or abating in any other way of nuisances or other
interferences with the cycle track or footpath.
27. Every person shall conform to and obey any indication of a Child Zone, as specified
by the National Road Safety Authority and shall comply with all directions given to that
person by any police officer, or other authorized person, for the time being engaged in
regulation and surveillance of a child zone.
Explanation.—"Child Zone" in this section means a specified area, as notified by the
State Safety Authority in conformity with regulations specified by the National Road Safety
Authority, frequented by children including spaces outside schools, parks or specified times
in the day, where the traffic shall be regulated through interventions including speed limits,
engineering interventions and other measures to ensure the safety of children.
28. ( 1) The Traffic Authority through an order made under this sub-section may
prohibit—
(a) the driving of motor vehicles on that road at a speed exceeding that specified
in the order;
(b) the driving of motor vehicles on that road at a speed exceeding that specified
in the order during periods specified in the order; or
(c) the driving of motor vehicles on that road at a speed exceeding the speed for
the time being indicated by traffic signs in accordance with the order.
(2) An order made by virtue of clause (c) of sub-section (1) may—
(a) make provision restricting the speeds that may be indicated by traffic signs
or the periods during which the indications may be given; and
(b) provide for the indications to be given only in such circumstances as may be
determined by or under the order; but any such order must comply with regulations
made under sub-section (3),  except where the State Government authorizes otherwise
in a particular case.
(3) The State Government may make rules governing the provision which may be made
by orders of local authorities under clause (b) of sub-section (2) and any such rules may in
particular—
(a) prescribe the circumstances in which speed limits may have effect by virtue
of an order;
(b) prescribe the speed limits which may be prescribed in an order; and
(c) make transitional provision and different provisions for different cases.
Duty to obey
Child Zones.
Speed limits
on roads
other than
restricted
roads.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

14
(4) While an order made under clause (a) of sub-section (1) is in force with regard to a
road, that road shall not be a restricted road for the purposes of section 30 of this Act.
(5) For the purposes of this section a "traffic authority" means an authority that
manages and regulates traffic under this Act.
29. (1) A person who drives a motor vehicle of any class in contravention of the speed
limits referred to in section 28, shall be punishable in accordance with Schedule II and shall
be awarded penalty points in accordance with Schedule I for each offence so committed.
(2) Whoever causes a person who is in his employment or under his control when
driving a motor vehicle to drive the vehicle in contravention of the speed limits referred to in
section 28, shall be punishable in accordance with Schedule II.
(3) The publication of a time-table or log book, or the giving of any direction
electronically as per which any journey or part of a journey is to be completed within a
specified time shall, if in the opinion of the Court, is not practicable in the circumstances of
the case for that journey or part of a journey to be completed in the specified time without
contravening the speed limits referred to in section 28, be prima facie evidence that the
person who published the time table or log book or gave the direction electronically has
committed an offence punishable under sub-section (2).
(4) Any person who commits an offence under this section may also have his license
suspended or revoked subject to the penalties mentioned in Schedule II, and may have to
undergo compulsory refresher training for renewal of licenses:
Provided that no statutory provision imposing a speed limit on motor vehicles shall
apply to any designated emergency vehicle on an occasion when it is being used for fire-
lighting and rescue purposes, ambulatory purposes, disaster response or police purposes, if
the observance of such provision is likely to hinder the use of the vehicle for the purpose for
which it is being used on that occasion.
30. (1) A person who drives a motor vehicle on a restricted road at a speed exceeding
the speed limit specified for such roads shall be guilty of an offence and punished in
accordance with Schedule II, along with being awarded penalty points under Schedule I.
(2) The traffic authority for a road may direct that the road—
(a) which is a restricted road for the purposes of this Act shall cease to be a
restricted road; or
(b) which is not a restricted road shall be a restricted road for the purposes of
this Act.
(3) For the purposes of this section a "traffic authority" means an authority that
manages and regulates traffic under this Act.
31. (1) For the purpose of ensuring that adequate guidance is given to drivers of motor
vehicle as to whether any, and if so, what, limit of speed is to be observed on any road, it shall
be the duty of the State Government, in the case of a road for which that person is the traffic
authority, to place and maintain speed management signs in such positions as may be
requisite for that purpose.
(2) In the case of any other road, the local traffic authority may issue an order in
writing—
(a) to place and maintain such number of traffic signs in such positions as may
be requisite in order to give effect to general or other directions given by the State
Governments for the purpose mentioned in sub-section (1); and
(b) to alter or remove traffic signs as may be requisite in order to give effect to
such directions, either in consequence of the making of any order by the State
Government or otherwise.
Offences of
driving at
excessive
speed.
Offence of
driving at
excessive
speed on
restricted
roads.
Speed
Management
Signs.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

15
32. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained under any other law, upon the approach
of an emergency vehicle equipped with, and operating, one or more flashing, rotating, or
oscillating red or blue lights, visible under normal conditions from a distance of five hundred
feet to the front of such vehicle; or the driver is giving audible signal by siren, exhaust
whistle, or bell, the dirver of every other vehicle, including VIP vehicles and VIP convoys
shall yield the right-of-way, immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as
possible to, the edge or curb of the road clear of any inter section, and stop and remain in
such position until the emergency vehcile has passed, except when otherwise directed by a
police officer or firefighter.
(2) No operator of any vehicle, unless he is on official business, shall follow any
emergency vehicle being operated in conformity with the provisions of sub-section ( 1)
closer than five hundred feet, nor shall he drive into, or park the vehicle into, or park the
vehicle within, the block where the vehicle has stopped in answer to an emergency call or
alarm unless he is directed otherwise by a police officer or firefighter.
(3) No motor vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a fire department
when the hose is laid down on any street, private driveway, or track for use at any fire or fire
alarm unless the fire department official in command consents that the hose be driven over.
(4) This section does not operate to relieve the person who drives an emergency
vehicle from the duty to operate the vehicle with due regard for the safety of all persons
using the roads.
(5) Whoever, being the driver of a motor vehicle or the person under whose instructions
a motor vehicle is being operated, knowingly causes or permits a violation of sub-sections
(1), (2) and (3), shall be punishable in accordance with Schedule II, shall be awarded penalty
points in accordance with Schedule I.
33. (1) A person who drives a motor vehicle shall maintain a safe distance to an extent,
as specified by the National Road Safety Authority, while overtaking or passing non-motorized
transport or pedestrian, on restricted roads.
(2) A person who drives a motor vehicle in contravention of sub-section (1), shall be
guilty of an offence, except if:
(a) it was necessary to do so to ensure safety of passengers in the motor
vehicle; or
(b) to avoid a collision on the road.
34. Whoever drives a motor vehicle in a manner which causes a sense of alarm or
distress to the occupants of the vehicle, other road users, and persons and property near
roads, which includes driving against the authorized flow of traffic, dangerous passing and
overtaking, including by authorized convoys with escort vehicles, convoy of private service
vehicles and vehicles carrying personal security officers in the convoy, driving dangerously
and dangerous driving with children on board, having regard to all the circumstances including
the nature, condition and use of the place where the vehicle is driven and the volume of
traffic at the time or which might reasonably be expected to be at such place even if such
person is within the limits of speed for  particular road, shall be punishable for each mentioned
offence, in accordance with Schedule II, and shall be awarded penalty points in accordance
with Schedule I.
35. (1) No person shall drive a motor vehicle under the influence of alcohol and the
National Road Safety Authority may make additional regulations in this regard.
(2) A person shall be punishable in accordance with Schedule II, along with being
awarded penalty points under Schedule I, if while driving, or attempting to drive a motor
vehicle, such person is found to have alcohol in his breath or blood on an impairment test or
on a test by a breath analyser or any other test including clinical test.
Right of way
to emergency
vehicles.
Maintenance
of safe
distance from
pedestrains
and non-
motorized
transport.
Driving which
causes threat
to public
safety.
Prohibition
on Driving
under the
influence of
alcohol or
drugs.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

16
(3) The Central Government, in consultation with the State Government and the National
Road Safety Authority, shall develop a liquor vending policy to regulate the placement of or
abolition thereof, of liquor vends adjacent to national highways.
(4) A person who, while driving, or attempting to drive a motor vehicle, is under the
influence of a narcotic, or a psychotropic substance or a drug or a prescription drug as
prescribed by the Central Government in this behalf, by notification, shall be punishable in
accordance with Schedule II, if—
(a) the person does not complete a compulsory impairment test in a manner
satisfactory to a police officer under section 59, provided that any such police officer
should be trained to give such test in the manner specified by the National Road
Safety Authority; and
(b) the person's blood or urine, as ascertained from an analysis through a clinical
test subsequently taken under section 61 contains evidence of the use of a drug or
drugs as specified by the National Road Safety Authority.
(5) A police officer may arrest a person without warrant if the person refuses or fails to
comply with provisions of sections 60 or 61.
(6) Any driver of a motor vehicle, carrying a child or children in the vehicle, who
violates sub-section (1) or sub-section (4), shall be punishable in accordance with
Schedule II, and subjected to an immediate cancellation of license for a period of three years.
(7) Any person who drives a transport vehicle or a heavy motor vehicle and violates
sub-section (1) or sub-section (4) shall be punishable in accordance with Schedule II, and
subjected to an immediate cancellation of license for a period of five years.
(8) Any person who has committed an offence under sub-section (4) shall have a
valid defence, if the court is satisfied that the person had consumed the relevant qualifying
drug:
(a) in accordance with:
(i) a current and valid prescription written for that person by a registered
medical practitioner; and
(ii) any instructions from a registered medical practitioner or from the
manufacturer of the qualifying drug; or,
(b) because it was administered by a registered medical practitioner, provided
that the person complied with the instructions, if any, that the registered medical
practitioner has given.
(9) It is no defence to proceedings for an offence that a provision forming part of
sections 59, 60 and 61 has not been strictly complied with or has not been complied with at
all, provided there has been reasonable compliance with such of those provisions as apply.
36. A person is guilty of an offence and shall be punished in accordance with Schedule
II if the person intentionally and without lawful authority or reasonable cause—
(a) causes anything to be on or over a road or near a road such that it affects the
safety of road users or obstructs clear and safe vision of road users; or
(b) interferes with a motor vehicle; or
(c) interferes directly or indirectly, with traffic equipment, in such circumstances
that it would be obvious to a reasonable person that to do so would be dangerous; or
(d) damages public property.
Causing
danger to
road users.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

17
Explanation I.—For the purposes of this section:—
(a) "dangerous" refers to danger either of injury to any person while on or near
a road, or of serious damage to property on or near a road; and in determining for the
purposes of that sub-Section what would be obvious to a reasonable person in a
particular case, regard shall be had not only to the circumstances of which a reasonable
person could be expected to be aware but also to any circumstances shown to have
been within the knowledge of the accused; and
(b) "traffic equipment" means:
(i) anything lawfully placed on or near a road by a highway authority;
(ii) a traffic sign lawfully placed on or near a road by an authorized person
or by an authorized member of the police or by a person acting under the
instruction, whether general or specific of a police officer other than a highway
authority; or
(iii) any fence, barrier or light lawfully placed on or near a road for the
purposes of construction or maintenance of the road, or by an authorized member
of the police or a person acting under the instructions, whether general or specific
of a senior officer of police.
37. If a person in charge of a vehicle causes or permits the vehicle or a trailer or a
semitrailer or mobile machinery drawn by it to remain at rest on a road in such a position or in
such condition or in such circumstances as to cause a sense of alarm or distress to occupants
of the vehicle, other road users, and persons and property near roads, that person shall be
guilty of an offence and punished in accordance with Schedule II.
38. A person shall be guilty of an offence and punished in accordance with
 Schedule II, if, while a motor vehicle is on a road or on a parking place provided by a local
authority, the person, without consent of the owner,
(a) gets on to the vehicle; or
(b) tampers with the brake or other part of its mechanism, without lawful authority
or reasonable cause; or
(c) tempers with safety electronic device.
39. If for the purpose of being carried or drawn, a person, without lawful authority or
reasonable cause, takes or retains hold of, or gets on to, a motor vehicle or trailer or semi-
trailer or mobile machinery while in motion on a road, the person shall be guilty of an offence
and punished in accordance with Schedule II.
40. A person who disrupts the flow of traffic in the following manners guilty of an
offence and shall be punished in accordance with Schedule II—
(a) parking a motor vehicle in a manner so as to disrupt the flow of traffic unless
that person can show that there was an emergency which necessitated such an act.
(b) crossing any road, street, way or thoroughfare at any point where signs,
fences, barriers, or other devices are erected to prohibit or restrict such crossing.
(c) crossing any road, street, way or thoroughfare in violation of a traffic signal
or traffic sign.
Explanation—For the purposes of this section, "flow of traffic" means the authorized
movement of motor vehicles, non-motorized transport and pedestrians.
41. (1) A person shall be guilty of an offence of overloading and punished in accordance
with Schedule II, if the person who drives a motor vehicle, or causes or allows a motor vehicle
to be driven, including common carriers, goods transport agents and consignees, where:
Leaving
vehicles in
dangerous
position.
Tampering
with vehicle.
Holding or
getting on to
vehicle in
order to be
towed or
carried.
Offence of
disrupting
Flow of
Traffic, etc.
Overloading.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

18
(a) the unladen weight of vehicle exceeds the unlanden weight specified in the
certificate of registration of the vehicle;
(b) the laden weight of vehicle exceeds the gross vehicle weight specified in the
certificate or registration;
(c) the number of persons carried in the vehicle exceeds the number of passengers
the vehicle is authorized to carry by the National Road Safety Authority;
(d) an object or cargo that protrudes outside the body of the vehicle is carried in
a manner that is likely to compromise the safety of or poses a danger to any person or
property:
Provided that in case the contravention is committed by the driver, he shall be awarded
penalty points in accordance with Schedule I:
Provided further that standard variance in weight may be permitted for equipment,
mandated under this Act, fitted to the vehicle:
Provided further that a toll operator, as defined in National Highways Authority Rules,
1997 shall be guilty of an offence under this section, if the toll operator allows such a motor
vehicle to be driven in that portion of the road over which such toll operator operates or has
obtained a concession:
Provided further that a police officer on duty at a particular location shall be guilty of
an offence under this section if the police officer permits such a motor vehicle to traverse that
location.
(2) Where the driver or person in charge of a motor vehicle driven in contravention of
sub-section (1) is not the owner of the vehicle or consignor of the goods carried by the
vehicle, a Court may presume that the offence was committed with the knowledge of or under
the orders of the owner of the motor vehicle or consignor of the goods:
Provided that a consignor shall be held responsible for the offence only if that person
is the sole consignor for the goods carried in the motor vehicles.
42. (1) Any authorized person may enter into a passenger vehicle and check whether
the vehicle is carrying more passengers than it is authorized to carry.
(2) In the event of vehicle carrying more passengers than it is authorized to carry, the
authorized person may direct the driver or the owner of the vehicle to offload passengers
beyond the authorized capacity and shall direct the driver or the owner to make other provisions
for such passengers.
(3) Any person authorized in this behalf by the National Road Safety Authority or the
State Safety Authority shall, if that person has reason to believe that a motor vehicle is being
used in contravention of section 41 require the driver to convey the motor vehicle to a
weighing device in such manner as may be specified by the National Road Safety Authority
and if on such weighing the motor vehicle is found to contravene the provisions of
section 41 regarding weight, that person shall, by order in writing, direct the driver to offload
the excess weight at the driver's own risk and cost and not to remove the vehicle or trailor
from that place until the laden weight has been reduced or the vehicle or trailer has otherwise
been dealt with so that it complies with section 41 and on receipt of such notice, the driver
shall comply with such directions.
(4) In case the vehicle owner or driver, as the case may be, fails to do so, such person
shall cause the extra weight to be unloaded at the risk and cost of owner or consignor and
such cost shall be recoverable from the owner of motor vehicle or consignor of goods.
(5) Where the person authorized under sub-section (1) makes the said order in writing,
that person shall furnish the relevant details of the overloading on the goods carriage permit
and also intimate the fact of such details to the authority which issued that permit.
Powers
regarding
vehicles
suspected of
overloading.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

19
(6) Any driver of a vehicle who refuses to stop and submit the vehicle to weighing
after being directed to do so by a person authorized in this behalf, or removes or causes the
removal of the load or part of it prior to weighing, shall be punishable in accordance with
Schedule II.
43. The State Government or any authority authorized in this behalf by the State
Government, if satisfied that it is necessary in the interest of public safety or convenience, or
because of the nature of any road or bridge, may by notification, prohibit or restrict, subject
to such exceptions and conditions as may be specified in the notification, the driving of
motor vehicles or of any specified category of motor vehicles or the use of trailers or other
road users either generally in a specified area or on a specified road and when any such
prohibition or restriction is imposed, shall cause appropriate traffic signs to be placed in
accordance with this Act.
44. (1) The State Government or any authority authorized in this behalf by the State
Government, may cause or permit traffic signs to be placed in any place for the purpose of
bringing to public notice any speed limits fixed under Section 28 or any prohibitions or
restrictions imposed under this Act or generally and may designate certain roads as main
roads by notification or by the placement at suitable places of the appropriate traffic sign for
the purposes of the driving regulations made by the National Road Safety Authority.
(2) Traffic signs placed under sub-section (1) shall be of such size, color and type and
shall have the meanings set forth as per regulations by the National Road Safety Authority:
Provided that the State Government or any authority empowered in this behalf by the
State Government, may make or authorize the addition to any sign set forth in the regulations
by the National Road Safety Authority:
Provided further that such sign mentioned in the regulations shall be reviewed every
three years and shall reflect International Standards as subscribed to by the Government of
India.
(3) A State Government or the State Safety Authority may, by notification, empower
any police officer to remove or cause to be removed any sign or advertisement which is so
placed in that officer's opinion as to obscure any traffic sign from view or any sign or
advertisement which in that officer's opinion is so similar in appearance to a traffic sign as to
be misleading.
(4) No person shall wilfully remove, alter, deface, or in any way tamper with, any traffic
signs placed under this section.
(5) If any person in a crash causes such damage to a traffic sign and renders it useless
for the purpose for which it is placed under this section, that person shall report the
circumstances of the occurrence to a police officer or at a police station as soon as possible,
and in any case within twenty four hours of the occurrence.
(6) Whoever violates a traffic signal shall be subjected to penalties in accordance with
Schedule II and awarded penalty points in accordance with Schedule I.
45. When any person is injured or any property of a third party is damaged, as a result
of crash in which a motor vehicle is involved, the driver of the vehicle or other person in
charge of the vehicle shall—
(a) unless it is not practicable to do so on account of mob fury or any other
reason beyond the control of the driver, take all reasonable steps to secure medical
attention for the injured person, by conveying that person to the nearest medical
practitioner or hospital or nursing home, and it shall be the duty of every registered
medical practitioner or the doctor on duty in the hospital or nursing home to immediately
attend to the injured person and render medical aid or treatment without waiting for
any procedural formalities, or financial arrangements unless the injured person or the
guardian of the injured person, in case the person is a minor, desires otherwise:
Power to
restrict the
use of
vehicles in
certain cases.
Power to
place traffic
signs.
Duty of
driver in case
of a crash and
injury to a
person.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

20
Provided that it shall be an offence by the owners, management, registered
medical practitioner or the doctor on duty if the registered medical practitioner or the
doctor on duty in the hospital or nursing home do not immediately attend to the
injured person.
(b) give on the demand of an authorized police officer any information required
by that person, or, if no police officer is present, report the circumstances of the
occurrence, including the circumstances, if any, for no taking reasonable steps to
secure medical attention as required under clause (a), at the nearest police station as
soon as possible, and in any case within twenty-four hours of the occurrence;
(c) give the following information in writing to the insurer, who has issued the
certificates of insurance, about the occurrence of the crash, namely:—
(i) insurance policy number and period of its validity;
(ii) date, time and place of the crash;
(iii) particulars of the persons injured or killed in the crash; and
(iv) name of the driver and the particulars of the driving license of the
driver.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, the expression "driver" includes the
owner of the vehicle.
46. (1) Every driver of a motor vehicle at the approach of any unguarded railway level
crossing shall cause the vehicle to stop and the driver of the vehicle shall cause the conductor
or cleaner or attendant or any other person in the vehicle to walk up to the level crossing and
ensure that no train or trolley is approaching from either side and then drive the motor
vehicle across such level crossing, and where no conductor or cleaner or attendant or any
other person is available in the vehicle, the driver of the vehicle shall get tdown from the
vehicle himself to ensure that no train or trolley is approaching from either side before the
railway track is crossed.
(2) Any person who drives a motor vehicle through a railroad crossing, and fails to
yield to barriers at the crossing, or disobeys traffic signals at the crossing or commits any
other violation which could put the driver and passengers in danger at the railway crossing,
shall be punishable in accordance with Schedule II.
47. (1) Any person who drives or causes or allows to be driven in any place a motor
vehicle while the vehicle has any defect, which such person knows of or could have discovered
by the exercise of ordinary care and which is calculated to render the driving of the vehicle a
source of danger to a motor vehicle in a manner which causes a sense of alarm or distress to
occupants of the vehicle, other road users, and persons and property near roads, shall he
punishable in accordance with Schedule II and shall be awarded penalty points in accordance
with Schedule I.
(2) Any person who drives or causes or allows to be driven, in any place a motor
vehicle, which violates the standards specified in relation to road safety, including headlights,
taillight, indicators, break lights, tyre tread, control of noise and air pollution, or with reduced
vehicle conspicuity for other road users, shall be punishable in accordance with Schedule II,
and in each case, shall be awarded penalty points in accordance with Schedule I.
(3) Any person who drives or causes or allows to be driven, in any place a motor
vehicle which violates the provisions of this Act or the rules and regulations made under the
Act relating to the carriage of goods which are of dangerous or hazardous nature, shall be
punishable in accordance with Schedule II, and in each case, shall be awarded penalty points
in accordance with Schedule I.
Duty of the
driver to take
certain
precautions at
unguarded
railway level
crossings.
Using vehicle
in unsafe
condition.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

21
48. (1) Any person or principal authority or contractor responsible for the design,
construction and maintenance of the safety standards of the road shall follow design,
construction and maintenance standards, as determined by the National Road Safety
Authority from time to time and shall ensure, that no death, injury or damage is caused to
road users as a result of failure to adhere to such safety standards.
(2) Any enforcing authority may bring an action for failure to maintain a road against
the designated authority under sub-section ( 1), if the persons responsible for the design,
construction and maintenance of the road have not exercised due care to secure the safety
circumstances as was reasonably required in the part of the road to which the action relates
to.
(3) The designated authority under sub-section (1) shall be punishable in accordance
with Schedule II if failure on part of such designated authority to comply with standards for
road design, construction and maintenance results in a death or disability.
(4) For the purposes of the action under this Section the court shall in particular have
regard to the following matters:
(a) the character of the road, and the traffic which was reasonably expected to
use it;
(b) the standard of maintenance appropriate for a road of that character and use
by such traffic;
(c) the state of repair in which a reasonable person would have expected to find
in the road;
(d) whether the persons responsible for the maintenance of the road knew, or
could reasonably have been expected to know, that the condition of the part of the
road to which the action relates was likely to cause danger to users of the road;
(e) where the persons responsible for the maintenance of the road could not
reasonably have been expected to repair that part of the road before the cause of
action arose; and
(f) whether adequate warning notices of its condition had been displayed.
49. Whoever uses any handheld communication device while driving a motor vehicle
shall be punished in accordance with Schedule II and shall be awarded penalty points in
accordance with Schedule I.
Explanation.— For the purpose of this section "communication device" means a
portable communication device, other than a two-way radio where authorized, with which a
person is capable of making or receiving a call or sending a Short Message Service (SMS)
message, watching a video or performing an interactive communication function with any
other person.
CHAPTER III
G
ENERAL OFFENCES AND INVESTIGATION PROVISIONS
50. (1) Whoever, commits an offence under this Act, shall be punished with one or
more of the following penalties:
(a) fines as specified under Schedule II;
(b) community service as may be specified by the National Road Safety Authority;
(c) imprisonment for both cognizable and non-cognizable offences;
(d) impounding of vehicles for a term, as specified under Schedule II;
Explanation.—For the purposes of this Act,—
(i) all references to impounding of motor vehicles shall be construed so as
Failure to
comply with
standards for
road design,
construction
and
maintenance.
Offences
relating to
certain
communication
devices.
General
provision
regarding
penalties.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

22
to include the immobilization of the motor vehicle on the premises of the owner
of the motor vehicle by means of an immobilisation device;
(ii) "immobilisation" means any device or appliance designed or so adapted
to be fixed to a vehicle for the purpose of preventing it from being driven or
otherwise put in motion.
(e) awarding of penalty points, as specified in Schedule I;
(f) suspension of licences, registration or permits, as specified under Schedule II;
(g) cancellation of licences, registrations or permits, as specified under Schedule II;
(h) compulsory refresher training in a manner as specified by the National Road
Safety Authority for each offence.
(2) Unless otherwise specified in this Act, an offence under a provision shall be
considered a repeated offence if its commission takes place either within a period of one year,
or as otherwise specified by the National Road Safety Authority, from the previous commission
of an offence under the same provision:
Provided that whoever contravenes any provision of this Act or of any rule, regulation,
order or notification made under this Act shall, if no penalty is provided for the offence, be
punished for the offence in accordance with Schedule II.
51. (1) Whoever, while driving commits an offence under this Act shall be awarded
penalty points for the offence, in accordance with Schedule I, in addition to the fine or
imprisonment as the case may be.
(2) The consequences of accumulated penalty points, and the period of validity of
such penalty points to any holder of a driving license shall be as specified under Schedule I.
(3) The procedure for awarding penalty points and maintaining records associated
with such penalty points shall be as specified by the National Road Safety Authority.
(4) The National Road Safety Authority may also formulate incentive schemes to
encourage safe driving behaviour.
52. (1) Whoever drives a motor-vehicle or causes or allows a motor vehicle to be
driven without a valid policy of insurance, shall be deemed to have committed a cognizable
offence and shall be punished in accordance with Schedule II.
(2) Any person responsible for insuring a vehicle including the vehicle owner or
consignor or driver, as the case may be, fails to insure, such person shall be deemed to have
committed a cognizable offence and shall be punished in accordance with Schedule II.
53. (1) Whoever, while driving or attempting to drive a motor vehicle or a motorcycle
causes a crash, shall be punished in accordance with Schedule II, and shall also be awarded
penalty points shall be punished in accordance with Schedule I, and shall have to undergo
compulsory refresher training.
(2) Whoever, while driving a motor vehicle or attempting to drive a motor vehicle
causes the death of a person, shall be punished in accordance with Schedule II, and the
subjected to an immediate cancellation of license.
(3) Whoever fails to complete a compulsory impairment test in a manner satisfactory to
a police officer, as specified by the National Road Safety Authority, when required to do so
by a police officer under section 59 shall be deemed to have committed an offence under this
Act.
54. Whoever abets the commission of an offence under this Act shall be punished
with the punishment provided for that offence:
Provided that the punishment in case of section 41 shall only be applicable to the
owner or consigner of the vehicle.
General
provision for
driver penalty
points
scheme.
Driving
uninsured
vehicle.
Punishment
for offences
relating to a
crash.
Punishment
for abetment
of certain
offences.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

23
55. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every
person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to,
the company for the conduct of the business of the company shall be deemed to be guilty of
the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded and punished accordingly:
Provided that no person shall be held liable for an offence under this sub-section if he
proves that the offence was committed wthout his knowledge or that he had exercised all due
diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), where an offence under
this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence was committed
with the consent or connivance of, or is at to any neglect on the part of any director, manager,
secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer
shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence, and shall be liable to be proceeded against
and punished accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section "director" means a partner in the firm.
56. (1) Any police officer in uniform may arrest without  a warrant any person—
(a) who in the presence of such officer commits an offence punishable under
sections 25, 26, 35, 52 and 53 or subject to the provisions of this section; and
(b) who has committed an offence under this Act and refuses to provide his
name and address on demand of such information.
(2) Any person arrested in connection with an offence punishable under section 35
shall, within two hours of such arrest, be subjected to a medical examination referred to in
sections 59, 60, 61 by a registered medical practitioner failing which such shall arrested
person shall be released from custody.
(3) A police officer arresting the driver of a motor vehicle without warrant shall, if the
circumstances so require, take or cause to be taken any step as he may consider proper for
the temporary disposal of the vehicle.
(4) A female offender may be arrested without warrant only by a female police officer in
uniform.
57. (1) If any police officer or other person authorized in this behalf by the State
Government has reason to believe that any license, permit, certificate of registration, certificate
of insurance or other document produced by the driver or person in charge of a motor vehicle
is a false document within the meaning of section 464 of the Indian Penal Code 1860, such
officer or authorized person, as the case may be, may seize and mark the document and call
upon the driver or owner of the vehicle to account for their possession of or the presence in
the vehicle of such document.
(2) If any police officer or any other person authorized in this behalf by the State Road
Safety Authority has reason to believe that the driver or owner of a motor vehicle who is
charged with any offence under this Act may abscond or otherwise avoid the service of a
summons, such officer or authorized person may seize any license or certificate of registration
of the vehicle held by such driver and forward it to the Court taking cognizance of the
offence and the said Court shall on the first appearance of such driver before it, return the
license or certificate of registration to the driver or owner, as the case may be, in exchange for
the temporary acknowledgement given under sub-section (3).
(3) A police officer or the authorised person seizing a license or the certificate of
registration under sub-section ( 2) shall give to the person surrendering the license or the
certificate of registraion a temporary acknowledgement for the same, and such
acknowledgement shall authorize the holder to drive until the license has been returned or
until such date as may be specified by the officer or authorized person in the acknowledgement,
whichever is earlier:
Offences by
companies.
Power to
arrest without
warrant.
Power to
impound
document.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

24
Provided that if any Magistrate, police officer or any other person authorized by the
State Road Safety Authority in this behalf is, on an application so made, is satisfied that the
license cannot be, or has not been, returned to its holder before the date specified in the
acknowledgement for any reason for which the holder is not responsible, the Magistrate,
police officer or authorized person, as the case may be, may extend the period of authorization
to drive to such date as may be specified in the acknowledgement.
58. (1) Whoever willfully disobeys any order lawfully issued by any person or authority
empowered under this Act to issue such order, or obstructs any person or authority in the
discharge of any functions which such person or authority is required or empowered under
this Act to discharge, shall, if no other penalty is provided for the offence, be punished in
accordance with Schedule II and be awarded penalty points in accordance with Schedule I.
(2) Any person who, being required by or under this Act to supply any information,
willfully withholds such information or gives information which such person knows to be
false or does not believe to be true, shall, if no other penalty is provided for the offence, be
punished in accordance with Schedule II, and be awarded penalty points in accordance with
Schedule I.
(3) Whoever, causes the death or an injury to any person in the discharge of any
functions under this Act, shall, if no other penalty is provided for the offence, be punished
in accordance with Schedule II.
59. (1) A police officer in uniform or a person authorized by the traffic authority in this
behalf, may require any person, driving or attempting to drive a motor vehicle in any place, or
whom the police officer has reasonable cause to suspect has recently committed an offence
under this Act, or who is driving or attempting to drive a vehicle involved in a crash or whom
the officer has reasonable cause to suspect was driving a motor vehicle involved in a crash,
to undergo a compulsory impairment test as specified by the National Road Safety Authority,
if the police officer has reasonable cause to suspect that the person has consumed a drug or
drugs.
(2) A police officer may require a person specified under sub-section (1) to—
(a) remain in the place where stopped, for a period of time that is reasonable in
the circumstances, to undergo the compulsory impairment test; or
(b) accompany a police officer to another place to undergo the compulsory
impairment test.
(3) A person who has undergone a compulsory impairment test must remain at the
place where the person underwent the test until the result of the test is ascertained.
(4) A police officer may exercise the powers in sub-sections (1) and (2) in addition to
any breath tests under section 60 and regardless of the outcome of any such tests.
(5) A person shall have a valid defence, if the court is satisfied that the person's failure
or refusal to undergo a compulsory impairment test is because of—
(a) a pre-existing medical condition or pre-existing disability that precludes
undergoing the test; or
(b) an injury, sustained in a motor vehicle crash giving rise to an obligation to
undergo the test that precludes undergoing the test.
60. (1) A police officer in uniform or a person authorized by the traffic authority in this
behalf, may require any person driving or attempting to drive a motor vehicle in any place, or
whom the police officer has reasonable cause to suspect has recently committed an offence
under this Act, or who is driving or attempting to drive a vehicle involved in a crash or whom
the officer has reasonable cause to suspect was driving a motor vehicle involved in crash, to
provide one or more specimens of their breath for breath tests at or near that place, if such
police officer or authorized person has reasonable cause to suspect such person of having
committed an offence under section 35.
Disobedience
of orders,
obstruction or
causing death
or injury of a
person
enforcing the
Act.
Impairment
Tests.
Breath tests.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

25
(2) A person who has undergone a breath test shall remain at the place until the result
of the test is ascertained.
(3) A requirement for breath tests under sub-section (1) shall be made, as soon as may
be reasonably practicable after the commission of such offence under this Act, in accordance
with the procedure specified by the National Road Safety Authority.
(4) If a motor vehicle is involved in a crash in any place and a police officer in uniform
has reasonable cause to suspect that the person driving the motor vehicle at the time of the
crash had alcohol in their blood or that such person was driving under the influence of a drug
referred to in section 35, the officer may require the person so driving to provide a specimen
of his breath for a breath test—
(a) at the hospital, if such person is an indoor patient subject to sub-section (2);
(b) in the case of any other person, either at or near the place where the requirement
is made; or
(c) if the police officer thinks fit, at a police station specified by the police officer.
(5) A person shall not be required to provide a specimen while at a hospital under
clause (a) of sub-section (4) if the registered medical practitioner in immediate charge of that
person's case:
(a) is not first notified of the proposal to make the requirement; or
(b) objects to the provision of a specimen on the ground that its provision or the
requirement to provide it would be prejudicial to the proper care or treatment of the
patient.
(6) If it appears to a police officer in uniform, in consequence of a breath test carried
out by that officer on any person under sub-section (1) or sub-section (3), that the device by
means of which the test was carried out indicates the presence of alcohol in the person's
blood, the officer may arrest that person without warrant except while that person is at a
hospital as an indoor patient.
(7) If a person is required by a police officer under sub-section (1) or sub-section (3) to
provide a specimen of breath for a breath test, and refuses or fails to do so, and the police
officer has reasonable cause to suspect that person of having alcohol in his blood, the police
officer may arrest that person without warrant except while that person is at a hospital as an
indoor patient.
(8) A person arrested under this section shall, while at a police station, be given an
opportunity to provide a specimen of breath for a breath for a breath test here.
(9) The results of a breath test made in pursuance of the provisions of this section
shall be admissible in evidence.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, "breath test" means a preliminary test
for the purpose of obtaining, by means of a device of a type approved by the National Road
Safety Authority, by notification, an indication whether as to the presence of alcohol in a
person's blood or breath is likely to exceed the specified limit.
61. (1) A person who has been arrested under section 35 may, while at a police station,
be required by a police officer to provide to such registered medical practitioner, a specimen
of their blood or urine for a clinical test if:
(a) it appears to the police officer that the device, by means of which breath test
was taken in relation to such person, indicates the presence of alcohol in the blood or
urine of such person; or
(b) such person, when given the opportunity to submit to a breath test, has
refused, omitted or failed to do so; or
Clinical test.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

26
(c) the police officer has reasonable cause to suspect that the person has
consumed a drug or drugs, and such person, when required to complete a compulsory
impairment test under section 59 does not complete such test in a manner satisfactory
to such police officer.
(2) A person who has been required by a police officer under sub-section (1) to permit
the taking of a blood specimen shall, without delay after being requested to do so by a
registered medical practitioner, permit that practitioner to take a blood specimen from that
person.
(3) Where the person required to provide such specimen is a female, and the registered
medical practitioner produced by such police officer is a male medical practitioner, the specimen
shall be taken only in the presence of a female medical practitioner or a police officer.
(4) A person while at a hospital as an indoor patient may be required by a police officer
to provide at the hospital a specimen of their blood or urine for a clinical test:
(a) if it appears to the police officer that the device by means of which a breath
test is carried out in relation to the breath of such person indicates the presence of
alcohol in the blood or urine of such person; or
(b) if the person having been required, whether at the hospital or elsewhere, to
provide a specimen of breath for a breath test has refused, omitted or failed to do so
and a police officer has reasonable cause to suspect that person of having alcohol in
their blood or urine; or
(c) if the police officer has reasonable cause to suspect that the person has
consumed drug or drugs, and the person does not complete a compulsory impairment
test in a manner satisfactory to a police officer, who is trained to give the test, when
required to do so by a police officer under section 59.
(5) A person shall not be required to provide a specimen of blood or urine for a clinical
test under sub-section (2) if the registered medical practitioner in immediate charge of such
person's case:
(a) is not first notified of the proposal to make the requirement; or
(b) objects to the provision of such specimen on the ground that its provision or
the requirement to provide it would be prejudicial to the proper care or treatment of the
patient.
(6) The results of a clinical test made in pursuance of this section shall be admissible
in evidence.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, "clinical test" means the analysis of
a specimen of blood or urine made at a laboratory established, maintained or recognised by
the Central Government or a State Government.
62. In any proceeding for an offence punishable under Section 98 if it is proved that
the accused when requested by a police officer at any time so to do, had refused, omitted or
failed to consent to the taking of or providing a specimen of their breath for a breath test or
a specimen of their blood or urine for a clinical test, such refusal, omission or failure may,
unless reasonable cause for the same is shown, be presumed to be a circumstance supporting
any evidence given on behalf of the prosecution, or rebutting any evidence given on behalf
of the defence, with respect to unfitness of the accused to drive.
63. Any authority that is empowered to enforce the provisions of this Act shall, if such
authority commits an offence under this Act, incur twice the penalty prescribed for that
offence.
64. (1) Any offence committed after the commencement this Act, which is punishable
with fine only, may, before or after the institution of the prosecution, be compounded by
Presumption
of unfitness
to drive.
Penalty for
offence
committed by
an enforcing
authority.
Compounding
of certain
offences.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

27
such officers or authorities and for such amount as the Central Government may, by
notification, provide in this behalf.
(2) No offence under sub-section (1) shall be compounded for—
(a) the offences involving amount less than the minimum amount of fine as may
have been provided under this Act;
(b) offences involving imprisonment;
(c) any third or subsequent offence; and
(d) offences in which penalty points specified cannot be waived.
65. (1) The Court taking cognizance of any offence (other than an offence which the
Central Government may by rules specify prescribe) under this Act,—
(a) may, if the offence is an offence punishable with imprisonment under this
Act; and
(b) shall, in any other case, state upon the summons to be served on the accused
person that he:
(i) may appear by pleader or in person; or
(ii) may, by a specified date prior to the hearing of the charge, plead guilty to the
charge and remit to the Court, by money order, such sum not exceeding the maximum
fine that may be imposed for the offence as the Court may specify, and the plea of guilt
indicated in the money order coupon itself:
Provided that the Court shall, in the case of any of the offences referred to in sub-
section (2), state upon the summons that the accused person, if such person pleads guilty,
shall so plead in the manner specified in clause (b) and shall forward the driving license to the
Court with such letter containing such plea.
(2) Where the offence dealt with in accordance with sub-section ( 1) is an offence
prescribed by the Central Government by rules for the purposes of this sub-section, the
Court shall, if the accused person pleads guilty to the charge and forwards that person's
driving license to the Court with the letter containing such plea, make an endorsement of
such conviction on such driving license.
66. The National Road Safety Authority shall have the power to amend Schedules in
order to amend the offences punishable under this Act.
CHAPTER IV
N
A TIONAL ROAD SAFETY AUTHORITY
67. (1) The Central Government shall, within six months of commencement of this Act,
by notification establish an authority to be known as National Road Safety Authority to
exercise the powers conferred on, and to perform the functions assigned to it under this Act.
(2) The National Authority shall be a body corporate with the name aforsesaid having
perpetual succession and a common seal with the power, subject to the provisions of this
Act to acquire, hold and dispose of property and to contract, and may, by the aforesaid
name, sue or be sued.
(3) The Authority shall consist of—
(a) the Union Minister for Road Transport and Highways as the Patron, not
being a member;
(b) a Chairperson, who shall have the rank of a Secretary to the Government of
India; and
(c) at least four and not more than eight members excluding the Chairperson,
who shall have the rank of Additional Secretary to the Government of India.
Summary
disposal of
cases.
Power of
National
Road Safety
Authority to
amend
Schedules.
Constitution
of National
Road Safety
Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

28
(4) A member of the National Road Safety Authority, not being the Chairperson, shall
be a person of ability, integrity and standing and with special knowledge of, or professional
experience in either one or more subjects of economics, transport, urban planning, law, traffic
management and regulation, medical sciences and trauma care, crash investigation and
forensics, air pollution, road safety, insurance, motor vehicles, civil engineering, which, in
the opinion of the Central Government, will be useful for the National Road Safety Authority
to render its functions and fulfill its objectives under this Act.
(5) All members of the National Road Safety Authority shall be whole-time members.
(6) The members of the National Road Safety Authority shall be appointed in such
manner so as to secure the highest standards of professional competence and a range of
relevant expertise in order to effectively discharge the duties and functions of the National
Road Safety Authority under this Act.
(7) The head office of the National Road Safety Authority shall be in the National
Capital Region of Delhi.
(8) The National Road Safety Authority may establish such number of offices at such
places in India as may be deemed fit by it to render its functions and to fulfill its objectives.
68. (1) The Chairperson and the members of the National Road Safety Authority shall
be appointed by the Central Government from a panel of persons recommended by a selection
committee established under this Act.
(2) The selection committee shall consist of:
(a) the Cabinet Secretary to the Government of India, as the Chairperson;
(b) the Secretary in-charge of the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways,
Government of India, as a member;
(c) two Secretaries to the Government of India; and
(d) three experts of repute with special knowledge of, or professional experience
in either one or more subjects of economics, transport, urban planning, law, traffic
management and regulation, medical sciences and trauma care, crash investigation
and forensics, air pollution, road safety, insurance, motor vehicles, automotive
engineering, civil engineering, as members.
(3) The term of the selection committee and the manner of selection of the panel of
persons shall be such as may be prescribed.
(4) The Central Government shall make a reference to the selection committee for filling
up of a vacancy in the National Road Safety Authority—
(a) within one month from the date of occurrence of a vacancy by reason of
death, resignation or removal of the Chairperson or a member of the National Road
Safety Authority; or
(b) three months before the superannuation or completion of the term of office of
the Chairperson or a member of the National Road Safety Authority.
(5) For every vacancy referred to it, the selection committee shall make such
recommendations within two months from the date on which reference is made to it.
(6) A member of the selection committee shall not be eligible to be considered for
appointment as the Chairperson or a Member of the National Road Safety Authority for a
period of two years from the date on which he ceases to be a member of the selection
committee.
(7) Before making any recommendations under sub-section (5), the selection committee
shall satisfy itself that every person so recommended is capable of functioning independently
Appointment
of
Chairperson
and other
Members.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

29
as a member of the National Road Safety Authority, where such independence means the
ability to maintain and exercise independent judgment in discharge of his duties.
(8) The Central Government shall appoint the Chairperson and the members of the
National Road Safety Authority, within a period of one month from the date of recommendation
of the selection committee.
69. (1) Before appointing any person as the Chairperson or member, the Central
Government shall satisfy itself that the person does not have any financial or other interest
as is likely to affect prejudicially to function as a Chairperson or a member.
(2) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
the Chairperson and the members, shall be such as may be prescribed.
(3) The terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and the members shall not
be varied to their disadvantage after appointment.
70. (1) The Chairperson or any member may, by notice in writing under his hand
addressed to the Prime Minister resign his office.
(2) The Central Government may, by order, remove from office the Chairperson or any
other member of the National Road Safety Authority if such person has,—
(a) been adjudged as an insolvent; or
(b) been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of Central Government,
involves moral turpitude; or
(c) become physically or mentally incapable of discharging his duties; or
(d) acquired such financial or other interests as is likely to affect prejudicially his
functions; or
(e) so abused his position so as to render his continuation in office prejudicial to
the public interest.
(3) No member shall be removed under clauses (d) or (e) of sub-section (1) unless such
person has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.
71. No member of the National Road Safety Authority shall, for a period of two years
from the date on which he ceases to hold office, directly or indirectly, for his own account or
an agent, administrator, officer, director, retainer, member of the executive body or shareholder
or equity owner of any other person, conduct any activity within the jurisdiction of the
National Road Safety Authority under this Act:
Provided that this section shall not apply when a member of the National Road Safety
Authority is appointed as a member of the State Road Safety Authority.
72. (1) The National Road Safety Authority shall have the power to determine the
number, nature and categories of officers and employees required by it to discharge its
functions.
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service
of the officers and employees shall be such as may be specified by regulations by the
National Road Safety Authority.
73. The Chairperson and a member of the National Road Safety Authority shall hold
office for a term of three years from the date on which he enters upon his office or until he
attains the age of sixty five years, whichever is earlier and shall be eligible for reappointment.
74. (1) In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the Chairperson
by reason of his death, resignation or otherwise, the Central Government may, by notification,
authorize one of the members to act as the Chairperson until the appointment of a new
Chairperson to fill such vacancy.
Conditions of
service of
Chairperson
and members.
Resignation
and Removal
of
Chairperson
and members.
Restrictions
on
employment.
Officers and
employees of
the National
Road Safety
Authority.
Term of
office of
Chairperson
and members.
Member to
act as
Chairperson
or to
Discharge his
Functions in
Certain
Circumstances.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

30
(2) When the Chairperson is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence on
leave or otherwise, one of the members as the Central Government may, by notification,
authorize in this behalf, shall discharge the functions of the Chairpersons until the date on
which the Chairperson resumes his duties.
75. No act or proceedings of the Authority shall be questioned or invalidated merely
on the ground of existence of any vacancy or defect in the constitution of the Authority.
76. ( 1) The National Road Safety Authority shall have the overall objective of
eliminating practices that are adverse to transportation safety, road safety, and innovation
and adoption of new technology.
(2) The objective of the National Road Safety Authority shall be reviewed and ratified
every five years by the Parliament.
(3) In pursuit of the objective under sub-section (1), the National Road Safety Authority
shall:—
(a) formulate standards for road safety, road infrastructure and control of traffic;
(b) provide for safe and sustainable utilization of road transport ecosystem;
(c) prescribed annual performance target; and
(d) provide measures for the safety of vulnerable road users.
(4) The National Road Safety Authority shall function as an economic regulator for the
purposes of developing a framework to guide the determination of costs of safety equipments
to be installed in motor vehicels.
(5) While developing the framework under sub-section (4) the National Road Safety
Authority shall be guided by—
(a) the recognition that the promotion of safety of road users is of paramount
importance;
(b) the general principles identified for the administration of this Act under
section 4;
(c)  the commercial principles governing the manufacture and installation of
safety equipments including that the costs be commensurate with the services being
provided;
(d) the requirement to encourage competition, innovation, efficiency, and
economic use of resources;
(e) the need that prescribed safety equipments should be correlated with the
anticipated safety outcomes and should be technology neutral; and
(f) the requirement to safeguard consumer interest and ensure equity.
77. (1) The National Road Safety Authority may, be regulations, inter alia, specify the
following:—
(a) the standards for the design, construction, operation and maintenance of
motor vehicles, parts of motor vehicles, trailers, semi-trailers, mobile machinery,
including—
(i) safety standards and minimum requirements for such design,
construction and maintenance for promoting safety of the occupants and other
road users;
Vacancies,
etc., not to
Invalidate the
Proceedings
of the
Authority.
Objectives
and Functions
of the
National Road
Safety
Authority.
Regulations
and other
functions of
the National
Road Safety
Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

31
(ii) safety standards and minimum requirements for such design,
construction and maintenance for protection of environment; and
(iii) conditions for safe usage of such vehicles with regard to occupants
of the motor vehicle, other road users, and persons and property near roads,
including for motor vehicles independent of body, trailer, mobile machinery or as
a whole.
(b) the standards for the design and construction of passenger transport vehicles
for promoting the safety and comfort of the passengers and drivers of such vehicles,
including for the bus body.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this sub-section 'bus body' means the portion
of a passenger transport vehicle that encloses such vehicle's occupant space, exclusive
of the bumpers, the chassis frame, and any structure forward of the last point of the
windshield mounting.
(c) the standards for the design and construction of the truck body of goods
transport vehicles for promoting the safety and comfort of the drivers as well as
occupants of such vehicles and the safe carriage of the goods by such vehicles.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section the 'truck body' means the portion
of the goods transport vehicle that encloses such vehicle's occupant space and space
for the carriage of goods, exclusive of the bumpers, the chassis frame, and any structure
forward of the forward most point of the windshield mounting;
(d) the standards and procedures for the tests of competence for issuance of
licences;
(e) the conduct of safety and performance audits to monitor compliance with the
standards anywhere in the country as may be specified by the National Road Safety
Authority;
(f) the creation, maintenance and sharing of a standard, national, uniform database
for collecting and managing data including data relating to licences, registrations,
insurance, permits, road crashes, offences and penalties;
(g) the procedure and the enforcement of quality control in relation to any
aspect of transport and road safety and fuel quality as specified under this Act;
(h) the methods of data collection, analysis and exchange of information among
enforcement authorities engaged in road safety;
(i) the evaluation of enforcement and administration of this Act;
(j) the accreditation of assessors for safety audits, inspections and ratings;
(k) guidelines relating to safety features for non-motorized transport and for
safe operating conditions for such transport;
(l) catering for the special requirements of vulnerable road users such as children,
senior citizens, differently-abled persons, non-motorized transport and pedestrians
relating to road safety and traffic management;
(m) catering for the safety and security of people travelling by road transport,
especially women, children and senior citizens;
(n) guidelines for and enabling electronic payment of fines and any other
payments;
(o) guidelines for the design, construction operation and maintenance of roads
to ensure safety of road users;
(p) guidelines for the management of traffic on roads, including the schemes for
segregation of various classes of road users and their right of way;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

32
(q) the electronic collection and dissemination of information related to restricted
roads, no entries, one ways, restricted entry and time-zones for various classes of
vehicles;
(r) guidelines for crash investigation procedure and training of enforcement
agencies;
(s) guidelines for creation of child safety zones;
(t) the standards for technology deployed in pursuance of this Act; and
(u) any other matters which are necessary to fulfil its functions under this Act.
(2) In addition, the National Road Safety Authority shall—
(a) provide technical advice and assistance to the Central Government, and
advise the Central Government and the State Governments on administration of the
provisions relating to safety as contained in this Act;
(b) advise the State Government, urban local bodies, municipalities, panchayati
raj institutions on matters relating to or arising out of traffic management on roads and
the use of motor vehicles for the purposes of ensuring road safety;
(c) make regulations specifying guidelines for establishing and operating trauma
facilities and para- medical facilities for dealing with traffic related injuries on roads and
highways;
(d) make regulations specifying guidelines for building capacity and skills in
traffic police, hospitals, highway authorities, educational and research organizations
and other organizations dealing with road safety and traffic management;
(e) promote relevant practices in road safety and traffic management, undertake
road safety and traffic education programmes, and conduct campaigns to create
awareness amongst all sections of road users;
(f) invole interest groups and non-government organization working in the area
of road safety and traffic management, and assist them in promotion of efficient traffic
management and road safety practices;
(g) establish a network of organizations with the aim to facilitate a technical
cooperation framework by the co-ordination of activities, the exchange of information,
the development and implementation of joint projects, the exchange of expertise and
best practices in the fields within the purview of the National Road Safety Authority;
(h) co-ordinate with other agencies such as education boards and institutions,
health services and non-governmental organizations in maters relating to road safety
and traffic management;
(i) contribute to the development of international technical standards for motor
vehicles and roads;
(j) promote co-ordination of work on motor vehicles and road standards
undertaken by international governmental and non-governmental organizations;
(k) promote consistency between international technical standards and domestic
standards while ensuring that the level of safety adopted in the country is not
compromised; and
(l) specify the process or methodology for the crash testing of vehicles.
(3) For the purpose of performing its regulatory and other functions under this Act, the
National Road Safety Authority shall conduct research, by way of collecting data, and
performing such analysis as may be relevant and necessary, and this may include—
(a) conducting or causing to be conducted research in different spheres
of road safety and traffic management and publishing its findings;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

33
(b) establishing procedures and centres for multi-disciplinary crash
investigation;
(c) establishing the procedure and methodology for data collection,
transmission and analysis at appropriate levels, and defining the role of different
agencies involved in the process;
(d) collecting and storing data from any central or state agency or body or
other institution with respect to road safety and traffic information;
(e) identifying areas or traffic congestion and crash prone zones on National
and State highways, rural and city roads and plans to mitigate the identified
problems in a time-bound manner; and
(f) any other measures necessary for the purpose of giving effect to the
purposes of this Act.
(4) The National Road Safety Authority shall make it public without undue delay—
(a) the opinions of the Technical Working Groups, including all representations
made to it by external experts, and at public hearings;
(b) the annual declarations of interest made by the Chairperson, members of the
National Road Safety Authority and members of the Technical Working Groups,
including declarations of interest, if any, made in relation to items on the agenda of
meetings;
(c) the results of its technical studies; and
(d) the annual report of its activities.
78. (1) The Chairpersons and the members of the National Road Safety Authority
shall, in addition to attending office regularly meet at least once a month, and at such times
and places, and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business
at its meetings, including quorum at such meetings and procedure for such meetings, as may
be prescribed.
(2) The Patron shall be free to attend and participate in any meeting or consultation or
event of the National Road Safety Authority, Technical Working Groups or all or any other
bodies or groups or advisory team established by the National Road Safety Authority for the
purposes of this Act.
(3) The Chairperson shall ordinarily preside over meetings of the National Road Safety
Authority unless the Patron is attending the said meeting in which case the Patron shall
preside over such meetings.
(4) If the Chairperson is unable to attend a meeting of the National Road Safety
Authority, the Chairperson may authorise any other member to preside over the meeting.
(5) The Chairperson and members must, at all times, act in good faith, and use diligence
in the discharge of their duties.
(6) The Chairperson or any member who has any direct or indirect interest in any
matter coming up for consideration at a meeting of the National Road Safety Authority shall,
disclose the nature of interest to the National Road Safety Authority.
(7) A disclosure made by the Chairperson or a member will be recorded in the proceedings
of the meeting, and the Chairperson or such member shall recuse from any deliberation or
decision of the National Road Safety Authority with respect to that matter or any matter
connected therewith:
Provided that if the Chairperson has to recuse himself from a proceeding of the National
Road Safety Authority, the Patron shall designate a member of the Authority to discharge the
functions of the Chairperson for that matter.
Proceedings
of the
National
Road Safety
Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

34
(8) All orders and decisions of the National Road Safety Authority shall be authenticated
by the Chairperson.
79. (1) If the National Road Safety Authority proposes to make any regulation, it shall
publish a draft of the proposed regulations for inviting public expression.
(2) Every draft of a proposed regulation which is published under this section shall be
accompanied by a statement setting out—
(a) the objectives of the proposed regulations;
(b) how the draft regulations fulfil the particular provision of this Act under
which the regulations are made;
(c) a regulatory impact analysis of the proposed regulations and a cost-benefit
analysis where feasible;
(d) the process by which any person may make a representation in relation to the
proposed regulations;
(e) the implications of any regulations applied with retrospective effect; and
(f) the implementation schedule for any regulations, which shall be determined
after due consultation with all stakeholders including consumers and industry.
(3) Before finalizing the draft of any regulation, the National Road Safety
Authority shall consider every representation made to it in accordance with clause ( d) of
sub-section (2):
Provided that the decision of the National Road Safety Authority shall be final whether
or not it had considered any representations made to it.
(4) While finalising the regulations, the National Road Safety Authority shall approve
that the regulations which are consistent with the Act and shall publish—
(a) all the representations received under clause (d) of section (2); and
(b) unless specified otherwise, at least a general account of the response to the
representations.
(5) If the notified regulations substantially differ from the proposed regulations
published by the National Road Safety Authority under sub-section ( 1), in addition, to
complying with sub-section (4), it must publish the details and reasons for such change.
(6) When carrying out a cost-benefit analysis for the purposes of this section, the
National Road Safety Authority must consider the probable costs that will be borne by:
(a) the persons required to comply with the regulations;
(b) road users, both directly and indirectly;
(c) the National Road Safety Authority in enforcing the regulations; and
(d) any other persons affected by the regulations.
(7) The National Road Safety Authority shall consider the probable benefits that may
accrue to road users and other persons as a result of the regulations.
(8) The National Road Safety Authority may, use the best available data and where
such data is not available, reasonable estimates to carry out the analysis.
80. (1) The National Road Safety Authority may dispense with the procedure under
section 17, if the time taken to comply with it has the potential to cause considerable harm or
losses for the persons likely to be affected by such regulations.
(
2) If the National Road Safety Authority makes regulations under this section, it shall:
(i) publish the reasons for invoking this section; and
Process for
making
regulations.
Emergency
regulation
making.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

35
(ii) submit a report to the Central Government within one week of invoking
this section.
(3) Unless the Central Government communicates its approval in writing within thirty
days to the National Road Safety Authority, the regulations made under this section will
cease to have effect after a period of one hundred and eighty days from the date on which the
regulations are notified by the National Road Safety Authority:
Provided that where the approval of the Central Government is not received in writing,
the regulations made under this section will continue to have effect beyond the period of one
hundred and eighty days, if the National Road Safety Authority completes the procedure
under section 17 of this Act within the hundred and eighty day period specified in this
section.
81. (1) The Chairperson shall be the legal representative of the National Road Safety
Authority and shall be responsible for—
(a) the day-to-day administration of the National Road Safety Authority;
(b) drawing up proposals for the work programmes including prioritisation of
work of the National Road Safety Authority;
(c) implementing the work programmes and the decisions adopted by the National
Road Safety Authority;
(d) ensuring the provision of appropriate technical and administrative support
for the Technical Working Groups;
(e) ensuring that the National Road Safety Authority carries out its tasks in
accordance with the requirements of its stakeholders, in particular with regard to the
adequacy of the services it provides and the time taken to provide such services;
(f) preparation of the statement of revenue and expenditure and the execution of
the budget of the National Road Safety Authority;
(g) identifying potential risks for the transport ecosystem in India, particularly
with respect to road and transport safety;
(h) pooling of knowledge;
(i) ensuring close cooperation between the National Road Safety Authority and
the enforcement agencies and organizations operating in the field of transport, roads
and motor vehicles;
(j) engaging with the Central Government, and for ensuring a regular dialogue
with the Technical Working Groups; and
(k) reporting to the Patron on any matter relating to the National Road Safety
Authority as may be required by the Patron.
(2) Every year, the Chairperson shall submit for adoption, by way of an annual review
meeting, to all the members of the National Road Safety Authority—
(a) programmes of work;
(b) the annual accounts for the previous year;
(c) the budget for the coming year;
(d) action taken report or response to instructions of the members of the National
Road Safety Authority; and
(e) a general report covering all the activities of the National Road Safety Authority
in the previous year.
Functions of
the
Chairperson.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

36
(3) The Chairperson shall, while following adoption under sub-section (2), forward a
copy of general report and the programs to the Central Government and the State Governments
and shall also publish for information to general public.
(4) The Chairperson shall approve all financial expenditure of the National Road Safety
Authority and report its activities to the Central Government.
(5) The Chairperson shall have administrative control over the officers and other
employees of the National Road Safety Authority.
82. (1) The National Road Safety Authority shall constitute Technical Working Groups,
consisting of independent technical experts to maintain and exercise independent judgment
in the discharge of duties.
(2) Each Technical Working Group constituted under this section shall be headed by
a member of the National Road Safety Authority designated by the Chairperson in consultation
with the Central Government, considering such member's special knowledge and field of
professional experience and any declarations of interest made by members from time to time.
(3) The Technical working Group shall invite the relevant industry and consumer
representatives to its deliberations.
(4) Without prejudice to the generality of sub-section ( 1), the National Road Safety
Authority may establish such number of Technical Working Groups as it considers necessary
on the following matters—
(a) roads standards;
(b) traffic management;
(c) testing standards for offences including drink-driving, and over-speeding;
(d) technology and enforcement;
(e) transport infrastructure and safety;
(f) crash Investigation and Forensics;
(g) data Collection and Analytics.
(5) the National Road Safety Authority may from time to time re-constitute the Technical
Working Groups by adding new members or by replacing the existing members or by changing
the name of the Group as the case may be.
(6) The administrative, financial and research support for the Technical Working Groups
shall be provided by the National Road Safety Authority.
83. (1) The National Road Safety Authority shall appoint the members of all Technical
Working Groups for a period of three years.
(2) The National Road Safety Authority shall, for the purpose of appointing of Technical
Working Groups under sub-section ( 1), invite applications by publishing the details in
leading international technical publications and by posting the details on its official website.
(3) The mode and manner of operation of Technical Working Groups as well as
coordination between the various Technical Working Groups shall be specified by regulations
made by the National Road Safety Authority.
(4) The regulations made under sub-section (2) shall relate in particular to:
(a) the number of times that a member can serve consecutively on a Technical
Working Group;
(b) the number of members in each Technical Working Group;
(c) the procedure to reimburse the expenses of members of the Technical Working
Group;
Technical
Working
Groups.
Procedure for
appointing
Technical
Working
Groups.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

37
(d) the manner in which tasks and requests for technical opinions are assigned
to the Technical Working Groups;
(e) the creation and organization of the body of the Technical Working Groups,
and the mode and manner of involvement and engagement of external experts being
included in the Technical Working Groups;
(f) the possibility, mode and manner of inviting observers to attend the meetings
of the Technical Working Groups;
(g) the possibility, mode and manner of organising public hearings;
(h) the conduct of meetings, including provision for meetings, to be held without
the physical presence of a member of a Technical Working Group; and
(i) the quorum of the meeting, notice and agenda of the meeting and such other
matters.
84. The National Road Safety Authority shall have the power to delegate all or any
power or function that has been conferred upon it by this Act to any person or group of
persons barring such exceptions as may be provided for in this Act:
Provided that the National Road Safety Authority shall not delegate its power to make
regulations under this Act.
85. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the official Gazette, constitute
a National Road Crash Victim Compensation Fund to which the following shall be credited—
(a) any grants and loans made to the National Road Safety Authority by the
Central Government;
(b) notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, a proportion of the
insurance premiums or a road safety cess on such insurance premiums collected in the
country, apportioned under this Act, as prescribed; and
(c) all sums received by the National Road Safety Authority from such other
sources as may be prescribed.
(2) The Fund shall be utilized for providing immediate interim relief, medical treatment
and rehabilitation to road accident victims in the territory of India:
Provided that the following persons shall be eligible to claim compensation from the
Fund:
(a) a person who has been grievously hurt in a road accident till such time as the
person may be stabilized;
(b) one or more legal representatives of a person who died in a road accident that
was not caused by the deceased on whose behalf the claim is being made and/or for
those road accidents where no person can be held liable;
(c) a person grievously hurt in a road accident where no fault can be fixed upon
either that person or on any other person involved in the accident; and
(d) any other person as the National Road Safety Authority may specify by
regulations.
(3) The maximum amount of compensation made available by the Fund in any case
shall be such as may be specified by the National Road Safety Authority.
(4) In all cases specified under sub-section (3), when the claim of such person becomes
payable, then the National Road Safety Authority Fund is entitled to recover from the insurer
the amount equivalent to such compensation received by such person.
Delegation of
Powers of the
National
Raod Safety
Authority.
Constitution
of National
Road Crash
Victim
Compensation
Fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

38
86. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, provide requisite sum to the National Road Safety Authority for carrying
out the provisions of this Act.
87. (1) The National Road Safety Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other
relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be
prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India.
(2) The Comptroller and Auditor General of India shall audit the accounts of the
National Road Safety Authority, and specify the intervals at which such audits may be
conducted, and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by
the National Road Safety Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor General of India may appoint any person in connection
with the audit under sub-section (2) and such person shall have the same rights and privileges
and authority in connection with the audit as the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
generally has in connection with the audit of Government accounts and, in particular, shall
have the right to demand the production of books of accounts and other documents and
papers and to inspect any of the offices of the National Road Safety Authority.
(4) The accounts of the National Road Safety Authority, as certified by the Comptroller
and Auditor General of India or any other person appointed in this behalf, together with the
audit report thereon, shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government and the Government
shall cause the same to be laid, as soon as it is received, before each House of Parliament.
88. The National Road Safety Authority shall prepare, in such form and at such time in
each financial year as may be prescribed, by rules made by the Central Government, the
budget for the next financial year, showing the estimated expenditure of the National Road
Safety Authority and forward the same to the Central Government.
89. (1) The National Road Safety Authority shall submit an annual report to the Central
Government and may at any time submit special reports on any matter which, in its opinion, if
of such urgency or importance that it shall not be deferred till submission of the annual report.
(2) The Central Government shall cause the annual and special reports of the Authority
to be laid before each house of Parliament, along with a memorandum of action taken or
proposed to be taken on the recommendations of the Authority, and the reasons for non-
acceptance of the recommendations, if any.
CHAPTER V
S
TATE ROAD SAFETY AUTHORITY
90. (1) Every State Government shall, within six months of commencement of this Act,
by notification establish an authority to be called as the State Road Safety Authority to
exercise the powers conferred on, and to perform the function assigned to under this Act.
(2) The State Authority shall be a body corporate with the name aforesaid having peretual
succession and a common seal with the power, subject to the provisions of this Act to acquire,
hold and dispose of property and to contract, and may, by the aforesaid name, sue or be sued.
(3) The State Government shall designate appropriate agencies to function under the
direction of the National Road Safety Authority or the State Road Safety Authority, as the
case may be.
91. (1) The State Road Safety Authority shall consist of:—
(a) a Chairperson, who shall have the rank of Secretary to the Government of
India or Chief Secretary to the State Government; and
(b) two members who shall have rank of Additional Secretary to the Government
of India or Principal Secretary to the State Government.
Central
Government
to provide
requisite sums.
Maintenance
of Accounts.
Budget.
Annual and
Special
Reports.
Constitution
of State Road
Safety
Authority.
Composition
of State Road
Safety
Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

39
(2) A member of the State Road Safety Authority, not being the Chairperson, shall be a
person of ability, integrity and standing and with special knowledge of, or professional
experience in either one or more subjects of economics, transport, urban planning, law, traffic
management and regulation, medical sciences and trauma care, crash investigation and
forensics, air pollution, road safety, insurance, motor vehicles, civil engineering, which, in
the opinion of the State Government, will be useful for the State Road Safety Authority to
render its functions and fulfill its objectives under this Act.
(3) All members of the State Road Safety Authority shall be whole-time members.
(4) The members of the State Road Safety Authority shall be appointed in such manner
so as to secure the highest standards of professional competence and a range of relevant
expertise in order to effectively discharge the duties and functions of the State Road Safety
Authority under the Act.
(5) The head office of the State Road Safety Authority shall be at such place as the
State Government may, by notification, specify.
92. (1) The Chairperson and the members of the State Road Safety Authority shall be
appointed by the State Government from a panel of persons recommended by a selection
committee established under sub-section (2).
(2) The slection committee shall consist of:
(a) the Chief Secretary to the State Government, as the Chairperson;
(b) the Secretary in the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways of the State
Government, as a member;
(c) three experts of repute with special knowledge of, or professional experience
in either one or more subjects of economics, transport, urban planning, law, traffic
management and regulation, medical sciences and trauma care, crash investigation
and forensics, air pollution, road safety, insurance, motor vehicles, automotive
engineering, civil engineering as members.
(3) The term of the selection committee and the manner of selection of the panel of
persons shall be such as may be prescribed.
(4) The State Government shall make a reference to the selection committee for filling
up a vacancy in the State Road Safety Authority—
(a) within one month from the date of occurrence of a vacancy by reason of
death, resignation or removal of the Chairperson or a member of the State Road Safety
Authority; or
(b) three months before the superannuation or completion of the term of office of
the Chairperson or a member of the State Road Safety Authority.
(5) For every vacancy referred to the selection committee, the committee shall make
such recommendations within two months from the date on which reference is made to it:
Provided that member of the selection committee shall not be eligible to be considered
for appointment as the Chairperson or a member of the State Road Safety Authority for a
period of two years from the date on which he ceases to be a member of the selection
committee.
(6) Before making any recommendations under sub-section (5), the selection committee
shall satisfy itself that every person so recommended is capable of functioning independently
as a member of the State Road Safety Authority, where such independence means the ability
to maintain and exercise independent judgment in discharge of his duties.
(7) The State Government shall appoint the Chairperson and the members of the State
Road Safety Authority within a period of one month from the date of the recommendation of
the selection committee.
Appointment
of
Chairperson
and other
Members.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

40
93. (1) Before appointing any person as the Chairperson or member, the State
Government shall satisfy itself that the person does not have any financial or other interest
as is likely to affect prejudicially to function as a member.
(2) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
the Chairperson and the members, shall be such as may be prescribed.
(3) The terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and the members shall not
be varied to their disadvantage after appointment.
94. (1) The Chairperson or any member may, by notice in writing under his hand
addressed to the Chief Minister of the State, resign his office.
(2) The Chairperson or a member of the State Road Safety Authority, after giving
notice under this section, will continue to hold office until the State Government appoint a
person to the office vacated or after the expiry of three months from the date of notice,
whichever is earlier.
(3) The State Government may, by order, remove from office the Chairperson or any
other member of the State Road Safety authority if such person has,—
(a) been adjudged as an insolvent; or
(b) been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of State Government,
involves moral turpitude; or
(c) become physically or mentally incapable of discharging his duties; or
(d) acquired such financial or other interests as is likely to affect prejudicially his
functions; or
(e) so abused his position as to render his continuation in office prejudicial to
the public interest.
(4) No Member shall be removed under clauses (d) or (e) of sub-Section (1) unless
such person has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.
95. No member of the State Road Safety Authority shall, for a period of two years from
the date on which he ceases to hold office, directly or indirectly, for his own account or as an
agent, administrator, officer, director, retainer, member of the executive body or shareholder
or equity owner of any other person, conduct any activity within the jurisdiction of the
National Road Safety Authority or the State Road Safety Authority:
Provided that this section shall not apply when a member of the State Road Safety
Authority is appointed as a member of the National Road Safety Authority.
96. (1) The State Road Safety Authority shall have the power to determine the
number, nature and categories of officers and employees required by it to discharge its
functions.
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to and other term and conditions of service of
the officers and employees shall be such as may be specified by regulations by the State
Road Safety Authority.
97. The Chairperson and members of the State Road Safety Authority shall hold
office for a term of three years from the date on which they enter upon their office or until
they attain the age of sixty-five years, whichever is earlier and shall be eligible for
re-appointment.
98. (1) In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the Chairperson
by reason of his death, resignation or otherwise, the State Government may, by notification,
authorize one of the members to act as the Chairperson until the appointment of a new
Chairperson to fill such vacancy.
Conditions of
Service of
Chairperson
and Members.
Resignation
and Removal
of
Chairperson
and members.
Restrictions
on
employment.
Officers and
employees of
the State Road
Safety
Authority.
Term of office
of
Chairperson
and Members.
Member to act
as Chairperson
or to discharge
his functions
in certain
circumstances.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

41
(2) When the Chairperson is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence on
leave or otherwise, one of the members as the State Government may, by notification, authorize
in this behalf, shall discharge the functions of the Chairperson until the date on which the
Chairperson resumes his duties.
99. No act or proceedings of the State Road Transport Authority shall be questioned
or shall be invalidated merely on the ground of existence of any vacancy or defect in the
constitution of the Authority.
100. (1) The State Road Safety Authority shall perform functions in accordance with
this Act and in accordance with any directions that may be issued by the National Road
Safety Authority in this regard.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the forgoing provision, the State Road
Safety Authority shall—
(a) coordinate and direct the activities of the implementation agencies notified
by the State Government for implementation of this Act consistent with any regulations,
guidelines, recommendations or directions made by the National Road Safety Authority;
and
(b) collect and store data in accordance with rules and regulations specified by
the National Road Safety Authority in this regard.
(3) For the purpose of exercising and discharging the powers and functions specified,
State Road Safety Authority may, subject to such conditions as may be specified by the
National Road Safety Authority, issue recommendations to any implementation agencies
notified by the State Government and such implementation agency shall, in the discharge of
its functions under this Act, give effect to and be bound by such recommendations or
directions.
101. (1) The National Road Safety Authority shall exercise the powers and perform the
functions of a State Road Safety Authority in relation to—
(a) a Union territory; and
(b) a State having no State Road Safety Authority.
(2) For the purpose of sub-section (1), the National Road Safety Authority may delegate
all or any of its powers or functions that have been conferred upon it by this Act to any
person or group of persons as the regulations may specify:
Provided that the National Road Safety Authority shall not delegate its power to make
regulations under this Act.
102. The National Road Safety Authority shall, for the purpose of exercising and
discharge of its functions specified under section 17, subject to such conditions as may be
prescribed, issue directions to any State Road Safety Authority, and State Road Safety
Authority shall, in the discharge of its functions under this Act, give effect to such directions.
103. (1) With effect from such date as each State Government shall, by notification in
the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there shall be constituted for the purposes of
this Act, a Fund to be called as State Road Safety Fund.
(2) A State Government may also credit to the State Road Safety Fund—
(a) any grants and loans made to the State Road Safety Authority by the State
Government;
(b) a proportion of the insurance premium or a road safety cess on such
insurance premium as prescribed by the State Government; and
Vacancies,
etc. not to
Invalidate the
Proceedings
of the
Authority.
Functions of
State Road
Safety
Authority.
National
Road Safety
Authority to
perfrom
functions in
certain cases.
Power of
National
Road Safety
Authority to
issue
directions.
Constitution
of State Road
Safety Fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

42
(c) all sums received by the State Road Safety Authority from such other sources
as may be prescribed.
(3) The Fund shall be utilized for making payment towards the preparation and
implementation of the State Road Safety Improvement Plan.
104. (1) The State Road Safety Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other
relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be
prescribed by the State Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General
of India.
(2) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India shall audit the accounts of the State
Road Safety Authority, and specify the intervals at which such audits shall be conducted,
and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the State
Road Safety Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India may appoint any person in connection
with the audit under sub-section (2) and such person shall have the same rights and privileges
and authority in connection with the audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India
generally has in connection with the audit of Government accounts and, in particular, shall
have the right to demand the production of books of accounts and other documents and
papers and to inspect any of the offices of the State Road Safety Authority.
(4) The accounts of the State Road Safety Authority, as certified by the Comptroller
and Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed in this behalf, together with the
audit report thereon, shall be forwarded annually to the respective State Government and
that Government shall cause the same to be laid, as soon as it is received, before each House
of Legislature of that State.
105. The State Road Safety Authority shall prepare, in such form and at such time in
each financial year as may be prescribed, by rules made by the State Government, the budget
for the next financial year, showing the estimated expenditure of the State Road Safety
Authority and forward the same to the State Government.
106. (1) The State Road Safety Authority shall submit an annual report to the State
Government and may at any time submit special reports on any matter which, in its opinion,
is of such urgency or importance that it should not be deferred till submission of the annual
report.
(2) The State Government shall cause the annual and special reports of the Authority
to be laid before each House of Legislature of that State, along with a memorandum of action
taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations of the Authority, and the reasons for
non-acceptance of the recommendations, if any.
CHAPTER VI
M
ISCELLANEOUS
107. Save as otherwise provided, the provisions of this Act shall have effect,
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.
108. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to the provisions of the Motor
Vehicles Act, 1988.
109. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for the purpose of carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government and every regulation made by the
Board, under this Act, shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House or
Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
Maintenance
of Accounts.
Budget.
Annual and
Special
Reports.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Application
of certain
laws.
Power of
Central
Government
to make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

43
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree
in making any modification in the rule or regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or
regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
that rule or regulation.
110. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to any of the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as it may deem necessary for removing the
difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
SCHEDULE I
SCHEME OF PENALTY POINTS FOR DRIVERS
1. Penalty Point System
Section                                                Offences Penalty
Points
12, 13 Offences relating to protective headgear 2
12, 13, 15,
16, 17 Offences relating to conspicuity 1
19 Failing to restrict the number of people on 2
motor cycles
21 Offences relating to seat belts 2
22 Offences relating to the sitting of Children 2
29 Offence of driving at excessive speed 1. for Ist offence and if
exceeding the speed limit by
more than 5 kmph but less
than 9 kmph
2. for Ist offence and if
exceeding the speed limit by
more than 9 kmph
3. for each subsequent offence
34 Driving which causes threat 3 for Ist offence
to 3 for Ist offence Public
Safety
4 for each subsequent offence
35 Driving under the influence of 3
alcohol or drugs
40 Penalty for causing obstruction 1
to free flow of 1 traffic
44 Violation of Traffic Signals and 3
Traffic Signs
47 Using vehicles in unsafe condition 3
49 Offences relating to certain communication 2
devices
Power to
remove
difficulties.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

44
50 General provision regarding penalties 1
53 Punishment for offences relating to crash 2
58 Disobedience of orders, obstruction and 3
refusal of information
2.  Award of penalty points
(1) The enforcing authority or any person authorized in this behalf shall award penalty
points corresponding to the specific offence to any person who commits an offence as
provided under Schedule II. The penalty points shall be endorsed and their record shall be
maintained in a manner as may be specified by the national authority.
(2) For the offences involving judicial proceedings and imprisonment, the court shall
award penalty points in addition to the fine or imprisonment that may be imposed.
3. Duration of validity of penalty points
Penalty points awarded for an offence shall remain on record for a period of 3 years
from the date of award.
4. Suspension and Cancellation of License
(1) At any point of time, if the cumulative total of the penalty points accrued by a driver
crosses the limit of twelve (12) points, the driving license shall be suspended for the period
of one year. On suspension of the driving license, the accrued penalty points shall cease to
subsist.
(2) If a driver whose license has been suspended again accumulates twelve ( 12)
points, that person's driving license shall be cancelled for a period of five years.
(3) If a person holding a learner's license accrues four ( 4) points, then that person's
learner's license shall be cancelled. The person whose learner's license has been cancelled
shall produce a certificate of driving as specified from recognized school or establishment
when that person applies for fresh learner's license.
Section                                                Offences Penalty
Points
5
10
15
20
25

45
SCHEDULE II
SCHEME FOR LEVYING PENALTIES INCLUDING FINES, IMPRISONMENT AND IMPOUNDING OF VEHICLES
Section Offence Type of Repeat Penalties to be Imposed
Vehicle or Offence
Offender Fine Community Imprison- V ehicle Suspension/ Refresher Remarks
(INR) Service ment Impoun- Cancellation of Training
ding licence or Permit
   1                   2         3     4     5           6         7      8            9      10 11
10 (1) Offences relating to driving 1 10,000 — 1 month — Cancellation of — Either penalty
licence—Person holding a all existing or both may be
license attempts to hold licenses imposed.
other licence 11 10,000 1 month Cancellation of
all existing
licenses
10 (3) Offences relating to driving 1 10,000 — 1 month Cancellation of — Either penalty
licenses—Person holding all existing or both may be
driving license holds any licenses imposed.
other driving licence 11 10,000 1 month Cancellation of
all existing
licenses
10 (4) Offences relating to driving 1 10,000 — 3 months Either penalty
licenses—Disqualified for or both may be
holding or obtaining driving 11 10,000 — 3 months imposed.
licenses
10 (5) Offences relating to driving 1 10,000 3 months
licenses—Not disclosing 11 10,000 — 3 months
endorsement made
12. 13 Offences relating to protective
headgear 5,000 Per person
12 Non- 1,500
motorised
transport

46
   1                   2         3     4     5           6         7      8            9      10 11
13 Offences relating to Motor 2,500 Find to be
conspicuity Cycles paid by owner.
15 Three 2,500
wheelers
16 Light motor 5,000
Vehicles
17 Stationary 10,000
Transport
Vehicles
21 Offences relating to 5,000 per person.
seat belts
22 Offences relating to 5,000 per child.
seating of children
25 Prohibition of parking 1 2,500
or abandoning of 11 5,000
motor vehicles at
certain places
26 Prohibition of driving 1 5,000
in certain places 11 10,000 2 weeks 1 month licence
suspension
2,500 Speeding by more
than 5 kmph but
less than 9 kmph.
Motor 1 5,000 Speeding by more
Cycles than 9 kmph but
less than 19 kmph.
10,000 1 months 1 month licence Yes Speeding by more
suspension than 19 kmph.
29 (1) Offence of driving 11 10,000 3 months 3 month licence Yes
at excessive speed suspension

47
3,500 Speeding by more
than 5 kmph but
less than 9 kmph.
Light 1 7,000 Speeding by more
motor than 9 kmph but
Vehicles less than 19 kmph.
15,000 1 month 1 month licence Yes Speeding by more
suspension than 19 kmph.
11 25,000 3 months 3 month licence Yes Speeding by more
10,000 suspension than 5 kmph but
less than 9 kmph.
1 15,000 2 months 2 month licence Yes Speeding by more
suspension than 9 kmph but
less than 19 kmph.
Medium 25,000 3 months Cancellation of Yes Speeding by more
and Heavy licence for one than 19 kmph.
Vehicles year; Suspension
of permit for 6
months
11 50,000 6 months Cancellation of
licence for one
year; Suspension
of permit for 6
months
29 (2) Offence of driving at excessive       Punishment in the same manner as provided for section above but the term for the impounding of the car
speed—Providing instructions           shall be twice as long.
to drive at excessive speed
32 Failure to yield right of way 1 5,000 Yes
to emergency vehicles 11 10,000
Non- 1 500 15 hours
motorised
transport 1 1 1,000 30 hours One week

48
   1                   2         3     4     5           6         7      8            9      10 11
34 Driving which causes threat Two- 1 2,500 Three One week Impounding to
to public safety—Driving wheelers days be imposed in
against the authorised and three- addition to fine or
flow of traffic wheelers imprisonment or
both.
11 5,000 One week Two weeks Yes
Light motor 1 5,000 One week Two weeks Impounding to
vehicle be imposed in
addition to fine or
imprisonment or
both.
11 10,000 Two weeks One month Yes
Medium 1 10,000 Two weeks One month Yes Impounding and
and heavy training to
motor be imposed in
vehicles addition to fine or
imprisonment or
both.
11 20,000 One month Two months Yes
34 Driving which causes threat All 1 2,500 15 hours Thre Either penalty or
to public safety—Dangerous days both may be
passing or overtaking imposed.
11 5,000 30 hours One week Yes
34 Driving which causes threat All 1 15,000 Fifteen Either penalty or
to public safety—Dangerous days both may be
driving with children on imposed.
board
11 30,000 One month Six months Yes
licence
suspension
34 Driving which causes threat All 1 2,500 Yes
to publicity safety—Dangerous 11 5,000
lane changing

49
35 (2) Prohibition on Driving Type 1 1 30,000 T welve Eighteen months Licence
under the influence of driver months which from the date of Suspension in
alcohol or drugs may extend conviction, or adition to fine or
to eighteen date of imprisonment
months sentencing or or both.
date of release.
Type 112 30,000 100 hours Impound Six months
driver for one licence
week suspension from
the date of
conviction, or
date of sentencing
or date of release.
Type 111
2 10,000 Not more Six months Licence
driver than six licence suspension in
months suspension from addition to fine
the date of or imprisonment
conviction, or or both.
date of sentencing
or date of release.
All Yes Not more Permanent
drivers than two Cancellation of
years driving licence.
35 (4) Driving under the All 1 15,000 Not more Six months
influence of alcohol than three licence
or drugs—Drugs months suspension
11 30,000 Six months Thirty Twelve months
(within to one year days licence
three suspension
years)

50
1 2         3     4     5           6         7      8            9      10 11
40 Penalty for causing obstruction Motor 1,000
to free flow of traffic, etc. Vehicles per hour
Pedestrians 200
41 Overloading Two- 10,000
wheelers
Light motor 25,000 Suspension for
vehicles one month of
Medium 35,000 permit granted
motor vehicles under above
Heavy motor 50,000 sections
vehicles
All vehicles Yes 50,000 Cancellation of
permit granted
under above
sections
41(2) Overloading 50,000 Fine to be paid
by the owner
of a vehicle or
the consignor
42 (2) Powers regarding vehicles
suspected of overloading— 35,000
Refusal to submit vehicle for
weighing after being directed to
do so by a person authorised in
this behalf.
44 Violation of traffic signs Non- 1,000
motorised
transport
I 5,000
II 10,000
All motor III and One month Yes
vehicles beyond 15,000 licence
suspension

51
44 .(6) V iolation of traffic sign—Stop Non- 500
signal or stop sign motorised
transport
All motor
vehicles 1,000 Two weeks
46. Railroad  crossing offences 5,000 Not more Either or both
than two penalties may
weeks be imposed.
47.(1) Using vehicle in unsafe Two and/or 5,000 1 month If bodily injury
condition Three or damage to
wheelers property is
caused the fine
is to be
increased to
Rs. 25,000
Light Motor 7,500 1 month
Vehicles
Medium and
Heavy Motor 10,000 2 months
Vehicles
47.(2) Using vehicle in unsafe Two and/or I 5,000 1 month
condition— Three wheelers II 15,000 2 months
Violation of standards Light Motor I 7,500 1 month
specified in relation to Vehicles II 15,000 2 months
road safety, control Medium and I 10,000 2 months
of noise and air pollution Heavy Motor II 15,000 4 months
Vehicles
47.(3) Using vehicle in unsafe I 50,000 6 months Either penalty
condition—Driving of or both may be
motor vehicle in imposed
violation of provisions and II 1 lakh 6 months
rules relating to the carriage which may
of dangerous and hazardous extend to one
goods year
48. Failure to comply with standard 10 lakh Fine per
for road design, construction person killed
and maintenance or disabled

52
   1                   2         3     4     5           6         7      8            9      10 11
49. Offences relating to certain I 4,000
communication devices II 6,000
III and
beyond 10,000 One month
I 2,500 licence Yes
suspension
50 General Provision II 5,000
52 Driving uninsured vehicle Two- 5,000
wheelers
Three- 10,000
wheelers and
Light motor
vehicles
Medium and 28,000
Heavy motor
vehicles
53(1) Punishment for offences 10,000 Two weeks Yes
relating to a crash licence
suspension
53(2) Causing death in certain 1 lakh Not less than Death of a
circumstances five years Child.
3 lakhs Not less than
seven years
Punishment in the same manner as that of the underlying offence Punishment
54 Punishment for abetment under above
of certain offences sections to
apply only
to  owner
and
consignor.
58 (1) Disobedience of order 2,500
58 (2) Withholding of information or 5,000 One month Either or
giving false both of the
infromation penalties to
be imposed.

53
58 (3) Causing injury or death of  a 1 Lakh Four years For causing
person enforcing the Act death
1 Lakh Two years For causing
injury
1 Type 1 driver is a driver driving any of the following vehicles:—
(a) V ehicles with children on board.
(b) Educational institution bus.
(c) Heavy Motor Vehicles.
(d) V ehicles carrying dangerous or hazardous goods.
(e) Chartered service vehicle.
(f) Restricted chartered service vehicle.
(g) Metered service vehicle.
(h) Restricted metered service vehicle.
(i) Scheduled service vehicle.
(j) Restricted Scheduled Service vehicle.
(k) Taxi
The allowable blood alcohol concentration for such drivers is less than 20.0 mg of alcohol per 100 ml of blood.
2 A driver who is not Type I driver and is—
(a) Between the age of 18 to 30 years, or
(b) Learner's license holder or recently disqualified drivers.
The allowable blood alcohol concentration for such drivers is less than 20.0 mg of alcohol per 100 ml of blood.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In 2013 itself, 1.4 lakh people were killed and 4.7 lakh injured in road crashes in India.
This trend is on the rise and this requires immediate legislative attention. The erstwhile
Planning Commission had stated in its report that India loses 3% of GDP every year due to
road crashes. However, the existing Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 does not address the issue of
road safety in its entirety.
In S. Rajaseekaran Vs Union of India, 2014, the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India has also
observed that Indian roads have proved to be giant killers demanding immediate attention
and remedial action.
The draft legislation forwarded by the Government of India with regard to Road Safety
diluted in comparison to the urgency of measures required. Thus, the National Road Transport
Safety and Miscellaneous Provisions Bill, 2015 has tried to incorporate provisions for the
establishment of both National and State Road Safety Authorities for promoting road safety
measures and practices and for the monitoring and regulation of safety standards for all
classes of road users. It also includes provisions for road safety and traffic management and
a more stringent and efficient penalty system for people violating traffic rules.
The loss of innocent lives of the roads is easily avoidable and the proposed legislation
seeks to initiate the process for safer and better road transport in the country.
Hence, this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RABINDRA KUMAR JENA
July 08, 2015.
54

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 67 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the National Road Safety Authority.
Clause 69 provides for remuneration and facilities to the Chairperson and members of the
National Road Safety Authority. Clause 85 provides for the constitution of National Road
Crash Victim Compensation Fund. Clause 86 provides for Central Government to provide
requisite sums to the National Road Safety Authority. Clause 90 provides for the constitution
of the State Road Safety Authority. Clause 103 provides for constitution of State Road Safety
Fund. The expenditure relating to constitution of State Road Safety Authority and State
Road Safety Fund shall be borne by the respective State Governments.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. At this stage, it is not possible to quantify the funds that may involve but it is
estimated that a sum of rupees five hundred crores may be involved as recurring expenditure
per annum.
Non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees one hundred crore may also be involved
for creating assets and infrastructure.
55

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 66 of the Bill empowers the National Road Safety Authority to amend the
Schedules to the Act. Clause 77 empowers the National Road Safety Authority to make
regulations for ensuring road safety. Clause 109 empowers the Central Government to make
rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. As the rules will relate to matters of detail
only, the delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
56

GMGIPMRND—2724LS(S-3)—30.11.2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to significantly reduce the high number of road accidents resulting in deaths and  injuries by
establishing a protective framework for all class of road users, including vulnerable
road users; fixing accountability on and establishing minimum safety
standards for road users, owners and vehicle manufacturers;
enhancing enforcement and improving over-all road
discipline and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Rabindra Kumar Jena, M.P.)