1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE CHANGE OF NAME OF AURANGABAD CITY OF THE STATE OF
MAHARASHTRA TO SAMBHAJI  NAGAR BILL, 2018
By
SHRI CHANDRAKANT KHAIRE, M.P.
A
BILL
 to change the name of Aurangabad city as Sambhaji Nagar in the State of Maharashtra
and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Change of Name of Aurangabad City of the State of
Maharashtra to Sambhaji Nagar Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. (1) The Central Government shall, in consultation with all agencies concerned, issue
a 'No-objection Certificate' for renaming Aurangabad city in the State of Maharashtra to
Sambhaji Nagar.
Bill  No. 248  of  2018
5
Change of the
Name of
Aurangabad to
Sambhaji
Nagar.
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(2) After receipt of 'No-objection Certificate', the State Government shall, by notification
in the State Gazette,  issue necessary orders for renaming of Aurangabad city as Sambhaji
Nagar for all purposes in records of the State.
3. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Government of Maharashtra to meet the
expenditure for changing of name of Aurangabad city to Sambhaji Nagar in all books,
records and documents of the State Government and for beautification and overall development
of the city.
4. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act, as may appear to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
5. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
The Central
Government
to take
appropriate
measures.
5
10
15
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Overriding
effect.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Aurangabad is an industrial centre which always had a Hindu majority. In the medieval
times, Mughal invaders occupied the city and named it after Aurangzeb. The reason for
altering the name of Aurangabad to Sambhaji Nagar is the sacrifice of Chhatrapati Sambhaji
Maharaj and his hard struggle to defeat Aurangzeb in Deccan by uniting Marathas. Heir of
Maratha King and Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj, his son Chhatrapati Sambhaji Raje
(Chhatrapati Sambhaji Raje Bhonsle) or Shambhaji (1657-1689) had prominent role in ending
the rule of most powerful enemy of Marathas i.e. Aurangzeb in India from the region of
Bijapur and Golkunda. Sambhaji Raje was very famous for his bravery, Sambhaji Maharaj had
fought one hundred and forty battles during his short rule and the important thing is that he
was never defeated. Battled by his heroics, Aurangzeb had taken a vow not to wear his
crown till Chhatrapati Sambhaji is captured.
The need is to change the name of Aurangabad city in the State of Maharashtra to
Sambhaji Nagar on account of sacrifice of Shri Sambhaji Maharaj on the lines of Aurangzeb
Road in Delhi to APJ Abdul Kalam Road, Faizabad and Allahabad in the State of
Uttar Pradesh to Ayodhya and Prayagraj, respectively.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; CHANDRAKANT KHAIRE
November 20, 2018.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides the Central Government to provide adequate funds to the
State Government of Maharashtra to meet the expenditure for changing the name of
Aurangabad city to Sambhaji Nagar in all records and documents of the State and for
beautification and overall development of the city. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring
expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore per annum would involve from the Consoli-
dated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
4

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to change the name of Aurangabad city as Sambhaji Nagar in the State of Maharashtra
and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Chandrakant Khaire, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—2523LS(S3)—20-12-2018.