Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
                   
                                                       
          
Bill No. 248 of  2022
THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
Dඋ. Kඋංඌඁඇൺඉൺඅ Sංඇ඀ඁ Yൺൽൺ ඏ,  M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Code on Social Security Act, 2020.
Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third  Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Code on Social Security (Amendment) Act, 2022. 
 (2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
   2. In section 2 of the Code on Social Security Act, 2020 (hereinafter referred as the 
principal Act) Code,—
Short title and commencement.

  ( i) in sub-section (20), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely—
 “Provided that the contractor shall include the agencies engaged by any establishment in 
the name of concessionaire or Licensee;”;
  (ii) for sub-section (78), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely—
 “( 78) "social security" means the measures of protection afforded to employees, 
unorganised workers, gig workers and platform workers to ensure access to healthcare 
and to provide income security including sickness benefits, unemployment benefits, 
old age benefit, employment injury benefit, family benefit, maternity benefit, invalidity 
benefit, survivors’ benefits and all other benefits as provided under the relevant 
provisions of this Code or under any other law for the time being in force;”; and
(iii) in sub-section (86) for the words "self-employed worker", the words, gig workers, 
platform workers, freelance workers, agricultural workers, self-employed workers shall be 
substituted.
  3. In section 53 of the Code,—
 ( a) in sub-section (1), for the words "five years", the words "two years" shall be 
substituted;
 ( b) in the first proviso for the words "three years", the words "two years" shall be 
substituted; and
 ( c) in the second proviso, for the words "five years", the words "two years" shall be 
substituted.
   
Amendment of 
section 53.

STATEMENT  OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 The Social Security Code, 2020 (the Code) has been enacted to amend and 
consolidate the laws relating to social security with the goal to extend social security to 
all employees and workers either in the organised or unorganised or any other sectors. The 
Code has vital provisions with respect to social security benefits to workers including gig 
workers. India’s obligation to provide a comprehensive social security cover for the workers 
may be traced to several provisions enshrined in the Constitution of India which include 
inter alia securing equal pay for equal work for both men and women; directions pertaining 
to the State’s responsibility for making effective provisions for assistance in cases of 
unemployment, old age, sickness and disablement; for securing just and humane conditions 
of work. 
 Further, to make the Code more inclusive and inline to various conventions and 
treaties, this amendment seeks to amend various provisions of the Code. Not only that, the 
standing committee also suggested some changes to the Code to make it more inclusive 
this amendment is necessary. Thus, the definition of ‘contractor’ does not include terms 
like ‘concessionaire or licensee’ which are largely used in Railways, Airports and other 
Infrastructural Sectors because the definition of ‘contractor’ is inline with the existing 
definition in the Contract Labour (Regulation & Abolition) Act, 1970 which had worked 
well over the years and retained in the code to maintain uniformity and this had been done 
in consultation with stakeholders. Thus, a proviso has been added to include ‘concessionaire 
or licensee’ under the ambit of the code. 
 In addition to it, the definition of ‘Social Security’ under the code is restrictive 
and do not include the nine components contained in the International Labour Organisation 
(ILO) Convention on Social Security (Minimum Standards) 1952. Keeping in mind the 
objective of the code, as the whole fulcrum of the code revolves around the definition 
of ‘social security’. It is thus absolutely necessary to make the definition inclusive and 
encompasses in it all the necessary requirements. Thus, this amendment seeks to make the 
definition more inclusive and inline to the mandate of ILO.
 Moreover, the definition is of ‘unorganised worker’ also require as it stated earlier 
in ‘the unorganised workers social security act 2008’ and the standing committee also 
recommend to make the definition more comprehensive and to include gig and platform 
worker in its ambit. Thus, this amendment encompass gig workers, platform workers, 
freelance workers, agricultural workers in the definition of unorganised worker.
 Also, the code prescribe the minimum service of five years for the benefit of gratuity. 
However, keeping in view the nature of India’s Labour market where most employees are 
employed for a short duration period only, it becomes difficult to avail any gratuity benefits 
as five years of continuous employment is required as per the extant provisions. This has 
become an incentive to employers to terminate employees before five years are over. 
Gratuity amount should therefore be made payable after completion of two years of service 
only. Thus, this amendment changes the five  years mandate to two years.
 Hence this Bill.
       Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                  KRISHNAPAL SINGH YADA V
      November 23, 2022.

ANNEXURE 
Eඑඍඋൺർඍ Fඋඈආ Tඁൾ Cඈൽൾ Oඇ Sඈർංൺඅ Sൾർඎඋංඍඒ Bංඅඅ, 2020.
(36 Oൿ 2020)
*                         *                            *          *
 2.   In this Code, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
 (20) "contractor", in relation to an establishment means a person, who — 
(i) undertakes to produce a given result for the establishment, other than a mere supply 
of goods or articles of manufacture to such establishment through contract labour; or (ii) 
supplies contract labour for any work of the establishment as mere human resource, and 
includes a sub-contractor;
 (78) "social security" means the measures of protection afforded to employees, 
unorganised workers, gig workers and platform workers to ensure access to healthcare 
and to provide income security, particularly in cases of old age, unemployment, sickness, 
invalidity, work injury, maternity or loss of a breadwinner by means of rights conferred on 
them and schemes framed, under this Code.
 ( 86) "unorganised worker" means a home-based worker, self-employed worker or 
a wage worker in the unorganised sector and includes a worker in the organised sector who 
is not covered by the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 or Chapters III to VII of this Code;
*                         *                            *          *
 53.  (1) Gratuity shall be payable to an employee on the termination of his 
employment after he has rendered continuous service for not less than five years,— 
(a) on his superannuation; or 
(b) on his retirement or resignation; or 
(c) on his death or disablement due to accident or disease; or 
(d) on termination of his contract period under fixed term employment; or 
(e) on happening of any such event as may be notified by the Central Government:
Provided that in case of working journalist as defined in clause of section 2 of the 
Working Journalists and Other Newspaper Employees (Condition of Service) and 
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1955, the expression "five years" occurring in this sub-
section shall be deemed to be three years: 
Provided further that the completion of continuous service of five years shall not be 
necessary where the termination of the employment of any employee is due to death or 
disablement or expiration of fixed term employment or happening of any such event as may 
be notified by the Central Government: 
Provided also that in the case of death of the employee, gratuity payable to him 
shall be paid to his nominee or, if no nomination has been made, to his heirs, and where 
any such nominees or heirs is a minor, the share of such minor, shall be deposited with 
the competent authority as may be notified by the appropriate Government who shall 
Other All-India 
Services.
Payment of 
gratuity.

invest the same for the benefit of such minor in such bank or other financial institution, 
as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government, until such minor attains majority.
*                         *                            *          *
*                         *                            *          *

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Code on Social Security Act, 2020.
————
(Dr. Krishnapal Singh Yadav, M.P .)