1
THE  COW  PROTECTION  AUTHORITY  BILL,  2016
By
SHRI GOPAL CHINAYYA SHETTY,  M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of an authority for the purpose of protection of cow and
its progeny in the country and similar authorities at the State level and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the  Cow Protection Authority Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of  India.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Authority” means the National Cow Protection Authority established under
section 4;
(b) “cow” includes its progeny and bulls and bullocks; and
Short title
and extent.
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 248 of  2016
5

2
(c) “ prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force or
any usage or custom to the contrary, no person shall cause any injury or kill or attempt to kill,
for any reason whatsoever, any cow in the country.
4. The Central Government shall establish an Authority to be known as the National
Cow Protection Authority for the protection and overall development of  cow  and its progeny.
5. (1) The Authority shall consist of :—
(i) a Chairperson, who shall be an expert in the discipline of rural economy
having not less than twenty years of experience in that field, to be appointed by
the Central Government; and
(ii) twenty members, having not less than ten years experience of teaching/
working in the field of rural economy and animal husbandry, to be nominated by
the Central Government in consultation with State Governments.
(2) The Chairperson and other members of the Authority shall hold office for a
period of five years.
(3) The Headquarters of the Authority shall be at Nagpur in the State of
Maharashtra.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of the
Chairperson and the members of the Authority shall be such as may be prescribed.
(5) The Central Government shall provide such number of officers and staff to
the Authority as may be required for its efficient functioning.
(6) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of the
officers and staff of the Authority shall be such as may be prescribed.
6. (1) The Central Government shall establish an Authority for the protection and
overall development of  cow and its progeny in each State/Union territory to be known as the
State Cow Protection Authority or the Union territory Cow Protection Authority, as the
case may be.
(2) The State Authority shall consist of:—
(i) a Chairperson, who  shall  be an expert in the discipline of rural
economy having not less than fifteen years of experience in that field, to be
appointed by the National Authority in such manner as may be prescribed; and
(ii)  ten members, having not less than ten years experience of teaching/
working in the field of rural economy and agriculture, to be nominated by the
National Authority in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The Chairperson and other members of the State Authority shall hold office
for a period of five years.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of the
Chairperson and the members of the State  Authority shall be such as may be prescribed.
(5) The State Authority shall function under the overall guidance and control of
the National Authority.
Prohibition of
Slaughter of
Cow and its
progeny.
Composition
of National
Cow
Protection
Authority.
Establishment
of National
Cow
Protection
Authority.
Establishment
of State Cow
Protection
Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

7. The Authority shall perform the following functions:—
(a) Collection and compilation of data pertaining to different varieties/hybrids
of cows found in the country;
(b) conducting comprehensive cow census once in every three years;
(c) monitoring slaughter-houses in the country with a view to ensuring that no
cow is slaughtered there;
(d) improving the breed of cows through various scientific processes including
artificial insemination;
(e) publicise and propagate the importance of cow for the Indian economy through
public awareness campaigns, newspapers and audio-visual media;
(f) promoting the use of modern animal husbandry techniques to increase milk
productivity of indigenous cow;
(g) promote and propagate the use of ayurvedic medicines prepared with the use
of contents of cow milk, gobar and gomutra among masses through print or electronic
media;
(h) functioning as a resource centre in respect of ayurvedic or other medicines
based on cow milk, gobar and gomutra and providing financial assistance for its
promotion;
(i) promoting and propagating the manufacturing of medicines with the help of
contents of cow milk, gobar and gomutra;
(j) increasing public awareness for greater use of cow dung as a manure as a
substitute for chemical fertilizers and making available the same to the farmers at
reasonable rates;
(k) providing assistance and guidance for developing local grazing grounds for
cows in such manner as may be prescribed;
(l) monitoring the implementation of ban on export of beef from slaughter houses
or from any other place in the country;
(m) promoting the production and export of milk and milk-based products;
(n) providing assistance to State Authorities for the loss of cow and other
infrastructure during natural calamities;
(o) providing for the care of sick, old and infirm cows;
(p) construction of cow shelters with the provision  of adequate facilities including
veterinary doctors and other support staff;
(q) providing financial assistance for construction of veterinary hospitals for
the treatment of cow;
(r) providing necessary assistance and guidelines for promotion of gobar gas
plants;
(s) tendering advice to State Governments/Union Territory Administrations on
issues arising out of implementation of the provisions of the Act; and
(t) such other functions as may be assigned to it by the Central Government.
8. The State/Union Territory Authority shall perform the following functions:—
(i) formation of special squads at district levels for enforcement of the provision
of ban on slaughter of cow and its progeny;
Functions of
the National
Authority.
Functions of
the State/
Union
Territory
Authority.
3
5
10
15
20
25
30
40
35

(ii) monitoring slaughter-houses within their jurisdiction with a view to ensuring that
no cow is slaughtered there;
(iii) taking the assistance of State Authorities in implementation of the provisions of
this Act;
(iv) moving the cows seized from the slaughter houses to the nearest cow shelter
constructed for the purpose; and
(v) such other functions as may be assigned to it by the National Authority.
9. (1) Whoever kills or attempts to kill or abets the killing of cow shall be punished with
rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than two years but may extend to
seven years and also with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees.
(2) Whoever causes injury to a cow shall be punished with fine which may extend to
five thousand rupees.
(3) Whoever indulges in export or import of cows for the purpose of slaughtering or
indulges in trading in beef or attempts to indulge in or abets such acts shall be punished with
imprisonment which may extend to five years and with fine which may extend to ten thousand
rupees.
10. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, provide adequate funds for the implementation of the provisions of the Act.
11. The provisions of this  Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law, for the time being in force, regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act.
12. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to
make rules.
Punishment.
Central
Government
to provide
adequate
funds.
Act not to be
in derogation
of other Laws.
4
5
10
15
20
25
30

5
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Our country is currently paying a heavy price for excessively interfering with the
nature. Wrong practices being adopted in agriculture have given rise to a number of issues
including unemployment, degradation of land and deteriorating water resources.
Deforestation has resulted in land erosion and also in lowering of water level. The ecological
experts are warning us against the ill-effects of reduction in Bio-diversity.
Cow and its progeny are the mainstay of agriculture and rural economy of the country.
Cows are considered sacred in our tradition and there is a good reason for that. Even then
we are unable to save them from extermination. Smuggling of livestock worth 150 million
rupees is taking place along Indo-Bangladesh border every year. According to an estimate,
approximately 80 per cent of the cow and its progeny have already been destroyed since
independence. It is our misfortune that we have undermined our culture from which we
have benefited so much. We still do not appreciate the kind of riches we can get if only
proper arrangements are put in place to protect and enrich our cows and their progeny. The
existence of 36,000 slaughter-houses in the country is a pointer to this.
Hybrid varieties yield more milk but become less productive in a short span. The
indigenous cows are important not only for their milk but also for other by-products such
as, cow dung, bones, horns, urine which have adequate medicinal importance. Community
animal husbandry can help run bio-gas plant having 85 to 125 cubic meter capacity. It may
be said that there is a strong linkage amongst rural industries, seven lakh villages and
promotion of cow progeny. Mosquito-resistant coils, phenyl, insecticides, distemper, earthen
tiles, shaving creams, face creams, utensil cleaning powders, tooth protection, herbal
shampoos and also medicines for stomach cancer, kidney disease, respiratory disease and
tuberculosis etc. are just some of the products that are based on materials derived from
cows. This proves that we can still generate employment on a very large scale to promote
rural economy on the basis of cow and its progeny. That is why, cow is regarded in our
country as gaumata and hence, there is need to make special provisions for protection,
promotion and development of cow and its progeny.
This Bill proposes to constitute a National Cow Protection Authority at the national
level and State Cow Protection Authority at the State level for protection and development
of cow and its progeny which is considered as the basis for the development of country and
rural economy.
Hence, this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; GOPAL CHINAYYA  SHETTY
August 9, 2016.

6
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a National Authority for
protection of cow and its progeny. Clause 5 provides for composition of the National
Authority and salary and allowances payable to the Chairperson and other members of the
Authority. Clause 6 provides for constitution of the State Authority in States and Union
territories for  protection and overall development of cow and its progeny in the States and
Union territories by the Central Government. Clause 7 provides that Central Authority shall
perform certain functions like collection and compilation of data pertaining to indigenous
cows, setting up of shelter with adequate facilities for cows, providing financial assistance
to the State Cow Protection Authority etc. Clause 8 provides for formation of special squads
for enforcement for protection of cows. Clause 10 provides that Central Government shall
release funds to Central Authority after due appropriation. The Bill, therefore, if enacted,
would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an
annual recurring expenditure of approximately rupees one thousand crore is likely to be
involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of one hundred crore rupees is also likely to be involved.

7
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only. Therefore, the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.

GMGIPMRND—2573LS(S3)—25-10-2016.
LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of an authority for the purpose of protection of cow and
its progeny in the country and similar authorities at the State level and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
—————
(Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty, M.P.)