1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI GOPAL CHINAYYA SHETTY, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment)  Act, 2015. Short title.
Bill No. 249 of 2015
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. After article 300A of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,
namely:—
"300B. (1) Notwithstanding anything in article 300A, the Parliament or the
legislature of a State shall not make any law which deprives any citizen to acquire,
hold and dispose of property in any part of the territory of India.
(2) Any law in force in the territory of India immediately before the
commencement of the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2015, in so far it is inconsistent
with the provisions of clause (1), shall, to the extent of such inconsistency, be void.".
Insertion of
new article
300B.
Right to
acquire, hold
and dispose of
property in
any part of
the territory
of India.
5

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Food, clothing and housing are the basic needs of human life. In our country, it is the
duty of the Government to provide basic facilities to its citizens. The Constitution provides
certain fundamental rights to all the citizens both individually as well as collectively.
However, even today, there are several States in our country where the citizens
belonging to another State don't have the right to purchase land or house. Every Indian
citizen should be conferred upon the right to purchase land or house anywhere in any part
of the territory of the country. Nonetheless, such arrangements have not yet been put in
place to enable citizens of our country so that they can purchase land and house in any part
in any State according to his own will.
Therefore, in order to attain the socialist objectives enshrined in the Constitution, the
provisions of right to purchase land or house anywhere in any State is being proposed for
incorporation in the Constitution.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; GOPAL CHINAYYA SHETTY
August 10, 2015.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2461LS(S3)—26-11-2015.