THE  NATIONAL LAW UNIVERSITIES OF INDIA BILL,  2016
By
PROF. (DR.) SUGATA BOSE,  M.P.
—————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
—————
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title and commencement
2. Declaration as Institutes of National Importance
3. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
T
HE UNIVERSITIES
4. Establishment of the Universities
5. Effect of  Incorporation
6. Objects of the Universities
7. Powers and Functions of the Universities
8. Admission and Appointment to the Universities
9. Teaching in the Universities
10. Visitor of the Universities
11. Chancellors of the Universities
12. Vice-Chancellors of the Universities.
CHAPTER III
T
HE NATIONAL COUNCIL
13. The National Council
14. The term of Office of the National Council
15. Functions and duties of the National Council
16. Meetings of the National Council
CHAPTER IV
A
UTHORITIES OF THE UNIVERSITIES
17. Authorities of the Universities
18. Governing Council and its term of the Office
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No.  249 of  2016
(i)

CLAUSES
19. Powers, Functions and Meetings of the Governing Council
20. Executive Council and its term of the Office
21. Powers, Functions and Meetings of the Executive Council
22. Academic Council and its term of the Office
23. Powers, Functions and Meetings of the Academic Council
24. Dispute Redressal Committee
25. Finance Committee.
CHAPTER V
O
FFICERS OF THE UNIVERSITIES
26. Officers of the Universities
27. The Vice-Chancellor
28. The Registrar
29. The Heads of the Department
30. Other Officers and Employees.
CHAPTER VI
M
ISCELLANEOUS
31. Selection Committees
32. Grants by the Central Government
33. Sponsored Schemes
34. Maintenance of a separate Bank Account
35. Maintenance of Account
36. Statutes and Regulations
37. Honorary Degrees
38. Withdrawal of Degree or Diploma
39. Discipline
40. Deemed Validity of Appointments
41. V acancy, etc. Not to Invalidate any act or Proceeding
42. Indemnity against General Proceedings
43. Overriding Effects
44. Power to remove Difficulties
45. Continuation of Authorities
46. Repeals.
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
THE SECOND SCHEDULE
(ii)

1
THE NATIONAL LAW UNIVERSITIES OF INDIA BILL, 2016
By
PROF. (DR.) SUGATA BOSE, M.P.
A
BILL
to establish, incorporate and declare certain law universities to be law universities of
national importance and to provide for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
WHEREAS  in furtherance of the noble cause of imparting global-standard legal education
in the country, various State Legislatures have passed laws to establish National Law
Universities;
A
ND Whereas it is desirable to consolidate the State laws providing for establishment
of National Law Universities into single Central Legislation with a view to minimize the
differences and difficulties  arising therein and harmonize their functioning;
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Law Universities of India Act, 2016.
Bill No.  249 of  2016
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title and
commencement.
5

2
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. Whereas the objects of the universities mentioned in the First Schedule are such as
to make them institutions of national importance, it is hereby declared that each such university
is an institution of national importance.
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:
(1) "Academic Council" means the Academic Council of the Universities;
(2) "Bar Council" means the Bar Council of respective States constituted under
the Advocates Act, 1961;
(3) "Bar Council of India" means the Bar Council of India constituted under the
Advocates Act, 1961;
(4) "Chancellor" means the Chancellor of the Universities:
(5) "The Chief Justice" when not referring to the  Chief Justice of India appointed
by the President of India under article 134 of the Constitution of India, means the
Chief Justice of the High Court of the respective State where the University is situated
and also includes and acting Chief Justice;
(6) "corresponding National University" in reference to a State university means
the national university mentioned in column 3 of the First Schedule against that State
university;
(7) "Executive Council" means the Executive Council of the Universities;
(8) "Finance Committee" means the Finance Committee of the Universities;
(9) "Governing Council" means the Governing Council of the Universities;
(10) "National Council" means National Council established under section 13;
(11) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(12) "Registrar" means the Registrar of the Universities;
(13) "Regulations" and "Statutes" in relation to any State University, means the
Regulations and Statutes, respectively, of the corresponding National Universities
made under this Act;
(14) "State University" means any of the Universities mentioned in column 2 of
the First Schedule;
(15) "Universities" means the National Law Universities of India, mentioned
under column 3 of the First Schedule; and
(16) "Vice-Chancellor" means the Vice-Chancellor of the Universities.
CHAPTER II
THE UNIVERSITIES
4. (1) Each of the universities mentioned in column 2 of the First Scheduled shall be
established as bodies corporate under this Act by the names respectively assigned to each
such university under column 3 of that Schedule having perpetual succession and a common
seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire and hold property, to
contract and sue and be sued by its name.
(2) The body corporate constituting each of the said universities shall consist of a
Chancellor, a Vice-Chancellor and other members of the Governing Council of the University.
Declaration of
Universities
under First
Schedule as
Institutions of
National
Importance.
Definitions.
Establishment
and
incorporation
of the
Universities.
25 of 1961.
25 of 19161.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
5. On and from the commencement of this Act,—
(a) any reference to a State University in any law, other than this Act or in any
contract or instrument, shall be deemed as a reference to the corresponding National
University;
(b) all property, movable and immovable, of or belonging to a State University
shall vest in the corresponding National University;
(c) all the rights and liabilities of a State University shall be transferred to, and be
the rights and liabilities of the corresponding National University; and
(d) every person employed by a State University immediately before such
commencement shall hold his office or service in the corresponding National University
for the same tenure,  at the same remuneration and upon the same terms and conditions
and with the same rights and privileges as to pension, leave, gratuity, provident fund
and other matters as he would have held if this Act had not been passed, and shall
continue to do so unless and until his employment is terminated or until such tenure,
remuneration and terms and conditions are duly altered by the Statutes:
Provided that if the alteration so made is not acceptable to such employee, his
employment may be terminated by the University in accordance with the terms of contract
with the employee or, if no provision is made therein  in this behalf, on payment to him by the
University, of compensation equivalent to three months' remuneration in the case of permanent
employees and one month's remuneration in the case of other employees.
6. The objects of the Universities shall be—
(a) to provide multi-disciplinary education in legal studies, keeping in view the
demands of the global economy and the needs of the domestic society;
(b)  to evolve and impart comprehensive legal education at all levels to achieve
excellence;
(c) to organise advanced studies and promote research in all branches of law;
(d) to disseminate legal knowledge, legal processes and their role in national
development by organising lectures, seminars, symposia, workshops and conferences;
(e) to promote cultural, legal and ethical values with a view to promote and foster
the rule of law and the objectives enshrined in the Constitution of India;
(f) to improve the ability to analyse and present for the benefit of the public,
contemporary issues of public concern and their legal implications;
(g) to liaise with institutions of higher learning and research in India and abroad;
(h) to publish periodicals, treatises, study books, reports, journals and other
literature on all subjects relating to law;
(i) to hold examinations and confer degrees and other academic distinctions;
(j) to promote legal awareness in the community for achieving social and economic
justice for all;
(k) to undertake studies and training projects relating to law, legislation and
judicial institutions;
(l) to promote inter-disciplinary study of law in relation to management,
technology, international co-operation and development;
(m) to develop in the students and the research scholars a sense of responsibility
to serve society in the field of law by developing skills in regard to advocacy, legal
services, legislation, parliamentary practices, law reforms and other such matters; to
make law and legal processes efficient instruments of social development;
Effect of
incorporation.
Objects of the
Universities.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(n) to assist and provide advice to the Central and the State Governments on
matters pertaining to law, legislation and judicial institutions; and
(o) to do all such things as are incidental, necessary or conducive to the attainment
of all or any of the objectives of the Universities.
7. The powers of the University shall be—
(a) to administer and manage the University and such centres for study, research,
education and instructions as are necessary for furtherance of the objects of the
University;
(b) to provide for instructions in all branches of knowledge or learning pertaining
to law and allied subjects as the University may deem fit;
(c) to make provisions for research and for the advancement and dissemination
of knowledge of law including through distance learning and continuing education
programmes;
(d) to hold examinations and to confer degrees, titles, diplomas and other
academic distinctions on persons subject to such conditions as the University may
determine and to withdraw any such degrees, titles, diplomas and other academic
distinctions subject to such conditions as the University may determine;
(e) to fix, demand and receive fees and other charges as may be prescribed;
(f) to institute and maintain halls and hostels and to recognize places of residence
for the students of the University and to withdraw such recognition accorded to any
such place of residence;
(g) to establish special centres, specialized study centres or other units for
research and instructions as are, in the opinion of the University, necessary in
furtherance of its objects;
(h) to supervise and control the residence and to regulate the discipline of the
students and staff of the University and to make arrangements for promoting their
health and general welfare;
(i) to make such special arrangements as are necessary in respect of residence,
discipline and teaching of women students;
(j) to create academic, technical, administrative, ministerial and other posts and
to make appointments thereto;
(k) to regulate and enforce discipline among the employees of the University
and to take such disciplinary measures as may be deemed necessary;
(l) to institute professorships, associate professorships, assistant professorships,
readerships, lecturerships and any other teaching, academic or research posts required
by the University;
(m) to appoint persons as professors, associate professors, assistant professors,
readers, lecturers or otherwise as teaching and researchers of the University and as
other classes of employees;
(n) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, prizes and medals;
(o) to provide for printing, reproduction and publication of research and other
works and to organize exhibitions;
(p) to sponsor and undertake research in all aspects of law, justice and social
development;
(q)  to co-operate with any other organizations in the matter of education, training
and research in law, justice, social development and allied subjects for such purposes
Powers of the
University.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
as may be agreed upon on such terms and conditions as the University may from time
to time determine;
(r) to co-operate with institutions of higher learning in any part of the world
having objects wholly or otherwise similar to those of the University by exchange of
teachers and scholars and generally in such manner as may be conducive to the
common objects;
(s) to regulate the expenditure and to manage accounts of the University;
(t)  to establish and maintain within the premises of the University or elsewhere
such schools, colleges and study halls as the University may consider necessary and
adequately furnish the same to establish and maintain such libraries and reading
rooms as may appear convenient or necessary for the University;
(u) to receive grants, subventions, subscriptions, donations and gifts for the
purpose of the University consistent with the objects for which is the University
established;
(v) to purchase, take on lease, or accept as gifts, or otherwise any land or building
or works, which may be necessary or convenient for the purpose of the University and
on such terms and conditions as it may think fit and proper and to construct or alter
and maintain any such building or works;
(w) to sell, exchange, lease or otherwise dispose of all or any portion of the
properties of the University,  movable or immovable, on such terms and conditions as
it may think fit and proper without prejudice to the interests and activities of the
University;
(x) to draw and accept, to make and endorse, to discount and negotiate promissory
notes, bills of exchanges, cheques or other negotiable instruments;
(y) to execute conveyances, transfers, re-conveyances, mortgages, leases,
licences and agreements in respect of property, movable or immovable including
government securities belonging to the University or to be acquired for the purpose of
the University;
(z) to appoint in order to execute an instrument or transact any business of the
University any person as it may deem fit;
(za) to give up and cease from carrying on any classes or departments of the
University;
(zb) to enter into any agreement with the Central Government, State Government,
the University Grants Commission or other authorities for receiving grants;
(zc) to accept grant of money, securities or property of any kind or description
on such terms and conditions as may be deemed expedient;
(zd) to raise and borrow money on bonds, mortgages, promissory notes or other
obligations or securities founded or based upon all or any of the properties and assets
of the University or without any securities and upon such terms and conditions as it
may think fit and to pay out of the funds of the University, all expenses incidental to
the raising of money, and to repay and redeem any money borrowed or debt made;
(ze) to invest the funds of the University or money entrusted to the University in
or upon such securities or deposits and in such manner as it may deem fit and from time
to time transpose any investments;
(zf) to make such Statutes,  Regulations and other instruments as may, from time
to time, be considered necessary for regulating the affairs and the management of the
University and its properties and to alter, modify and to rescind them;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
(zg) to constitute for the benefit of the academic, technical, administrative and
other staff, in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed
pension, insurance, provident fund and gratuity and other schemes as it may deem fit
and to make such grants as it may think fit for the benefit of the staff of the University
and to aid in the establishment and support of associations, institutions, funds and
trusts for the benefit of the staff and the students of the University;
(zh) to confer honorary degress and other distinctions in the manner laid down
in the regulations;
(zi) to delegate all or any of its powers to the Vice-Chancellor or any committee
or to any one or more members of the Councils of the University or its officers; and
(zj)  to do all such other acts and things as the University may consider necessary,
conducive or incidental to the attainment or enlargement of the aforesaid objects or
any of them.
8.  (1) The Universities shall, subject to the provisions of this Act and the regulations,
be open to all persons of all sex and of whatever race, creed, caste or class, place of birth and
no test or condition shall be imposed as to religious belief or profession in appointing
members of the authorities of the Universities or any other office bearers, admitting students,
appointing teachers or workers or in any other connection whatsoever.
(2)  Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall require the Universities—
(a) to admit to any course of study any person who does not possess the
prescribed academic qualification or standard;
(b) to retain on the rolls of the Universities any student whose academic record
is below the minimum standard required for the award of a degree or other academic
distinction; or
(c) to admit any person or retain any student whose conduct is prejudicial to the
interest of the Universities or the rights and privileges of other students and teachers.
(3) No bequest, donation or transfer of any property, which involves conditions or
obligations opposed to the spirit and object of this section, shall be accepted by any University.
(4) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2), the State Government may, by
order, direct that the University shall reserve such per cent. of seats therein—
(a) for resident students of the State, as the State Government shall in that order
define and specify, which shall not exceed fifty per cent. of the total seats of the
University excluding seats reserved in clause (b);
(b) for the students belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes,
Other Backward Classes and any other backward class as the State Government may
notify in that order.
9. (1) All teaching at each of the Universities shall be conducted by or in the name of
the respective Universities in accordance with the Statutes and Regulations made in this
behalf.
(2) All teaching in connection with the degrees, diplomas and certificates of the
University shall be conducted in accordance with the syllabi prescribed by the Regulations.
(3) The courses and curricula and the authorities responsible for organizing the teaching
of such courses and curricula shall be such as prescribed by the Regulations.
10. (1) The Chief Justice of India shall be the Visitor of every University.
(2) The Visitor may appoint one or more persons, who shall be senior Judges of the
Supreme Court, to review the work and progress of any University and to hold inquiries into
the affairs thereof and to report thereon in such manner as the Visitor may direct.
Admission and
Appointment
to the
Universities.
Teaching in
the
Universities.
Visitor of the
Universities.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
(3) Upon receipt of any such report, the Visitor may take such action and issue such
directions as he considers necessary in respect of any of the matters dealt with in the report
and the University shall be bound to comply with such directions.
(4) The Visitor when present shall preside over the convocations of the University and
the meetings of the Governing Council.
11. (1) The Chief Justice shall be the Chancellor of every University as mentioned in
the Second Schedule.
(2) The Chancellor, when present and in the absence of the Visitor, shall preside over
the convocations of the University and the meetings of the Governing Council.
(3) The Chancellor may cause an inspection to be made by such person or persons as
he may direct, of the University, its buildings, libraries and equipment and of any institution
maintained by the University, and also of the examinations, teaching and other work conducted
or done by the University and cause an inquiry to be made in the like manner in respect of
any matter connected with the administration and finances of the University.
(4) The Chancellor may offer such advice to the University as he may deem fit with
reference to the result of such inspection or inquiry.
(5) The University shall communicate to the Chancellor the action taken or proposed
to be taken on such advice.
(6) In case of differences among the authorities or officers of the University on any
matter which cannot be otherwise resolved, the decision of the Chancellor shall be final.
(7) The Chancellor may invite a person or persons of eminence in law and legal education
to advise the University in relation to affairs of the University as and when he deems it
necessary.
12. (1) There shall be a Vice-Chancellor of the University who shall be appointmented
in the manner as provided in section 27.
(2) The term of the Vice-Chancellor shall be for a period of five years, and shall be
eligible for re-appointment till he attains the age of seventy years.
CHAPTER III
THE  NATIONAL  COUNCIL
13. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government shall, by notification in
the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, there shall be established a central body to be
called the National Council.
(2) The National Council shall consist of the members, namely:—
(a) the Union Minister of  Law and Justice, Chairperson, ex officio;
(b) the Vice-Chancellor of each University, member, ex officio;
(c) the Registrar of each University, member, ex officio;
(d) the Chairman, University Grants Commission, member, ex officio;
(e) the Chairman, Bar Council of India, member, ex officio;
(f) two persons to represent the Union Ministry of Law and Justice, two persons
to represent the Ministries of Finance and Human Resource Development and one
person to represent any other Ministry to be nominated by the Central Government;
(g) not less than three, but not more than five, persons to be nominated by the
Visitor, who shall be persons having special knowledge or practical experience in field
of law, legislation or social sciences;
Chancellors of
the
Universities.
Vice-
Chancellors of
the
Universities.
The National
Council.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

8
(h) three Members of Parliament, of whom two shall be from the House of the
People and one from the Council of States to be elected from amongst the members of
each House.
(3) An officer of the Ministry of Law and Justice of the Central Government shall be
nominated by that Government to act as the Secretary of the Council.
14. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this section, the term of office of a member of the
National Council shall be three years from the date of his nomination or election, as the case
may be.
(2) A member of the National Council referred to in clause (f) of sub-section (2) of
section 13 shall hold office during the pleasure of the Central Government.
(3) The term of office of a member elected under clause (h) of sub-section (2) of section 13
shall expire as soon as he ceases to be a member of the House of Parliament which he
represents.
(4) The term of office of a member nominated or elected to fill a casual vacancy shall
continue for the remainder of the term of the member in whose place he has been nominated
or elected.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, an outgoing member shall,
unless the Central Government otherwise directs, continue in office until another person is
nominated or elected as a member in his place.
15. (1) It shall be the general duty of the National Council to co-ordinate the activities
of all the Universities.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), the National Council shall
perform the following functions, namely:—
(a) mentoring of the Universities in all spheres;
(b) to advise on matters relating to the common admission test to be conducted
by the Universities and to co-ordinate and work harmoniously with the Legal Education
Committee of the Bar Council of India to decide on matters of academic standards and
other academic matters;
(c) to lay down policy regarding cadres, methods of recruitment and conditions
of service of employees, institution of scholarships and freeships, levying of fees and
other matters of common interest;
(d) to examine the development plans of each University and to approve such of
them as are considered necessary and also to indicate broadly the financial implications
of such approved plans;
(e) to examine the annual budget estimates of each University and to recommend
to the Central Government the allocation of funds for that purpose;
(f) to advise the Visitor, if so required, in respect of any function to be performed
by him under this Act;
(g) to decide upon inter-University disputes and student grievances referred to
it; and
(h) to perform such other functions as are assigned to it by or under this Act.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the Bar Council of India shall
have the same rights and privileges as envisaged in sections 7(1)(h) and 7(1)(i) of the
Advocates Act, 1961 and no rule made by the National Council shall be in direct contravention
of the rules framed by the Bar Council of India for that purpose unless there is sufficient
reason to the contrary in the best interests of the legal education.
The term of
office of the
National
Council.
Functions and
duties of the
National
Council.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

9
16. (1) The Chairperson of the National Council shall ordinarily preside at the meetings
of the National Council.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Chairperson of the National Council to ensure that the
decisions taken by the National Council are implemented.
(3) The Chairperson shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as
are assigned to him by this Act.
(4) The National Council shall meet at least once every year and the date shall be fixed
by the Chairperson, who shall give not less than fifteen days' notice to all the members.
CHAPTER IV
AUTHORITIES OF THE UNIVERSITIES
17. Each University shall have the following authorities, namely:
(a) the Governing Council;
(b) the Executive Council;
(c) the Academic Council;
(d) the Dispute Redressal Committee;
(e) the Finance Committee; and
(f) such other authorities as may, from time to time, be declared as such by the
Statutes.
18. (1) The Governing Council shall be the supreme authority of the University and
shall consist of the following persons, namely:—
(a) the Chancellor;
(b) the Vice-Chancellor;
(c) two persons from amongst the sitting Judges of the High Court of the
respective State, nominated by the Chancellor;
(d) one person from amongst the former Judges of the High Court of the respective
State, nominated by the Chancellor;
(e) the Chairman, Bar Council of India;
(f) the Chairman of the Bar Council of the respective State;
(g) two pre-eminent persons in the disciplines of social sciences or humanities,
nominated by the Chancellor;
(h) two pre-eminent persons in the legal and educational fields, nominated by
the Chancellor;
(i) the Chief Secretary to the State Government concerned;
(j) the Principal Secretary, Finance Department of the State Government
concerned;
(k) the Secretary of Higher Education of the State Government concerned; and
(l) the Principal Secretary of Law, Justice and Legislative Affairs of the
State Government concerned.
(2) Where a person has become a member of the Governing Council by reason of the
office or appointment he holds, his membership shall terminate when he ceases to hold that
office or appointment.
Meetings of
the National
Council.
Authorities of
the
Universities.
Governing
Council and its
term of the
Office.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

10
(3) The term of office of the nominated members of the Governing Council shall be
three years.
(4) A member of the Governing Council shall cease to be a member if he resigns or
becomes of unsound mind or becomes insolvent or is convicted of a criminal offence involving
moral turpitude.
(5) A member, other than the Vice-Chancellor, shall cease to be member if he accepts a
full-time appointment in the University, or if he, not being an ex-officio member, fails to attend
three consecutive meetings of the Governing Council without the leave of the Chancellor.
(6) A member of the Governing Council, other than an ex-officio member, may resign
from his office by a letter addressed to the Chancellor and such resignation shall take effect
as soon as it has been accepted by the Chancellor.
(7) Any vacancy in the Governing Council shall be filled by nomination by the respective
nominating authority.
19. (1) The Governing Council shall be the plenary authority of the University and
shall formulate and review from time to time the broad policies and programmes of the
University and devise measures for the improvement and development of the University and
shall also have the following powers and functions, namely:—
(a) to consider and pass the annual report, financial statement and the budget
estimates prepared by the Executive Council and to adopt them with or without
modification;
(b) to make Statutes concerning the administration of the affairs of the University
including prescribing the procedures to be followed by the authorities and the officers
of the University in the discharge of their functions.
(2) The Governing Council shall meet at least once in a year, to be presided over by the
Chancellor of the University, and in his absence, by any senior judge of the High Court to be
nominated by the Chancellor.
(3) An annual meeting of the Governing Council shall be held on a date to be fixed by
the Executive Council, unless some other date has been fixed by the Governing Council in
respect of any year.
(4) A report on the working of the University during the previous year, together with a
statement of receipt and expenditure, the balance sheet as audited, and the financial estimates
shall be presented by the Vice-Chancellor to the Governing Council at its annual meeting.
(5) The meetings of the Governing Council shall be called by the Chancellor or by the
Vice-Chancellor either on his own or at the request of not less than ten members of the
Governing Council.
(6) For every meeting of the Governing Council, fifteen days' notice shall be given.
(7) One-half of the members existing on the rolls of the Governing Council shall form
the quorum.
(8) Each member shall have one vote and if there be equality of votes on any question
to be determined by the Governing Council, the person presiding over the meeting shall, in
addition, have a casting vote.
(9) In case of difference of opinion among the members, the opinion of the majority
shall prevail.
(10) If urgent action by the Governing Council becomes necessary, the Vice-Chancellor
may permit the business to be transacted by circulation of papers to the members of the
Governing Council.
Powers,
functions and
meetings of
the Governing
Council.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

11
(11) The action proposed under sub-section ( 10) shall not be taken unless agreed to
by a majority of members of the Governing Council.
(12) The action taken under sub-section (11) shall be forthwith intimated to all members
of the Governing Council.
(13) In case the authority concerned fails to arrive at a decision, the matter shall be
referred to the Chancellor, whose decision shall be final.
20. (1) The Executive Council shall consist of the following persons, namely:—
(a) the Vice-Chancellor of the University;
(b) the Chairman of the Bar Council of India;
(c) the Chairman of the Bar Council of the respective State;
(d) the Principal Secretary, Finance Department of the State Government
concerned;
(e) the Secretary of Higher Education of the State Government concerned;
(f) the Principal Secretary, Law, Justice and Legislative Affairs, of the State
Government concerned;
(g) three Professors of Law, who shall be eminent jurists, from outside the
University to be nominated by the Chancellor;
(h) two teachers of the University  to be nominated by the Vice-Chancellor, of
whom one shall be from amongst the professors and one from amongst the associate
professors of the University, by rotation, for a period of one year.
(2) The Vice-Chancellor shall be the Chairperson of the Executive Council.
(3) Where a person has become a member of  the Executive Council by reason of the
office or appointment he holds, his membership shall terminate when he ceases to hold that
office or appointment.
(4) The term of office of the nominated members of the Executive Council shall be three
years.
(5) A member of the Executive Council shall cease to be a member if he resigns or
becomes of unsound mind or becomes insolvent or is convicted of a criminal offence involving
moral turpitude.
(6) A member, other than the Vice-Chancellor or teacher, shall also cease to be a member
if he accepts a full-time appointment in the University, or if he, being a teacher fails to attend
three consecutive meetings of the Executive Council without the leave of the Vice-Chancellor.
(7) A member of the Executive Council, other than an ex-officio member, may resign
from his office by a letter addressed to the Vice-Chancellor, and such resignation shall take
effect as soon as it has been accepted by him.
(8) Any vacancy in the Executive Council shall be filled by nomination by the respective
nominating authority and on expiry of the period of vacancy, such nomination shall cease to
be effective.
21. (1) The Executive Council shall be the chief executive authority of the University
and, as such, shall have all powers necessary to administer the University subject to the
provisions of this Act and the Statutes made thereunder; and may make Regulations for that
purpose  and also with respect to matters provided hereunder.
(2) The Executive Council shall have the following powers and functions, namely:—
(a) to recommend the names of three persons to the Chancellor for appointment
as Registrar of the University on the recommendations of the selection committee
constituted for that purpose by it and headed by the Vice-Chancellor;
Executive
Council.
Powers,
functions and
meetings of
the Executive
Council.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

12
(b) to prepare and present to the Governing Council at its annual meeting:—
(i) a report on the working of the University;
(ii) a Statement of accounts as under section 35; and
(iii) budget proposals for the ensuing academic year;
(c) to manage and regulate the finances, investments, properties, business and
all other administrative affairs of the University and for that purpose, constitute
committees and delegate the powers to such committees or such officers of the
University as it may deem fit;
(d) to invest any money belonging to the University, including any unapplied
income in such stock, funds, shares or securities, as it may, from time to time, think fit,
or in the purchase of immovable property in India, with the like power of varying such
investments from time to time;
(e) to transfer or accept transfer of any moveable or immovable property on
behalf of the University;
(f) to enter into, amend, execute and cancel contracts on behalf of the University
and for that purpose to appoint such officers as it may think fit;
(g) to provide the buildings, premises, furniture and apparatus and other means
needed for carrying on the work of the University;
(h) to entertain, adjudicate upon, and if it thinks fit, to redress any grievances of
the officers, teachers, students and employees of the University;
(i) to create teaching, administrative, ministerial and other necessary posts, to
determine the number of and emoluments for such posts, to specify the minimum
qualifications for appointment to such posts on such terms and conditions of service
as may be prescribed by the Regulations made in this behalf;
(j) to appoint examiners and moderators, and if necessary to remove them and to
fix their fees, emoluments and travelling and other allowances, after consulting the
Academic Council;
(k) to select a common seal for the University; and
(l) to exercise such other powers and to perform such other duties as may be
considered necessary, or imposed on it by or under this Act.
(3) The Executive Council shall meet, at least, once in three months and not less than
fifteen days notice shall be given of such meetings.
(4) The meeting of the Executive Council shall be called by the Registrar under
instructions of the Vice-Chancellor or at the request of not less than five members of the
Executive Council.
(5) One-half of the members of the Executive Council shall form the quorum at any
meeting.
(6) In case of difference of opinion among the members, the opinion of the majority
shall prevail.
(7) Each member of the Executive Council shall have one vote and if there be equality
of votes on any question to be determined by the Executive Council, the Chairperson of the
Executive Council or as the case may be, the member presiding over that meeting shall, in
addition, have a casting vote.
(8) Every meeting of the Executive Council shall be presided over by the Vice-Chancellor
or in his absence by a member chosen by the members present.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

13
(9) If urgent action by the Executive Council becomes necessary, the Vice-Chancellor
may permit the business to be transacted by circulation of papers to the members of the
Executive Council.
(10) The action so proposed to be taken shall not be taken unless agreed to by a
majority of members of the Executive Council.
(11) The action so taken shall be forthwith intimated to all the members of the Executive
Council.
(12) In case the authority concerned fails to take a decision, the matter shall be referred
to the Chancellor whose decision shall be final.
22. (1) The Academic Council shall consist of the following persons, namely:—
(a) the Vice-Chancellor who shall be the Chairman;
(b) three persons from outside the University from amongst educationists of
repute or men of letters or members of the legal profession or eminent public men, who
are not in the service of the University, to be nominated by the Chancellor;
(c) a nominee of the Bar Council of India;
(d) Heads of  all the Departments of the University;
(e) two members of the teaching staff, one each respectively representing the
associate and assistant professors of the University to be, nominated by the
Vice-Chancellor for a period of one year on rotation.
(2) The term of the members, other than ex-officio members and those whose term is
specified by clause (e) of sub-section (1), shall be three years.
23. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, Statutes and Regulations and overall
supervision of the Executive Council, the Academic Council shall manage the academic
affairs and matters in the University and,  in particular, shall have the following powers and
functions, namely:—
(a) to report on any matter referred or delegated to it by the Governing Council
or the Executive Council;
(b) to make recommendations to the Executive Council with regard to the creation,
abolition or classification of teaching posts in the University and the emoluments
payable and the duties attached thereto;
(c) to formulate and modify or revise schemes for the organization of the faculties,
and to assign to such faculties their respective subjects and also to report to the
Executive Council as to the expediency of the abolition or sub-division of any faculty
or the combination of one faculty with another;
(d) to recommend arrangements for the instruction and examination of persons
other than those enrolled in the University;
(e) to promote research within the University and to require, from time to time,
reports on such research;
(f) to consider proposals submitted by the faculties;
(g) to lay down policies for admission to the University;
(h) to recommend recognized diplomas and degrees of other Universities and
institutions and to determine their equivalence in relation to the certificates, diplomas
and degrees of the University;
(i) to fix, subject to any conditions accepted by the Governing Council, the time,
mode and conditions of competition for fellowships, scholarships and other prizes and
to recommend for award of the same;
Academic
Council.
Powers,
functions and
meetings of
the Academic
Council.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

14
(j) to make recommendations to the Executive Council in regard to the appointment
of examiners and, if necessary, their removal, fixation of their fees, emoluments, travelling
and other expenses;
(k) to recommend arrangements for the conduct of examinations and the dates
for holding them;
(l) to declare or review the result of the various examinations or to appoint
committees or officers to do so, and to make recommendations regarding the conferment
or grant of degrees, honours, diplomas, licences, titles and marks of honor;
(m) to recommend stipends, scholarships, medals and prizes and to make other
awards in accordance with the Regulations and such other conditions as may be
attached to the awards;
(n) to approve or revise lists of prescribed or recommeded textbooks and to
publish the same and syllabus at the prescribed courses of study;
(o) to approve such forms and the registers as are, from time to time, required by
the Regulations;
(p) to formulate, from time to time, the desired standards of legal education to be
adhered to in drawing up the curriculum/syllabi for being taught in the University; and
(q) to perform, in relation to academic matters, all such duties and to do all such
acts as may be necessary for the proper implementation of the provisions of this Act
and the Regulations made thereunder.
(2) The Academic Council shall meet as often as may be necessary, but not less than
two times during an academic year.
(3) One-half of the existing members of the Academic Council shall form the quorum for
a meeting of the Academic Council.
(4) In case of difference of opinion among the members, the opinion of the majority
shall prevail.
(5) Each member of the Academic Council, including the Chairperson of the Academic
Council, have one vote and if there be an equality of votes on any question to be determined
by the Academic Council, the Chairman of the Academic Council, or, as the case may be, the
member presiding over the meetings, shall in addition, have a casting vote.
(6) Every meeting of the Academic Council shall be presided over by the Vice-Chancellor
and in his absence by a member chosen in the meeting to preside on the occasion.
(7) If urgent action by the Academic Council becomes necessary, the Chairperson of
the Academic Council may permit the business to be transacted by circulation of the papers
to the members of the Academic Council.
(8) The action proposed to be taken shall not be taken unless agreed to, by a majority
of the members of the Academic Council.
(9) The action so taken shall forthwith be intimated to all the members of the Academic
Council.
(10) In case the authority concerned fails to take a decision, the matter shall be referred
to the Chancellor whose decision shall be final.
24. (1) There shall be a Dispute Redressal Committee to redress the dispute that may
arise between the management and staff, management and students, teachers and students
and teachers and management, comprising:—
(a) the Vice-Chancellor or his nominee;
(b) one member of the Executive Council, nominated by the Chancellor;
Dispute
Redressal
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

15
(c) one member, nominated by the Chancellor, who is not part of any of the
council or committees to the University and who is a distinguished law academic with
at least fifteen years' experience in a similar institution.
(2) The Registrar shall be the Convenor of the Disputes Redressal Committee.
(3) Where the dispute relates to a complaint of sexual harassment, the Dispute Redressal
Committee shall constitute an ad hoc Sexual Harassment Committee, which shall consist of
such members, as may be prescribed, and shall dissolve upon resolution of the complaint.
(4) The Executive Council or any smaller body that may be constituted by the Executive
Council for this purpose shall be the appellate authority.
(5) The rules and regulations governing the functioning of the Dispute Redressal
Committee and the appellate authority shall be framed by the Executive Council.
25. (1) There shall be a Finance Committee constituted by the Executive Council
consisting of the following, namely:—
(a) the Vice-Chancellor;
(b) the Principal Secretary, Finance Department of the State Government; and
(c) three other members to be nominated by the Executive Council from amongst
its members of whom one shall be a professor.
(2) The members of the Finance Committee, other than the Vice-Chancellor and the
Professor, shall hold office so long as they continue as members of the Executive Council.
(3) The functions and duties of the Finance Committee shall be as follows:—
(a) to examine and scrutinize the annual budget of the University and to make
recommendations on financial matters to the Executive Council;
(b) to consider all proposals for new expenditure and to make recommendations
to the Executive Council;
(c) to consider the periodical statements of accounts as formed under section 35
and to review the finances of the University from time to time and to consider re-
appropriation statements and audit reports and to make recommendations to the
Executive Council;
(d) to give its views and to make recommendations to the Executive Council on
any financial question affecting the University either on its own initiative or on reference
from the Executive Council or the Vice-Chancellor.
(4) The Finance Committee shall meet at least thrice in every year and three members of
the Finance Committee shall form the quorum.
(5) The Vice-Chancellor shall preside over the meetings of the Finance Committee and,
in his absence, a member  elected at the meeting shall preside.
(6) The decision of the Finance Committee shall be taken by the majority of the members
present.
CHAPTER V
OFFICERS OF THE UNIVERSITIES
26. Each University shall have the following officers, namely:
(a) the Vice-Chancellor;
(b) the Registrar;
(c) the Heads of the Departments;
Finance
Committee.
Officers of the
Universities.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

16
(d) such other officers as may, from time to time, be declared as such by the
Statutes and Regulations.
27. (1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be an academic person and an outstanding scholar in
law or an eminent jurist and shall be a whole-time salaried officer of the University.
(2) The Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed  by  the Chancellor on the recommendations
of the Governing Council from out of a panel of not less than three persons recommended
(the names being arranged in the alphabetical order) by a Selection Committee constituted
under sub-section ( 3);
Provided that if the Chancellor does not approve of any of the persons so recommended,
he may call for fresh recommendations.
(3) The Selection Committee referred to in sub-section (2) shall consist of three members
of whom one shall be nominated by the Executive Council, one by the Chairman, University
Grants Commission and one by the Chancellor from amongst the retired or serving Judges of
the High Court of the respective State.
(4) The person nominated to the Selection Committee by the Chancellor shall be the
Convenor of the Selection Committee;
Provided that no person who is an employee of the University shall be nominated as
the member of the Selection Committee.
(5) The Vice-Chancellor shall hold office for a term of five years, or such less period as
the Governing Council may decide, from the date on which he enters upon his office, or until
he attains the age of seventy years, whichever is earlier, and he shall be eligible for re-
appointment for further term till he attains the age of seventy years;
Provided that the Chancellor may require the Vice-Chancellor after his term has expired,
to continue in office for such period, not exceeding a total period of one year, as may be
specified by him.
(6) It shall be competent for the Chancellor to accept the resignation of the Vice-
Chancellor.
(7) The emoluments and other conditions of service of the Vice-Chancellor shall be as
prescribed by Statutes.
(8) If the offfice of the Vice-Chancellor becomes vacant due to death, resignation or
otherwise, or if he is unable to perform his duties due to ill health or any other cause, the
Chancellor shall have the authority to designate a professor of the University to perform the
functions of the Vice-Chancellor until  the new Vice-Chancellor assumes his office or until the
existing Vice-Chancellor attends to the duties of his office, as the case may be:
(9) The Vice-Chancellor shall be the academic head and principal executive officer of
the University and shall—
(a) ensure that the provisions of this Act, Statutes and Regulations are duly
observed, and he shall have all powers as are necessary for that purpose;
(b) convene the meetings of the Governing Council, the Executive Council, the
Academic Council and shall perform all other acts, as may be necessary to give effect
to the provisions of this Act;
(c) preside over the meetings of the Governing Council in the absence of the
Chancellor;
(d) be the competent authority to appoint the teachers, librarians, finance officer
and other officers in consultation with the Chancellor on the recommendations of the
Selection Committee appointed by the Executive Council thereof for that purpose in
accordance with the guidelines prescribed;
The Vice-
Chancellor.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

17
(e) be the competent authority to take disciplinary action against the above
officers in accordance with the procedure prescribed;
(f) have all powers relating to the maintenance of proper discipline in the
University.
(g) if, in his opinion, any emergency has arisen which requires that immediate
action be taken,  he shall take such action as he may deem fit and shall report the same
for confirmation in the next meeting of the authority which, in the ordinary course,
would have dealt with the matter.
28. (1) The Registrar, who shall be an academic person in law not below the rank of a
Professor, shall be appointed by the Chancellor on the recommendation of the selection
committee. Constituted by the Executive Council and headed by the Vice-Chancellor, on
such terms and conditions of service as the selection committee may specify subject to the
provisions of the Statutes and Regulations.
(2) The Registrar shall,—
(a) be ex-officio Secretary of all the authorities, committees and other bodies of
the University and shall also be the Convenor of all the meetings, other than those
which the Vice-Chancellor shall convene, and shall prepare notes and maintain the
minutes of the meeting;
(b) be the principal adjutant of the Vice-Chancellor in all matters pertaining to the
administration of the University;
(c) exercise special responsibilities and powers as may be entrusted by the
Executive Council;
(d) have the power to appoint, with the approval of the Vice-Chancellor, the non-
teaching staff, including employees of last grade service and contingent staff in
pursuance of the recommendations of the selection committee, appointed for that
purpose, in the prescribed manner and shall be the competent authority to take
disciplinary action against such employees in accordance with such procedure as may
be prescribed;
(e) comply with all directions and orders of the Executive Council and
Vice-Chancellor;
(f) be the custodian of records, common seal and such other property of the
University as the Executive Council shall commit to his charge.
(3) The term of appointment of the Registrar shall be for a Period of five years or till he
attains the age of sixty-five years, whichever is earlier, and he shall be eligible for
re-appointment by the Vice-Chancellor with the approval of the Chancellor.
29. (1) There shall be a Head of each department in the University.
(2) The powers, functions, appointments and conditions of service of the heads of the
departments shall be as prescribed by the Regulations.
30. (1) Subject to the Regulations made for the purpose, every officer or employee of
the University shall be appointed in accordance with the written contract which shall be
lodged with the University, and a copy thereof shall be furnished to the officer or employee
concerned.
(2) Any dispute arising out of a contract between the University and any of its officers
or employees shall, at the request of the officer or the employee concerned or at the instance
of the University, be referred to a Tribunal for arbitration consisting of three members appointed
by the Executive Council as prescribed by the Regulations.
Registrar.
Heads of
Department.
Other Officers
and
Employees.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

18
CHAPTER VI
MISCELLANEOUS
31. (1) The Executive Council shall constitute various selection committees for
appointment to the posts of officers and non-teaching staff,  including last grade service and
contingent staff.
(2) The procedure for appointment of members of selection committees and the
procedure to be adopted by the selection committees shall be such as may be prescribed by
the Regulations.
32. For the purpose of enabling the Universities to discharge their functions efficiently
under this Act, the Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament
by law in this behalf, provide to every University in each financial year such sums of money
and in such manner as it may think fit.
33. Whenever the University receives funds from the Central Government or the State
Government or the University Grants Commission or any other agencies for sponsoring a
scheme to be executed by the University, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or
the regulations,—
(a) the funds received shall be utilized only for the purpose of the scheme; and
(b) the University may appoint such number of staff as are required to execute
the scheme in accordance with the terms and conditions stipulated by the sponsoring
organisation.
34. (1) Every University shall maintain a separate bank account to which shall be
credited:
(a) all money provided by the Central Government and State Government;
(b) all fees and other charges received by the University;
(c) all money received by the University by way of grants, gifts, donations,
benefactions, bequests or transfers; and
(d) all money received by the University in any other manner or from any other
source.
(2) All money credited to the fund of any University shall be deposited in such Banks
or invested in such manner as the University may, with the approval of the Central Government,
decide.
(3) The Fund of any University shall be applied towards meeting the expenses of the
University including expenses incurred in the exercise of its powers and discharge of its
duties under this Act.
35. (1) Every University shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and
prepare an annual statement of accounts, including the balance-sheet, in such form as may
be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of  India.
(2) The accounts of every University shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India and any expenditure incurred by him in connection with such audit shall be
payable by the University to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any person appointed by him in
connection with the audit of the accounts of any University shall have the same rights,
privileges and authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India has in connection with the audit of the Government accounts, and, in
particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected
vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect the offices of the University.
Selection
Committees.
Grants by the
Central
Government.
Sponsored
Schemes.
Maintenance
of separate
bank account.
Maintenance
of accounts.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

19
(4) The accounts of every University, as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit
report  thereon, shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government and that Government
shall cause the same to be laid before each House of Parliament.
36. (1) The first Statutes of each University shall be framed by the Central Government
with the prior approval of the Visitor and copy of the same shall be placed before each House
of Parliament as soon as possible, which shall approve them with or without modifications.
(2) Subsequent Statutes or modification of the Statutes shall be made by the Governing
Council, and the Statutes shall have effect from such date as the Governing Council shall
direct.
(3) Every new Statute or addition to the Statutes or any amendment or repeal of
Statutes shall require the previous approval of the Visitor who may grant assent or withhold
assent or remit it to the Governing Council for consideration.
(4) A new Statute or a Statute amending or repealing an existing Statute shall have no
validity unless it has been assented to by the Visitor.
(5) The first Regulations of the University shall be made by the Vice-Chancellor with
the approval of the Chancellor and shall be placed before the Executive Council at its first
meeting, which may adopt them with or without modifications.
(6) Subsequent Regulations or modification in the Regulations shall be made by the
Executive Council, and the Regulations shall have effect from such date as the Executive
Council shall direct.
(7) Every new Regulation or addition to the Regulations or any amendment or repeal of
Regulations shall require the previous approval of the Chancellor, who may grant assent or
withhold assent or remit it to the Executive Council for consideration.
(8) A new Regulation or a Regulation amending or repealing an existing Regulation
shall have no validity unless it has been assented to by the Chancellor.
37.  If not less than two-thirds of the members of the Academic Council recommend
that an honorary degree or academic distinction be conferred on any person on the ground
that he is, in their opinion, by reason of eminent attainment and position, fit and proper  to
receive such degree or academic distinction, the Governing Council may, by a resolution,
decide that the same be conferred on the person recommended.
38. (1) The Governing Council may, on the recommendation of the Executive Council,
withdraw any distinction, degree, diploma or privilege conferred on, or granted to, any
person, by a resolution passed by the majority of total membership of the Governing Council
and by a majority of not less than two-third of the members of the Governing Council present
and voting, at the meeting, if such person has been convicted by a court of law for an
offence, which in the opinion of the Governing Council, involves moral turpitude or if he has
been guilty of gross misconduct.
(2) No action under sub-section ( 1) shall be taken against any person unless he has
been given an opportunity to show cause against the action proposed to be taken.
(3) A copy of the resolution passed by the Governing Council shall be immediately
sent to the person concerned.
(4) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Governing Council may appeal to the
Chancellor within thirty days from the date of receipt of such resolution.
(5) The decision of the Chancellor in such appeal shall be final.
39. (1) The final authority responsible for maintenance of discipline among the students
of the University shall be the Vice-Chancellor. His directions in that behalf shall be carried
out by the heads of departments, hostels, and institutions.
Statutes and
Regulations.
Honorary
Degrees.
Withdrawal of
Degree or
Diploma.
Discipline.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

20
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) the punishment of debarring
a student from an examination, or restication from the University, or a hostel or an institution
shall, on the report of the Vice-Chancellor, be considered and imposed by the Executive
Council:
Provided that no such punishment shall be imposed without giving the students
concerned a reasonable opportunity to show cause against the action proposed to be taken
against him.
40. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law or instrument having the
force of law for the time being in force, the appointments made to any post in the University
in accordance with the Statutes and Regulations shall be deemed to be valid and in accordance
with law.
41. No act or proceeding of the Governing Council, the Executive Council or any other
authority or officer or body of the University shall be invalidated or questioned on the
ground merely by reason of:
(a) the existence of any vacancy or defect in the constitution thereof;
(b) any defect in the nomination or appointment of a person acting as a member
thereof;
(c) any irregularity in its procedure, not affecting the merits of the case.
42. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the University or
any authority or officer or employee of the University for anything which is in good faith
done or intended to be done in pursuance of the provisions of this Act, or the Statutes or
Regulations or rules made thereunder.
43. The provisions of this Act and the Rules, Statutes, and Regulations made there
under shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent contained therewith in any
other law or instrument having the force of law for the time being in force.
44. If any difficulty arises as to the first constitution or reconstitution of any authority
of the University after the commencement of this Act or otherwise in giving effect to the
provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by order, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient
for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of five years from the date of
the commencement of this Act.
45. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
46. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act:—
(a) the Authorities of a University functioning as such immediately before the
commencement of this Act shall continue to so function unless in contravention of
any provisions of this Act;
Deemed
Validity of
Appointments.
Vacancy, etc.
not to
invalidate any
act or
proceeding.
Indemnity
against general
proceedings.
Overriding
effects.
Power to
remove
Difficulties.
Power to
make rules.
Continuation
of authorities.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

21
(b) until the first Statutes and the Regulations are made under this Act, the rules
and regulations as in force immediately before the commencement of this Act shall
continue to apply to that University in so far as they are not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act.
47. The following Acts are hereby repealed:—
(1) The National Law School of India Act, 1986 (Karnataka Act No. 22 of 1986);
(2) The Rashtriya Vidhi Sansthan Vishwavidyalaya Adhiniyam, 1997 (Madhya
Pradesh Act No. 41 of 1997);
(3) The National Academy of Legal Studies and Research University Act, 1998
(Andhra Pradesh Act No. 34 of 1998);
(4) The West Bengal National University of Juridical Sciences Act, 1999 (West
Bengal Act No. 9 of 1999);
(5) The National Law University, Jodhpur Act, 1999 (Rajasthan Act No. 22 of 1999);
(6) The Hidayatullah National University of Law Chhattisgarh Act, 2003
(Chhattisgarh Act No. 10 of 2003);
(7) The Gujarat National Law University  Act, 2003 (Gujarat Act No. 9 of 2003);
(8) The Doctor Ram Manohar Lohiya Rashtriya Vidhi Sansthan Uttar Pradesh
Adhiniyam, 2005 (Uttar Pradesh Act No. 28 of 2005);
(9) The Rajiv Gandhi National University of Law Punjab Act, 2006 (Punjab Act
No. 12 of 2006);
(10) The Chanakya National Law University Act, 2006 (Bihar Act No. 24 of 2006);
(11) The National University of Advanced Legal Studies Act, 2005 (Kerala Act
No. 27 of 2005);
(12) The National Law University Act, 2007 (Delhi Act No. 1 of 2008);
(13) The Damodaram Sanjivayya National Law University Act, 2008 (Andhra
Pradesh Act No. 32 of 2008);
(14) The National Law University Act, 2008 (Orissa Act No. 4 of 2008);
(15) The National Law University and Judicial Academy, Assam Act, 2009 (Assam
Act No. 25 of 2009);
(16) The National University of Study and Research in Law Act,  2010 (Jharkhand
Act No. 4 of 2010);
(17) The National Law University of Uttarakhand Act, 2011 (Uttarakhand Act
No. 11 of 2011);
(18) The National Law University Haryana Act, 2012;
(19) The Tamil Nadu National Law School Act, 2012 (Tamil Nadu Act No. 9
of 2012);
(20) The Maharashtra National Law University Act, 2014 (Maharashtra Act No.
6 of 2014);
Repeals.5
10
15
20
25
30
35

THE FIRST SCHEDULE
[See sections 2, 3(6), 3(14) and 4]
LIST OF UNIVERSITIES INCORPORATED INTO THE ACT
Sl. No.  Existing State University Corresponding Central University
1 . The National Law School of India University The National Law University of India at
Bangalore Bengaluru
2 . The NALSAR University of Law, Hyderabad The National Law University of India at
Hyderabad
3 . The National Law Institute University, Bhopal The National Law University of India at
Bhopal
4 . The West Bengal National University of Juridical The National Law University of India at
Sciences, Kolkata Kolkata
5 . The National Law University, Jodhpur The National Law University of India at
Jodhpur
6 . The Hidayatullah National Law University, Raipur The Hidayatullah National Law University
of India at Raipur
7 . The Gujarat National Law University, Gandhinagar The National Law University of India at
Gandhinagar
8 . The Doctor Ram Manohar Lohiya National Law The Doctor Ram Manohar Lohiya National
University, Lucknow Law University of India at Lucknow
9 . The Rajiv Gandhi National University of Law, The Rajiv Gandhi National Law University
Patiala of India at Patiala
10. The Chanakya National Law University, Patna The Chanakya National Law University of
India at Patna
11. The National University of Advanced Legal The National Law University of India at
Studies, Kochi Kochi
12. The National Law University, Delhi The National Law University of India at
Delhi
13. The Damodaram Sanjivayya National Law The Damodaram Sanjivayya National Law
University, V isakhapatnam University of India at V isakhapatnam
14. The National Law University, Odisha, Cuttack The National Law University of India at
Cuttack
15. The National Law University and Judicial The National Law University of India at
Academy, Assam Guwahati
16. The National University of Study and Research in The National Law University of India at
Law, Ranchi Ranchi
17. The National Law University of Uttarakhand The National Law Univrsity of India at
Nainital
18. The National Law University, Haryana The National Law University of India at
Sonepat
19. The Tamil Nadu National Law School, The National Law University of India at
Tiruchirapalli Tiruchirapalli
20. The National Law University, Mumbai The National Law University of India at
Mumbai
21. The Himachal Pradesh National The National Law University of India at
Law University, Shimla Shimla
22

THE SECOND SCHEDULE
[See section 11(1)]
LIST OF CHANCELLORS OF INCORPORATED UNIVERSITIES
Sl. No. Name of the  University Chancellor of the  University
1 . The National Law University of India at The Chief Justice of the High Court of
Bengaluru Karnataka
2 . The National Law University of India at The Chief Justice of the High Court of
Hyderabad Judicature for the State of Telangana and
the State of Andhra Pradesh
3 . The National Law University of India at The Chief Justice of the High Court of
Bhopal Madhya Pradesh
4 . The National Law University of India at The Chief Justice of the High Court at
Kolkata Calcutta
5 . The National Law University of India at The Chief Justice of the High Court of
Jodhpur Rajasthan
6 . The Hidayatullah National Law University of The Chief Justice of the High Court of
India at Raipur Chhattisgarh
7 . The National Law University of India at The Chief Justice of the High Court of
Gandhinagar Gujarat
8 . The Doctor Ram Manohar Lohiya National The Chief Justice of the High Court of
Law University of India at Lucknow Judicature at Allahabad
9 . The Rajiv Gandhi National Law University of The Chief Justice of the Punjab and Haryana
India at Patiala High Court
10. The Chanakya National Law University of The Chief Justice of the High Court at Patna
India at Patna
11. The National Law University of India at Kochi The Chief Justice of the High Court of Kerala
12. The National Law University of India at Delhi The Chief Justice of the Delhi High Court
13. The Damodaram Sanjivayya National Law The Chief Justice of the High Court of
University of India at Visakhapatnam Judicature for the State of Telangana and
the State of Andhra Pradesh
14. The National Law University of India at The Chief Justice of the Orissa High Court
Cuttack
15. The National Law University of India at The Chief Justice of the High Court of
Guwahati Assam
16. The National Law University of India at The Chief Justice of the Jharkhand High
Ranchi Court
17. The National Law University of India at The Chief Justice of the High Court of
Nainital Uttarakhand
18. The National Law University of India at The Chief Justice of the Punjab and Haryana
Sonepat High Court
19. The National Law University of India at The Chief Justice of the High Court of Tamil
Tiruchirapalli Nadu
20. The National Law University of India at The Chief Justice of the High Court of
Mumbai Bombay
21. The Himachal Pradesh National The Chief Justice of the High Court of
Law University, Shimla Shimla
23

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Legal education in India was imparted like any other graduate degree, and due to its
falling standards some decades ago, the Bar Council of India had brought out a social
experiment with the formation of the very first National Law School being set up as society
under the name of the National Law School of India, Bangalore by the National Law School
of India Act, 1986 (Karnataka Act No. 22 of 1986), which has now become the National Law
School of India University, Bangalore.
Thereafter, the Committee appointed by the The Chief Justices' Conference on Legal
Education and Training, 1993 and the All India Law Ministers' Conference, 1995 had resolved
to set up in each state of India a Law School modelled on the lines of the National Law School
of India University, Bangalore for improving the overall quality of professional legal education
in India. Hence, today, twenty States have enacted legislations for the establishment of
National Law Schools.
There are four main reasons these National Law Schools have been a
success, namely:—
(a) Autonomous status: The National Law Schools are all 'Universities' themselves
and enjoy the autonomy to improve the quality and curriculum of legal education as
and when required, subject to the University Grants Commission regulations. This
provides an effective way of expeditiously changing and moulding legal education to
the needs of the society, changing laws and global trends without interference.
(b) Five-year integrated law programmes: Law, as a subject, was earlier being
studied in isolation from various other allied disciplines. With the introduction of the
concept of five year integrated degrees by these National Law Schools, there stood an
opportunity of amalgamation of the law degrees with another courses of the students'
choice, mainly a Bachelor of Arts degree. This allowed law to be studied in consonance
with the concepts of political science, economics, sociology, focused and tailored
specifically to meet the requirements of understanding the law better, and use them as
social tools, for social engineering by studying the complementary social sciences.
(c) Intensive curriculum: With the intensive curriculum designed to meet global
standards and involvement of practical teaching with the introduction of moot courts,
internships, trial advocacy and the like, the National Law Schools have succeeded in
instilling in their pupils, a high degree of professional excellence, along with the academic
excellence they achieve. This helps to understand the practical difficulties and
implications of the law better than the traditional law schools which use a different
rigid class study method of teaching rather than the global problem-based and case-
study method that the National Law Schools have adopted in line with the top global
institutions.
(d) Involvement of legal luminaries: Supervision of these National Law Schools
have been carried on by various legal luminaries, who are often the elite Constitutional
figures, such as the The Chief Justice of India and the which The Chief Justices of
various High Courts of the country who are the 'Visitors' and 'Chancellors'.
However, there are reasons why the National Law Schools have not traversed the
tremendous growth trajectory they should have for mainly one reason—none of the National
Law Schools really defines what exactly National Law Schools are. The University Grants
Commission recognizes them as 'State Universities', and each National Law School is affiliated
to the Bar Council of India. The States desirous of having a National Law School usually
passes a legislation in the State Assembly establishing one. The terms of the legislation
govern these National Law Schools and different legislations of different States lack coherence
24

25
with varying types of authorities, officers and the like for example  in  some States the
Chancellor of the National Law University is the  Chief Justice of the High Court of the State,
in some it is the Chief Justice of India and in some it is the Chief Minister of the State
concerned. These law schools are required to practice and maintain excellent legal standards
and need not get the status as their counterparts in other States. The conferment of the
'National' status by a State has created confusion and has left many meritorious students not
opting for the newer National Law Schools.
In contrast to every other National Institution in the country in all fields, like the Indian
Institutes of Technology, the National Institutes of Technology, the Indian Institutes of
Science Education and Research,  the Indian Institutes of Management,  the National Institute
of Design, the All India  Institute of Medical Sciences, the Schools of Planning and Architecture,
the National Institutes of Fashion Technology all of which are Central Universities with a
standard coherent definition and presence, most being declared as ‘Institutes of National
Importance’, the National Law Schools lack every aspect of the statutory support that other
National Institutions enjoy.
Based on the above mentioned differences and difficulties it is desirable to enact a law
to:—
(a) declare all the twenty State Universities in First Schedule as Institutes of
national importance;
(b) bring the statutory provisions of National Law Schools at par with other
eminent National level Institutions of the country;
(c) retain the individuality of the State Universities;
(d) make provisions for co-ordination and regulation of the affairs of the State
Universities; and
(e) firmly maintain the national character of the State Universities while
significantly being under State control to uphold the federal nature of the country
whilst not affecting the position of  the Bar Council of India.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SUGATA  BOSE
July 22, 2016.

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 32 of the Bill provides that Central Government shall, after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law in this behalf,  provide to every University in each financial year
such sums of money and in such manner as it may think fit. The requirement of funds for
these Universities is determined every year on the basis of their requirement at the beginning
of the year. Clause 33 provides inter alia for grants of funds to the universities for sponsoring
schemes by the Central Government. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve recurring
and non-recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, at this stage
it is not possible  to estimate the exact amount of recurring and non-recurring expenditure
likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India.
26

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Sub-Clause (1) of Clause 36 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to frame, with
the prior approval of the Visitor (The Chief Justice of India), the first Statutes of each University.
A copy of such Statutes shall be laid before each House of Parliament. The Governing
Council of each Institute has been empowered to make new or additional Statutes or amend
the said Statutes made by the Central Government. The matters in respect of which the
Statutes may be made relate inter alia to the formation of departments of teaching; the fees
to be charged for courses of study and for admission to examinations for degrees and
diplomas of the University; the institution of fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions, medals
and prizes; the term of office, the method of appointment and the conditions of service of
officers, teachers and other staff of the University; the constitution of pension, insurance
and provident funds for the benefit of officers, teachers and other staff of the University; the
constitution, powers and duties of officers of  the University other than those provided for
in this Bill; the constitution, powers and duties of officers of  the Universities other than
those provided for in this Bill; the procedure to be followed in the conduct of the business of
the Authorities of the University, or any other Committee.
Sub-clause (4) of clause 36 empowers the Executive Council of each State University
to make Regulations consistent with the provisions of the enactment and the Statutes. The
matters in respect of which such Regulations may be made relate inter alia to the admission
of students to the University; the courses of study to be laid down for degrees and diplomas
of the University; the conditions under which students shall be admitted to the degree or
diploma courses and to the examinations of the University; the conditions and mode of
appointment and duties of examining bodies; the conduct of examinations and the maintenance
of discipline among students of the University.
Clause 45 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill.
As the matters for which the Statutes, Regulations and rules will relate to matters of
detail only, the delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
27

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to establish, incorporate and declare certain law universities to be law universities of
national importance and to provide for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
————
(Prof. (Dr.) Sugata Bose, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2733LS(S3)—27-10-2016.