1
Short title and
commencement.
THE MENSTRUATION BENEFITS BILL, 2017
By
SHRI NINONG ERING, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide certain facilities to female employees during menstruation at work place
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Menstruation Benefits Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 249 of  2017
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2. It applies, in the first instances,—
(a) to every establishment being a factory, mine or plantation including any such
establishment belonging to Government and to every establishment wherein persons
are employed for the exhibition of equestrian, acrobatic and other performances;
(b) to every shop or establishment within the meaning of any law for the time
being in force in relation to shops and establishments in a State, in which ten or more
persons are employed, or were employed, on any day of the preceding twelve months:
Provided that the State Government may, with the approval of the Central
Government, after giving not less than month's notice of its intention of so doing, by
notification in the Official Gazette, declare that all or any of the provisions of this Act
shall apply also to any other establishment or class of establishments, industrial,
commercial, agricultural or otherwise;
(c) to every men who is self-employed or working in the unorganized sector or in
establishments where less than ten persons are employed.
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means, in relation to an establishment being a
mine, or an establishment wherein persons are employed for the exhibition of equestrian,
acrobatic and other performances, the Central Government and in relation to any other
establishment, the State Government;
(b) "establishment" means—
(i) a factory;
(ii) a mine;
(iii) a plantation;
(iv) an establishment wherein persons are employed for the exhibition of
equestrian, acrobatic and other performances;
(v) a shop or establishment; or
(vi) an establishment to which the provisions of this Act have been declared
under section 2 to be applicable;
(c) "menstruation benefit" means the benefits referred to in section 4;
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(e) "wages" means all remuneration paid or payable in cash to woman, if the
terms of the contract of employment, express or implied, were fulfilled and includes—
(1) such cash allowances (including dearness allowance and house rent
allowance) as a woman is for the time being entitled to;
(2) incentive bonus woman; and
(3) the money value of the concessional supply of foodgrains and other
articles, but does not include—
(i) any bonus other than incentive bonus;
(ii) over-time earnings and any deduction or payment made on
account of fines;
(iii) any contribution paid or payable by the employer to any pension
fund or provident fund of for the benefit of the woman under any law for
the time being in force; and
(iv) any gratuity payable on the termination of service; and
2
Application
of the Act.
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(f) "woman" means a woman employed, whether directly or through any agency,
for wages in any establishment.
4. Every woman—
(a) who is working as an employee in any establishment registered with the
appropriate Government; or
(b) who is a student in or above Class VIII in any school recognized by the
appropriate Government,
shall be entitled to paid leave or leave from the school, as the case may be, for four days
during her menstruation:
Provided that if a woman employee undergoing menstruation opts to work instead
of taking leave, she shall be paid overtime allowance at such rate and in such manner
as may be prescribed.
5. Every woman employee working in the establishment during her menstruation shall
be entitled to thirty minutes of rest period twice a day for not more than four days during
menstruation in a month.
6. Every establishment having fifty or more employees shall have the facility of creche
within such distance as may be prescribed, either separately or along with common facilities.
7. Every establishment shall intimate in writing and electronically to every woman at
the time of her initial appointment regarding every benefit available under this Act.
8. Every woman shall have a right to self perception of her menstruation, in accordance
with the provisions of this Act.
9. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Internal Complaints Committee
constituted under the Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition,
and Redressal) Act, 2013 or similar Grievance Redressal Committees constituted within the
establishment shall address the grievance pertaining to menstrual leave within the
establishment.
10. Whoever,—
(a) denies leave to a woman during her menstruation; or
(b) obstructs a female employee from entitlement of menstrual leave; or
(c) denies or discontinues prescribed rest and recreation facilities to the women
during her menstruation,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one month but
which may extend upto three months and with fine which shall not be less than ten thousand
but which may extend to fifty thousand Rupees.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Right to
Menstrual
Leave.
Regulation of
working hours
during
menstruation.
Establishment
to have
creche
facility.
Duty of
establishment
to inform the
benefits.
Recognition
of
Menstruation.
Redressal.
Punishment.
Power to
make rules.
14 of 2013.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND REASONS
There have been frequent demands across India to further amend the Labour Laws in
order to provide better working facilities to the female employees. The menstruation leave
movement has gained momentum across the nation and there has been intense demand to
entitle women with paid leave during menstruation. Besides, there have been demands to
provide intermediate breaks during menstruation in the working days and facilities for rest at
the workplace in India. A lot of women, media and civil society organizations have begun
addressing the difficulties associated with menstruation and demanding paid leave. The
success of several campaigns and petitions launched for menstrual leave asserts that the
movement is gaining fast momentum in India.
History of paid menstrual leave dates back to a period as early as the World War II.
Countries like Japan, South Korea, Indonesia and Taiwan have been far sighted regarding
the issue and are entitling female employees with menstrual leave. Italy has also proposed a
Bill on paid menstrual leave. Historically, Indian societies have been marked with the feature
of vibrant liberalism. A girls school in the State of Kerala had granted its students menstrual
leave as early as 1912. This financial year, a couple of companies in India have individually
introduced the policy of paid menstrual leave for their female employees.
According to a research conducted at University College London, and published
earlier this year revealed that period pain can be “as bad as having a heart attack”. Given the
biological complexity of females and the intense pain they have to suffer, they shall have the
right to be entitled with leave during menstruation. In addition, women are least productive
in terms of job during the menstruation, specially on the first and the second day of the
menstrual cycle due to unmanageable discomforts. Thus, it may not be much fruitful to the
employers in terms of production. Therefore, with both the perspectives of the female
employees as well as the employers, menstrual leave is desirable.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to entitle female employees with paid menstrual leave for two
days. It also seeks to provide better facilities for rest at the workplace during menstruation.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; NINONG  ERING
November 27,  2017.
4

5
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying
out the provisions of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide certain facilities to female employees during menstruation at work place
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Ninong Ering, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2651LS(S3)—19-12-2017.