\. 
, THE ANTIQUITIES (EXPORT CONTROL) AMENDMENT 
, BILL, 1965 : 
11 at IMT. 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Antiquities (Export Control) Act, 1947. 
BE it enacted. by Parliament in the Sixteenth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may ,be called the Antiquities.. (Export Control) Short 
Amendment Act, 1965. title me! 
cnmmence-
5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern· menl 
ment may, by notification in the Offtcial Gezette, appoint. • ' 
Z. In section 2 of the Antiquities (Export Control) Act, 1947 Amea4-
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),- ment of 
.action 2-(a) for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted, 
10 namely:-
• (a) "antiquity" includes-
(1) (i) any coin, sculpture, epigraph or other work 
of art or craftsmanahip, 

t ~. 
; 
. (ii) any article, object or thinl detached frOD1 a 
buildi.na or cave, 
(iii) any article, object or thing illuatrative of 
science, art, crafts, literature, religion, cUltoms, mon1a 
or politics in bygone ages, S 
(i'V) any article, object or thing of historical interest, 
('V) any article, object or thing declared by the 
Central Government, by notification in the 01Bcial 
Gazette, to be an antiquity for the purposes of tIiia Act, 
which has been in existence ,for not less than one bund- 10 
red years; and 
(II) any manuscript, record or other document 
which is of scientific, historical, literary or aesthetic 
value which has been in existence for Dot leas than 
seventy-five years;'; IS 
(b) after dause (4), the following elause shall be iDaerted, 
namely:- j . 
'(04) "Board" means the Board constituted under sec-
tion 3D;'; 
(c) after clause (b), the following clauses shall be inserted~ 20 
namely:- ' 
'(c) "Licensing Committee" means an Antiquities Li-
censing Committee constituted under sectioa. 3A; 
(d) "prescribed" means ' prescribed. by naleI made under 
this Act.'. 25 
~_ 3. For section 3 of the principal Act, the following lJeC'tioaa aball 
tuiiaQ of be substituted, namely:-
Dew~ 
tIoa.for 
.eetion 3. 
~~­
~Q(, 
export 
without 
licence. 
Antiqul-
tiel Licens-
inI Com-
mlttee.. 
~ ~. 
"3. No person shall export any antiquiq eKel)t under and 
in accord'ance with a liCence granted under this Act 
3A. (1) The Central Govemment may, by DOHc.tlOD In '30 
the Ofllelal Gazette, constitlltel at .. m pIIIees ai' it may d.eem 
nee .... '" aa Antiq~ LU;ensin, c~t_, conUtilqr of two 
or more peDODS who, in ita ep.bdo-., .... ve II)Mdal Jmowledp In 
matters rel.tine to antlqulti •. 

. _ ......... -- --.~. 
3 
.. (2) The number and the term of o6;lce of, the manner of 
ftlling casual vacancies among, the proeedure to be followed in 
. the dJsc:harge of their functions by,. the aalaries and allbwances 
payable to and other matters connected with, th~ memberS of a 
Licensing Committee shall be sqch as may be prescribed. 
38. (1) For the P1ll'pOlle of hearinc appeals from the orden Antiqui-
of Llcea .. n, Committees, the Ceatnl GoV8I'IUII.eDt may, by tiel Appel-
DotI8catt_ in tile 0Ib:ial Gasette, eoaatitute a Board to. be called ~ 
the Antiquities Appellate Board. 
10 (2) The Board shall consist of the foll'owlng members, 
namely:-
IS 
:10. 
3$ 
(a) such number of members not exceeding five, as the 
Central GoVernment may think fit to appoint to the Board 
to represent- ! 
(i) the National Museum; 
(ii) the Archaeological Survey of India; 
(iii) the National Archives of India; and 
(w) such other interests as, in the opinion of the 
Central Government, ought to be represented on the 
Board; 
(b) not more than two members ~ted in such man-
ner as may be prescribed by the members ippointed under 
clause (4). 
(3) The Central Government shall nominate one of the 
members appointed under clau!@ (4) of sub-section (2) to be the 
Chairman of the 1!oard. 
(4) The term of aftice of, the manner of filUng casual vacan-
cies among, the procedure to be followed in the discharge of their 
functions by, the salaries and allowances payable to and other 
matters connected with, the members of the Board shall be such 
as may be prescribed. • 
3C. (1) Any person desiring to export any antiquity may GnDtot 
apply in such form and together with such fees as may be pres- Been_ 
eribed to a Licensing Committee for the grant at • licence. etc. 
(2) On receipt of an application under sub-lec:tion (1), the 
Licensing Committee may, after conducting an inquiry in such 
manner as may be prescribed-
(a) grant a licence, subject to such conditi0n8 (includ-
in, a condition for the deUv~ by ~'e applicant, at his own 
.. -

~\\ 
Power to 
determine 
whether 
or not an 
article 
iaan 
antiqlllty. 
Appeals. 
4 
expense, to the Central Government, a repliCa, copy or other 
__ r~production of such size and nature as may be spec:lfted, of 
the antiquity) as it may deem ilt; or 
(b) refuse, for reasons to be recorded in writing, to 
~ta~~. S 
(3) The Licensing Committee shall not impose any condition 
for the delivery of ~y replica, copy or other reproduction under 
clause (a) of sUlb-section (2) unless it is satisfied that it is neces-
sary for p~s of record and reference. to keep such replica, 
copy or other reproduction. 10 
3D (1) Any person who is in doubt as to whether any 
article,' object or thing which he intends to export, or which is 
intended or about to be exported is or is not an antiquity for 
the purposes of this Act, may refer the question, in such manner' 
as may be prescribed, to a Licensing Committee for a decision. IS 
(2) The Licensing Committee shall, after conducting an 
inquiry in such manner as may be prescribed, decide for reasons 
to be recorded in writing whether the article, object or thing in 
respect of which a reference has been made to it under sub-
section (1) is or is not an antiquity for the purposes of this Act. 20 
3E. (1) Any person aggrieved by a condition imposed under " 
clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 3C or by an order made 
under clause (b) of that sub-section or by a decision given 
under seetion 3D may· prefer an, appeal in SlJch manner and 
within such time as may be prescribed to the Board. 25 
(2) On receipt of an appeal under sub..section (1) , the 
Board may, after giving an opportunity to. the ~ppellant to be 
heard and after making ~chinquiry, as may be ,necessary, pass 
such order as it thinks fit and the order of the Board shall be 
final.".' . 30 
Substi- 4. For section 4 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
tIltionof be substituted, namely:"""; -\ 
newaection 
for.-
tlon '-
AppUca-
tlon of Ad 
52 of 1962. 
"4. The Customs Act, 1962 shall have effect in relation' to an 
antiquities the export of which is. probibi~ed under s~c~on 3, 
save in so far as that Act is inc.onslstent WIth the prOV1.~10nS of 3S 
this Act and, elCcept that, the provisions of section 125 of that 
Act notwithstanding, any confiscation authorised under that 
Act'. shall be· made, unless the Cen.tral Government, on an 
appUcation to it in tlult behalf, otherwise directs.". 

8 of-18'18 
Not 1982. 
, 
5 
S. In aection 5 of the principal Act, in 8ub-section (1), for the Amencl-
---words and figures "Sea Customs Act, 1878, as applied by section 4", ment of 
the wards and figures "Customs Act, 1962" shall be substituted. aectiOll I. 
•. For section 6 of the principal Act, the following Bection shaD Subrti-
S be substituted, namely: _ tution OIl 
DeWMIC-
tiOllfor 
.ectf.on 8. 
10 
IS 
20 
'6. (1) If the person committing an offence under this Act OJ!ences 
is a company, every person who, at the time the offence was byCom-
committed was in oharge of, and was responsible to, the com- pam .. 
pany for the conduct of business of the company, as well as the 
company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall 
be Uable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall 
render any such person liable to such punishment provided in this 
Act if he proves that the offence was committed without his 
knowledge or that he exercised aU due diligence to prevent the 
commission of such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section 
(1), where an offence under this Act bas been committed by a 
company and it is proved that the offence has been committed 
with the consent or connivance of, or that tbe commissiC?n of the 
offence is attributable to any negligence on the part . of, any 
director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such 
director, manager, secretary, or other ofBcer shall also be deemed 
to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to, be proceeded 
. against and punished acaordingly. 
EzpZanation..-For the pur.poses of this section,-
(a) "company" means a body corporate and fnclud~ 
a firm or other association of ,individuals; and 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means ., p~ner in 
30 the ftrm.'. 
35 
'1. In section 7 of the principal Act, for sub-section (2), the fol-AmeD4-
lowing sub-sections shall be substituted, namely: - ment at IeCt10D ,. 
cc (2) In particular and without prejudic~ to the genera1it! 
of the foregoing power, such rules may prOVIde for-
(4) the number and the term of offtce of, tlnt manner 
of fUllng casual vacancies among, the procedure to be fal-

... ~, .. '::.' .'J ,'" 
,.. ,. ~. ~ 
~.-.~,- .. - ... -.. -~.--.. .. . 
~ .. \. : 
''', . 
.. ..;.. .... , . 
,,' .. I' 
:' . " 
.. ~ .'. - .'. 
-. - ~:.. .' 
Inae.rtt0ll, 
of new ' 
IeCtiion 7A. 
Power to " make ' ,. 
copies 
, or repro.. 
,',dUCUQns 
.. -·ot~u-
, ·cils;';'etc.. 
dellverect 
toCentnl 
GoV81'D:-, ' , ' , 
menl 
, .' 
6 
",low~d ~ the disch~ge ~t their functions by. the _aries 
,and aUowances payable to and' Other J!DattelB c01Dlected 
with, the members of LiCeDBiilg Committees; , 
(b ~ the term of oftlce of, the lnalUter of ftrung dIIUal 
Vacancies among, the procedure to be followed in the dia-
cha!rge o~ their functions by, the salaries and' allowances 
payable to and other matters Corinected with the mem-
bers of the Board; . , 
\" ....• 
(c) the fann of application for the grant of a licence 
under section SC, the fees pa~ble and the manner in which 10 
,an inquiry may be made in respect of such applications; 
(d) the manner in which any questiQn may be refer:-
red UDder section 3D; 
(~) the form and manner and the time within which 
appeals may be preferred under section 3E and the man- IS 
ner in which an inquiry may be made in respect of such 
appeals; and 
(j) any other matter which is to be, may be, or is re-
quired to ·be, prescribed under this Act. 
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon 20 
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament 
.. while it is in session for a total period of tliirty days w~ch 
~y be comprise4 in one session or in two suceeasive sessions, 
. an~ if, before the expiry of the sesaiO!! in which it is 10 laid or 
the seSsion immediately lolloWiJig, both Houaea agree in making 25 
~y 'modification ,in th~ rule or both Houses agree" that the 
rule ~hould' not hi! made, the rule shaH. thereafter have eflect 
o~y i~ such modlfied 'form or be of nolfleet, as- the ease may 
be; so, however, that ey sueh modiftcatlon or anDulment shall 
be without prejudice to 'the.' validity of. , "anythia, previously 3~ 
done UDder that rule.". 
8. ,After section 7 of the principal Act. the following section 
shall be inserted, namely:-
. u7A- The Centra[ Government may, for purposes of record 
'" and reference make or take photographic or other copies or 35 
reproductions 'of replicas, copies or other nprOductions c:Je-
livered to it under this Act.". 
, " 

STATEMBNT GP OB4CTS .AND BEASONS ---_ ... _--_. 
The Antiquities (Export Control) Act, 1M7 was m.t.ded.to pr0-
vide for 'control of the export of valuable objectives o1.ntiqU4lriUl_'O~ ) 
historical interest. Experience ~ the working of the Aet hu"abown 
~t it is necessary to amend \he Act in certain r.,e.. ' . 
. -2. UDder the Act, the power to arut bcen<;ea for expOrt of ~ti~ . 
qtdUes ia ~ ill the Central Government aDd the DirectoJ: Ge.neriI· 
of Arahaaology is mthoriaec:l to-·4ecide whether aD article iDteDded' 
fOl' GpOl!t Sa an antiquity ~ Dot b the purpoaes of the. Act. In- the . 
cfreumstancea. all applieationa for sport of antiquities bMre tebe 
releiftd to' the Director General of Azchaeology. This creates dUI-" 
culties for the intending· esporters md tile customs authorities. be-
sides consuming a great deal of time. It is, therefore,propo&ed to· 
constitute Licensing COmmittees, at SIlC'h places as it may be deemed 
necessary, for the purpose of detennfnfng whether an article is an 
antiQ!Uity or not and also for granting licences for the export of anti-
quities. It is also proposed to provide for an appellate authority to 
hear appeals from the orders of such Lfcenafng Committees. 
3. It is necessary to pres~ in the counUy copies, repijcM qr 
other reproductions of important antiquities allOwed to be exported. 
It. ia proposed to. JJ18ke suitable ~o~ions for ~ purpose. 
, 4. A CoIDlDittee on arcblvallegislation. set up by ,the ~ of 
. Education recommended that it would be desirable to bring &1q)ressly . 
. witbia tAe purvie.w of th~ Act records and documep.ts, etc. It is now 
p1'!OIJOSeCi to bring records and documents of hiitorical, U_.ryor. 
,_betk value wbichhavEtbeen in eldstence fqr not less th~ aeveuty-
ftve years within the purview of the Act.. . . ., , . 
.... - .. . .... 
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
M. C. CHAGLA. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 24th February, 1965. 
. 7 

· - ~.ANCIAL-MiMORANDm.t 
Proposed section 3A (1ride cla~e 3) provides for the constitution 
of Antiquities· Licensing Committees at such places as the Central 
Government may deem necessary. Proposed section 3B (tride clause 
3) provides for the constitution of Appellate Board for the purpose 
of hearing appeals from the orders of Licensing Committees. Ordi-
narily, the existing Government ofticers will be 'appointed 88 mem,.. 
ber.i of the said Committees and the said Board. However, the poe-
aibility of non-ofticials being appointed thereto cannot be ruled out. 
~us, some' expenditure may be inVolved from the ConaoUdated 
Fund of india. While it is ~ot possible to give any exact indication 
of such expenditure at this stage, it is considered tba~, such expen-
diture may come to about Rs.· 25~OOO per annum. 
PRESIDENT'S ·RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. F.4-11/63-C.3/I, dated the 24th February, 1965 
from 8hri M. C. Chagla, Minister of Education to the Secretary, 
~k Sabha]. 
The President having been informed of the subject matter of the 
Bill further to amend the Antiquities (Export Control) Act, 1947, 
recommends under article 117 (3) of the Constitution the considera-
tion of the Bill. in the Lok Sabha. 
8 

.. 
~RANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION . '. . 
Clause 7 of the Bill amends section 7 of the Act to empower the 
Central Government to make rules in relation. to certaiJl additional 
matters. The additional matters relate inter cdi4 to the number and 
term of otice of the members of AntiqUi~ Lleenslng CbdUDitb!es' 
and of the Antiquities Appellate Board, the procedure to be fbUt)-w .. 
ed by, the manner of filling casual vacancies among, the aalaries and 
allowances payable to such ,membel'S 8Ild:the manner in which in-
qWries ttlay be m.de lh respect of aP9licattoJis for grant of licences 
and in respect of appeals preferred' from o~ o'l Lieensing Com-
mittees. TIl .. 1Ila1:ter4 pertabl to prondure, fum or detail and, as 
IUch, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal ~baracter. 
9 . : " -~" ... 
• 

ProJU-
bitiollGt 
elIpOl't. 
A.pp1ia-
tiOll of 
Act 8at 
1878. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTBACTS noM TID AlmQUITIRs (EXPORT COln'BOL) Ac:r, 1947 
(31 01' 1947) I 
'. • • • • • • 
2. ~ this Act" unl_ ~ere is anything repu~ant iYl the sub;ect or ~~,_ ,,0- A'! , ~ 
(0) "antiquity" includes-
, (i) any coin, sculp~, ma;~~ript, epigraph, or other 
work of art or craftsmanship, ' 
(ii) any article, object or thing detached from a build-
ing or cave, 
(iii) any article, object or thing illuatrative of Idence, 
art, crafts, literature, religion, customs, morals or poUtics in 
bygone ages, 
(it7) any article, object or thing declared by the Central 
Government by notification in the Oftlcial Gazette to be an 
antiquity for the purposes of this Act,-
which has been in existence for not lesarthan one hundred yeara; 
• • • • 
3. No person shall export any antiquity except under the autho-
rity of a licence granted by the Central Government. 
" All antiquities the export of which is prohibited under aec-
tion 3 shaH be deemed to be goods of which the export bu heeD 
prohibited under section 19 of the Sea Customs Act, 18'18, and all the • CIIt 18'11. J.j 
provisions of that Act shan have e1!ect accordingly, except that, the 
provisions of section 183 of that Act notwithstanding, any confiscation 
authorised under that Act shall be made, unless the Central Govem-
ment, on appUcation to it in such behalf, otherwise directs. 
5. (1) If any person exports at attempts to export an aDtiquity 
in contravention of section 3, he shall, without prejudice to an, 
confiscation or penalty to which he may be Hable under the pro'ri-
siona of the Sea Customs Act, 1878 as applied by section f, be punlsh- I al 1871. 
able with imprisonment for a term which may extend te one month, .... 
or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both . 
• • • 
10 .... ,--...... '.~~ 
.. ". 
• 
, I 
J,.. 

II 
•. If any question arises. Whether any article, object or thing hi Power· tD 
or is not an antiquity for the purposes of this Act, it shall be referred detenDiDe 
to the Director General of Archaeology in India, and bls decision w~ or .... _ 
thereon &hall be flnal. -.------------- --- uti. 
is_ 
u~. 
7. (1)· • • Power to . makerm-
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generaUty of the 
foregoing power, such rules may prescribe the procedure for granting 
licences for the export of antiquities, and fix the fees payable on 
applications therefor. . 
• • • • • • 
I ... . 
• 

---- ------------ -~ - '-
... • .. - ....... .I 
. . 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Antiquities (Export Control) Act, 1947 . 
..... 
"" • . J. ••.• -
--
(Shri M.C. Chagla, 
r Minisur 0/ Education.) 