LOK SABHA .. 
CORRIGENDA 
·to _, 
. 
THE DELHI CO-OPERATIVE SOCI~TIES BILL, 1970 
no be/As 1ntroduced'iri,Lok Sabh~_7 
1. Page (iv), 11ne 7,~ 
. , 
for "PENALITIES" read "PENALTIES" - -
2. Page 6, line 28,-
a.fter "until" omit " " , , 
-
3. Page ~,-in the marginal heading -to c1~use 20~-
for Itmetrber t• ~ "mE'llrbers." 
4. Page 9, line 19,-
m ",proft tit ~ "profi'ts lt 
5. Page 15, line 2,-
for "SOCITIES" read "SOCIETIES" 
6. Page 16, line 10,-
for It thereon" re ad II thereinll -
7. Page 16, line 19,-
for "himblt .. .!:.!.!2 "him" 
8. Page 16, line 31,-
!.!?!. fsociety' ~ '''society'',' 
9. Page 18, line 8,· 
omit· "and" -
10. Page 21, line 6,-
for "vochers" -
read Itvouchers" , . 
11. Page 21, line 14,-
~ "require." 

- 2 -
12. Page 21, line 37, -" 
ill .It persons II 
13. Page 21, line 41,-
after ."sha l 1". 
14. Page 21, line 43,-
read "person" 
-
omit - " " , 
.!E!. "person" ~. "parsons" 
~5. Page 22, in the marginal heading to clause 57,-
for 11 coe t" r(? ad "C os ts" -
16. Page 22, line 40,-
a.fter "heard" 
17.. Page 23, line 45,-
!.2.!: "69" read -
18. Page 25, line 11,-
insert " ,It , 
"6 ')" 
after "Ins urance" insert "Corpor a tion" 
19. Page 26, line 14,-
after "of" insert" a" --
20. Page 29, in the m<trginal hE'adtng to clause 77,-
ill "for" reCld "or" 
21. Page 29, line 39,-
for "of the" ~ "of thisl\ 
?2. Page 30, line 36,-
!It er II as" insert II to" . , 
23. Page 3'), line 43,-
after "of" omit 
24. Pas;e 30, line 46,-
" "I , 
for lIof" re9.d "or" - -
25. Page 32, ,line 19,-
after "order" omit -
II " , 
26. Page 32, lin~ 39, for the marginal citation 
117 of 1925." re ad "BoJ'1. 7 of 1925." 
P. T. O. 

- 3 -
27. Page 33, line 37,-
for "proceedings" read "proceedingl1 
-' -
28. Page 34,-
. ., 
for the existihg marginal heading to clause 97,-
read "Rules!' 
29. Correct line numberG on pagee 21.and 24. 
NEW DELHI; 
March 20, 1970 
Phalguna 29, 1891 (Sak!3') 

As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABlIA 
("';> '~, ~~~ ,~' n' ~,~ -: : 
to", 
_ _ BlII No. Z4 of 117. 
TIlE DELHI CO-OPERA TlVE SOCIETIES BIll, 1970 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CLAUSES 
CHAPl'ER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
RzGISTRATION OF CO-oPBRATIVR SOCD:TmS 
3. Registrar. 
4. Societies which may be registered. 
5. Restrictions on registration. 
6. Restrictions on holding of shares. 
7. Applicati<m for registration. 
8. Power of the Registrar to decide certain questions. 
9. Registration. 
10. Registration certificate. 
11. Amendment of bye-laws of a co-operative society. 
12. When amendments of bye-laws come into force. 
13. Change of name. 
14. Change of liability . 
. 15. Amalgamation, transfer of assets and Uabilities and division of 
co-operative societies. 
16. Power to direct amalgamation, division and reor,anisation in 
public interest, etc. 
17. Registrar to prepare scheme of amalgamation of co-operative 
bank in certain cases. 
18. Liability of a co-ctperative bank to the Deposit Insurance Cor-
poration. 
19. Cancellation of registration certiftcates of co-operatlve societies 
in certain cases. 
CHAPTER III 
MEMBERS 01' co-oPlRATIVE 80CIETIIS AND THEIR IllGH'I'B AIm LIA8n.rrDS 
20. Persons who may become members. 
21. Nominal or assaciate members. 
22. Member not to exercise rights till due payment made. 
23. Votes of members. 

til) 
CLAUSBS 
24. Manner of exercising vote. 
25. Restriction on transfer of shares or interest 
.:.26. . Transfer of interest on death of members. 
27. Liability of 'past member and estate of deceaSEd member. 
CHAPTER IV 
MANAGEMENT OF CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES 
28. Final authoTity in a co-operative society. 
29. Annual general meeting. 
30. Special general meeting. 
31. Election and nomination of members of committees. 
32. Supersession of committee. 
33. Securing possession of recor'ds, etc. 
34. Acts 01 co-operative societies not to -be invalidated by certain 
defects. 
CHAPTER V 
PRIvILEGES or CO-oPERATIVE SOCIE'l'lES 
35. Co-operative societies to be bodies corporate. 
36. First charge of co-operative society on certain assets. 
37. Charge on immovable property of members borrowing loans 
from certain societies. 
38. Charge and set-off in respect of share or contribution or iriterest 
of members. 
39. Share or contribution or interest not liable to attachment. 
40. Register of members. 
41. Admissibility of copy of entry as evidence. 
42. Exemption from compulsory registration of instruments. 
43. Exemption from certain taxes, fees and duties. 
44. Deduction from salary to meet co-operati'Ve society's claim in 
certain eases. 
45. Other forms of State aid to CO'-operative societies. 
CHAPl'ER VI 
PROPERTIES AND FUNDS or CO-oPERATIVE SOCIETIES 
46. Funds not to be divided by way of profit. ", 
47. Contribution to charitable purpose. 
:48. Contribution to Co-operative Education Fund. 
49. Investment <:If funds. 
SO. Restrictions on loans. 
51. Restrictions on borrowings. 
52. Restrictions on other transactions with non-memben. 

(iii) 
CHAPTER VII 
AUDIT, INQUIBY, INSPECTION AND SURCHARGE 
53. Audit. 
54. 
55. 
Inspection of societies. 
Inquiry by Registrar. 
56. Inspection of books of indebted societies. 
57. Costs of inquiry. 
58. Recovery of costs. 
59. Surcharge. 
CHAPTER VIII 
SE'l"l'LEMENT OF DISPl1TJ!3 
60. Disputes which may be referred to arbitration. 
61. Reference of disputes to arbitration. 
62. Power of financing bank to proceed. 
CHAPTER IX 
WINDING UP OF CO-OPDlATIVE SOCIETIES 
63. Winding up of C<t-operative societies. 
, " 
64. Winding up of co-operative banks at the direction ot'the Re-
serve Bank. 
65. Reimbursement to the Deposit Insurance Corporation by the 
liquidators. 
66. Uquidator. 
67. Powers of liquidator. 
68. Priority of contributions assessed by liquidator., 
69. Power of Registrar to cancel registration of a co-operative 
society. 
CHAPrER X 
EXECUTION OF AWARDS, DECREES, ORDERS AND DECISIONS 
70. Enforcement of charge. 
71. Execution of orders, etc. 
72. Execution of orders <If liquidator. 
73. Attachment before award. 
74. Registrar or person empowered by him to be civil court for 
certain purposes. 
75. Recovery of sums due to Government. 
CHAPTER XI 
76. Appeals. 
77. No appeal or revision in certain casee· 

(Iv) 
CLAUUS 
78. Delhi Co-operative Tribunal. 
79. Review of orders of Tribunal. 
80. Revision. 
81. Interlocutory orders. 
CHAPTER XII 
OFFENCES AND PENALITIES 
82. Offences. 
83. Cognizance of offence. 
84. Address of societies. 
85. Copy of Act, rules and bye-laws, etc., to be open to inspection. 
86. Prohibition against the use of the word "co-operative". 
87. Power to exempt societies from conditions as to registration. 
88. Power to exempt ca-operative societies from provisiOns of the 
Act. 
89. Liquidator to be public servant. 
90. Notice necessary in suits. 
91. Companies Act not to apply. 
92. Saving of existing societies. 
93. Bar of jUrisdiction of courts. 
94. Powers of civil court. 
95. Indemnity. 
96. Qualifications, remunerations and other conditions of service of 
employees of c~operative societies. 
97. Rules. 
98. Repeal and savings. 

Bill No. 24 of 197& 
THE DEUII CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES BILL, 1970 
A 
BILL 
to c07l80Zidate and amend the law relating to co-oper~tive societies in the 
Union f4e'Mitory of Delhi. 
Bill it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-first Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Delhi Co-operative Societies Act, Short 
1970. Ut~, 
10 
(2) It extends to the whole of the Union territory of Delhi. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Lleutenant-Governor 
may, by notification in the Delhi Gazette, appoint. 
Z. In this Aft, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a.) '''bye-laws'' means the registered bye-laws for the tbne being 
in force, and includes registered amendments of such bye-laws; 
(b) "committee" means the governing body of a co-operative 
society, by whatever name called, to which the management of the 
I, a1fa1~ of the society is entrusted; 
extent 
and 
commen-
cement. 
Deftni-
tiona. 

2 
(c) "co-operative bank" shall have the same meaning as is 
assigned to it in the Deposit Insurance Corporation Act, 1961; 47 of 1961. 
(d) "co-operative society" means a society registered or deemed 
to be registered under this Act; 
(e) "oo-operative society with limited liability" means a co- S 
operative society the liability of wlwse members is limited by its 
bye-laws to the amount, if any, unpaid on the shares individually 
held by them or to such amount as they may individually undertake 
to contribute to the assets of the society, in the event of its being 
wound up; 10 
(f) "co-operative society with unlimited liability" means a co-
operative society the liability of whose members is unlimited for the 
purpose of contributing jointly and severally to any deficiency in the 
assets of the society in the event of its being wound up; 
(g) "Deposit Insurance CorpO'l'ation" means the Deposit Insur- IS 
ance Corporation established under section 3 of the Deposit Insur-
ance Corporation Act, 1961; 47 of 1961. 
(h) "federal society" means a society-
(a) not less than five members of which are themselves 
societies; and 20 
(b) in which the voting rights are sa regulated that the 
members which are societies have not less than four-fifth of the 
total number of votes in the general meeting of such. society; 
(i) "financing bank" means a co-operative society, the objects 
of which include the creation of funds to' be lent to other co-operative 25 
societies; 
(;) "Lieutenant-Governor" means the administrator of the Union 
territory of Delhi appointed by the President under article 239 of the 
Constitution; 
(k) "member" means a person joining in the application for the 30 
registration of a co-operative society and a person admitted to mem- . 
bership after such registratIon in accordance with this Act, the rules 
and the bye-laws, and includes a nominal and an associate member 
and the Central Government when it subSCribes to the share capital 
of a society; 35 
(1) lCofficer" means the president, vice-president, chairman, vice-
chairman, managing director, secretary, manager, member of com-
mittee, treasurer, liquidator, administrator and includes any other 
person empowered under the rules or the bye-laws to give directions 
in regard to the business of a co-operative society; 40 
(m) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules; 
(71) "Registrar" means a person appointed to perform the func-
tions of the Registrar of Co-operative Societies under this Act, and 
includes any person appointed to assist the Registrar when exettising 
all or any of the powers of the Registrar; 4S 
(0) "Reserve Bank" means the Reserve Bank of India constitu-
ted under the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934. ~ ot 1934. 

(P) "rules" me8DS the rules made ~der this Act; 
'(q) "Tribunal" means the Delhi Co-operative Tribunal constitu-
ted under section 78. 
CHAPTER II 
REGISTRATION OF CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES 
3. (1) The Lieutenant-Governor may appoint a penon to be tile Be- Regia. 
gistrar of Co-operative Societies for the Union territory of Delhi and may trar. 
,appoint other persOlll to assist him. 
(2) The Lieutenant-Governor may, by general or special order, confer 
10 on any person appointed to assist the Registrar all or any of the powers 
of the Registrar under this Act. 
(3) Every person appointed to assist the Registrar shall exercise the 
powers canferred on him under sub-section (2) subject to the general 
guidance, superintendence and control of the Registrar. 
IS (4) The Lieutenant-Governor may, by notification in the Delhi Gaze,te 
and subject to such conditions as he may think fit to impose, confer all 
. or any of the powers of the Registrar under this Act on any federal 
.. ~iety, or an officer of such federal society; and every such federal 
society or officer on whom the powers of the Registrar are so conferred 
~o shall exercise such powers under the general guidance, superintendence 
and control of the Registrar. 
4. (1) Subject to the provisions hereinafter contained, a SOCiety which 
has as its object the promotion of the economic interests of its members 
in accordance with C<1-Operative principles, or a society established with 
2S the object of facilitating the operations of such a society, may be regis-
tered under this Act with or without limited liability: 
Provided that no society shall be registered if it is likely to be econo-
'mically unsound or the registration of which may have an adverse effect 
on development of co-operative movement: 
30 Provided further that, unless the Lieutenant-Governor by general or 
special order otherwise directs, the liability of the society of which a 
member is a CO'-operative society shall be limited. 
(2) The word "limited" or its equivalent in any Indian language shall 
be the last word in the name of every society registered under this Act 
3S with limited liability. 
5. No society other than a federal society shall be registered under 
this Act unless it consists of at least ten persons (each of such pel1JOns 
being a member of different family), who are quali1ied to be members 
under this Act and who reside in the area of operation of the society. 
Ezplanation.-For the purposes of this section the expression "mem-
40 ber of a family" means wife, husband, father, mother, grand-father, 
grand-mother .. step-father, step-mother, son, un-married daughter, un·mar-
ried step-daughter, step-son, grand-son, un-married grand-daughter, un-
married sister, un-married half-Sister, brother, half-brother and wife of 
4sbrother or half-brother. 
Societies 
which 
may be 
regis-
tered. 
1Iedrie. 
tIoftll 
On real.-
traUon. 

RestrJc-
tions 
on hold. 
ing of 
shares. 
Appli. 
cation for 
regis-
tration. 
Power o'i 
the Re-
gistrar to 
decide 
certain 
questions. 
Re,is. 
tration. 
Regis. 
tration 
oerti-
fiC'ate. 
Amend-
ment ot 
by-laws 
ot a co_ 
opera-
tive 
aoc1etl". 
4 
6. No member other than the Central Government or a co-operative 
society shall hold more than such portion of the share-capital ot a c0-
operative society, subject to' a maximum of one-fifth, as may be pres-
cribed or have or claim any interest in the shares of such society exceed-
ing ten thousand rupees, whichever is less. 5 
7. (1) For the purposes of registration, an application shall be made 
to the Registrar. 
(2) The application shall be signed,-
(a) in the case of a society of which nO'member is a eo-operative 
society, by at least ten persons qualified in accordance with the re- 10 
quirements of section 5; and 
(b) in the case of a SOCiety of which a member is a eo-operative 
society, by a duly authorised person on behalf'O'f every such society 
and where all the members of the society are not co-operative socie-
ties, by ten other members, or when there are less than ten other 1$ 
members, by all of them. 
8. Where any question arises whether for the purpose 'O'f this Act a 
person resides in the area of operation of a society or not, or whether a 
society is of same type as another society or '0'1. different type, the ques-
tion shall be decided by the Registrar whose decision shall be final. 3Q 
9. (1) If the Registrar is satisfied-
(a) that the application complies with the provisions of this Act 
and the rules; 
(b) that the objects of the proposed lJO'Ciety are in accordance 
with section 4; 2S 
(c) that the proposed bye-laws are not contrary to the provi-
sions of this Act and the rules; and 
(d) that the proposed society has reasonable chances of success, 
the Registrar may register the society and its bye-laws. 
(2) When the Registrar refuses to register a society, he shall com- 30 
municate the order of refusal, together with the reasons therefor, to such 
of the applicants as may be preSCribed. 
(3) The application for registration shall be disposed of by the Regis-
trar within a period of two months from the date of receipt thereof by 
him. 35 
10. Where a society is registered under this Act, the Registrar shall 
issue a certificate of registration signed by him, which shall be coDclu-
sive evidence that the co-operative society therein mentioned if duly 
registered under this Act. 
11. (1) No amendment of any bye-laws of a co-operative society sha1140 
be valid unless such amendment has been registered under this Act. 
(2) Every proposal for such amendment shall be forwarded to the 
Registrar and if the Registrar is satisfied that the proposed amendment-
(a) is not contrary to the provisions of this Act and the rules; 

5 
(b) does not con1lict with co-operative principles; and 
(c) will promote the economic interests of the members of the 
society, 
he may register the amendment. 
S (3) The Registrar shall forward to the society a copy of the registered 
amendment together with a certificate signed by him and such certificate 
shall be conclusive evidence that the amendment has been duly register-
ed. , 
(4) Where the Registrar refuses to register an amendment of the bye- ' 
10 laws of a co-operative society, he shall communicate the order of refusal 
together with the reasons therefor, to the society in the manner pres-
cribed. 
12. An amendment of the bye-laws of a co-operative society shall, un-
less It is expressed to come into operation on a particular day, come into 
15 force on the day on which it is registered. 
13. (1) A co-operative society may, by an amendment of its bye-laws, 
change its name but such change shall not affect any right or obligation 
of the society or of any of its members or past members, and any legaJ 
proceedings pending may be continued by or against the society under 
20 its new name.· .. "~ 
(2) Where a co-operative society changes its name, the Registrar shall 
enter the new name on the register of co-operative societies in place of 
the former name and shall amend the certificate of registration accord-
ingly. . ., 
When 
amend· 
men~ of 
bye-law. 
come 
into 
force. 
Chanae 
of 
name. 
25 14. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules, a co-opera-
tivesociety may, by an amendment of its bye-laws, change the form or 
extent of its liability. 
Chan,. 
of Ua-
bilfty. 
(2) When a co-operative society has passed a resolution to change the 
form or extent of its liability, it shall give notice thereof in writing to 
30 all its members and creditors and, notWithstanding any bye-law or con-
tract to the contrary, any member or creditor shall. during a period of 
one month from the date of service of the notice upon him, have the 
option of withdrawing his shares, deposits or loans, as the case may be. 
(S) Any member or creditor who does not exercise his option within 
35 the period specified in sub-section (2) shall be deemed to have assented 
to the change. 
(4) An amendment of a bye-law of a co-operative society changing 
the form or extent of its lfabtlity shall not be registered or take effect 
until either-
40 (a) the assent thereto of all members and creditors has been ob-
tained; or 
(b) all claims of members and creditors who exercise the option 
referred to In sub-s~lon (1) wtthi!l the period specified therein have 
been met in full. 

Amalga-
mation, 
transfer 
of useta 
and lla· 
biUtJea and 
division 
of co-ope-
rative 
lOCietie •. 
Power to 
direct 
amalp-
mation, 
cUv1alon 
and reo 
orpni-
.ation In 
public 
Intend, 
ete. 
8 
15. (1) A co·operative SOciety may, with the previous approval of the 
Registrar and 'by a resolution passed by a two-thirds maJqJ;'i~y of the mem-
bers present and voting at a general meeting of the society,,",,":,, 
(4) transfer its assets and 1iabiUti~s in ~bo~e or in p.vt 19 '-!11 
other co-operative society; S 
(b) divide itself into two or more c{)oooperative sQciet.i,cr~· 
(2) Any two or more co-operative societies may, with the previous 
approval of the Registrar and by a resolution passed by a two-thir.da 
I.Ji\~orit}' of the m~mbers p~~sent and vc;>ting at a '~e~~~aJ~~, of 
~~ch '$~h soci,ety, amalgamate themselves and fon:n a ne.w cOo:o~F.ra~v.e I~ 
~#~~ty.' 
(3) The resolution of a co-operative society under sub-section (.l) or 
sub-section (2) shall contain all particulars of the transfer, division or ..• ~ , r ,. !. . . . . I ,1' ... 
amalgamation, as the case may be: ," ... ( ','''''''' 
Provided that in the case of a co·operatlve bank. the Registrar shall I, 
not accord approval to any such resolution without the previous sanction 
in writing of the Reserve Bank. 
(4) When a co-operative society has passed any such resolution. it 
shall give notice thereof in writing to all its members and cre<iito" aDd. 
notwithstanding any bye-laws or contTact to the contrary, any member 20 
or creditor shall, during the period of one month of the date of servt~ 
of the notice upon him, have the opti<m of withdrawing hit· shares, de-
P,osUs or loan,S, as the case m"ly be. 
(S) Any member or creditor who does not exercise hjs opijnll witNJl. 
the pe,riod specified in sub-section (4) shall be d~etQe4 to have ~~ 2S 
to the proposals contained in the resolution. 
(6) A resolution passed by a co-operative society under this section 
shall not take effect until, either- . , ., . , '.' " .' , 
(a) the assent thereto of all the members a~cr,~ a.s. ~ 
obtained; or .,-. " 30 
(b) all claims of memb~rs and creditors; wh9,e'f~rc~,~~. ~~ op~<?~ 
referred to in 5ub-sectiqn (4) within the. p~r.iR~, sp~~ill~~,t~~r,t:Jp l)avJ! 
heen met in full. . 
(7) Where a re!lOlution passed by a co-operative society under this 
section involves the transfer of any ASsets and Habi1fti~. the resohdkm 3S 
sball. notwlt~stATlding anything ('ont~ip.~$i inap.y IflW. f91' th~ ~~ ~nlf 
in rpl:'ce, be a suffl..ci~l'\t convevancp tp v~st th~, as~~t$ IIDsi, Hab~m1~ iJl, 
the transferee without any further assurance. . 
1~. (1) Wh~r~ the Re~strar is satf~fled t'bat it is e~~!'!n.tiIlJ fn tp'e .P'~b--
1~ it)ter~8~. or In the in~er~st of the cQ:-pp'erR~ive tnPv.~n.'I~nt. or fqT, tn ... 40 
nurposl" of securing thp proner maTln~ement. nf anv co-operat1y.~i 1l!9,C1~n­
that two or mnTe cO·I'I'Op.r::ttivp foci .. tip.o; Sh011lrl he amalf:!"Imated or anv 
co-operative sncfptv .. :\0\01110 h." dh7idp~ t" fonn two 1'1'1" mOTe r.O-(ItlE'rative 
!'Ine;etiP"l I'IT ~J,nuld he renrl1A'I'1;secl. thpn !'\ntwithstAnr'liTl <f l:ntvth!,,~ con-
bl~np.d in !i;ectfon 15. but subiect to thf! nrovi!;fnns of th;~ Y'et:ion. the'" 
'Retrlstt~,. mav. bv order. Drl'lvjrtp 10 ... n,,.. nmAlmlmll~oT'l. d,Yisfrm. Oli. Te-
ort;!8nisation of thes .. co-onprativf' ~I'l('ieti('<; into II !!inlfl, spcle~ or,. into 
IKIcif'tips with CInch' cI'ln!!t'tuti"". pro!",.,.tv Tigh.ts iTlt .. r-stl'l and Ruthart-

ties and such liabilities, duties and obligations as may be specified in the 
order: ".;0 
: . : .L--J... .... 
Provided that no such order of amalgamation, division or reorganisa-
tion in respect of a co-operatlve bank shall be made without the previOUI 
5 sanction in writing of tile Reserve Bank. 
10 
IS 
(2) No order shall be made under this section, unless-
(a) a copy of the proposed order has been sent in draft to the 
co-operative society or each of the co-operative societies concerned; 
and 
(b) the Registrar has considered and made such modifications 
in the draft order as may seem to him desirable in the light of any 
suggestion and objections which may be received by him within such 
period (not being less than two months from the date on which a 
copy of the order aforesaid is received by the SOCiety or societies, aa 
the case may be), as the Registrar may fix in that behalf, either from 
tlle'sQciety or from any of the societies concerhed or from any mem-
ber or class of members thereof or from any creditor or class of cre-
ditors thereof. 
(") The order referred to in sub-section (1) may contain such inc!-
20 dental, consequential and supplemental provlsions as may, in the opiDion 
of the Reptrar, be necessary to give effect to the amalgamation, divi-
sion or reorganisation, as the case may be. 
(~ EVely ntember or creditor of each of the co-operative societies to 
be amalgamated, divided or reorganised, who has objected to the scheme 
2~CJl' amalgmlation, division or reorganisation, within the period specified, 
shin be entitled to receive, on the issue of the order of amalgamation, 
dlvilidn Or reOrganisation, his share or interest, if he be a member, arid 
the amount in satisfaction of his dues, if he be a creditor. 
(:6) On the iuue of an order uhder sub-section (1), the proVisions of 
3O,a'Qb4iectiODs (2), (3) and (4) of section 19 shall apply to the eo-operative 
~tetles sO amalgamated, divided or reorganised as· if the amalgamation, 
dtv1t6oDdr reorganisation had been made under section 15. 
\ ,'.j .• 
17. When an or<ier of moratorium has been made by the Central G:ov-
cnment uncler sub-section (2) of section 45 of the Banking ReeuIation 
10 ol 1He 3S Act, 1949, in respect of a co-operative bank, the Registrar, with the pre-
vious approval of the Reserve Bank in writing, may, during the period of 
moratorium, prepare a scheme-
• ., of 1181. 
(a) for the reorganisation of the co-operative bank; or 
(b) for the amalgamation ctf the co-operative bank with any 
40 oiher co-operative bank. 
18. Notwtthatanding anything contained in sections 15 and 16 or any 
other provision of this Act, where a co-operative bank, being an insured 
bank within the meaning of the Deposi~ Insurance Corporation Act, 1961, 
is amalgamated or reorganised arid' tli~ ~postt Insurance Corporation 
45 has become liable to pay to the depositors of the insured bank under sub-
section (2) of section 16 of that Act, the bank with which such insured 
l;a1fi1e~'attta.lnih«t~d, or the ne.w co-QpM-aflve bank formed.' after such 
amalgaJiiAtion;-or as" the cUi;' may be, the lriIhred bRnk or ttarilferee 
Rqiltrat 
to 
prepare 
.eheme 
ofamal,.-
mation 
of co-ope.. 
rative 
bank in 
ee.r~ 
c .... 
LiabUiti 
or' a CO-
operatiw 
bank to 
the 
Depolit 
IDIUI4anCe 
Corpora-
tion. 

Cancel-
lation ot 
re,istra-
tion certi-
ficate. of 
co-ope. 
rative 
SOcM!ties 
in certain 
ca.e •. 
Persons 
who may 
become 
member. 
8 
bank shall be under an obligation to repay to the Deposit Insurance Cor-
poration in the circumstances, to the extent of and in the manner referred 
to in section 21 of the Deposit Insurance Corporation Act, 1961. 
19. (1) Where the whole of the assets and liabilities of a co-operative 
society are transferred to another co-operative society in accordance with S 
the provisions of section 15 or section 16, the registration of the first men-
tioned co-operative society shall stand cancelled and the society shall be 
deemed to have been dissolved and shall cease to exist as a corporate 
body. 
(2) Where two or more co-operative societies are amalgamated into 10 
a new co-operative society in accordance with the provisions of section 
15 or section 16, the registration of each of the amalgamating societies shall 
stand cancelled on the registration of the new society, and each society 
shall be deemed to have been dissolved and shall cease to exist as a corpo-
rate body. IS 
(3) Where a co-operative society divides itself into two or more c0-
operative societies in accordance with the provisions of section 15 or is 
divided by the Registrar in accordance with the provisions of sec-
tion 16, the registration of that society shall stand cancelled on the regis-
tration of the new societies, and that society shall be deemed to have been 20 
dissolved and shall cease to exist as a corporate body. 
(4) The amalgamation and splitting of co-operative societies shall not 
in any manner whatsoever affect any right or obligation of the resulting 
co-operative society or societies or render defective any legal proceedings 
by or against the co-operative society or societies, and any legal pro- 25 
ceedings that might have been continued or commenced by or against 
the co-operative society or societies, as the case may be, before the anlal-
gamation or splitting, may be continued or commenced by or against the 
resulting co-operative society or societies. 
(5) Where a co-operative society has not commenced business within 30 
a reasonable time of its regilltration or has ceased to function or if the 
Registrar is satisfied, after making such inquiry as he thinks fit, that the 
society no longer has genuinely as its objects one or more of the objeetl 
specified in section 4 and that its registration ought in the interests of the 
general public be cancelled, he shall make an order canceWng the regis- 3.S 
tration of a co-operative society. A co-operative society shall, from the 
date of such order of cancellation, be deemed to be dissolved and shall 
cease to exist as a corporate body. 
CHAPTER III 
MEMBERS OF CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES AND THEIR RIGHTS AND LIABIJ..ITII:S 40 
20. (1) No person shall be admitted as member of a co-operative s0-
ciety except the following, namely:-
(4) an individual competent to contract under seetion 11 of the 
Indian Contract Act, 1872; 
(b) any other co-operative society; 
(c) the Central Government; and 
(d) such class or classes of persons or association of pel'lons u 
may be notified by the Lieutenant-Governor in this behalf: 
" 011881. 
• of 1872. 

8 
Provided that the provisions of clause (a) shall not apply to an indi-
vidual seeking admission to a society exclusively formed for the benefit 
of students of a school or college. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the Lieu-
5 tenant-Governor may, having regard to the fact that the interest of any 
pe1'IOJ1 or class of persons conflicts or is likely to conflict with the objects 
of any society or class of societies, by general or special order, published 
in the Delhi Gazette, declare that any person or class of persons engaged 
in or carrying on any profession, business or employment shall be disqua-
10 lliled from being admitted, or for continuing, as members or shall be eli-
gible for membership only to a limited extent of any specified society or 
class of societies, so long as such person is or such persons are engaged 
in or carrying on that profession, business or employment, as the case 
may be. 
IS 21. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (d) of section 
20, a co-operative society m'ay admit any person as a nominal or associate 
member in accordance with its bye-laws. 
(2) A nominal or associate member shall not be entitled to any share 
in any form whatsoever, in the assets or profit of the co-operative 
20 society. 
(3) Save as provided in this section, a nominal or associate member 
shall have such privileges and rights of a member and be subject to such 
liabilities of a member, as may be specified in the bye-laws of the society. 
Z2. No member of a co-operative society shall exercise the rights of a 
2S member unless he has made such payments to the society in respect of 
membership or has acquired such interest in the society as may be speci-
fied in the bye-laws. 
Nominal 
or 
Ulociate 
members. 
Member 
not to 
exercae 
r.lghta 
till due 
payment 
made. 
II. Every member of a co-operative society shall have one vote in the Vot. of 
aftairs of the society: memberl. 
30 Provided that-
35 
(4) in the case of an equality of votes, the chairman shall have 
a second or casting vote; 
(b) a nominal or associate member shall not have the right of 
vote; 
(c) where the Central Government is a member of the co-opera-
tive society, each person nominated by the Central Government on 
the committee shall have one vote. 
M. (1) Every member of a co-operative society shall exercise his 
vote in person and no member shall be permitted to vote by proxy. 
40 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), a co-
operative JOCiety which is a member of another co-operative society, 
may, subject to the rules, appoint one of its members to vote on its be-
half in the affairs of that other society. 
Manner 
of exer-
elida, 
vote. 

BeRrie-
tion on 
trllDlfer 
of ahare. 
or 
interest. 
Transfer 
otinte-
relt on 
death of 
member •. 
Liability 
of lout 
member 
and estate 
of decea-
.. 
member. 
10 
Ii. The transfer of the share dr interest of a member in the capitlI of 
.. eo-operaUve society shall be subject to such conditidDS as to madtil1im 
holding as are specified in section 6. 
It. (1) On the death of a member a co-operative ~ty may t~ 
the share dr interest of the deceased member to the person nonrlnat~ 'in S 
.reeordance with the rules made in this behalf, or, if there is no periGh '&0 
~inated, to such person as may appear to the committee to .1H!. th& 
Nett or legal representative of the deceased member, Or pay to ·rich 
'fioiiiiDee, heir or legal representative, as the case may be, a sUril ~ 
seMing the value of such member's share or interest as ascertained m 10 
..eOOrdanee with the rules or bye-laws: 
Provided tbat-
(i) in the case of a co-operative society with unlimited liability, 
such nominee~ heir or legal representative, as the cue may be, may 
require payment by the society of the value of the share or iD'terelt IS 
of the deceased member ascertained as aforesaid; 
(ii) in the case of a co-operative society wi'th limited Uabutty, the 
society shall transfer the share or interest of the deceased :inemf>et to 
such nominee, heir or legal representative, as the case may be, b'emg 
qualified in accordance with the rules and bye-laws for membership 20 
of the society, or on his application within one month of the death of 
the deceased member to any person specified in the IlPPlication who is 
so qualified; -
(iii) no such transfer or payment shall be made except With the 
consent of the nominee, heir or legal representative, as th~ cast)' rilay 2$ 
be. 
(2) A co-operative society shall, subject to the provisions of section 
36 and unless within six months of the death of member prevented by an 
order of a competent court, pay to such nominee, heir or legal represen-
titive, as the case may be, all other moneys due to th'e deel!8Ad'ftleiJ\\ber 30 
from the society. 
(3) All transfers and payments made by a co-operative societyia ac,. 
cordance with the provisions of this section shall be valid· and effectual 
a~ any de1hartd made upon the society by any' other peisbn. 
21. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), the liability of a 3' 
put' 'm~rriber or of the estate of a deceased member of a C!CJi.Operattv8 
society for the debts of the SOCiety as they existed,-
(a) in the case of a past member, on the date on which he ceased 
to be a member; 
(b) in the case of a deceased member, on the date of his death, 40 
shall continue for a period of two years from such date. 
(2)- Where a co-operative society is ordered to be wound up UIlder 
aectiott·88, the liability of a· past mem~r or of theest&te of a deceased 
member who ceased to be a member or died within two years immediately 
pteceding the date of the aider of witidttig up, shl1l eontbtue'tfnt1!' the .. , 
erttlre liquidatibh proceedin~ are corilplErted, butsueli liabllity stutlt ... 
tetid onl~ to the debtS of the society as they existed oh the· ctm ot btl 
ceasing to be a member or death, as the c8l!li· m.,.· be; 

• 
--. lJ, 
CHAPT~R IV 
MANAGEMENT OF CO-OPERA'11VE SOCIETIES 
.. (1) ~he final authority in a co-operative society shall vest in the 
~ b.ody of members: 
.s ~videdtbsJ where the bye-laws of a co-ope.rative society provide for 
... ~tiiution of a smaller body consisting of delegates of members of 
the society elected or selected in accordance with such bye-laws the 
"IJl811er body shall exercise such powers of the general body as may be 
~ or as may be specified in the bye-laws of the society. 
10 (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in 8ub-section (2) of aeotion 
U -each dele;ate shall have onE' vote in the affairs of the society. 
Zt. (1) Every co-operative society shall, within a period of six months 
next after the date fixed for making-u.p its accounts for the year under 
the rules for the time being in force, call a general meeting of its mem-
[5 hera for the purpose of-
(4) apPtQval of the programme of the activities of the IOclety 
prepared by the committee for the ensuing year; 
(b) ele.ction, if any, of the members of the committee other than 
nominated members subject to the provisions of section 31; 
20 (e) consideration of the audit report and the annual report; 
(d) disposal of the net proflts; and 
(e) con,sideration of any other matter which may be brought for-
ward in accordance, with the bye-laws: 
Pro~id~ that the Registrar may, by genera] or special order, extend 
2, ~F ~~' for hold~g such meeting for a further period not exceeding 
th.. ' _,..,.+1._; . .. ., ,. ,'-. ' ,.... 
t~.~~. 
Provided further that, if in the opinion of the Rpm!lltrRT' no such emn-
!Ioats necessary, or such meetin~ is not called by the society within the 
extended period, if any, granted by him, the Registrar or any pereon 
30 authorised by him I may call such meetin~ in the manner pt'escllibelOl, and 
that meetin~ shall be deemed to be a genera] meeting duly caJJed bv the 
. society; and the Registrar may order that the expenditure fncu.rred tD eal-
lin~ rueh a meeting shall be paid out of the funds of the IIOclety or bv 
~ .~. or persona who. in the opinion of the ReltistT'ar. were respon-
35 sible for the refusal or failure to convene the general meeting. 
(2) At every annual general meeting (1f 8 co-operative soC'ietv, the' 
eommittee shall lay before the society a statement showin~ the detaf1s 
..., .. ijle ~oaJUl. if any, given to any of the members of the commlttt"e during 
tq.. pr..ecedlng year. 
40 .. (I) "'e committee of a co-operative society mav, at any time, call 
a speclaJ general meetln~ of the society and shall call such meetinjl with· 
h' one month after the reeeipt of a reQutsit'on in writing from tJ,e ReclJ.-
trar or from such number of mlemberl or a proportion of thf' total number 
of members, as may bE' prnvfded tn the bye-Iawa. . 
Final au-
thority 
in a co-
operative 
society. 
Annual 
,eneral 
meetln .. 
SpeelaJ 
general 
meetfn .. 

Election 
and nomi_ 
nation of 
members 
of com-
mittee •. 
(2) If a special general meeting of a co-operative society is not called 
in accordance with the requisition referred to in sub-section (1), the Re-
gistrar or any person authorised by him in this behalf shall have the power 
to call such meeting and that meeting shall be deemed to be a meeting 
called by the committee, and the Registrar may order that expenditure S 
incurred in calling such a meeting shall be paid out of the funds of the 
society or by any such person or persons who, in the opinion of the Regis-
trar, were responsible for the refusal or failure to convene the special 
~eneral meeting. 
31. (1) The superintendence, direction and control of the prepllratioa 10 
of the electoral rolls for, and the conduct of, elections of the members of 
the committees of such co· operative societies or class of eo-operative so-
cieties as the Lieutenant.Governor may, by general or special order, 
notify, shall be vested in such returning offi-cers as may be appointed by 
him in this behalf. IS 
(2) The vote at such elections shall be by secret ballot. 
(3) The term of office of the elected members of the committee shan 
be such, not exceeding three co-operative years including the co-operative 
year of their election, as may be specified in the bye-laws of the society: 
Provided that the. elected members shall continue to hold offtce till 20 
their successors are elected or nominated under the provisions of the Act 
or the rules or bye-laws. 
(4) No person shall be eligible to be elected as a member of the com-
mittee of a co-operative society unless he is a shareholder of that co-opera-
tive society, or after he has held such office in the society during two con- 25 
secutive terms, whether full or part. 
Explanation.-(i) Where any person holding office of a member of the 
committee at the time. of commencement of this Act is again elected to 
that office after such commencement, he shall for the purpose of this sub-
section be deemed to have held office. for one term before such election. 30 
(ii) A member who has ceased to hold any office on the committee 
continuously for three co-operative years, shall again be eligible for elee-
tion as a member of that committee. 
(5) NotWithstanding anything contained in this Act, a person shall be 
disqualified for appointment as, or for being, a member of a committee,- 3S 
(a) if he is a member of a committee of an·other society of the 
same type; or 
(b) if he is a member of thf' committee" of three or more societies 
of a different type or different types: 
Provided that nothing contained in this 1mb-section shall be deemed 40 
to disqualify a person for election as, or for being, a delegate of a society. 
(6) On the committee of such co-operative societies or class of co-opera-
tive societies as may be prescrIbed, two seats shaH be reserved, one for 
the members who beloT'g to the Scheduled Castes and one for economical-
Iv weaker sections of the members who as land-owners or tenants or as 45 
both do not hold more than the prescribed area of agricultural land or 

fulfil. the prescribed conditions, and if no such persons are elected the 
committee shall. co-opt the required number of members from am~t 
the persons entitled to such representation. 
ExpLan"~ion.-.r~or the purpose of this sub-section. "Scheduled Castes" 
5 meall any of the Scheduled Castes specified. in Part I of the Schedule to 
tne Constitution (Scheduled Castes) (Umon Territories) Order, 1951. 
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, any dispute re-
lating to election of members of any committees of a co-operative society 
notiHed under sub-section (1) shall be referred to the Lieutenant-Gover-
10 nOl" whose decision thereon shall be final. 
IS 
20 
2S 
(8) The Lieutenant-Governor may make rules generally to provide ior 
or to regUlate .matters in respect of elections of members of the comInit-
tees. 
(9) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) to (8),-
(4) where the Central Government has subscribed. to the share 
capitaJ. of a co-operative society, the Central Government or any per-
son auti1~rised by it in this behalf shall have the right to nominate en 
the committee such number of persons not exceeding three or one-
third of the total number of members thereof, whichever is lesa, u 
the Central Government may determine; 
(b) where the Industrial Finance Corporation, the State Finance 
Corporation or any other financing institution notified in this behalf 
by the Central Government has provided finance to a co-operative 
SOCiety, the Industrial Finance Corporation, State Finance Corpora-
tion or other financing institution, as the case may be, shall have the 
right to nominate one. person on the committee. 
(10) A perSon nominated under sub-section (9) shall hold oftice during 
the pleasure of the Central Government or the Corporation or other An-
ancing institution, as the case may be. 
30 3Z. (1) If, in the opinion of the Registrar, the committee of any c:<)-
~ operative society persistently makes default or is negligent in the per-
.. formance of the duties imposed on it by this Act or the rulel or the bye-
i";' laws, or commd.ts any act which is prejudiCial to the interest of the society, 
or its members, the Registrar may, after giving the committee an oppor-
3S tunity to state its objections, if any, by order in writing, remove the com-
mittee; and 
(11) order fresh election of the committee, or 
(b) appoint one or more adminiJtrato~s who need not be member. 
of the society, 
to manage the affairs of the society for a period not exceeding one year 
40 specified in the order, which period may, at the discretion of the Registrar 
be extended from time to time, so, however, that the aggregate period 
does not exceed three years. 
(2) 'I'be Registrar may fix any remuneration for the administrator, as 
45 he may think fit. Such remuneration shall be paid out of the funds of the 
lOclety. •. 

Securing 
:>ossession 
)':f 
-ecorda, 
~tc. 
cts of 
i-opera-
ve socie-
:es not 
be in-
Ilidatecl 
rtain 
fecta. 
,14 
(3) The' 'admililstrator shall,subject to the control of the Registrar and 
to such instructions as he may from time to time give, have poWer to exer-
cise all Ql' any of. the functions of the committee or of any officer of the 
society and take all such actions as may be required in the interest of the 
society. '.' S 
(4) The administtator shall, at the expiry of his term of office,arrange 
for the conetitutioft~of a new committee in accordance with the bye-laws 
of the society. 
(5) Before taking any action under sub-section (1) in respect of a co-
operative BCiCiety, the Registrar shall consult the financing institution to 10 
which it is indebted. 
(6) Notwithstanding anything OO'Iltained in this Act, the Registrar shall 
in the case 'of a co-opera.tivebank, if so required in writirigby the 'Reserve' 
Bank in the public interest or for preventing the affairs oUbe co,.operative 
bank being ~onducted in a manner detrimentaL to the interests of the, IS 
depositors or for securing the proper management of a co-operative bank 
pass an order for the supersession of the committee of that co-operative 
bank and .appointment ·of an administrator therefor for such period or 
periods not exceeding five years in the aggregate, as may from time to 
time be specified by the Reserve Bank. 20 
33. (1) (a) If the record, registers or the books of accounts of a co-ope-
l1ative SOCiety are likely to be tampered With or destroyed and the fund 
and property of a SOCiety are likely to be misappropriated or misapplied; 
or 
(b) if the committee of a co-operative society is reconstituted at a 2S 
general meeting of the society or the committee of a SOCiety is removed 
by the Registrar under section 32 or if the society is ol:'dered to be 
wound up under section 63 and the outgoing members of the commit-
tee refUse to hand over charge of tha records and property of the so-
Ciety to those having or entitled to receive such charge, 30 
the Registrar may apply to the magistrate, within whose jurisdiction ,the 
society functions, for securing the records and property of the societyj 
(2) On receipt' of an application under SUb-section (I) , the ma" 
gistrate may, by a warrant, authorise any police officer, not below the 
rank of sub-inspector to enter and search any place where the re- 35 
cords and the property are kept or are believed to be kept and to seize 
such records and property; arid the records and property 80 seized 
shall be handed over to the new committee or administrator of the 
society or the liquidator, as the case may.be. 
M. No act of a co-operative society or of any committee or of any 40 
otBcer shall be deemed to be'invalid by reason only of the ex1stenee 
of any defect in procedure or in the constitution of the society or . Of 
the committee or in the appointment or election of an officer or on 
the ground that such oftlcer was disqualified for his appointment. 

15 
CHAPTER V 
PRIvILEGES OF CO-OPERATIVE SOCITIIS 
35. The registration of a co-operative society shall render it a body 
corporate by the name under which it is registered having perpetual 
5 IJuccession and a C'C1mmon seal, and with power to hold property, enter 
into contract, institute and defend suits and other legal proceedings and 
to do all things necessary for the purposes for which it is constituted. 
•. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the 
time bein~ in force, but subject to any prior claim of the Government 
10 in respect of land revenue or any money recoverable as land revenue, 
any debt or outstandlng demand owing to a co-operative society by any 
member or past member or deceased member shall be a first charlle 
upon the croPS and other amcultural OfOdlll"P.. ('attle. forM,.1' fo'!' cattle, 
aJtrlcult1l1'81 or fndu!IItrh,' imoleme"bf nr ma('hh,,.t'V. NlW m9tp,",Rlc; for 
15 manufacture and anv ftnished orndllct!ll manUfaf"ttl'!'M from RUeh raw 
materials, belonllinl! to such member. llBst memher n,. .~ormfng part of 
the estate of the deceased member, as the case may be. 
(2) No person shall transfer any oroperty which is subject to a 
. charge under sub-section (1) except with the previous permission in 
20 writing of the co-operative society which holds the charge. 
(") Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time 
beinR in force, any transfer of property made in contraventipn of the 
provisions of sub-flection (2) shall be void. 
(4) The charge created under sub-section (1) shall be availahle as 
18 of 1883. as a~ainst any claim of the Government aMsinl! from a loan I!fanted under 
12 of 1884. the Land Improvement Loans Act. 1883. or the Acmculturtst.s' Loans 
Act, 1884, after the grant of the loan by the soc:lety. ... 
Co-ope. 
rative so-
cieties to 
be bodies 
corporate. 
First 
char,e of 
co-opera. 
tive so-
ciety on 
certain 
asset •. 
37. NotwithRbmdinJ:(' anything contained in this Act or in any other ;:a~o_ 
30 
3S 
45 
law for the time being in force,- vable 
(i) any person who makes an apolication to a Rocfetv of whfch 
he is a member for a loan shall, if he owns any land or ha" in-
terest in anv land as II tenant. make a declaratfon in the p1'elcrfbM 
fonn which shan state that the almlfcant therebv creates a cha1'lle 
on such land or interest snecifierl in the declaration for the pay-
ment of the amonnt of the loan whfch the society may make to the 
member in purRuanee of the application and for an future advan-
ces, if any, required by him which the society may make to him 
as such member sub1ect to such maximum as may be determIned 
by the society together with intere!lt on such amount of the loan 
and advances; 
(ii) any per9O'l1. who ha!ll borrowed a loan from a Rodety of 
which he is a member before the date of thE' comfn~ into force of 
this Act. and who owns any land or has anv interest-tn land as a 
tenant shall, as soon 8$ possible, make a .. dec1aration in the form 
and to the efl'ect referred to in clause (i); 
(iii) a declaratfon made under clause (i) or clatue (tf) may 
be varied at any time by a member with the conrent of the society 
in favour of which such charge is created; , 
property 
of 
member. 
borrowing 
loan. 
from 
certain 
lOcietlel, 

Char •• 
and set 
ott in 
respect 
dI share 
or contri-
butiOn or 
interest 
of 
members. 
Share or 
contribu· 
tion or 
interelt 
not 
liable to 
attach-
ment. 
16 
(w) no member shall alienate the whole or any part of the 
land or interest therein specified in the declaration made under 
clause (i) or clause (ii) until the whole amountboITowed by the 
member together with interest thereon is paid in full: 
Provided that for the purpose of paying in full to the society 5 
the whole amount borrowed 'by the member together with interest 
thereon, the member may, with the previous permission in writing 
of the society and subject to such conditions as the society may 
impose, alienate the whole or any part of such land or interest 10 
thereon: 
Provided further that standing crops on any such land may 
be ali~nated with the previous permission of the society: 
(v) any alienation made in contravention of the provisions of 
clause (iv) shall be void; 
(vi) subject to the prior claims of the Government in respect IS 
of land revenue or any money recoverable as land revenue, there 
shall be a first charge in favour of the society on the land or in-
terest specified in the declaration made under clause (i) or clause 
(ii) for and to the extent of the dues owing by himb on account of 
the loans and advances; 30 
(vii) the record of rights shall also include the particulars of 
every charge on land or interest created under a declaration under 
clause (i) or clause (iil notwithstanding anything contained in 
any law relating to land revenue for the time being in force; 
(viii) any sum due to a societv in consequence of char~e creat- 25 
ed undel' a declaration under clause (i) or clause (ii) shall, on 
application for its recoverv bein~ made by such society accom-
panied by a certiflcate signed by the ReJ!istrar. be recoverable by 
the Collector. at-cording to the law and under the rules for the time 
being in force for the recovery of land revenue. 30 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section. society shall mean 
any co~operative society or c1as~ of co-operative societies specifled in 
this behalf by the Lieutenant-Governor by a general or special order. 
38. A co-operative trocietv I'lhall have 11 chRrge upon the share or 
contribution or interest in the capital and on the deposits of a member 3S 
or past member. OT deceased- member and u",,-)n anv dividend. bonus 
or proftts payable to a member or nast membp.r or the estate of a de-
cl'ased member in respect of any deht due from such member or past 
member or the estate of such deceased member to the society. and may 
I'let-oft anv sum credited or payable to a member or PMt mf'mber or the 40 
estate of deceased member in or towards payment of any such debt. 
39. Subject to the provisions of section 38, the share or contribution 
or interest of a member or past member or deceased member in the 
capital of a co-operative society shall not be liable to attachment or sale 
under any decree or order of any court in respect of any debt or lia- 45 
bilitv ineurred bv- such member, and a receiver under the Provincial 
Insolvency Act. 1920 shall not be entitled to or have any claim on such II of 1920. 
share or 'contribution or interest. . 

17 
40. Any register or list of members or shares kept by any eo-ope- Jlqiater or 
rative society shall be prima facie evidence of any of the following memben. 
particulars entered therein:-
(a) the date on which any person entered in such register or 
5 list became a member; 
(b) the date on which any such person ceased to be a member. 
41. (1) A copy of any entry in a book of a co-operative SOCiety re-
gularly kept in the course of its business shall, if certified in .uch 
manner as may be prescribed, be received in any suit or legal pro-
Ia ceedings as pTima facie evidence of the existence of such entry, and 
shall be admitted as evidence of the matters, transactions and accounts 
therein recorded in every case where, and to the same extent as, the ori-
ginal entry itself is admissible. 
(2) No officer of a co-operative society and no officer in whose office 
15 the books of a co-operative SO'Ciety are deposited after Uquidation 
shall, in any legal prQCeed.ings to which the society or the liquidator 111 
not a party, be compelled to produce any of the society's books or docu-
ments the contents of which can be proved under this section, or to 
appear as a witness to prove the matters, transactions and account. 
:lo therein recorded, except under order of the court or the arbitrator 
made for special cause. 
Admiui-
bllityof 
copy of 
entry al 
evidence. 
Exemption 
42. Nothing in clauses (b) and (e) of sub-section (1) of section 17 of from 18 of 1908. 
the Indian Registration Act, 1908 shall apply to- compul-
30 
(1) any instrument relating to shares in a co-operative society 
notWithstanding that the assets of the society consist in whole or in 
part of immovable property; or 
(2) any de,benture issued by any such society and not creating, 
declaring, assigning, limiting or extinguishing any right, title or inter-
est to or in immovable property, except in So far 88 it entitles the 
holder thereof to the security afforded by a registered instrument 
whereby the society has mortgaged, conveyed, or otherwise transferred 
the whole, or part of its immovable property or any interest therein 
to trustees upon trust for the benefit of the holders of such deben-
tures; or 
35 (3) an endorsement upon or transfer of any debenture ilsued by 
any such society. 
43. (1) The Central Government .. y, by notification in the Oftlc:iaJ 
Gazette, remit the income-tax payable in respect of the profit. of an), 
dass of co-operative Societies or the dividends or otber paJllltlllh reeeiv. 
40 ed by members of any cia. of such societies on aceount of pro8ta. 
(2) The Ceatral Government may, by notift~tion in die 0IldaI Gat:-
ette, remit in reepect of any class of co-operative lOdeti __ 
(a) the stamp duty ehargeable under any law for the time beiq 
in force in respect of any instrument ex8C1ded by or on bebaIf of a 
45 eo-operative sodety or by an eIIeer or IDMIlber dlenol aad reIatiac 
to the business of such society or any dasa of aueb iDttnll'*Jts or in 
respeet of any award or order made 1lDder thb Ad, in c:uea, where, 
1Or,y re-
g!ftra-
tion of 
instru_ 
ments. 
Exemption 
from 
certain 
taxes, 
tees and 
duties. 

18 
but for such remISSion the co-operative society, officer or member, 
1"""'" uthe euelllily be, would' be liiable to pay'sueh stamp duty; 
(b) any fee payable under any law for the time being in force 
relating to the registration of documents or court-fee. 
(3) The Central Government may, by notifieation, exempt any c1asfI 5 
of c:o-operative societies from-
(a.) land reVeDur, 
(b) taxes on agricultural income; and 
I 
(e) taxes on sale or purchase of goods; and 
(d) taxes on profeuiOlls, trades, callings and employments. 10 
Deduction 44. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time 
trom l , be !IIalary to . ing in force, a member of a co·operative society may execute an agree-
meP.t cO. . men't in favour of the society providing that his emlployer shall be eom-
operatwe . :petMt to deduct from the salary or wages payable to him by the employer, 
8ocietY~.!~1 .. such:iamount as may be specifledin the agreement and to pay the amount IS claim m certain so 'deducted to the society in satisfaction of any debt or other demand 
easel. I), tywfng by the member to the society. 
(2) On the execution of such agreement, the employer shall, if so re-
quired by the co-operative society by a requisition in writing and so long 
as the SOCiety does not intimate that the whole of such debt or demand 20 
has been paid, make the deduction in accordance with the agreement and , 
pay the amount so deducted to the society. as if it were a nart of the t~ 
salary or waJl'es payable on thf> nay as required under the Pnyment of 
WageR Act. 1936. Such nayment shall be valid d;sch~t1!e of thp employer _ 40'f 1938. 
for his liability to pay the amount deducted. 25 
(3) Where a requisition in writinlT from Rny societv rel!ic;tered or 
deemed to be M!jlistered in any recinrocatin't State in resnect of a mf'mber 
("If that socip.tv, who has executed any such R~reemf>'nt a!! is referred to in 
!luh-section (1) and who for the time bpi"!! is employed in the Uni"n tpr-
Titorv of Delhi. is r~~eived bv h;s p.mnlover. the requisition .. hall be aC'tp.d 30 
.upon as if it had been made bv a society in Delhi and the nrovlsions of 
th'R section shall have effect accordinl!ly. 
F::mlanaHon.-For the pUrnORf> of thi!! suh-!;ection. "recinroeatin(! State" 
'mel1Ti!l flny- Sbte or Uninn territorY whir.h thf> Lieut.enant-Governor may, 
bv notiflcation in thp Delhi Gazette. deelar .. to be a recinrocatinlT State. 35 
(4) If after the receint of R relluisition mRdp under Rub-section (2) Ill" 
lIIuh-section (3). the employer I'lt any time fail!! to deduct the amount sne-
cifted in the reQuisitIon from thE' Rl\lllrv or WRl!eo: navablf' ttt the membf>r 
concerned or makeR default i11 remittlnl! the amount denucted to the sorte-
tv. the lIocietv shall bf> pntitled to recover anv such ammmt from the 40 
emnlover 11"1 ATTeariof land re'\fE'nue and the Rmount so due from the 
emnlover !!hall rank in nnnrttv in re!med of the lilibility of the.p.mplover 
. 'eonA' td that {If the wa~ in arrears. 
,11'1- ~,' ~.! 
'(5) NothinJt contained tn this SPetlon shall IlPplv to establishment 
~nffer.ranwaV'8dmtntstration Ol)f>~"tfnrr any railway ""defined in clause 45 
(!O) . 'Of ~rtt<:le .~ of the Constitution. . . 

1890. 
i. 
45. Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time beina Oliter 
In force, the Central Government may- forma 
. .' , . " ot State 
(a) subscribe to the share capital of 8 co-operative l8eiety; aid to 
(b) give l~. 01'. make ad.vances to. ~o~«ve. .. 8od,U~ eo-opcra_ . 'tlve /IU. 
5 (c) guarantee tlte repaymeat of priDoipal and· payment of interest cieties. 
on debentures issued by a co-operative society; 
(d) guarantee the repayment of share capital of a co-operatlve 
society and. dividends thereon at such rates as may be speei8ed by 
the Central Government; 
• ' •• ~ ,j .. 
10 (e) I1JIU"8I1tee the repayment of principal and payment of illter-
est on loans and advances to a co-operative society; aad 
IS 
(f) give financial assistance in any other form, inducltag aubsi-
dies, to any co-operative society. 
CHAPTER VI 
PROPERTIES AND FUNDS OF CO-OPERATIVm SOCIETIBS 
4.6. No part of the funds of a co-operative SOCiety shall be divided by Funds 
y;ay of bonus or <;lividend or otherwise among its members: not to be 
'cfivlded 
Provided that after .at least one-fourth of. the netproftta· in any year, . .-y " 
has been carried to the reserve fund, payments troDlthe remaiDdelllof W.Y,ot 
20 such profits and from any profits of past years available for distribution proftt. 
may be m~de to the members to such extent and under such conditions 
as may be prescribed by the rules or bye-laws. 
47. Any co--opel'ative society may, with the sanction of the\ReliBtIlar,.Contribu~ 
after one-fourth of the net profits in any year has been carrledtotbe ,UOQ"to 
25 Reserve Fund, contribute an amount not exceecUng flve per cent. of the .. charitable pilrpOH. remaining net profits to any purpose, connected with the development. of. 
co-operative .moveJXlent or charitable purpose as defined in section 20 of 
the Charitable Endowments Act~ 1890. 
48. A C6-operat1ve society shall out of its net profita in any year -credit . Contribu-
30 such portion of the profits not exceeding five per cent. as maT'be'~ tUln to 
cribed to the Co-operative Education Fund constituted under the ruleI. co~oper.· 
tive ~u~ 
catioD 
!'und. 
49. (1) A co-operative society may invest or deposit its fund-
(a) in the post office savings ~; ()r ", 
(b) in any of the securities specified in section 20 of the Indian 
Investment 
of fundi. 
ot 1882. 3S Trusts Act, 1882; or. '- _ ., I ; 
(c) in the shares or securities of any other co-operaUve 1Odety; 
or 
(d) with any bank carrying on the business of bankinf approved 
for this purpose by the R,eg1strar; or 
40 (e) :in any other mode permitted by the rulel. 
(2) ~ ¥;1,vestmen~ or deposits D18d~ before the. commencern~t ot: 
this Act which would have been valid if this Act had been in force arf 
hereby ratified and confirmed. . 
'( :. 

Re.trlc-
tion. 
On loaM. 
Re.tric-
tion. on 
borrow-
in,.. 
Restric_ 
tion. on 
other 
traDI&e-
tioDi 
with non· 
member .. 
Audlt. 
SO. (1) A co-operative society shall not make a loan to any person other 
than a member: 
Provided that with the general or special sanction of the Registrar a 
·co-operative societ)' ma)' make loan to another co-operative societ)'. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained. in sub-section (1), a co-opera- 5 
tive society IDa)' make a loan to a depositor within his deposit on its secu-
rity. L ... _ ... 4 ...... .", ,~ __ 1& 
5L A c~.ope.rative society shall receive deposits and loans only to such 
extent and under such conditions as may be prescnbed or as may be spe-
cifted in the bye-laws. 10 
52. Save as prOvided in sections 50 and 51, the transactions of a c~ 
operative society with any person other than a member shall be· subject 
to such prohibitions and restrictions, if any, as may be prescribed. 
CHAPTER VII 
AUDIT. INQUIRY, INSPECTION AND SURCHAllGE 
i3. (1) The Registrar shall audit or cause to be audited by a person 
authorised by him by general or special order in writing in this behalf, 
the accounts of every co-operative society at least once in each year. 
IS 
(2) The audit under sub-section (1) shall include an examination of 
overdue debts, 1f any, the verification of the cash balance and securities, 20 
and a valuation of the assets and liabilities of the society. 
(3) The pel'8On auditing the accounts of a co-operative society shall 
have free access to the books, accounts, papers, vouchers, stock and other 
property of such society and shall be allowed to verify its cash balance 
and securities. . .2S 
(4) The directors, managers, administrators and other officers of the 
tociety shall furnish to the person auditing the accounts pf a co-operative 
lIOciety all such informattpn as to its transactions and working as such 
person may require. 
(5) The Registrar or the person authorised by him under sub-section 30 
(1) . to audit the accounts of a co-operative SOCiety shall have power where 
neceu&ry- ._ ... ",.1 
. _ .. 'l"'~.~ 
«(I.) to summon at the time of his audit any officer, agent, servant 
or member of the society, past or present, who he has reason to believe 
can live valuable information in regard to transactions of the SOCiety 35 
or the management of itsaftairs; and 
(b) to require the production of any book or document relating 
to the affairs of, or any cash or securities belonging to, the SOCiety by 
IllY officer, agent, servant, or member in posseSSion of such books, 
documents, cash or securities and in the event of serious irregulari-14 Cl 
tiel discovered during audit, to take them into custody. 
(6) U at the time of audit the accounts of a society are not complete, 
the Registrar or the person authorised by him under sub-section (1) to 
audit, ma, cause the accounts to be written up at the expense of the 
lOCiet". ~ 45 

21 
(.n.Audit fee. if any, due from any co-operative society. shall be re-
coverable in the same manner as is provided in section 75. 
Nt illl~.~&kar. 9f any person. autboris.ed by ge,ner~l or spedalor:cier 
in this behalf by him, may inspect a co-operative society. For the pur-
5. pose of inspection, the Registrar or the person so authorised by him 
shall at all times have access to aU books, accounts, papers. vochers, 
securities, stock and other property of the society and may in the event 
of"wwU$ irreg\llarities di&covered during inspection take them into 
custody and shall have power to verify the cash balance of the society 
10 and subject to the general or special order of the Registrar to call a com-
~~ Ol~ting, ~d a general meeting. Every officer or member of the 
s~~\.~, f~sh; such intormauon with rea-rd to the w('rking of the 
seet,.u,the Registrar, {lr .the person making such inapection may require. 
raqijire, 
5$. (1) The Registrar may of his own motion Or on the application of 
IS a majority of the committee or of not le:;s than one-third of the members, 
hold an inquiry or direct some person authorised by him by order in wr:t-
ing in this behalf to hold an inquiry into the constitution, working and 
financial condition of a co-operative society. 
(I) The Registrar or the person .authorised by him under sub-section 
20 (1) shall have the following powers, namely:-
(a) he shall at all times have, for purpose of examination, free 
access to the books, accounts, cash and other properties belonging to 
or,in, the custody, of the society and may summoa any person in pos-
_aiM or responsible for the custody of any such books, accounts, 
25 Goc\lmeJlta. seoudt;ies. cash or other proper.ti~s to produce the same, 
at any plac:e specified by him; 
(b) he may, notwithstanding any rule or bye-law specifying the 
perjod 01 notice. for a general meeting of the society, reqJlire the oftl-
cers of the SOCiety to call a general meeting at such time and place at 
30 the headquarters of the society to consider such matter., as may be 
directed by hiJn; and where. the oftlcers of the SOCiety refuse or fail to 
call such a meeting he shall have power to call it himself; . 
(c), he may swrunan any person w.ho i. te8lOnably believed by" 
lUm-;to,aavelaDy.knowledge of, .the atlQirs·of the society to appear.·be. 
35 fare ,him at. any place at the headquariers of the society or any branch 
ther.eof,and·may examine such persons on oath. 
(3) Any meeting called unde.r clause (b) of sub-section (2) shall have 
all the powers of a general meeting called under the bye-laws of the so-
ciety and its proceedings shall be re.gulated by such bye-laws. 
40 (~~ ~;Baii."'ar shall, co.mmunicate a ,brief .a.unmary of,the repWtpf 
t~,iJlq\Wy to the society, tbe flnancing institutiON, if any, to which ~ 
society is aftUiated, and to the person or authority, if any, at whose in-
stan.Qe ·t~ ~ry is made. 
II.; (l~ The Registrar shall, on the application of a creditor of a co-
45 opel'fttive4OCiety, inspect or direct some person authorliled by him by order 
in welting in this behalf to inspect the boob of the society: 
3698 ('J) LS-" 
Inspection 
01 
societies. 
Inquiry 
by 
Registrar. 
Inspection 
of 
book, of 
Indebted 
lOcletiel, 

COlt of 
inquiry. 
Recovery 
of costl. 
Burcharle. 
r' 
Ii.' 
~ 
ProVided that no stich inspection shall be made unless the appUca1lt-
(a) satisfies the Registrar that the debt is a sum then due, and 
that he has demanded payment thereof and has not re.ceived satisfac-
. tion within a reasonable time; and 
(b) deposits with the Registrar such sum as security for the costs S· 
of proposed inspection as the Registrar may re.quire. 
(2) The Registrar shall communicate the result of any such inspection 
to the creditor. 
57: Where an inquiry is held und'er section 55, or an inspection is made' 
under section 56, the Registrar may apportion the costs,' or such part of 10 
the costs, as he may think fit, between the society, the members or 
creditor demanding an inquiry or inspection, and the officers or former 
officers and the members or past members of the society: 
Provided that-
(a) no order of the apportionment of the costs shall be made IS 
under this section unless the society or the person liable to pay the 
costs thereunder has had a reasonable opportunity of being heard; 
(b) the Registrar shall state 'in writing under his own ha'nd the 
,rounds on which the costs are appoTtioned. 
58. Any sum awarded by way of costs under section 57 may be re- 20 
covered,on application to a magistrate having jurisdiction in the place 
where the person from whom the money is claimable, actually and 
voluntarily resides or carries on business, and such, magistrate shall 
recover the same as if it were a fine imposed by himself. 
't. (1) If in the course of an audit, inquiry, inspection or the winding 2 
up of a co-operative so~iety, i~ is found, that any person, who is ,or was S 
en~rusted with, th~ organisation or map"agement of such I ~ociety, qr "(ho 
is or has at any, tIme '~en an ,?~cer ?r an employee of t,h~ s?,c~etX', ,has 
made any payment contrary to thIS Act, the rules or the bye-laws or has 
caused any deficiency in the aaseta of the society by breach' of trust or 3 
w1lfulnegligence' or has, misappropriated or fraudulently retained any 0 
money or other property. belonging to such' Society, the Registrar may, 
of his own motion or on the application of the, committee, liquidator or 
~y creditor, inquire h:.nself or direct any person authorised by him, by 
an order in writing ill this behalf, to inquire into the conduct of suc~ ,35 
person: 
f " 
Provided that no such inquiry shall be held after the eXpiry of six 
years ftOm the date of any act or o:nission referred to 'in thi$ sub-sectkm. 
..; ~. 
(2) Where an inquiry is made under sub-section 1(1), the Registrar' 
~y. after giving the ~~ concerned an opportunity of ~,helf'd 40 
make an order, llequi~ing him to repay or restore the money or properl)r. 
or any part thereof, wit~;inter~t at such ra~'jor to pay contribution and 
costs or compensation to such extent, as the Registrar may consider just 
and equitable. ' '. . • 

23 
CHAPTER VIII 
SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES 
60. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time 
being in force, if any dispute touching the constitution, management or 
S the bUsiness of a co-op ~rative society other than a dispute regarding dis-
ciplinary action taken by the 5'Ociety or its committee against a paid em-
ployee of the society arises-
(a) among members, past members and persons claiming 
through members, past members and deceased members, or 
10 (b) between a member, past member or person claiming through 
IS 
a member, past member or deceased member and the society, its 
committee or any officer, agent or employee of the society or liquida-
tor, past or present, or 
(c) between the society or its committee and any past committee, 
any officer. agent O'f employee, Of any past officer, past agent or past 
employee or the nominee, hlj!irs or legal reprO!Sentatives of any de-
c~ased officer, deceased agent, or deceased employee of the society, 
or 
(d) between the society and any other co-operative society, 
20 between a society and liquidator of another society or between the 
·liquidator of one· society and the liquidator of another society, 
such disputes shall be referred to the Registrar for decision and no court 
shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or other proceedings in res-
pect of such dispute. 
2S (2) For the purposes of sub-section (1). t.he follOWing shall be deemed 
to be disputes touching the constitution, management or the business of 
a co-operative society, namely:-
(a) a claim by the society for any debt or demand due to it 
from a member or the nominee, heirs or legal representatives of a 
30 deceased member, whether such .debt or demand be admitted or not; 
(b) a claim by a surety against the principal debtor where the 
society has recovered from the surety any amount in respect ctf any 
debt or demand due to it from the principal debtor as a result of the 
default of the principal debtor. whether such debt or demand is ad-
3S mitted or not; 
(c) any dispute arising in connect50n with the election ctf any 
officer of a society other than a society notified under sub-section (1) 
of section 31. 
(3) If any question arises whether a dispute referred to the Registrar 
40 under this section is or is not a dispute touching the constitution, manage-
ment or the business of a co-operative society, the decision thereon of 
the Registrar shall be final and shall not be CAlled in question in any 
court, 
61, (1) The Registrar may, on receipt of the reference of dispute 
4S under section 69,-
(a) decide the dispute himself, Of 
(b) transfer it for disposal to any person who has been invested 
by the Lieutenant-Governor with powers in that behalf, or 
Disputes 
which 
may be 
referred 
to vbi. 
tration, 
Ret\erence 
of dia-
putes to 
arbitra. 
tion, 

Power of 
financing 
bank to 
proceed. 
Winding 
up of co-
operative 
societies. 
(c) refer it for disposal to one arbitrator. 
(2) The Registrar may withdraw any reference transferred under 
clause '(b) of Bub-Bection (1) or referred under cJause (e) otthat 'sub-
,section and deddeit himself or refer the same te another arbitrator 
5 for decision. 
(3) The Registrar ar any othrr p..!rson to whom a dispute is referred 
for decision under this section may, pending the decision of the dispute, 
make such interlocutory orders as he may deem necessary in lthe interest 
of justice. 
6Z. ,(1) If a co~perative society is unable to pay its . deb~to,~ ftnanc- 10 
ing bank by reason of its members committing default in the payment of 
the moneys due by them, the financing bank may direct the committee 
of such a society to proceed against such members under section 60 and 
if the committee fails to do so within a period of ninety days from the 
date of receipt of such direction, the financing bank itself may proceed IS 
against such members in which case the provisions of this Act, the rules 
or the bye-laws shall apply as if all references to the society or its com-
mittee in the said provisions were references to the financing bank. 
(2) Where a financing bank has obtained a decree or awud against 
a soetety in respect of moneys due to it fMm the society, the ftnanclng '20 
bank may proceed to recover such moneys firstly from the assets df the 
~ty .and .secondly fromt.he .members;to ·the extent of· Uleir .bts.~dMe 
to the society. 
CHAPrER IX 
WINDING UP OF CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES 
63. (1) If the Registrar, after an inquiry has been held under section 
-55, . or an inspection has been made under section 56, or on rl'eeipt of an 
application made by not less than three-fourths of the members of a co-
operative society, is of opinion that the society ought to be wound up, 
he may iasue an o.rder directing it to be wound up_ 30 
(2) The Registrar may of his own motion tnake an order directing 
'the winding up of a co-operative society-
(a) where it is a condition of the registration of the society that 
the satiety shall consist of at least ten members and the number of 
members has been reduced to less than ten or , 35 
(b) where the co-operative sodety has not cOlDDleMed·,'Wwking 
or .has ceased to function in accordance with co.qperative prindples. 
(3)' The Registrar may cancel an order for the winding up of a co-
operative society. at any time, in any case where, in his opinion, the 
society should continue to exist. 40 
(4) A copy of .such .or<,ier shall be communic$ted ,by registered. post 
to the society and to the financing institutions, if any, of which the society 
is a member. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained. in this section no co-opera-
tive bank sball.be wo~nd up except with the prerious sanction in writing 
of the Reserve Bank. . 45 

25 
III. N<1twlthstanding anything' to'the contrary contained in this Act, 
!the Begi8trar .. hallrnake an order for winding up of a co-operative bank, 
if so required by the Reserve Bank in the circumstanees mentioned in 
47 oll961. section l3D of the Deposit Insurance Corporation Act, 1961. 
5 "j·Where a ~ative ·bank being an insured bank withiD the mean-
47011861. iRg w the DepoaitlDauraaee Corporation Ad, 1161, ·is 'wouad up, or taken 
into liquidation, and the Deposit Insurance Corporation hubeeomeliable 
to the depO'Sitors of the insured bank under sub-aection (1) of section 
f}6 'df'tnat A"t, 'the Deposit Insurance Corporation shU be reimburaed 
10 by the liquidator or such other person in the cireum.tanees to the extent 
.and·ill the -manner provided in section 21 of the Depoait Insurance Act, 
1961. 
Winding 
up ot co· 
operative 
bank. 
at the 
direction 
of the 
Relerve 
Bank. 
Reimbur-
sement 
to the 
Deposit 
Insurance 
Corpora. 
tion 
by the 
liquida. 
tors. 
.... \".l~ ...... -&he 8awWrar ·Iau naa4e .. 'Or_ wader "en 83 for Uqui-
.die ..-.. .... « a c.-epentive IOdety, the BeaistrlU' ... y appoint a dator. 
15 liquidator for the purpole an4 fix his remuneration. 
'{J:) . ·A tiq1li4atorshall, ·on appointment, take into hiI custody or under 
his control all the -property, .e1fectI aDd actionable claims towbioh the 
society is or appears to be entitled and shall take such steps as he may 
deem necessary or expedient, to prevent loss or deterioration of, or 
2q 'damage to, such property, effects and claims. fie may carry c1n the 
bwdneu of the society so far as may be necessary with the previous 
allfllll8V111f lbt:the "~. 
(3) Where an appeal is preferrC'd under section 76, an order of wind-
ing up of a co-operative society made under sect.ion 63 shall not operate 
21'hlC .. kr 'untt1 the ·order is conftnned in appeal: 
Provided that the l:quidator ,hall continue to have custody or control 
of the property, effect., and actionable claims mentloned in sub-section 
~) ' .... hII'ft! autbol'tty to 1ake the .... refer!led to ift that wb-aection. 
(4) Where an order of Winding up of a co-operattve IOCfety is set 
30 aside in appeal, the property, effects and actionable claims <1f the society 
.han revest in the society. 
tn. (1) Subject to any·ruIeI tnade if! this behalf, the ",hole of the 
.. ets 'f1l a eo-operative aoctety, in respeet of whida an onier for Winding 
up· has ben made, shaU WIt in the liquidator appotRted under section 66 
35 from the date em which the order takes elfeet.nd the Uquiciatol' shan 
have power to realise such. assets by sale or otherwise. 
4S 
(2) 1haclb liquidator shall also haw power, subjlttt to the ton'll'o{ of 
the Registl'ar,-
(a) to wtHute and defend suits and other legal proceedings on 
behall of the COoGpeI'ative society by the name of his office; 
<b> to detennfne from time to tltne tIM! contribuUOD (illelodfng 
debts due and costs ot liquidation) to be 1IIIlde or~mamtDgto be 
made by the membel1l or past members or by the estates or nominees, 
heirs or legal representatives of deceased members or by any oftlcers 
or former officers, to the assets of the society; 
Power. of 
liquida-
tor. 

Priority 
of contri-
butions 
assessed 
by liqui-
dator. 
26 
(c) to .investigate all claims against the co-operative society and 
subject to the provisions of this Act, to decide questions Qf priority 
arMing between claimants; 
(d) to pay claims against the co-operative society including 
interest up to the date of winding up according to their respective 5 
priorities, if any, in full or rateably, as the assets of the society may 
permit; the surplus, if any, remaining after payment of the claims 
being applied in payment of interest from the date of sueh order of ' 
winding up at a rate fixe; by him but not exceeding the contract 
rate in any case; 10 
(e) to determine by what persons and in what proportions .the 
costs of the liquidation are to be borne; 
<f) to determine whether any person is a member, past mem-
ber or nominee of deceased member; 
(g) to give such directions in regard to the'oollection8ncldistri- 15 
bution of the assets of the society as may appear to him to be neces-
sary for winding up the affairs of the society; '! 
(h) to -carryon the business of the 'society' sO. far. ~,may be 
necessary for the beneficial winding up of the same; 
(i) to. make any compromise or arrangement' with creditors or 20 
perSons clajming to be creditors or having or alleging to have any 
claim,. present or future, whereby th,e society, may b~ rendered Ua~lel 
(j) to make any compromise or arrange~nt with any person 
between whom .and the society _ there exists any dispute and to refer 
any such dispute to arbitration; 25 
(k) after consulting the members of the society, to dispose of 
the surplus, if any, remaining after paying the claiIns against the 
society. in, such manner as may be prescribed; and . , 
(l) to compromise all calls or liabilities to calls -and debts and 
liabilities capable, of resulting in debts, and all claims, presen~ or 30 
future, certain or contingent, subsisting or supposed to subsist bet-
ween the society and a contributory or alleged contributory' or other' 
debtor or person apprehending liability to the co-operative society 
and all questions in any way relating to or affecting the assets or 
the winding up of the society on such terms as may be agreed and 35 
take any security for the discharge of any such call, liability, debt or 
claim and give a complete discharge in respect thereof. 
(3) When the affairs of a co-operative soCiety have been wound up, 
. the liquidator shall make a. report to the Registrar and deposit the re-
cords of the SOCiety in such place as the Registrar may direct. 40 
88, Notwithstanding anything contained in the Provincial Insolvency 
Act, 1920, the contribution assessed by a liquidator shall rank next to 
debts due to the Government or to any local authority in order of priority 
iil insolvency proceedings. 
5 of 1920. 

2ft. , 
! :19. (1)! The Registrar may'after considering the teport~-ot'tl1e liqut- j 
datormade to- him underaub-section (3) 'ofaectit)D 67 'Ofder'the reps.: 
tration of the co-operative society to be caneelled. • 
Powerot 
Registrar 
to cancel 
registra· 
tion of a 
co-ope-
rativc 
society. 
(2) An order passed under sub-section (1) shall be communicated by 
S registered post to the president of the society and· to the financing insti-
tutions, if any, of which the society was a member. . 
CHAPTER X 
EXECUTION OF AWARDS, DECREES, ORDERS ANDDECrsroNS 
,~ 70. Notwithstanding anything contained in Chapter V1U or any other Enforce-
10 law for; the tUne being in force, but without prejudice to any other mode mentot 
of recovery provided in this Act, the Registrar .or'any PerSOil JlUbetdiDate char ••. · 
to him empowered by the Registrar in this behalf may, on the applica· 
tion of a co-operati-vesociety, make an OI'der directing the payment oflby 
debt or outstanding demand due to the society by any member or past 
IS 'or deceased member, by sale of' the property or any interest tJlerelD,' 
which is subject to a ch81'ge under section 36: 
Provided thqt no order shall be made under this section unless' the 
member, past member or the nominee" heir or legal representative of the 
deceasee member, has been serv.ed with a notice in the manner pres-
20 cribed. 
7l~ Every decision, award 'or order duly passed by the Registrar or 
arbitrator or Tribunal under sections 29, 30, 59,61, 70, 76, 78 and· 79 res- . 
pectively, shall, if not carried out,-
(4) on a certificate signed by the Registrar or any person 8,).ltho-
2S . rised bv him in this behalf, be d~ed to be a decree of a civil court 
and sh~ll be executed in the same manner as decree of such court; or 
30 
(b) be executed accorldin,.,to the provisiOl'lS of the Land Reve-
nue Code and the rules thereunder for the time being in force for the 
recovery of arrears of 'land revenue; 
.( c) be executed by the Rfi\l~trar or anY.j o~~eJl, person . lU~rdJ­
nate to him empowered by the Registrar in this behalf, by attach-
ment and sale or by sale without attachment of any property of the 
) person ot a co-operative ~ocietyagainst whom the order, deeislon or 
award has been obtained or passed. 
35 "12. Th~ orde~s· of t.lJ.e liqUidator under i section· 67 Shall be execl,lted 
a&orditlg to the Act and under the rules for the time being in force for 
. thereeovery of arrears of land revenue. ' 
1 
73. Where the Registrar is satisfied that a party to allY refJrerl~ made 
to him under section 60 with intent to defeat or delay the -exeaation of 
4~ E(n~' A~i02l lhatmay: be passed theteon is' about to- '. 
I' 
(4) dispose of the whole or any part of the property; or 
(b) remove the whole or any part of tlle property from the 
local limits of the jurisdiction of the Registrar, 
thelJ Regfstt-af nfay, 'wiless ad~uate ·sectitity is' furn1ilhed,: direct the 
45 conditional attachment ot the'Baid' property or' suc!hpjrt thereof M he 
Execution 
of order., 
etc. 
Execution 
ot Cll'ders 
ot Iiqul • 
dator. 
Attach· 
ment 
before 
award. 

Re ....... 
orpetlOn 
empower-
ed by him 
to be civil 
court for 
certain 
purp()lel. 
Recovery 
of1Jums 
due to 
Govem-
ment. 
Appeals. 
~8. 
tbinka neqeuaI\Y. Sueh attachment shall be exec:u~by a civU· ceurt 
huiAI j~ic:Uon in. ,the aame :way as an aUacbJMnt..OIJ<ier ~.·lIi'· 
itself and shall have the·.UJne e4evt ... S\lCh:.an, oM8J:i:. 
Provided that the powers of t·!1e Registrar under this -seetion shaD not 
be . delegated to any officer below such rank as m.y be ptescribed. S 
74. The Registrar or any person empowered by him in this behalf 
shall be deemed, when exercising any powers under this Act for the re-
covery of any amount by the attachment and sale or by sale without 
attachment of any property, or when passing any orders on any appli-
catiOn· I18de to him for mell recovery or for ta.king a. atap,.m-aidto.f JlQCh Ie 
fectoV8ry. to be civil court for the pw-poses. of artUtle. 136. of the, kbaduJ.e. 
tG.the.Wmitation Act. 1963. 
fl. (1) All: ~ due from a oo-opeNative society. all fnQn .. anl.~Q8D 
QI;.a.embe£ ·'or PllAat!lDber of a co-operative soaiety ........ to GCWUlh-t 
JIIIIIIItt iaeluding an, costs awarQed, to Government under. any. pmv.illonl ,I S: 
of thia Act, may 011 a certifioateiaaued by. the Regilltml' inliltia .• behall,1Hl 
recovere4.the .~ lPU1Iler as arrears of land revenue. 
(2) Swoa due from.a co-aperative aociety to Gov".....,t aru:Lr.aeo .... , 
... llndez' lUb-section (1.) may be recovered. lratly, hom the proped¥; 
ot .. socielY.iE!Condly. in the case of a society the liabtlity of the mem .. ~RJ 
hera. 0( which ta limited, from the members, Plst members or the estates 
of· d ... ~ rnembefa, aubjectto the limit of their liability. ana. tbilldly, 
inl tile. e .. of other lIOcieties, fr.orn· the· members. put. membel'l ortbe 
estate. of ~e dec~d members: 
Previded that the liability of past members and the (""tates ·of deceas- 25 
ed members sball in aU cases be sub~ \'0 the provisjrms of section 27. 
CH:ltPTER Xl 
ApPiIA1&. 4P-:~ 
ft. (1) Subject to the provisions of section '1f; an appeal· shall Ue 
under this section against- 30 
(1., •• 1kO ...... ·qC. ~ ~ . ...oe, ~~Q8d~ of 
section 9 refusing to register I· .-.iety; 
(b) an order of the Registrar ~de under lU~ion (41, .tIl_-
tlQn. H re~us1.ng to register an amendment Q{ the bye-lawlloC,,, co-
operative society; 35 
(c) an order of the Registrar made under Bubo-section (l) of 
~-,}Q; 
(d~ a decision of a co-operative socioty refuaing to ..... i. ""y 
pei'rqh as a mea)ber· of the lOCIiety who is o~. duq. . ..,.a,ct, '. 
tor merJ;lbership qp4er the bye-laws of, the &o.ciet~; I ";' "! ~o . . 
(~) a decillion of ~ ~rative society ex~lling an)" ofJtII men.· 
bers; . . 
{~ a~ .. order, of the ~t~ar reqlQvin,a ~ ~it;W. ~/. ~ 
Op6UUye society nu.de uml~ section 3~ 
38 of 1983. 

29 
(g) an order made by the Registrar under section 57 apportion-
ing the costs of an enquiry held under Hection 55 or I.ll insl)eCtiOD 
madt under section 56; 
(h) any order of su!"Charge under section 59; 
5 (9 any decision or award made under section 61; 
(j) an order made by the Registrar under section 63 directin~ 
. the winding up of a co-operative society; 
(k) any order made by the liquidator of a co-ope~tive society 
in exercise of the powers conferred on him by l)(octiclI 67; 
10 (l) any order made under section 73. 
(2) An appeal against any decision or o;·Jer under ~ub-sedion (1) 
shan be made within sixty days from the date of the deci!dm'l or otder-
(a) if the decision or order falls under clauSA (g), (h), (i) or 
(l) of ~ub-section (1). to the Tribunal; 
15 (b) in any other case, to the Lieutenant-Governor or the Itegill-
trar according as the decision or order was made by the :Registrar or 
any other person. 
(3) No appeal shall lie under this section from any deciS!on or order 
made by the Registrar in appeal. 
20 77. NotwithStandmg anything contained in this Act. where witb the No .p. 
previous sanetion in writing or on requisition of H~,~ Ret~r"e Bank.- peal for revision 
(i) a co-operative bank is being wound up; or 
(ii) in respe<:t of which a scheme of amalgamation or reorgani-
sation is given effect to; or 
(iii) in respect of which;ln order for the supersession of the 
committee and the appointment of an administratoJ therefor has 
been made, 
no appeal. revision or review there against shall lie c:tt be permissible, and 
the sanction or requisition of the Reserve Bank IlhaJl not be liable to be 
30 caned in question. 
in certain 
cases. 
78. (1) The I..ieuteJIaD.t-Govena~ shall eoMtitute a Tribunal to. be Delhi Co--
catied the· DeIhJ Co-opefttlve Trib'Pnal to exeftise the rUctions eonfer. operative 
redOD the TrlbtuutJ by or lIDder this Art. . Tribunal. 
3~ 
(2) The Tribunal sha]) consist of not more them th\'(:~ m~'11bers pol-
!!eSSing such qualifications as may be prescribed. 
(3) Any vacancy in the membership of the Tribunu! sh 111 ~oe tlllect by 
the Lieutenant-Governor. 
(4) Subject to the previous aporoval of the Lieutenant-Govemor, the 
Tribunal shall frame regulations cons~nt with the provtlfons of the 
.0 Act and the rules made thereunder, for reguJatlogits procedure and the 
disposal of tts business. . 
(5) The regulations made under ~ub-sect'on (4) "h H bt! pUblished by 
the Lieutenant-Governor in the Delhi GazPtte. 
3698(B) LS-5. 

Review of 
ordera of 
Tribunal. 
Revillon. 
Interlocu-
tor,. 
orders. 
30 
(6) The Tribunal may call for and; examine the recora of any proceed-
ings, in which an appeal lies to it, fur the purpose of satisfying itself as 
to the legality or propriety of any decision or order ~~sed and if in any 
CRse it shall appeal to the Tribunal that any such declslOJi :lr orrler should 
be modified, annulled or reversed, the Tribunal ma~T ,.5S such order 5 
thereon as it may deem fit. 
(7)· An order passed in appeal under section 76 or .~ ... revl!ion under 
sub-section (6) of this section or in review under section 79 by the Tri-
bunal shall be final and conclusive, and shall not be called in question 
In any civil or revenue court. 10 
Explanction.-The Tribunal hearing an appeal under this Act shall 
exercise all the powers conferred upon an appellate court by section 97 
of, and Order XLI of th~ First Schedule to, the Code of Civil Procedure, 5 of 1908. 
1908. .' •• 
'79. (1) The Tribunal may either on the application of the Registrar, IS 
or on the application of any party interested, review its own order in 
any case, and pass in reference theretOI such order as it V1inks just: 
'Provided that no such application made by the party shall be enter-
tained unless the Tribunal is satisfied that there has been the discovery 
of new and important matter of evidence. which after the exercise of due 20 
diligence was not within the knowledge of the applkant or ('ould not b~ 
produced by him at the time when its order was made or that there has 
been some mistake or error apparent on the face of the record, or for 
any other sufficient reason: 
Provided further that no such order shall be vart"!d at re .. ,ised unless 3S 
notice has been given to the parties interested to appear and be heard in 
support of such order. 
(2) An application for review under sub-section (1) by any party 
shall be made within ninety days from the date of communication of the 
order of the Tribunal. 30 
80. Subject to the provisions of section 77, the Lieutenant-Governor 
may, suo motu or on the application of a party to a reference, call for and 
examine the record of any proceedings in which no appeal lies to the 
Lieutenant-Governor under section 76 (not being any proceedings in 
which an appeal lies to the Tribunal) for the purpose of satisfying him- 35 
self as the legality and propriety of any decision or order passed and 
if in any case it shall appear to him that any such decision or order should 
be modified, annulled or revised, he may pass such order thereon as he 
may deem fit. 
81. Where an appeal is made under section 76 or whele the Tribunal 40 
or Lieutenant-Governor calls for the record of a case 1rtlder section 78 
or section 80,. the appellate authority or the Tribunal or Lieutenant-
Governor, as the case may be, may, in order to prevent the ends of, justice 
being defeated. make such interlocutory order. including an order of stay. 
ilending the decision of the appeal or revision as s\lc:h authority or the 
Tribunal of Lieuten!int-Gove~or may df;!em fit. 45 

OFFENCES AND PENALTIES' 
82. (1) Any person other than a co-operative society carrying on busi- OfreD~ 
ness under any name or title of which the word "oo-operative", or its 
S equivalent in any Indian language, is part, without the sanction of the 
Lieutenant-Governor shall be punishable with fine which may extend to 
two hundred rupees and in the case of a continuing breach with a further 
fine which may extend to five hundred rupees for every day during which 
the breach is continued after conviction for the tirst such breach. 
10 (2) Any member or past'member or the nominee, heir or legal repre-
sentative of a deceased member of a co-operative society who contravenes 
the provisions of sections 36 and 37 by disposing of any property in res-
pect of which the society is entitled to have a first charge under that sec-
tion or do any other act to the prejudice of such claim, shall be punishable 
15 with fine whicb may extend to five hundred rupees. 
(3) A co-o~ative society or an officer or member thereof wilfully 
making a false return or furnishing false information, or any person wil-
fully or without any reasonable excuse disobeying any summons, requi-
sition or lawful written order issued under the provisions ~f this Act or 
, 20 wilfully not furnishing any information required from him by a person 
authorised in this behalf under the provisions cl this Act, shall be punish-
able with tine which may extend to two hundred rupees. 
(4) My employer who, without sufficient cause, faUs to pay to • c0-
operative SOCiety the amount deducted by him under section 44 within 
2S a period of fourteen days from the date on which such deduction is made 
shall, without prejudice to any action that may be taken against him 
under any law for the time being in force, be punishable with tine which 
may extend to five hundred rupees. 
(5) Any ofbcer or custodian who wilfully fails to hand over cuatody 
30 of books, records, cash, security and other property belonging to a c0-
operative society of which he is an officer or custodian, to a person entitl-
ed under section 33, 53, 54, 55 or 66 shall be punishable with tine which 
may extend to two hundred rupees and in the case of a continuing breach 
with a further tine which may extend to flve hundred rupees for every 
35 day during which the breach is continued after conviction for the first 
such breach. 
(6) Any person who fraudulently acquires or abets in the acquisition 
of any such property which is subject to a charge under sections 36 and 
37 shall be punishable with flne which may extend to two hundred 
40 rupees. 
n 83. (1) No court inferior to that of a magistrate of the first clas, shan 
try any oftence under this Act. 
(2) No prosecution shall be instituted under this Act without the pre-
vioUJ sanction of the Registrar and such sanction.hall not be given with-
45 out giving to the penon concerned a reasonable opportunity to repreeent 
bis cue. 
Coan!· 
zanceot 
olfenc:e. 

Addrell 
of .ode-
ties. 
Copy of 
.~ct, rules 
and bye-
laws, etc., 
to be open 
to ins-
pection. 
Prohibi-
tion 
agllinst 
the use of 
the word 
"eo-opera-
tift". 
Power to 
exempt so-
cieties 
from con-
ditions as 
te· regis-
tution. 
Power to 
exempt co-
operative 
societies 
from pro-
visiolls of 
the Act. 
Lkluidator 
to be 
public 
.. rvant. 
Notice 
neeeuary 
m 1Uita. 
Companies 
Aet not 
to apply. 
Savinlot 
existing 
SQdetietl. 
32 
k Every co-operative $OCiety shall have an address registered. in tht! 
manner prescribed to which aU' notices and communications may be IeJ1t, 
and shall send to the Registrar notice of every change thereof within 
thirty days ot such change. 
8!i. Every co-operative society shan keep a copy of this Act, thlI rules S 
and its bye--laws and also a list of its ,-.lembers; open to inspecti~n fn!e of 
ehlrrge at all reasonable times at the r:;gister~' address of theioclety: . 
86. No person other than a co-operative society shall trade or carry 
on business under any name or title of which the word "co-operative" 
or its equivalent in any Indian language is part: 10 
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to the use by any 
persbn '::ir his successor-in-interest of any name or title UriC$er wh'!ch be 
cllrrled on business at the date on which the Co-operativeSOcie~ieS Aet, 2 of 1'1&. 
1912, 'came into ope:-ation. 
87. NotWithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Lieutenant- IS 
Governor may. by general or special order and subject to sueh conditions, 
if any, as he may impose. exempt any society or class of societies ftom 
any of the requirements of this Act as to registration. 
88. The Lieutenant-Governor may, by general or special order, to be 
published in the Delhi Gazette, exempt any co-operative society or any 20 
class of co-operative societies from any of the provisions of this Act, or 
may direct that such provisions shall apply to such soc:jetie!j or class of 
societies with such modifications as may be specified in the Qrder. 
89. Any person appoint~d as liqUidator under the provisions of this 
Act or the rules shall be deemed to be a pUblic servant within the mean- 2 .5 of 1880. 
ing .00 section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. 5 
... No suit shall be instituted against a co-operative soeiety or any 
of. its officers in Tespeet of any act touching the bUsineSs of the sOctety 
'unW the expiration of three months next after notice in writtnghitS "b,en 
d~fvered to the Registrar or left at his oft\ce, stating the cauSe of aetiOh, 30 
Uie'tiame, description and place of residence of the plaintiff and the 're1t~f 
Wh!chhe elal1ns. and the plaint shall contain a statement that such notiee 
has been so delivered or left. 
91. The provisions of the Companies Act, 1956. shall not apply to co-
operative societies. 1 at 1.58. 
3S 
92. (1) Every society now existing which has been registered under the 
Co-operative Credit Societies Act. 1904 or under the Co-operative Sode-
ties Act, 1912. or under tht. Bombay Co-operative Societies Act, 1925. as 10 at 190. 
in, force in the Union territory of Delhi. shall be deemed to be registered ; ~/~~i5. 
under the corresponding provisions of this Act. and its bye-laws shall, .0 
so far as the. same are not inconsistent with the express provlsions'ofthis 
Act. continue in force until altered or rescinded. 
(2) All appointments, rules and ordters made, notifications and notices 
ill8ued and suits and other' proeeedinp iniUtutect . under the Aid ~ 

5 of 1908. 
33 
sha.ll, so tar as they are .consistent with the provisions of thia Act, be 
deemed to have been respectively made, issued and instituted under this 
Act, save that an order m.ade cancelling the registration of a society ahall 
be d~med, unless the society has already been finally liquidated, as an 
5 order ISSUed unde.r section 63 for its being wound up. 
n. (1) Save as provided in this Act, no civil or revenue court shall 
have any jurisdiction in respect of-
(a) the registration of a co-operative SOCiety or ita bye-laws or of 
an amendment of a bye-law; . 
10 (b) the removal of a committee; 
(c) any dispute required under section 60 to be referred to the 
Registrar; and 
(d) any matter concerning the winding up ed the dissolution of 
a co-operative society. 
IS (2) While a co-operative society is being W'GUlld up, no suit or other 
legal proceedings relating to the business of such SOCiety sn.u.be proceed. 
ed with or instituted against, the liquidator as such or against the ~ety 
or any member thereof, except by leave of the Registrar and eubJed to 
such terms as he may impose. 
20 (3) Save as provided in this Act, no order, deeision or award made 
under this Act shall be questiJned in any court on any ground whatsoever. 
M. (1) In exercising the 1unctions conferred on him by or under this 
Act, the Registrar, the arbitrator or any other person decidlns a clilpute 
under section 61 and the liquidator of a co-operative society or penoD 
l5 entitled to audit, inspect or hold an inquiry and the Tribunal, aball have 
all the powers of a civil court, while trying a suit, under the Code ot CivU 
Procedure, 1908, in respect of the following matters, naniely:-
30 
(a) summoning and enforCing the attendance of any person and 
examining him on oath; 
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any doeument; 
(c) proof of facts by affidavits; and 
(d) issuing commissions for examination of witneaes. 
(2) In the case ';:il an affidavit, any officer appointed by the Registrar, 
the arbitrator or any other person deciding a dispute and the liquidator 
3S or the Tribunal, as the case may be, may administer the oath to the 
deponent. 
95. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedlnis shall lie. agaiOlt the 
Registrar or any person subordinate to him or acting on' his authority in 
respect of anything in go~d faith done or purporting to have been done 
,.0 under this Act. 
96. (1) The Ueutenant-G:wernor shall, as soon as may be alter the 
commencement of this Act, constitute 8 common set'vice compruing of 
officers and other employees of djfferent classes of co-operattve societies 
and shall determine the number and designation of sueh offtcers and 
45 other employees. 
(2) The Lieutenant-Governor shall make rules regulating the qualifi· 
cations. remuneration, allowances, recruitment. and other conditions of 
service of such officers and other employees of the co-operative societies. 
1II4eftt. 
Atty. 
QualJftca. 
tioftl, re-
muoera-
lion an.ct 
other 
condi· 
Uons of 
~ 
01. 
empIe-
YHII of 
co-ope-
rative 
Meiet1eI 

34 
Ru\ 91. (1) The Lieutenant-Governor may, for any co·operative society 
or class of co-operative societies, make rules to carry out the purposes of 
this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following 5 
matters, namely:-
(i) the maximum number of shares or portion of the capital of 
a co-operative society which may, subject to the provisions of section 
6, be held by a member; . 
(ii) the form to be used and the conditions to be complied with 10 
in the making of applications for the registration of a society and 
the procedure in the matter of such applications; 
(iii) the procedure and conditions for change in the form and 
extent of the liability of a co-operative society; 
(iv) the matters in respect of which the society mayor shall IS 
make bye-laws and for the procedure to be followed. in making, alter-
ing and abrogating bye-laws and the conditions to be satisfied prior 
to such making, alteration or abrogation; 
(v) the conditions to be complied with by persons applying for 
admission or admitted aE> members, for the election and admission 20 
of members, and for the payment tOlbe made and the interest to be 
acquired before the exercise of the right of membership; 
(vi) the manner in which funds may be raised by means of shares 
and debentures or otherwise; 
(vii) for general meeting of the members and for the procedure 25 
at such meetings and the powers to be exercised by such meetings; 
(viii) the prohibitions and restrictions subject to which societies 
may transact business with persons who are n<rt members; 
(ix) the proportion of individuals and societies in the constitution 
of the committee of management and the general body of a co-opera- 30 
tive society of which another co-operative SOCiety is a member; 
(x) subject to the provisions of section 31, the election and nomi-
nation of members of committees, the appointment or election of oftl-
cers and the suspension and removal of the members and other oft!-
cers, and for the powers to be exercised and the duties to be perform- 35 
ed by the committees and other officers; 
(xi) the area of agricultural land, the conditions required to be 
fulftlled for the purpose of sub-section (6) of section 31; 
(xii) the appointment and regulation of work entrusted to person 40 
or persons replacing the committee in pursuance of section 32; 
(:riii) prohibiting a co-operative SOCiety from electing a default-
ing member on its committee or to be its representative; 

,..... 
L._ 35 
(xiv) the accountR and books to be kept by a co-operative society 
and the audit of such accounts and the charges, if any, to be made 
for such audit, and for the periodical pUblication of a balance-sheet 
showing the assets and liabilities of a co-operative sOCiety; 
5 (~) the returns to be submitted by a co-operative society to the 
Registrar, the persons by whom and the form in which such returns 
shall be submitted and in case of failure to submit any such returns 
for the levy of expenses of preparing it; 
(xvi) the persons by whom and the foTm in which copIes of the 
10 entries iIi books of societies may be certified and for the charges to 
be levied for the supply of such copies; 
(xvii) the formation and maintenance of a register of members 
and where the liability of the members is limited by shares, of a 
register of shares; 
15 (xviii) the appointment of an arbitrator to decide disputes; 
(xix) the procedure to be followed in proceedings before the 
Registrar, arbitrator or other persons deciding disputes including the 
appointment of a guardian for a party to the dispute who is a minor 
or who', by reason of unsoundness of mind or mental infirmity, is 
20 incapable of protecting his interests, and the levy of the expenses 
relating to such proceedings; 
(xx) the withdrawal and expUlsion of members and for the pay-
ments, if any, to be made to members who withdraw or are expelled 
and for the liability of past members and of the estates of deceased 
25 members; 
30 
35 
40 
45 
(xxi) the mode in which the value of a deceased member's share 
or interest shall be ascertained and for the nomination of a person to 
whom such share or interest may be paid or transferred; 
(xxii) the payments to be made and conditions to be complied 
with by members applying for loans, the period for which any loans 
may be made and the maximum amount which may be lent, to any 
member; 
(mU) the formati<nl and maintenance of reserve funds and 
other funds and the objects to which such funds may be appUed, and 
for the investment of any funds under the control of a co-operative 
society; 
(mu) the extent to which a co-operative society may limit the 
number (1f its members; 
(X'XV) the conditions under which proAts lnay be distributed to 
the members of a co-operative society with unlimited Iiabflfty, and 
the maximum rate of dividend which may he paid by co-operatlve 
societies; 
(xxvi) the calculation and writing off of bad debts by co-opera-
tive societies; 
(xxvii) the procedure to be followed by a liqUidator apPOinted 
under section 66 in respect of provisions of sectiml 67; 

36 
(xxviii) the procedure to be followed in presenting and dispos-
ine of appeals under this Act; 
(xxix) the form of orders referred to in sections 71 and 72; 
(x:u) qualificatkrns of the members of the Tribunal; 
(zz:ri) the issue and service of processes and for proof o'f service 5 
thereof; . 
(xxxii) the manner of effecting attachment; 
(n;:.riii) the custody, preservation and sale of property under 
attachment; 
(xmv) the investigation of claims by persons other than the 10 
clefaulter to any right or interest in the attached property, and for 
the postponement of the sale pending such investigation; 
(XX.nl) the immediate sale of perishable articles; 
(xxxvi) the inspection of documents in the office of the Regis-
trar or of any other omcer or authority and the levy of fees fOT IS 
granting certified copies of the same; 
(xxxvii) the terms and conditions on which the Central G<lv-
emment may make share-capital contribution or give assistance, 
financial or other, to societies and the terms and conditions· on which 
the Central ~vernment may guarantee the payment of the princi- :<0 
pal or interest on debentures issued by societies or loans raised by 
them; 
(.rxxt.'iii) the manner in which funds may be raised by a society 
or a class of societies by means of shares or debentures or otherwise 
and the quantum of funds S'~ raised; 2~ 
(xx.rix) for giving reasonablE' notice of the charge under sec-
tions 36 and 37; 
(xl) qualifications, remuneration. allowances and recruitment and 
ihe conditions of service of officers and other employees of a SO'ci~ty 
or class of societies; 3" 
(xli) the method of communicating or publishing any order, 
decision OT award required to be communicated or published under 
this Act or the rules. 
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may 
be after it is made before each House of Parliament while it is in sel- :5 
Ilion for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in on~ 
_tOft {\f in two successive sessions, and if before, the expiry of the ses-
sion in which it !~ ao laid or the session immediately following, both 
HCNSes agree in making any nt«Uftcation in the rule or both Houses agree 
that the rule should not be made, the rule stur,ll thereafter have et!ect only 40 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the'case may be, so. however, 
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejuttieeto the 
validity of anything previously done under that rulE'. 
lB. On the day on which the Delhi Co-operative Societies Act, 1970 
cobleS into force, the Bombay Co-operative Socie.ties Act. 1925 as in force 45 bom. 7 of 
in the Union territory of Delhi shall stand repealed: 19'!~. 

37 
Provided that the repeal shall not affect-
(a) the previous operation of the Act So repealed or anything duly 
done or suffered thereunder; or 
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued 
S or incurred under the Act so repealed; or 
(c) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of 
any offence committed against the Act so repealed; or 
(d) any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of 
any such right, privilege, obligation, liability, p.enalty, forfeiture or 
10 punishment as aforesaid, 
and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted, 
continued or enforced, and any such penalty, forfeiture. or punishment may 
be imposed as if that Act had not been repealed. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Bombay Co-operative Societies Act, 19251 was extended to 
the Union territory of Delhi in 1949. This Act, which was in force in the 
States of Mal'U~rashtra and Gujarat has 8inc~ beftn repealed in thj3&e States 
and replaced by new Acts passed by t.Qeir respective Legisl~tureJ. In 
view of the. expansion and diversification of activities of co-operatives, it 
is considered necessary to replace the existing co-operative legislation by 
the present Bill to meet the requirements of co-operative development in 
the Union territory of Delhi. 
2. The salient features of the Bill are that it provides for obviating de-
lays in the registration of co-operative societies, open membership, ex-
peditious amalgamation and division of co-operative societies, delegation 
of powers of the Registrar to federal societies, State partnership in co-
operatives and contribution by co-operatives too a Co-operative Education 
Fund. Provision has also been made for appealing against refusal of 
society to admit a person as its member and against orders of a society 
expelling a member. To facilitate mobilisation of deposits by co-opera-
tive banks, an enabling provisdon for the extension of the deposit insurance 
scheme to co-'O'perative banks has been included in the Bill. 
3. Following provisions have also been incorporated in the Bill for 
curbing the growth of vested interests in co-operatives as recommended 
by the Conference of Chief Ministers and State Ministers of Co-operation 
held in June, 1968: 
(a) Persons like money-lenders, traders and other middle-men 
whose interests conflict with the objects of co-operatives are to be 
excluded from membership of co-operatives. 
(b) Two seats-one each for Scheduled Castes and small farm-
ers-are to be reserved on the board of management of certain cate-
gories of societies. 
(c) No individual is to hold office. for more than 2 terms of 3 years 
each in the same institution. 
(d) No individual is to hold office simultaneously in more than 
three institutions. 
(e) The loans given to members of the managing committee of 
a society should be reviewed at the general body meetings of the 
society. 
(I) Elections in bigger co-operative institutions will be conductell 
through an independent authority. 
(g) Constitution· of common service Qf personnel of co-operatives. 
NEW DELm; ANNASAHEB P. SHINDE. 
The 13th February, 1970. 
38 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Delhi Co-operative Societies Bill, 1970 seeks to replace the Bom-
bay Co-operative Societies Act, 1925 in its application to the Union terri-
to~ of Delhi. E~cept~n~ fo'r a small acldition~ ex~nditure that may 
anse under Clause 31 of the Bill, no other new expenditure is contemplated 
by reason merely of the passing of the Bill. 
2. Claus~s 8, 53, 54, 55, 56, 61 and 66 of the Delhi Co-operative Socie-
ties Bi1~, 191'0 whtcp provid~ for the appoi~tment of Registrar and other 
officers, audit, inspection and inquiry, appointment of arbitrators and 
liquidators by the Registrar, will not entail any additional expenditure 
8$ the Registrar's organisation is already undertaking these responsibi-
liti~ in ter~ of the existing Co-operative SQcietie$ Act in force in the 
Union territory of Delhi_ 
3. Clause 31 of the Bill lays down that the election cf the members 
of the committees of such co-operative societies or class of co-operative 
societies, as the Lieutenant-Governor may, by general or special order, 
notify, shall be held under the superintendence, direction and control of 
returning officers to be appointed in this behalf. The exact amount of 
expenditure involved on this cannot be assessed at this stage. The addi-
tional expenditure may, however, be of the order of rupees 25,000 a year. 
4. Clause 43 provides for remission cf certain taxes including income-
tax, stamp duty, court fee, registration fee, land revenue, taxes on agri-
cultural income, taxes on sales or purchase of goods and taxes on profes-
sion, trades, callings and employments. The financial liability to Gov-
ernment as a result of the application of this enabling prOvision will de-
pend upon the nature and the extent of exemption given from time to 
time. The Co-operative Societies Act in force in the Union territory of 
Delhi already contains an enabling provision to exempt co-operatives 
from income-tax, stamp duty, court fee and registration fee. 
5. Clause 45 of the Bill provides for financial assistance to co-operatives 
in the form of share capital, loans and advances, subsidies and guaran-
tees. The system envisaged in this provision is already in vogue and 
no additional expenditure to the Government is envisaged. 
6. Clause 78 of the Bill pr<1Vides for the constitution of a Tribunal on 
the lines of section 63A of the Co-operative Societies Act in force in the 
territory and therefore no additional expenditure is involved. 
. 7. The budget provision of the Co-operative Department of the Union 
territory for the current financial year 1969-70 is of the order of rupees 
15.50 lakhs as revenue expenditure and rupees 16.50 lakhs as capital ex-
penditure for loans and share participation. Only a small additional ex-
penditure is contemplated by reason merely of the passing of this Bill. 
8. This Bill does nat involve any non-recurring expenditure. 
19 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 78 of the Delhi Co-operative Societies Bill, 1970 empowers the 
Delhi Co-operative Tribunal, to be constituted under the said clause, to 
frame regulations, with the previous approval of the Lieutenant-Governor 
for the purpose of regulating its procedure and the disposal of its busi-
ness. Further, clause 97 of the Bill empowers the Lieutenant-Governor 
to make rules to carry out the purposes of the Act. The various matters 
with respect to which rules may be so made are specified in sub-clause 
(2) of clause 97 of the Bill. It has been provided in sub-clause (3) af 
the said clause 97 that all rules so made shall be laid before each House 
of Parliament. 
2. The matters in respect of which regulations are to be framed or 
rules are to be made, are matters of procedure or detail and the delega-
tion of legislative power is thus (if a normal character. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
"to consolidate and amend the law relating to co-operative societies in the Union Territory 
of Delhi. 
(Shri Annasahib P. Shinde, 
Minister of State in the 
Ministry oJ Food, Agriculture, 
Community Dt.fJelopmet't and 
Co-operation.) 