10K SABHA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
Tllli i~.A.i\EL Hl VE 8 'J~\'D-;N JO nJ.,.J T.ci.h.[) :n. G P HI V."i·3, LDU TED 
.\!\;D DOi'1ESTIC G:\.S PRIVATE LIHI'l'1£D' (TAKING OVER 'JF 
·1.:i.i\ A\."TE>1El-j T) BILL, 19?) 
L-To be/As introduced in lpk ,sabha. 7 
I. l'8.(C 1, line- 2,-, 
l:Q..aQ.. "h ad T! 
;;'. Page 2, line 45,-
fnr "Fheraze Shah" I:Q.&i ~'Phirl)zshah" 
") 
.. Ta.w:'! 3, lino 10,· .. 
fQ..r.. "marketing, t!'qn sporting" 
~ "tr311 sporting, marketing" 
4. rage 6, line 24,-
a.fter "0 fficl=!r~" in Gert "shall !! 
5. Pa~e~, line 41,-
m "empliyee" ~ "employee If 
t... r:.;o 7,-
fQrthe marginal heA.dlng tu cl.ause 12, 
r!il!l.!l "CoEtr:;.cts 111 b:ld f:.:ith. etc. to 
be terminatr:-t or ITI')dified. I' 
7 . f ~.ge ? ir) tile :lJ.~r gin aJ he adin g to c 1 aU se 1 3, -
fo r " A<1 VPI.'r, co l! r~ ':' d 
8. Page'1, line 24,-
II " .. :'" i d ..... n ,..." n .,\.\ ~~ _', ~. '""J 
!.oJ: 'tni tice" r!l.a!l ''n0tice'' 
t;. PJ.gB 8, in the r:l1.rginR.l he1.ding to clause ",f.,-
for "of" ~ "to lT 
NE W D}I~ UiI; 
'Hatch 3, 1Cl1Q 
rhs:).lgunai 2, 1900 (Saka) 

As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA ON 
Bill No. Z6 of 1979 
THE PAREL INVESTMENTS AND TRADING PRIVATE LIMITED 
AND DOMES'IUC GAS PRIVATE LIMITED (TAKING OVER OF 
MANAGEMENT) BILL, 1979 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the taking over, in the public interest, of the management 
of the undertakings of the Parel Investments and Trading Private 
Limited and the Domestic Gas Private Limited, pending acquisition 
of those under'takiings, with a ,view to maintaining a service essen-
tial to the life CYf the community, namely, the bottling, transporting, 
marketing and distribwticm Of liquefWd petroleum go..B, and fO'l' 
1n4tters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
WHlIlRmAS the undertakings in India of Caltex (India) Limited, a 
foreign company, and vested in Caltex Oil Refining (India) Limited, 
a Government company within the meaning of the Companies Act, 1956, 
under the Caltex [Acquisition of Shares of Caltex Oil Refining (India) 
5 Limited and Of the Undertakings in India of Caltex (India) Limited] 
Act, 1977; 
AND WHEREAS the agreement dated the 23rd November, 1970, entered 
int~ by Caltex (India) Limited with the East Coast Gas Company, a 
partnership tlnn which has since been taken over Iby Parel Investments 
10 and Trading Private Limited, under which Caltex (India) Limited 
appointed. the East Coast Gas Company as distributors for sale of its 
liquefied petroleum gas packed in cylinders, to domestic, commercial 
and industrial customers, in certain areas, has terminated on the 31st 
December, 1978; 
IS AND W'HIl:RmAS the agreement dated the 23'rd November, 1970, entered 
into by Caltex (India) Limited with Domestic Gas Private Limited, 
under which the former appointed the latter as distributors for sale of 
its liquefied petroleum gas packed in cylinders, to domestIc, commer-

Short 
title and 
com-
mence-
mmt. 
Defini-
tions. 
2 
cial and industrial customers, in certain areas, has terminated on the 
31st DeCember" 1~8; 
AND WHEREAS by an order issued by the Company Law Board on the 
9th May, 1978, the aforementioned Caltex Oil Refining (India) Limited 
has been amalgamated with Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited; S 
AND WHEREAS for giving effect to the policy of the State towards 
securing the principle specified in clause (b) of article 39 of the Consti-
tution, it is proPJsed to acquire the undertakings of Parel Investments 
and Trading Private Limited and Domestic Gas Private Limited so that 
the means and resources as to bottling, transporting, marketing and 10 
distribution of liquefied petroleum gas of the said undertakings become 
vested in the State and thereby are so distributed as best to subserve 
the common g:>od; 
AND WHEREAS pending the acquisition of the undertakings of Parel 
Investments and Trading Private Limited and Domestic Gas Private IS 
Limited with a view to the nationalisation of the business of bottling, 
transporting, marketing and distribution of liquefied petroleum gas hither-
to carried on by them, it is expedient in the public interest to take over 
the management of the said undertakings; 
20 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirtieth Year of the RepubUc 
of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 2.5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Parel Investments and Trading 
Private Limited and Domestic Gas Private Limited (Taking Over of 
Management) Act, 1979. 
(2) It shall come into force at once. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "appointed. day" means the date on which this Act comes 30 
into force; 
(b) "Custodian" means the Government company appointed 
under section 4 to take over the management of the undertaking of 
each of the two companies; 
(e) "Government c:()mpany" has the meaning assigned to it by 35 1 of 1956 
section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956; . 
(d) "liquefied petroleum gas" has the same meaning as in sub-
item (2) of item No. llA of the First Schedule to the Central 
Excises and Salt Act, 1944; 10f 1944. 
(e) "notification" means a notification published in the Official 40 
Gazette; 
(f) "the two companies" means--
(i) Parel Investments and Trading Private Limited, a com-
pany within the meaning of the Companies Act, 1956, having 1 of 1968. 
its registered office at 53/57, Lakshmi Insurance Buildings, Sir S 
Pheroze Shah Mehta Road, Bombay-I; 4 
(ii) DoItleStic Gas Private Limited, a company within the 
meaning of the Companies Act, 1956, having its registered Office 
at 3464, Rashtrapathi Road,· Secundera~ad. 
, I 
1 of leG8. 

3 
CHAPTER II 
TAKING OVER OF MANAGEMENT OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE TWO COMPANIES 
3. (1) On and f.rom the appointed day, the management of the under-
taking of each of the two companies shall vest in the Oentral Government. 
S (2) The undertaking of each ot the two companies shall be deemed to 
include all .assets, rights, leaseholds, powers,. authorities and privileges and 
all property, movable and immovable, including lands, buildings, works, 
workshops, accommodation, shops and godowris, projects, stores, gas 
cylinders, facilities for bottling and filling liquefied petroleum gas and 
10 marketing, transporting and distrlbutioo: thereof in bulk and in cylinders, 
regulators, valves, machinery, locomotives, autofl¥.jbiles, tank -lorries, 
tank wagons, and other vehicles, liquefied petro~eum gas in process or in 
stock or in transit, bank balances, cash balances, reserve funds, invest-
ments, book debts and all other rights and interests in or arising out of 
15 such property as were, immediately before the appointed day. in the 
ownership, possession, power or co.ntrol of the Ct>1lcerned company in re-
lation to or concerning the undertaking in India, and all books of ac-
counts, registers, records, correspondence files, instruments (including 
agreements with dealers, sub-dealers and customers), assurances, maps, 
20 plans, sections. drawings, records of SUtVE'y and all Qther documents of 
whatever nature relating thereto. 
(3) Any contract, whether express or implied, or other arrangement 
in so far as it relates to the management of the business and affairs of each 
ot; the two companies in relation to its undertaking and in force imme-
2S diately before the appointed day shall be deemed to have terminated on 
the appointed day. 
(4) All persons in charge of the management including persons holding 
offices as directors, managers or any other managerial personnel of each 
of the two companies immediately before the appointed day shall be deem-
30 ed to have vacated their offices as such on the appointed day. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the 
time being in force, no person in respect of whom any contract of manage-
ment or other arrangement is terminated by reason of the provisiol)Jls 
contained in sub-section (3) or who ceases to hold any office by reason of 
35 the provisions contained in sub-section (4), shall be entitled to C'laim any 
compensation for the premature termination of the contract of manage-
ment or other arrangement or for the loss o~ office, as the case may be. 
4. (1) The Central Government shall, as from the appointed day, 
apP'>int Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited, a Government com-
4o·pan y, as the Custodian of the undertaking of each of the two companies 
for the purpose of taking over the management thereof, and the Custodian 
shall carry on the management of the undertaking of each of the two 
companies for and on behaJf of the Central Government. 
(2) The Central Government may issue such directions (including 
45 directions as to initiating, defending or continuing any legal proceedings 
before any court, tribunal or other authority) to the Custodian as to its 
powers and duties as the Central Government deems desirable and the 
Custodian may apply to the Centr a1 Government at any time for instruc-
t.ions as to the mannel:' in w' hich the Custodian sh,.l c;:on~uct th~ 
Manage-
mentot 
the 
under-
takiDgsof 
the two 
companies 
to vest in 
Central 
Govern-
ment. 
Appoint-
mentof 
Custodian 
to take 
over 
manage-
ment of 
the under-
takings 
of the 
two com-
J?aniet!. 

4 
management of the undertaking at each of the two CQIllpanies or in relation 
to any matter arising in the course of such management. 
(3) Subject to the provisions of this Act and to the control of the 
Central Government, the Cust"lxtian shall be entitled, notwithstanding 
anything contained in the Companies Act, 1956, to exercise all the powers S 1 of 1956. 
of the Board of Directors o~ the two companies (including the power to 
dispose of any properties or assets of the two companies) whether such 
powers are derived from the Companies Act, 1956, or from the memoran-
dum and articles of association of either of th~ two companies or 1rom 
any other source. 10 
(4) Any person having possession, custody or control of any property 
forming part of the undertaking of either of the two CQmpanies, shall, on 
demand, deliver forthwith such property to the Custodian or to any such 
person as may be authorised by the Custodian or the Central Government 
in this behaU. IS 
. , 
(5) If any person fails or refuses to comply with any demand made 
under sub-section (4) for the delivery of any property. the Custodian 
or any person authorised under the said sub-section may take possession 
of that property and may, for that purpose, use such reasonable force as 
may be necessary. 2.() 
(6) Any person who, on the appointed day, has in his possession or 
under his control any books, papers or other documents relating to the 
undertaking o~ either of the two companies, including the minutes books 
containing the resolutions of the persons in charge of the management 
thereof before the appointed day, the current cheque books relating to 25 
the undertaking of such company, any letters, memoranda, notes or other 
communications between him and such company. shall, notwithstanding 
anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, be liable 
to account for the books, papers and other documents (including such 
minutes books, cheque books, letters, memoranda or other communica. 30 
tions) to the Custodian and shall deliver them up to the Cuatodian or to 
any such person as may be authorised by the Custodian or the Central 
Government in this behalf. 
(7) Every person in charge of the managenumt Qf the undertaking of 
either of the two companies immediately before the appointed day. shall, 3$ 
within ten days from the appointed day or within such further period as 
the Central Government may allow in this behalf furnish to the Custodian 
a complete inventory of all the properties and assets (including particulars 
of book debts and investments and belongings) foiming part of such' 
undertaking immediately before the appointed day and of all the liabtlities 40 -
and obligations of such company in relation to its undertaking subsisting 
immediately before that day and any orther information relating to the 
undertaking of such company which tne Custodian may require in this 
behalf and also of all agreements entered into by such company in rela-
tion to its undertaking and in force immediately before that day, 4S 
(8) The Custodian shall receive from the funds of the undertaking of 
ach of t~~ said companietJ lJuch remuneration as the Ce»t+al Government .y fix. -

1 of 1956. 
S 
5. (1) Each of .tIIe two eompanies shall be givea by the Central Gov. 
ernment an amount, in. cash, for vestilll iD it, UIIder aeetMu 13. 'of the 
management of the undertaking thereof. 
(2) For every month during which the management so V'ests in 'the 
S Central Government, a-e amount referred to lin sub-section (1) shall 
be a sum oIf rupees seven hundred and :fifty in the case of 'the !Parer 
Investments and Trading Private Limited and rupees two hundred and 
fifty in the case of the Domestic Gas Private Limited. 
10 
CHAPTER III 
MISCELLANEOUS 
6. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies Act, 1956, 
Or in the memorandum or articles of association of either df the two 
companies, so long as the management of the undertakings of the two 
c4)Illpanies remains vested in the Central Govenunent,-
IS (a) it shall not be lawful for the shareholders of either of the 
two companies or any other person to nominate or appoint any person 
to be a director of such company; 
(b) no resolution passed at any meeting of the sha!reholders of 
either of the two companies on' or after the appointed day shall be 
20 given effect to unless approved by the Central C".rOvernment; 
(c) no proceeding for the winding up of either of the two com-
panies. or for the appointment of a liquidator or receiver in respect 
thereof shall lie in any court except with the consent of the Central 
Government. 
25 (2) Subject to the provisions contained in sub-section (1), and to the 
other prOvisions contained in this Act and subject to such other excep-
tions, restrictions and limitations, if any, as the Central Government may, 
by notification, specify in this behalf, the Companies Act, 1956, shall con-
tinue to apply to the two companies in the same manner as it applied 
30 thereto befor.e the appointed day. 
7. (1) Any person, who-
(Ill) having in his possession, custody or con'i..rol any property 
forming part of the undertaking of any of the two companies, wrong-
fully withholds such property from the Custodian or any person 
3S authorised under this Act for the purpose, or 
(b) wrongfully obtains possession of any such property, or 
(c) wilfully and without lawful excuse, retains any property of 
the undertaking of any of the two companies or removes or destroys 
it, or 
40 (d) wilfully withholds or fails to deliver any books, papers or 
other documents which may be in his possession or under his control 
to the CustoQ4m OJ;' anr person autho~d under this Act for the 
purpose, or 
Pay-
mental 
amount. 
Applica-
tion of 
Act 1 of 
1956. 
Penalties. 

Oftences 
by com-
panles. 
Exclusion 
otperiod 
of opera-
tion of 
Act. 
Act to 
have 
over-
riding 
effect .. 
Protec-
tion of 
action 
taken in 
good 
faith. 
6 
(e) fails, without reasonable cause, to furnish information or 
'Particulars as prcvided in sub-section (7) of section 4, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
. two years, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or 
with both. 5 
(2) No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under this 
section except with the previous sanction of the Central Government or 
of an officer authorised by the Central Government in this behalf. 
8. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a com-
pany, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in 10 
charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the 
business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be 
guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any IS 
such person liable tC' any punishment if he proves that the offence was 
committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due dili-
gence t:> prevent the commission of such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1). where any 
offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved 20 
that the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, 
or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, 
secretary Or other officer of the company. such director, manager, secre-
tary or other officer be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall 
be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 25 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm or 
other association of individuals; and 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 
9. In computing the period of limitation prescribed hy law for the 30 
time being in force for any suit or applicat'on against any person by 
either of the tW) compu'1ies in respect of any matter arising out of any 
transaction in relation to the undertaking of such company, the time 
during which this Act is in forcp shall be excluded. 
10. The provisions of this Act or any notification, order or rule made 35 
then'under shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent there-
with contained in any law other than this Act or in any instrument hav-
ing effect by virtue of any law other than this Act or in any decree or 
order of any court. 
11. (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against 40 
any officer or other empliyee of the Central Government, the Custodian or 
any chainnan, director, officer or other employee of the Custodian for 
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under 
this Act . 
. (2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Gov- 4' 
ernment Or any of it$ officers or other. employees or the Custodian or any 

1 
chairman, director, officer or other employee of the Custodian for any 
damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith 
done or intended to be done under this Act. 
12. I£ the Central Government is satisfied, after such inquiry as it 
5 may think fit, that any contract or agreement entered into at any time 
within twenty-four months immediately preceding the appointed day, 
between either of the two companies and any other person, in so far as 
such contract or agreement relates to the undertaking of either of the two 
companies, has been entered into in bad faith or is detrimental to the 
10 interests of the undertaking of the concerned company, it may make an 
order terminating or modifying (either unconditionally or subject to such 
conditions as it may think fit to impose) and thereafter the contract or 
agreement shall have effect accordi.ngly: 
Provided that no contract or agreement shall be terminated or modified 
15 by the Central Government except after giving to the parties to the con-
tract or agreement a reasonable opportunity of being heard and except 
after recording in writing its reasons for such termination or modification. 
13. Any transfer of property, movable or immovable, or any delivery 
of goods (other than a delivery made in the ordinary course of business) 
20 or relinqUishment or surrender of any right or interest in respect of any 
property under any arrangement secured by agreement or otherwise by 
either of the two companies or East Coast Gas Company (before its take 
over by Parel Investments and Trading Private Limited) made at any 
time after the 29th December, 1977 (being the date on which the nitice 
25 terminating the dealership agreements with the relevant companies was 
made known) and before the appointed day shall be void against the Cen-
tral Government or the Custodian, as the case may be, and notwithstand-
ing anything contained in any other law or agreement or instrument re-
lating to any such property, right or interest, the Central Government or 
30 the Custodian, as the case may be, shall, on and after the appointed day, 
be entitled to such property, right or interest on the same terms and con-
ditions on which either of the two companies or East Coast Gas Com-
pany would have been entitled to such property, right or interest if it 
had not transferred, delivered, relinquished or surrendered the same and 
35 this Act had not been passed: 
Prov~ded tnat nothing in this section shall apply to any property, 
goods, right or interest, transferred, delivered, relinquished or surrender-
ed in good faith and for sufficient monetary consideration. 
14. If the Custodian is of the opinion that any contract of employment 
40 entered into by: either of the two companies in relation to the undertaking 
of such company, at any time before the appointed day, is unduly 
onerous, it may, by giving to the employee one month's notice in writing 
or the salary or wages for one month in lieu thereof, terminate such con-
tract of employment. 
45 15. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, 
the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the provi-
sions of this Act, remove the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period 
of two years from the appointed day. 
Contracts 
.in bad. 
faith 
maybe 
cancel-
led or 
varied. 
AdVance 
of 
transferor 
surrender 
after 29th 
December, 
1977. 
Power to 
terminate 
contract of 
employ-
ment. 
Power to 
remove 
difficul-
ties. 

Powerol 
make 
rules. 
8 
16. (1) The Central Government may, by notit\cation, make rules to 
carry out the provisions of· this Act. 
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall 
be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before eaeh House of Parlia-
ment while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be 
5 comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any medifica-
tion in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, 
10 the !ule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form, or be of 
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modificatioQ. or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of snything pre-
viously done under that rule. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Caltex (India) Limited, a foreign company, had entered into 
agreements on the 23rd November, 1970, with the East Coast Gas Com-
pany, a partnership firm, and the Domestic Gas Private Limited, appoint-
ing them as distributors for sale of its liquefied petroleum gas packed in 
cylinders, to domestic, commercial and industrial customers in certain 
areas. The said agreements have terminated with effect ~rom the 31st 
December, 1978. The undertakings of the East Coast Gas Company are 
now owned by Parel Investments and Trading Private Limited. Caltex 
,(India,) Limited has since been acquired and vested in Caltex Oil Refining 
(India) Limited which has subsequently been amalgamated with Hindus-
tan Petroleum Corporation Limited. 
2. In pursuance of the policy for progressively securing that the owner-
ship and control of the means and resources for bottling, transporting mar-
keting and distribution of liquefied petroleum gas are also vested in the 
State and thereby so distributed as best to sub serve the common good, it 
will be necessary to acquire the undertakings of Parel Investments llnd 
Trading Private Limited and Domestic Gas Private Limited referred to 
above. Pending such acquisition, which is likely to take some time, Gov-
ernment consider it expedient, in the public interest, to take over the 
management of the said undertakings and appoint Hindustan Petroleum 
as Custodian ~or the purpose. 
3. The Bill seeks to give effect to the above objects. 
NEW D!:LllI; 
The 24th FebTuaTY, 1979. H. N. BAHUGUNA 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. R-30023J1 J77-MC., dated the 26th February, 1979 
from Shri H. N. Bahuguna, Min~ster of Petroleum, Chemicals and Ferti-
lizers to the Secretary, Lok Sabha.] 
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Bill 
to provide for the taking over, in the public interest, of the manage-
ment of the undertakings of the Parel Investments and Trading 
Private Lim~ted and the Domestic Gas Private Limited, pending acquisi-
tion of those undertakings, with a view to maintaining a service essential 
to the life of the community, namely, the bottling, transporting, market-
ing and distribution of liquefied petroleum gas, and for matters connect-
ed therewith or incidental thereto, recommends under article 117 (3) of 
the Constitution of India, the consideration of the Bill by Lok Sabha. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that on the appointed day the manage-
ment oi the undertaking of each of the two companies, namely, Parel 
Investments and Trading Private Limited and Domestic Gas Private 
Limited, shall vest in the Central Government, 
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for the payment of an amount of Rs. 750 
per month to the Part'l Investments and Trading Private Limited and 
.Rs .. 250 per month to the Domestic Gas Private Limited for every month 
during which the manilgement of the undertaking of the concerne-d com-
pany remains vested in the Central Government. 
The Bill, if enacted, will not involve any nOh-recurring expendit\l1'e. 
It will. however, involve a total recurring expenditure of rupees one. 
thousand per month payable as aforesaid to Parel Investments and Trad-
ing Company Private Limited and Domestic Gas Private Ltmited. 
10 .. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 15 of the Bill empowers the Central Government generally to 
make rules to carry out the provisions of the Bill. The matters in respect 
of which such rules may be made are matters o~ detail which cannot be 
provided for in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is 
of a nonna! character.. 
1I 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the taking over, in the public interest, of the management 
of the undertakings of the Parel Investments and Trading Private 
Limited and the Domestic Gas Private Limited, pending acquisition 
of those undertakings, with a view to maintaining a service essential 
to the life of the community, namely, the bottling, transporting, 
marketing and distribution of liquefied petroleum gas, and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
(Shri H. N. Bahugu:na., 
Minisfer of Petroleum,. 
Chemicals and Fertilizers.} 