Bill No. 24 of 1954. 
THE AUXILIARY TERRITORIAL FORCE BILL, 1954 
(As INTRODUCED IN THE HOUSE OF THE PEoPLE) 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the constitution of an A u.riliary Territorial Force. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifth Year gf our Republic as 
follows:-
1. Short title and extent.-(1) This Act may be called the Auxili-
ary Territorial Force Act, 1954. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
2. Deflnitions.-In this Act, unless the context otherwise' re-
quires,-
(a) 'camp' means any place etablished under section 4 
as a camp where any body of persons enrolled under this Act is 
for the time being undergoing training; 
(b) 'Force' means the Auxiliary Territorial Fdrce constitut-
ed under this Act; 
(c) 'enrolled person' means a person enrolled in the Force 
under this Act; 
10 
(d) 'prescribetmeans prescribed by rules made under this IS 
Act; 
(e) 'superior officer' means any officer, junior commissioned 
officer or ndn-commissioned officer of the regular Army or of 
the Territorial Army; 
(f) all words and expressions used in this Act and not de- 20 
fined but defined in the Army Act, 1950 (XLVI of 1950), or in the 
Territorial Army Act, 1948 (LVI of 1948), shall have the mean-
ings respectively assigned to them in the said Acts. 
3. Constitution of the Auxiliary Territorial Force.-There shall 
be raised and maintained by the Central Govemment in the manner 2S 
hereinafter provided a force to be designated the Auxiliary Territori-
al Force. 

2 
4. Establishment of camps.-The Central Government may 
establish such number of camps for the purposes of the Force as 
it thinks fit and may close down or re-estabUsh any such camps. 
5. Enrolment.-Any citizen of India may offer himseU for enrol-
S ment as a member in the Force, and may, if he satisfies the prescribed 
conditions, be enrolled by the prescribed authority for such period 
not exceeding five years and subject to such conditions as may be 
prescribed. 
6. Duties of enrolled persons.-N 0 enrolled person shall, by virtue 
10 of being a member of the Force, be liable for military service, but 
subject thereto an enrolled person may be called upon at any time 
to undergo such training as may be prescribed, and while undergoing 
such training shall perform such duties and discharge such obligations 
as the prescribed authority may, by general or special order, direct: 
IS Provided that where an enrolled person has, during the period 
of his enrolment, undergone training at least once after being called 
upon for the purpose, any further training shall be at his option, 
and if any enrolled person fails to attend at any place for subsequent 
training when called upon td do so, he shall not be deemed to have 
:ao committed an offence within the meaning of clause (i) of sub-section 
(1) of section 8. 
7. Dtscharge.-Every enrolled person shall be entitled to re-
ceive his discharge from the Force on the expiration elf the period 
for which he was enrolled, but any such person may, prior to the 
2S expiration of that period, be discharged from the Force by such 
authority and subject td such conditions as may be prescribed. 
8. Off~ces and penalties.-(l) If any enrolled person commits 
any of the following offences, that is to say,-
-(i) without sufficient cause fails to attend at any place when 
So duly required. to do so; or 
35 
(ii) while in camp on duty-· 
(a) absents himself frO'm the camp without leave; 
(b) uses criminal 'force or uses threatening or insubordi-
nate language to a superior officer or assaults a superior 
officer; A 
(c) disobeys any lawful comma. of a superior officer; 
(d) neglects to dbey any standing, general or other 
orders by the officer commanding the camp; 
(e) uses criminal force to or assaults any enrolled per-
son or any person subject to the Army Act, 1950 (XLVI of 
1950), or any officer dr person enrolled under the Territorial 
Army Act, 1948 (LVI of 1948); 
(f) escapes from lawful custody; 
(g) knowingly does any act which is prejudicial to the 
maintenance of good order or military discipline in camp; 

1 
he shall be punished summarily by order of the prescribed authmity 
with fine which may extend to fifty rupees or in default by being 
confined to barracks for a term which may extend to seven days. , 
(2) Any fine imposed by order of the prescri~ed· authority under 
sub-section (1) may, on application made in this behalf by the pre- S 
scribed authdrity to a magistrate having jurisdiction in the place 
where the enrolled person resides or has a place of business. be 
recovered in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Cri-
minal Procedure, 1898 (Act V of 1898), as if it were a fine imposed 
by such magistrate. 10 
9. Liability for causing loss of or damage to Government pro-
perty.-If any enrolled person wilfully or negligently causes loss of, or 
damage to, any property of the Government, the prescribed authority 
may, after giving that person an opportunity df being heard and 
after making such inquiry into the matter as it thinks fit, make an'S 
order requiring him to make good the loss or damage within such 
time as may be specified in thE' order or within such further time 
as may be allowed by the prescribed authority in this behalf, and 
where the amount thereof as determined by the pre~cribed authority 
is not paid within the time allowed, it shall, on application made by 20 
the prescribed authority to the Collector of the district in which the 
enrolled person resides or has his place of business, be recovered from 
such person in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue may be 
recovered by the Collector under any law for the time being in force 
relating to public demand. 2S 
10. Presumption as to certain documents.-Where an enrolled per-
son is required by or in pursuance of any rule made under this Act 
td attend at any place, a certificate purporting to be signed by the 
prescribed officer stating that the person so required to attend failed 
to do so in accordance with such requirement shall, without proof 10 
of the signature or appointment of such officer, be evidence of the 
matters stated therein. 
11. Power to make rules.-(l) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the pur- ~S 
poses of this Act. ;:I 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
fdregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the follow-
ing matters, namely:-
(a) the authorities by which, the manner in which, the 
period for which, and the conditions subject to which, any 40 
person may be enrolled under this Act; 
(b) the training, disciplin~, duties and obligations which an 
enrolled person has to undergo, observe, perfdrm or discharge 
under this Actj 
(c) the authorities by which. and the conditions subject to 4' 
which, any enrolled person may be discharged; 
(d) the manner in which, and the conditions subject to which" 
an enrolled persdn may be called out for training or duties; 

4 
(e) the allowances or other remuneration payable to enrolled persons; • 
(f) the determination of authorities for the purposes of 
this Act; 
(g) the dfficers by whom certificates may be signed under 
section 10; and 
(h) any other matter which under this Act is to be or may be 
prescribed. 

5 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The object of the scheme is to inculcate a sense of discipline 
among the members of the public by giving them elementary milit-
ary training. Military training is imparted in camps which are 
set up at convenient places both in urban and in rural areas. All 
able-bodied male citizens between the ages of 18 and 40, except 
serving and ex-per90nnel cJf the Territorial Army, ,ex-servicemen and 
ex-cadets of the National Cadet Corps, are eligible to join the 
Auxiliary Territorial Force which does not carry any liability for 
compulsory military service. 
The Bill seeks to provide the legal basis fdr the imparting of 
training and lays down the broad principles for the establishment 
of training camps and for the exercise of diSCiplinary control over 
the trainees while in the camps. All other matters of administrative 
details connected with training, remuneration payable td trainees, 
issue of stores, etc. will be regulated by means of rules to be framed 
under the proposed law. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 4th May, 1954. 
MAHAVIR TYAGI. 

6 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The formation of the Auxiliary Territorial Force, originally called 
the Auxiliary. Territorial Army, involves expenditure from the Con-
solidated Fund of India. At the rural camps, the trainees are provid-
ed with free rations and tented or other accommodation for the period 
of training .. Trainees in urban camps are not required to stay in 
camp, but they are entitled to a small refreshment allowance. All 
trainees are given an out-of-pocket allowance of Rs. 5 on completion 
of training. A rural camp has hitherto been of one week's duration 
and in urban camps, training has been given for 3 hours per day 
for two weeks. In future, it is proposed to increase the duration ctf 
the rural camp to 10 days and of an urban camp to 20 days. Each 
camp is intended to ttain about 480 persons. 
2. The cost of training will vary from year to year depending on 
the number of persons to be trained. It is estimated that the eX-
penditure involved in a rural camp will be about Rs. 9000 per camp 
and in an urban camp Rs. 5000 per camp. This amount does not 
take into account the pay and allowances of the training teams 
which are provided by the Army out of its existing resources. 
3. As an experimental measure, 36 camps were set up in 1953-54 
and financial provision necessary for similar camps and training has 
been included in the Defence Services Estimates for 1954-55 under 
Demand No. 12 and voted by the Parliament. An extract from the 
Explanatory notes to the Defence Services Estimates is enclosed. 
AN EXTRACT FROM THE EXPLANATORY NOTES TO THE DEFENCE SSRVlCas 
ESTIMATES FOR THE YEAR 1954·55 
The Territorial Army was constituted under the Territorial Army 
Act, 1948 and c<1mmenced raising in 1949. When fully formed, it 
will be composed of combatant, technical and administrative units. 
The personnel of the Territorial Army are given periodical military 
training. During the training period and when embodied for service, 
they are entitled to pay, allowances, etc., at the same rates as far 
corresponding ranks of the regular Indian Forces. 
Commencing from the year 1953-54, a new organisation given so 
far the name of Auxiliary TerI'itorial Army has been formed. All 
able-bddied Indian male citizens between the ages of 18 and 40'years 
are eligible to join this organisation. Training. in t~ese Forces c:on-
sists of drill without arms, elementary field engmeermg and phYSiCal 
training, etc. 

'J 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED 
LEGISLATION IN THE AUXILIARY TERRITORIAL 
FORCE BILL, 1954 
The broad features of the scheme, namely the constitution of the 
Auxiliary Territorial Force, the establishment and closure of camps 
(both rural and urban), the enrolment of citizens df. India as members 
of the Force, the commission of offences by members of the Force 
and the penalties to which they will be liable are laid down in the 
Bill itself. With a view to a successful implementation df. the 
scheme, the powers to provide matters of administrative details, such 
as the prescription of the authorities by which members of the Force 
may be enrolled, the manner in which, the period for which, and 
the cdnditions subject to which, such persons may be enrolled, the 
training, discipline, duties and obligations which such persons may 
undergo, observe, perform or discharge, the manner in which, and 
the conditions subject to which, such persons may be called out for 
training or duties, the alldWances or other remuneration to be paid 
to such persons, the conditions subject to which suc~ persons may 
be discharged.!. etc., have been delegated to the Central Government 
to prescribe by means of subordinate legislation, as it is not practi-
cable for Parliament to visualise, at the moment, the actual working 
of the scheme and to lay down in the Bill itself all the necessary 
details. Some of the powers delegated to the Central Government 
such as the powers to appoint authorities by which persons may be 
enrolled and to prescribe the training, discipline, duties and obliga-
tions which such enrolled persons may undergo, observe, or discharge 
and the allowances to be paid to such enrolled persons etc., which 
may not appear prima facie to be normal in character are really so if 
one has regard to the fact that in enactments relating to the Army, 
the Navy and the Air Force, it is not possible for Parliament to lay 
down matters of administrative details in the law itself. 

HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the constitution of an Auxiliary Territorial Force. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (3) of article 
117 of the Constitution. of India, recommended to the House 
of the People the consideration of the Bill. 
M.N. KAUL, 
SeCTeta'Y1/. 
(SAri MaJuro;r Tyagi, 
Minister for Defence Organisation.) 
GIPD-LAD-179 M of Law-13'S'S4-17So 