AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

|
रू
|
E
| मे

Bill No. 24 of 2000
| SCHEDULED CASTES AND THE SCHEDULED TRIBES
(RESERVATION IN SERVICES) BILL, 2000
By
SHRI RASHTRAPAL PRAVINCHANDRA SOMABHAI, M.P.
A
BILL

) provide for reservation in services for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes
establishments under the Central and State Governments and in private sector and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

Beiitenacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (0) This Act may be called the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Reservation
services) Act, 2000.

(2 Itextends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.

(4) It shall apply to every establishment as defined in this Act.
"2. In this Act unless the context otherwise requires—

(a) appropriate Government means the Central Government or a State
~ Government as the case may be;

Short title
extent,
commence-
ment and
application.

Definitions.


Reservation
for the
Scheduled
Castes and the
Scheduled
Tribes in posts
and classes of
posts and
percentage of
reservation.

2

(0) “establishment” means any office under the control of the appropriate
Government, the Parliament of India, Comptroller and Auditor General of India,
Election Commission, Union Public Service Commission, all local bodies or other
authorities within the territory of India and under the control of the appropriate
Government, Public Sector Banks, Public Sector Undertakings, Statutory Authorities, 5
Autonomous bodies or Authority constituted under an Act of Parliament, registered
or deemed to have been registered under any Act of Parliament or Universities
recognised/affiliated by an Act of Parliament or a State Act or educational institutions
receiving grant-in-aid from the appropriate Government, partnership, Act, 1932, firm — 9 of
registered under Indian Partnership Act, 1932 a Company registered under the 10
Companies Act, 1956 a Trust registered under Indian Trusts Act, 1882 and Co- | of
operative Societies registered under the Co-operative Societies Act, 1912 ordeemed 2 of
to have been registered under that Act and receiving loan or grant in lump sum, financial? of
ions from the appropriate Government or any Nationalised Bank,
Financial Corporation managed or controlled by the appropriate Government, 15
constituted or body corporate under any Act of Parliament or maintained by or with
the help of the appropriate Government or where appropriate Government has majority
share capital in an establishment;

(c) “notification” means a notification issued under the Act and published in the
Official Gazette of India; 20

(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act or are in force
but not inconsistent with this Act or rules made thereunder;

(e) “prescribed authority” means Department of Personnel and Training of the
appropriate Government or Secretary to the appropriate Government or any other
Department, Nodal Ministry or Head of the Department or appointing authority in 25
any establishment, or as may be specified in the appropriate rules, regulations, or
instructions applicable to the establishment;

(f) "recruitment year" means the calendar year during which recruitment is made
and include part of an year preceding the recruitment, if recruitment is made more
than once within a year as per the procedure or as defined in the relevant recruitment 30
rules or regulations or rules made under the proviso to article 309 of the Coristitution
of India and applied to that establishment;

(g) “rules” means rules made under this Act and instructions/directions/orders
issued under this Act or of those existing but not inconsistent with this Act and rules;

(h) “Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes” shall have the same meanings 35
assigned to them, respectively, under clause (24) and clause (25) of article 366 of the
Constitution of India and notified by the President of India under articles 341(1) and
342(1) and as amended from time to time;

(i) “service” means any post or classes of posts in connection with the
affairs of the establishment. 40

3. (1) There shall be reservation in every establishment for the Scheduled Castes and
the Scheduled Tribes in all posts or classes of posts, including single post in a service, at all
levels of recruitment, appointment, promotion or upgradation, except those exempted from
the purview of the Act with prior approval of both Houses of Parliament.

(2) The percentage of reservation in posts or classes of posts for the Scheduled Castes 45
and the Scheduled Tribes in sub-section (1) shall be in the ratio of the proportion of their
population to the total population of the country in accordance with latest census but not
less than fifteen per cent for the Scheduled Castes and seven and a half per cent. for the
Scheduled Tribes, respectively, or at such higher percentage as is applicable to the concerned
establishment in case the recruitment, promotion or upgradation is made on the regional 50
basis.


3

Explanation:—‘census' for the purpose of this Act, will be treated complete if it had
covered more than seventy per cent, of the total population of the country, irrespective of
the fact that it remained incomplete in one or more States wholly or partially for any reason
whatsoever.

5 (3) The posts or classes of posts reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes shall be filled in such manner as may be prescribed.

(4) The posts or classes of posts reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes shall be filled by candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled
| Tribes, as the case may be, and shall not be filled up by the general category candidates.

Ee (5) The unfilled reserved posts or classes of posts for whatever cause may be, shall
be dereserved and shall be carried forward from time to time:

Provided that in case required number of candidate belonging to the Scheduled Tribes
are not selected or not available to fill up the posts or classes of posts reserved for such
category, the same shall be filled up by candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes and
15 vice-versa:

Provided further that in subsequent recruitment, in case a candidate belonging to the
Scheduled Tribes is selected, he shall be appointed and adjusted in quota reserved for the
Scheduled Castes and the balance 6f the prescribed percentage of reservation shall always
be maintained.

4. Notwithstanding anything contained in any law, judgement or decree or order or
direction of a Court of Law or Tribunal or Authority having judicial powers.

(1) a candidate belonging to the Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes selected
‘on merit basis shall not be barred to avail the benefit of relaxed evaluation or concession
for consideration at a later stage to a reserved post;

(2) a candidate belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes
selected on merit basis in a direct recruitment or promotion or upgradation or
appointment by transfer, shall have his inter-se seniority on such post with general
candidates and he shall be eligible for consideration for reserved posts in future;

(3) the candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes
appointed or promoted to reserved posts shall be entitled for seniority, from the date
of such appointment or promotion or upgradation and adjusted in the service as per
the roster maintained in the establishment concerned at each stage of appointment or
promotion or upgradation irrespective of the roster points occupied in the immediate
lower cadre/posts as the case may be and the roster shall be treated as seniority for
general as well as reserved condidates.

5. The appropriate Government or the State Government or an establishment shall—

(J) fill up backlog vacancies reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes by special recruitment drive or promotion or upgradation without clubbing the
current vacant post(s) or vacancy(ies);

(2) make provision for relaxation, prescribe lower qualifying marks or lesser
standards of evaluation or relax experience for direct recruitment, promotion,
upgradation for the candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes to secure their full representation in any cadre or grade or category in service;

(3) make provision for relaxation in upper age limit in favour of candidates
belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes for appointments in any
service as may be prescribed;

Determination
of inter- senior-
ity of candi-
dates belong-
ing to the
Scheduled
Castes and the
Scheduled
Tribes.

Special recruit-
ment drive for
filling up of re-
served backlog
vacancies and
certain other
benefits to the
Scheduled
Castes and
Scheduled
Tribes.


Roster,

Responsibility
for implemen-
tation of the
Act.

Act done in
good faith.

Appointments
of Liasion
Officers in
every establish-
‘ment,

4

(4) exempt payment of any fee for taking an examination to such extent as may
be prescribed in case of candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes;

(5 pay travelling allowances to candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes
and the Scheduled Tribes called for interview as may be determined from time to
time;

(6) club single posts carrying equal scale of pay or responsibility or duty in an
establishment to provide reservation for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes
in appointment or promotion or upgradation in accordance with the provisions of this
Act.

6. (1) The roster points earmarked for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes,
as the case may be shall remain in force as was in operation before the judgement of the
Supreme Court of India in R.K. Sabarwal versus State of Punjab (1995)2 SCC 745;

(2) The roster shall be applied for a single post in an establishment and if a candidate
belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes is available at the roster point at
the time of vacancy and he is found selected, he may be appointed;

(3) On appointment by promotion/upgradation to a higher post in a cadre / grade /
service / category on regular basis according to rules, the seniority of the promotee belonging
to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes shall be fixed in the appropriate roster
point earmarked for the respective reserved category and the seniority of such a promotee
shall be according to the roster in the promoted cadre or grade or service and the roster in
the lower cadre or grade or service shall cease to have application from the date of promotion
or upgradation on regular basis;

(4) A senior employee belonging to general category in lower cadre or grade or
service, on promotion or upgradation to the next higher cadre or grade or service shall not
gain seniority over the earlier promoted employee belonging to reserved category who is
junior to him and the inter-se seniority between reserved and general category employees
shall be determined from the respective dates of promotion or upgradation, irrespective of
seniority or juniority position they had in the lower cadre or grade or category.

7. The Head of the establishment and if the appointing authority is higher in rank than
Head of the establishment, the appointing authority shall be responsible for implementation
of this Act.

8. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against any establishment
or other person responsible for implementation and application of the Act or anything which
is done in good faith in pursuance of thisAct or rules or order made thereunder or applicable
in respect thereto.

9. Every establishment shall nominate one or more officers of such rank or ranks as
may be prescribed to act as liasion officers from among the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes, who shall, in particular, be responsible for:—

(a) coordination and strict implementation of the provisions of this Act and
rules, instructions or directions issued thereunder, in their true spirit and purpose and
to achieve its object;

(b) submission of the report and returns to the appropriate Government within
the prescribed period;

(©) conducting annual inspection of the records of the establishments in such
manner as may be prescribed;

(9) doing such other incidental work or act, as may be necessary, for the above
purposes.

20

25

35

45


25

5

10.(1) Every establishment shall maintain such records as may be prescribed and
shall furnish every year to the appropriate Government in such manner and at such time as
may be prescribed, an annual report on appointments and promotion or upgradation of
candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes made by it during
the previous year and number of unfilled posts or vacancies and the steps taken to fill up the
posts or vacancies and reasons for not filling them up.

(2)An officer authorised by the appropriate Government in this behalf not below the
rank of Director in the Ministry concemed may inspect any records or documents maintained
in the establishment of the recruitment, appointment and promotion or upgradation of
candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in a establishment:

Provided that if an officer of equal rank or status to that of Director belonging to the
Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be, is available, he shall be
authorised for inspection and reporting.

(3) It shail be the duty of the Head of the establishment to make available such
records or documents for inspection by the authorised officer under sub-section (2) and
furnish such information or extend and arrange such assistance, as may be necessary, for
him to carry out his functions under this Act.

11. Whosoever responsible for implementation of the Act contravenes the provisions
of this Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend upto six months or
fine of not less than rupees ten thousand or both and fine shall be recoverable from pay of
such person:

Provided that nothing in this section shall render any person liable to punishment, if
he proves that he had made very bonafide and sincere endeavour or exercised utmost care,
attention, diligence and devotion to implement the provisions of the Act or rules or orders
or directions issued under this Act or presently in force but not inconsistent with this Act
and rules.

12. (1) Any person claiming to be a member of the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled
Tribes, as the case may be has applied for recruitment/seeks promotion or upgradation shall
file an affidavit duly attested by a gazetted officer of the appropriate Government or a
judicial Magistrate of the First Class and above rank as per the instruction of the Central
Government as prescribed in the Schedule, that he by birth belongs to the Scheduled Castes
or the Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be, and continues to be a member of the Scheduled
Castes or the Scheduled Tribes and if that person had already obtained a certificate from a
competent officer or authority in the prescribed format that he belongs to the Scheduled
Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be the original certificate shall be produced
at the time of selection.

(2) As soon as appointment in any post or office or service has been made in case of
a candidate belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, the appointing
authority shall immediately send the affidavit and the original Caste certificate and application
for recruitment or promotion or upgradation to the Director of the Social or Tribal Welfare
Department for verification and prompt reporting to the establishment.

(3) On receipt of the record from the establishment, the Director, Social Welfare or
Tribal Welfare Department himself or by his authorised officer shall verify or cause
verification of the correctness of the social status of the candidate and shall report back
within three months from the date of the receipt of the record to the appointing authority/
Head of the Department of the establishment, of the correctness or otherwise of the social
status of the candidate who has been appointed,

(4) In case the report is adverse to the appointee, the appointing authority shall
immediately issue a show cause notice to the appointee together with a copy of the report
received from the Director, Social Welfare or Tribal Welfare Department of the appropriate
Government calling for an explanation within a specified time and on receipt of the

Submission of
annual report
and
maintenance
thereof.

Penalty for
contravention
of this Act.

Caste
certificate and
verification,


Cognizance
and trial of the
offences under
this Act.

Saving of
existing
directions etc.,
issued by the
Central
Government.

Power of
Central
Government to
give

directions.

Act to have
over-riding
effect.

Removal of
difficulties.

Laying of
Annual Report.

6

explanation, if any, within the specified or extended time, it shall take appropriate action
within a period of one month as per the rules or in accordance with the principles of natural
justice and pass appropriate orders as the case may be.

(5) Anappeal shall lie against the impugned order passed by the Head of the Department
if it is the appointing authority, to the immediate higher authority who shall, after giving an
opportunity of hearing in person to an aggrieved employee, decide the same within three
months from the date of filing of the appeal and the decision shall be final and binding on
the appointee.

(6) Whosoever knowingly makes a false claim that he is a member of the Scheduled
Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be, and whosoever charged with the
responsibjlity of issuing a certificate or attesting an affidavit knowingly issues a false Caste
certificate or attests an affidavit, and if proved that the person is not amember of the Scheduled
Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be, shall be punishable with imprisonment
of not less than three years or fine which may extend to rupees twenty thousand or with
both.

(7) The conviction under sub-section (6) shall be also a disqualification for
appointments in any establishment under the appropriate Government.

13. (1) No prosecution for any offence under this Act shall be maintainable against an
officer except by, or with the sanction of the Competent officer with prior approval of the
National Commission for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes constituted under article
338 of the Constitution of India who shall have the authority to examine whether the
conclusion of prima facie violation of the Act is proved from record or not.

(2) No court, inferior to that of'a Metropolitan Magistrate or a judicial Magistrate of
the First Class shall try an offence punishable under this Act.

(3) An offence under this Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable.

14, All instructions, directions and orders issued by the prescribed authority relating
to the reservation of posts/classes of posts or vacancies in services etc. including relaxation,
concessions and safeguards for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes existing
immediately before the judgement in the case of Indira Sawheny versus Central Government
1992, Supplement 3 SCC 217 in respect of which there is no express provision in this Act,
in so far 88 they are not consistent with the provisions of this Act, shall continue.to be in
force, unless withdrawn or superceded in the meanwhile with prior approval of both the
Houses of the Parliament.

15, Every establishment shall be bound by the Act, rules or such existing rules,
directions/instructions by whatever name may be called not contrary to or inconsistent with
the provisions of this Act or as the Central Government may by general or special order,
prescribe from time to time to give effect to the provisions of this Act.

16. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law, order, judgement or decree of any Court, Tribunal or
authority for the time being in force or any instrument instruction having effect by virtue of
any law, other than this Act.

17. (J) Ifany difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary for removing the
difficulty.

(2) Every rule, instruction or direction or order made under sub-section (1) shall, as
soon as may be, after it is so made, be laid before each House of Parliament.

18. The Central Government shall in every two years, lay before each House of
Parliament, a report giving full account of the implementation of theAct during the preceding
two years.

20

25

30

35

40

45

50


प्र

19. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-going powers,
such provisions may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—

(a) the percentages of posts to be reserved in services for the members of the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes which shall be not less than fifteen percent,
and seven and a half percent, respectively;

(b) the manner of filling the posts reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes;

(c) relaxation of upper age limit;
(d) exemption of fee for'applying to the recruitment to a service;
(०) the authority to determine the travelling allowances;

(0 rank of officer to be nominated as liaison officer;

(g) the manner of conducting annual inspection of records;

(8) the records to be maintained by an establishment and the manner in which
and the time at which an annual report on the appointment, etc. of the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes made during the previous year to be furnished;

(i the authority to sanction prosecution for violation of the provisions of the
Act;

() form of affidavit of the candidate and form of affidavit of the candidate and
the manner of attestation; a

(k) procedure for inquiry by the appointing authority and appellate authority;
( any other matter, which is required to be, or may be prescribed.

(3) Every rule or instruction or direction made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be, after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
instruction or direction both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule or
instruction or direction shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under this rule or instruction
or direction.

Power to make
rules.


SCHEDULE

AFFIDAVIT
1, son/daughter of. of
Village /Town within the jurisdiction of Police Station
in, Taluk / Mandal in
the District/Div of the State/"Union Territory’
belong to Community / Caste /Tribe which is recognised
in item No. as the Scheduled Caste / Scheduled Tribe

under the Constitution (Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe) Order, 1950 as amended from
time to time by the Scheduled Caste/ Scheduled Tribe List Modification Order, 1956, the
Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960, the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966, the State of
Himachal Pradesh Act, 1970, the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation), 1971
and the Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe Order Amendment, Act, 1976.

1९ son/daughter of further
state that myself and my parents ordinarily/normally reside in the said Village/ Town and
within the jurisdiction of Police Station in_————.
ता Taluk/Mandal_ in the District/Division

of the State/Union Territory. I, further

solemnly verify and state that the facts stated above are true and correct to the best of my
knowledge and belief and no part of the statement is incorrect or false.

Signature

Attested by Gazetted Officer
Note : In case the candidate is son/daughter of a migrant labourer/transferee, it should
further be stated in the affidavit the date of migration/transfer and the duration of

stay in the migrated/transferred State in which the Caste/Tribe was not recognised
as a Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe.

The following are eligible to attest the affidavit:

(1) District Magistrate/Additional District Magistrate/Collector/Deputy
Commissioner/Additional Deputy Commissioner/Deputy Collector/First Class Stipendary
Magistrate/Sub Divisional Magistrate/Taluk Magistrate/Executive Magistrate/Extra Assistant
Commissioner.

(2) Chief Presidency Magistrate/Additional Chief Presidency Magistrate/Presidency
Magistrate.

(3) Revenue Officer not below the rank of Tehsildar and

(4) Sub-Divisional Officer/Mandal, Revenue/Development Officer of the area where
the candidate and/or his family normally resides.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The preamble of the Constitution assures social and economic justice, equality of
Status and of opportunity to every citizen.

Article 38 imposes duty on the State to strive to promote the welfare of the people by
securing and protecting as effetively as it may a social order in which justice Social, economic
and political shall inform all the institutions of the national life in particular strive to and
endeavour to eliminate inequalities in status, facilities and opportunities among individuals
and the groups of people.

Article 46 enjoins the State to promote with special care, economic interest, in
particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes and shall protect them from
social injustice.

Article 335 mandates that the claims of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes shall be taken into consideration consistently with efficiency of administration in
making of appointment to services and posts under the State.

Even after fifty-three years of independence the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes do not have proper representation in all the services under the State.

The Supreme Court of India in Indra Sawhney versus Union of India case has opined
that reservation in specialised posts in engineering, medical, military etc. shall not be made.

In Ajit Singh-II case the Supreme Court held that the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes promoted to reserved quota posts shall not be entitled to seniority from
the date of promotion till the erstwhile senior general candidates are promoted.

It was also held that the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes promotes have
no fundamental right to promotion though article 16(4A) guarantees such right while
declaring’the general candidates have right to promotion as a fundamental right impending
the phase of providing proper representation to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes in all services and posts under the State.

It was also held that the roster points in the lower cadre of the reserved candidates on
promotion should not be delinked. In Narsihman and Telecommunication cases, the Supreme
Court opined that reservation in single post is violative of article 14 of the Constitution. In
Ajit Singh-II case the Supreme Court had held that the facilities and opportunities in relaxed
standards for consideration of the claims of the reserve candidates for appointment or
promotion to a service or a post is illegal. The Department of Personnel, Public Grievances
and Pension in purported implementation of the above judgements of the Supreme Court
issued various orders nullifying the effective implementation of the reservation in the letter
and spirit of the Constitutional mandate.

It has been the policy of the Central Government that reservation in services/posts
under the Central Government etc. is one of the policies to provide equality of ‘opportunity
and of status, economic and social justice to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.

The aforésaid judgements defeat the object of the Constitution and the policy of the
State in securing proper and adequate representation to the Scheduled Caste and the Scheduled
Tribe in various posts and services under the State.

Every opportunity to the Scheduled Castes and the ScheduledTribes should be provided
to remove social inequality and economic empowerment be given to secure equality to
status and dignity of individual.

After adopting liberal economy and private investment in Public Sector Undertakings,
it has become a necessity to provide opportunity of employment to the Scheduled Castes
and the Scheduled Tribes in the services and posts in the private sector also.

9


10

With a view to remove the injustice being meted out to the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes in implementation and enforcement of the policy of reservation in services
under the State. It is necessary to enact a law to that effect.

Hence this Bill.

New DELHI; RASHTRAPAL PRAVINCHANDRA SOMABHAI
December 23, 1999.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

No additional or fresh recurring or non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved
from the Consolidated Fund of India since the existing concemed Departments and Ministries
ire already implementing the reservation scheme in services.

ll


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 19 of the Bill empowers the Central Govemmment to make rules for carrying
ut the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation
of the legislative power is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA.

A
BILL

to provide for reservation in services for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes
in establishments under the Central and ‘State Governments and in Private sector
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

(Shri Rashtrapal Pravinchandra Somabhai, M.P)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—3363LS—23.02.2000.

Laci