1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB, M.P .
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2015.
(2)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  After article 14 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
‘‘14A.  The State shall not discriminate in the matters of personal laws, including
but not limited to laws relating to marriage, divorce, succession, guardianship, adoption
and maintenance, on the ground of religion.”
3.  Article 44 of the Constitution shall be omitted.
Bill No. 24 of  2015
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title and
commencement.
Insertion of
new article
14A.
State not to
discriminate in
the matters of
personal laws
on the ground
of religion.
Omission of
article 44.
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Article 44 of the Constitution, in mild diction, persuades the State to secure a uniform
civil code for all the citizens. However, despite the fact that a common civil code is considered
a desired objective by the very organic law of the country, any semblance of consensus on
the issue has eluded us during the sixty-five years of the working of the Constitution. As a
result, different civil laws prevail for different religious communities.
Ironically, the Constitution also comprises the principle of equity and equality before
law, which, among other things, prohibits the State from discriminating against citizens on
the ground of religion. In order to establish equality before law in its true sense, it is necessary
that all citizens are subjected to the same civil laws irrespective of their religious persuasions.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to insert a new article 14A with a view to provide that the
State shall not discriminate in the matters of personal laws on the ground of religion. The Bill
also seeks to omit article 44 of the Constitution.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB
November 19, 2014.
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * * *
44. The State shall endeavour to secure for the citizens a uniform civil code throughout
the territory of India.
* * * * * * *
3
Uniform
civil code for
the citizens.

GMGIPMRND—4328LS(S-3)—19.02.2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab, M.P .)