THE ENTRANCE EXAMINATIONS (ABOLITION) BILL, 2008
By
DR. R. SENTHIL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for abolition of entrance examinations in admission to institutions
offering higher education.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Entrance Examinations (Abolition)  Act, 2008.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) “entrance examination” means any pre-admission test including a written or
an oral test or both conducted for the purpose of enrolment or admission of a candidate
to an academic or professional course of study imparted by an institution of higher
education;
(b) “institution of higher education” means an institution or a college including
a professional college recognized by or affiliated with any university or a body or
established by or under a statute of the Central Government or the State Government,
as the case may be, for imparting education and awarding degree after senior
secondary level school education in any discipline including natural science, medicine,
engineering, law, commerce, management, social science or any other professional
course; and
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 24 of  2008
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Definitions.
5
10
15

2
Abolition of
entrance
examinations.
(c) “qualifying examination” means passing of senior secondary examination
or such other examination, the passing of which makes a candidate eligible for
admission to any course of study in an institution of higher education.
3. (1) On and from such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette appoint, no institution of higher education shall conduct any entrance
examination for admission of candidates to any course of study.
(2) The admission to all institutions of higher education shall be made exclusively on
the basis of marks or percentage of marks or grade, as the case may be, obtained by
candidates in the qualifying examination.
4. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force but save as aforesaid, the
provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other law, for the
time being in force.
5. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the removal of the difficulty.
6. (1) The Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every order and every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall
be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in
session, for a total period of thirty days, which may be comprised in one session or in two
or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any
modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be;
so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the
validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25

STA TEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
These days, the selection of candidates to higher educational institutions—whether
government or private—like medical, engineering, law or teacher training institutions or
other institutions of professional education are based on entrance examinations.
The entrance examinations need specialized coaching and training which are not
available in rural areas. Hence, entrance examinations give an advantage to urban students.
Some of the entrance examinations include general knowledge questions and the poor rural
students do not have access to the latest happenings and are not able to answer these
questions. This virtually eliminates the rural students from the competition for entry to
higher educational institutions.
Indian students study different syllabuses. Some syllabuses like the syllabuses for
Central Board of School Examinations are different and larger and contain more subjects than
the State Examination Board syllabuses. Hence, the students studying under the state
syllabuses which are mostly students of rural origin, are at a disadvantageous position.
All these factors have made entrance examinations a hurdle for the rural and poor
students to enter higher educational institutions. To eliminate this disadvantage, it is important
to abolish entrance examinations to institutions of higher education.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; R. SENTHIL
February 18, 2008.
3

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill.
As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of
a normal character.
.
4

LOK   SALOK   SABHABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for abolition of entrance examinations in admission to institutions offering
higher education.
————
(Dr. R. Senthil, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—635LS(S-5)—04.03.2008.