THE UNDERDEVELOPED AND BACKWARD AREAS AND REGIONS
(SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR ACCELERATED DEVELOPMENT)
BILL, 2009
By
SHRI BAIJAY ANT PANDA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of an autonomous central Authority to ensure rapid,
accelerated and overall development of poor, underdeveloped and backward
areas and regions of the country which lag behind in matters of development
of infrastructure in economic, social, educational, technical and industrial
fields and assure their speedy development in a planned manner and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of  the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Underdeveloped and Backward Areas and Regions
(Special Provisions for Accelerated Development) Act, 2009.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 24 of 2009
TO BE  INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “Authority” means the Underdeveloped and Backward Areas and Regions
Development Authority established under Section 4;
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(d) "underdeveloped and backward areas and regions" means the areas and
regions which are economically, socially, educationally and industrially lagging behind
from rest of the country and so declared by Central Government under Section 3.
3. The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but not later than one year from
the commencement of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare such areas and
regions of the country as poor, underdeveloped and backward areas and regions, which in
its opinion, require priority attention to bring such areas at par with the developed areas and
regions of the country.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish
an Authority to be known as the Underdeveloped and Backward Areas and Regions
Development Authority.
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate, by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both
movable and immovable, and to contract and shall, by the said name sue and be sued.
(3) The headquarter of the Authority shall be at Bhubaneswar in the State of Orissa
and the Authority may, with the consent of the appropriate Government, establish its offices
at other places in the country.
5. The Authority shall consist of the following members:—
(a) the Prime Minister, who shall be the Chairman, ex-officio;
(b) the Deputy Chairman of the Union Planning Commission, who shall be the
Vice Chairperson, ex-officio;
(c) five members of Parliament representing underdeveloped and backward
regions, of whom three shall be from the Lok Sabha and two from the Rajya Sabha, to
be nominated by the Presiding Officers of the respective Houses;
(d) ten members to be appointed by the Central Government representing the
Planning Commission and Ministries/Departments of Agriculture, Rural Development,
Industry, Finance, Railways, Road Transport, Human Resource Development, Power
and Water Resources of the Union Government; and
(e) not more than five members to be appointed by the Central Government by
rotation in the alphabetical order to represent the Governments of the States having
the underdeveloped and backward areas and regions.
6. (1) The Authority shall follow such procedure for holding its meeting as may be
prescribed.
(2) No act or proceeding taken by the Authority under this Act shall be questioned on
the ground merely of;—
(a) the existence of any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution of the Authority,
or
(b) any omission, defect or irregularity not affecting the merits of the case.
7. (1) The Authority shall have a Secretariat consisting of such officers and employees
as may be prescribed.
Definitions.
Notification
of
underdeveloped
and backward
areas and
regions.
Establishment
of
Underdeveloped
and Backward
Areas and
Regions
Development
Authority.
Composition
of the
Authority.
Procedure to
be followed
by the
Authority.
Secretariat of
the Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(2) The conditions of serivce, emoluments and other perks of the officers and
employees shall be such as may be determined by the Central Government from time to time
for the efficient functioning of the Secretariat of the Authority.
8. The Central Government shall provide, from time to time, after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, adequate funds for—
(a) the developmental works to be undertaken by the Authority; and
(b) administrative expenses of the Authority.
9. (1) It shall be the duty of the Authority to undertake such special steps in order to
ensure rapid and accelerated development of underdeveloped and backward areas and regions
of the country, as it may deem necessary and expedient to do so for the overall development
of such areas and regions.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the Authority shall
take following measures:—
(i) development of infrastructure such as railways, roads, communication
network;
(ii) promoting industrial development by encouraging investment;
(iii) development of irrigation facilities, agriculture and agro-based industries;
(iv) augmenting water resources through watershed projects and constructing
wells, bore wells, canals, ponds and providing potable water facilities;
(v) installing power projects based on conventional and non-conventional
sources of energy; and
(vi) encouraging other activities such as poultry farming, piggery, livestock,
dairy products, cottage and village industries, network of public distribution system,
health services, family welfare, education, vocational training, tourism or such other
activities as the Authority may deem necessary for the overall development of the
underdeveloped and backward areas of the country.
10. The appropriate Government shall, for the purposes of this Act, provide the requisite
necessary assistance to the Authority in undertaking its developmental work in the areas
and regions within the territorial jurisdiction of such Government.
11. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty.
12. (1) The Authority shall prepare an annual report, in such form and in such manner
as may be prescribed, of its development activities undertaken under this Act and submit it
to the President of India.
(2) The President shall cause the report to be laid before each House of Parliament
as soon as may be after receipt of the report.
13. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act.
14. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
Funds to the
Authority.
Authority to
ensure rapid
growth and
development
of
underdeveloped
and backward
areas and
regions.
Appropriate
Government
to provide
requisite
assistance to
the Authority.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Annual report
of the
Authority.
Act not in
derogation of
other laws.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
It is a matter of regret that even after six decades of independence and implementation
of as many as ten five-year plans and the eleventh Five Year Plan being in midway of
implementation, there are many States, areas and regions in the country which are still
underdeveloped, backward and afflicted with extreme poverty, hunger and sufferings in the
country. The eastern parts of the country particularly Orissa, Bihar, Jharkhand, Eastern Uttar
Pradesh, entire North-Eastern region, Chhattisgarh and Tribal areas of Madhya Pradesh in
the Central India, Vidarbha, Marathwada, Saurashtra, Kutchh, desert and famine prone areas
of Rajasthan in the western parts, Telengana, Mehboob Nagar, Rayalseema in Andhra Pradesh
and other areas in Southern part of the country are still most backward, Kalahandi-Bolangir-
Koraput (KBK) districts in Orissa are synonymous with poverty, backwardness and hunger.
Non-development of many areas and regions has given rise to demand for creation of new
States. Some new States have already been created whereas the demands for other States
like Vidarbha, Gorkhaland, Telengana, Harit Pradesh and Bodoland, etc. is being raised
frequently. Though reducing regional imbalance is one of the primary goals of our five-year
plans but, unfortunately, this imbalance still persists which clearly shows that the Union
Government and the State Governments concerned have not paid due attention to the
development of such areas and regions in the right earnest. So in the larger interest of the
country as a whole, it has become necessary to take steps for the overall development of
such underdeveloped areas and regions on priority basis by the Government. For this purpose,
an autonomous Authority should be established for implementing State, area and region
based package programmes for their overall development in a time bound manner in
coordination with Central and State Governments.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI;  BAIJAYANT PANDA
June 5, 2009.
5

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the establishment of Underdeveloped and Backward
Areas and Regions Development Authority. Clause 7 provides for the establishment of a
secretariat with such number of officers and employees for the Authority as may be prescribed.
Clause 8 provides that Central Government shall provide adequate funds to the Authority.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
It is not possible at this stage to give an exact estimate of the actual expenditure that may
have to be incurred. It is, however, estimated that a recurring expenditure to the tune of
rupees two thousand crore would be involved per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
6

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill, which will relate to matters of detail only. The delegation of legislative
power is, therefore, of a normal character.
7

LOK SABHA
————
A
Bill
to provide for the establishment of an autonomous central Authority to ensure rapid,
accelerated and overall development of poor, underdeveloped and backward
areas and regions of the country which lag behind in matters of
development of infrastructure in economic, social, educational,
technical and industrial fields and assure their speedy
development in a planned manner and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Baijayant Panda, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2261LS(S-5)—24.06.2009.