ee

ee

Bill No. 81_of 2000

THE NATIONAL CAPITAL TERRITORY OF DELHI (DEVELOPMENT) BILL, 2000
By
‘Suri Sania SINGH VERMA, M.P.
A
BILL
10 provide for measures for all round development of National Capital Territory of Delhi.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (7) This Act may be called the National Capital Territory of Delhi (Development)
Act, 2000.

(2) It extends to National Capital Territory of Delhi.

(3) It shall come into force on stich date, as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(७) “building” means and includes any structure or erection or any part of a
building but does not include a plant or machinery comprised in a building:

(6) “competent authority” means such officer or authority as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint as such authority
for the purposes such of this Act;

Short title,
extent and
‘commence-
ment,

Definitions.


Slum areas to
be notified.

‘Accommoda-
tion of
evacues in
alternate
‘houses.
Clearance area,

Prohibition of
setting up of
Jhuggi fhopr.

Demolition of
Mogal

structures,

Plans and
Projects

Setting up of a
committee,

(c) “jhuggi jhopri” means a small roughly built house ora shelter usually made
of mud, wood or metal having thatched or tin sheet roof covering:

(d) “illegal structure” means any building, structure, dwelling house or
commercial place used for any purpose and has been built without obtaining proper
clearance from authorities;

(©) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act:

(4 “slum” means an area consisting of jhuggi jhopri clusters, badly built and
over-crowded houses and buildings; and

(g) “slum clearance” means the clearance of any slum area by demolition and
removal of buildings therefrom.

3. (1) The competent authority may, from time to time by notification in the Official
Gazette, declare any area to be a slum area within the meaning of this Act

(2) Where the competent authority is satisfied that the most satisfactory method
of dealing with the conditions in a slum area is demolition of all the buildings and jhuggi
jhopri clusters in the area, the authority shall by an order notified in the Official Gazette,
declare the area to be a clearance area, that is to say, an area to be cleared हीं all buildings
and jhuggi jhopri clusters in accordance with the provisions of this Act.

4. (1) All the residents of slum clearance areas shall be evacuated and accommodated
in alternate houses to be built by the Government.

(2 The houses built under-sub-section (1) shall have all necessary basic facilities.

5. As soon as may be after competent authority has declared any slum area to be a
clearance area, the Government shall cause such slum area to be cleared of all jhuggi
jhopri clusters and other buildings removed from that area,

6.(1) No person shall be allowed 1052 up any jhuggi jhopri in any area.

(2) Any jhuggi jhopri set up in violation of the provisions of this Act shall be
demolished by the competent authority in such manner, as may be prescribed.

7. After the date of commencement of this Act, any illegal structures built by any
person shall be demolished forthwith.

8. The Municipal Corporation of Delhi and New Delhi Municipal Council shall prepare
annual plans and projects for all round development of National Capital Territory of Delhi
and forward them to the Central Government.

9. (1) The Central Government shall set up a Committee consisting of —
(i) the Chairman of Union Planning Commission;
(ii) Union Minister of Finance;
(
(iv) the Chief Minister of National Capital Territory of Delhi;

Union Minister of Urban Development;

(v) the Minister of Finance of National Capital Territory of Delhi;

(vi) the Members of Parliament representing the National Capital Territory of
Delhi.

(2) The Committee shall examine all the projects and plans prepared by the
Municipal Corporation of Delhi and the New Delhi Municipal Council and decide upon the
projects and plans to be taken up during a financial year.

(3) The Committee shall in close coordination with the Government of National
Capital Territory of Delhi ensure that the plans and projects are executed within the scheduled
period.


3

10. The Central Government shall Provide adequate fund for execution of the Fund.

Plans and projects as recommended by the Committee set up under sub-section (1) of
section 9.

11. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules Power to make
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. rules.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

New Delhi, the capital of India represents the cultural traditions and diversity of ethnic
India in a microcosm. In view of the peculiar status of the capital where we have a State
Government and a more than active involvement of the Central Government, keeping the
city clean and beautiful and preserving its cultural heritage acquires added significance.

Poor people from every nook and comer of the country throng the capital in search of
better opportunities and jobs for earning their livelihood. Poverty forces them to find shelter
in slum and Jhuggi Jhopri clusters.

At present, Delhi has around 1100 slum clusters encroaching around 4000 hectares of
land and number of people living in slums are around 35 lacs. Government has a duty to
relocate these slum dwellers suitably not only to enable them to live in clean and hygienic
environment but also to save the environment of the adjoining places and reduce the immense
pressure on the civic amenities. It is also the duty of the Government to nip this problem in
the bud by ensuring that such slums do not come up in an unauthorised manner at Government
land henceforth.

Slum relocation and rehabilitation of people is the work allocated to the slum and
JJ Department of Municipal Corporation of Delhi. Officials of Government agencies like
Municipal Corporation of Delhi, New Delhi Municipal Council, Delhi Development
Authority, Delhi Vidyut Board and other civic bodies who are responsible for the management
and upkeep of their land should be held accountable for any encroachment and strict punitive
measures should be taken against them after fixing responsibility.

There should not be any dearth of funds for development of Delhi. Members of
Parliament should be actively involved in all round development of Delhi.

‘New Detut; SAHIB SINGH VERMA
April 3, 2000


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 4 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall provide alternate
houses with all basic facilities to those who are living in slum areas. The Bill, if enacted, will
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. Clause 10 provides that the Central
Government shall provide adequate funds for completion of plans and projects. It is estimated
that a sum of rupees four hundred crore will be involved as a recurring expenditure per
annum.



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. 85 the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

A

BILL

to provide for measures for all round development of National Capital Territory | Dell

(Shri Sahib Singh Verma, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—80LS1—17,04.2000,