1
THE PROTECTION OF PLANTS BILL, 2018
By
SHRI MULLAPPALLY RAMACHANDRAN , M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for protection of plants in the country and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Protection of Plants Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 24 of 2018
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Collector" means the chief officer in charge of the revenue
administration of a district or any other officer not below the rank of a Deputy
Collector as may be appointed by the State Government in this behalf;
(b) "commencement of this Act", in relation to —
(i) a State, means commencement of this Act in that State;
(ii) any provision of this Act, means the commencement of that
provision in the concerned State;
(c) "director" means the person appointed as Director of Plant Life
Preservation under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 3;
(d) "felling", with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions,
includes,—
(i) killing, cutting or mutilating of any plant and every attempt to do
so;
(ii) injuring or destroying or removing any part of the plants;
(iii) damaging the seeds, seedlings, saplings, branches, roots, leaves, bark
or other part of the plant.
(e) "garden" includes any place where plants are grown and maintained on
land, water, terraces, pots or other containers or hanging from any supports, or in
green houses whether in the form of formal and planned gardens or merely growing
on space available;
(f) "Government property" means any property belonging to the Government
whether Central or State or to any Government or Semi-Government Department;
(g) "habitat" includes land, water or vegetation which is the natural home
of any plant;
(h) "land" includes soil, canals, creeks, ponds and other water channels,
reservoirs, rivers, streams and lakes, whether artificial or natural, marshes and
wetlands and includes boulders, rocks, green houses, terraces and pots where
plants are growing;
(i) "license" means a license granted under this Act;
(j) "National Board" means the National Board for Plant Life Preservation
constituted under section 5;
(k) "national park" means an area declared under this Act or to be declared
as a National Park;
(l) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette;
(m) "plants" includes trees, shrubs, creepers and all types of leafy plants
that grow on land, in water or in earth's atmosphere including plant article their
saplings, seedlings, seeds and other embryo form, if any;
(n) "plant article" means an article made from any part of a plant including
root, leaf, stem, flower, fruit, gum, seed, bark and any object in which the whole
or any part of such plant has been used;
(o) "permit" means a permit granted under this Act or any rule made
thereunder;
(p) "person" means any individual or legal person and includes a firm;
(q) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(r) "State Board" means a State Board for Plant Life Preservation constituted
under section 7;
(s) "State Government" in relation to a Union territory, means the
Administrator of that Union territory appointed by the President under article
239 of the Constitution;
3. (1) The Central Government may, for the purposes of this Act, appoint,—
(a) a Director of Plant Life Preservation; and
(b) such other officers and employees as may be necessary.
(2) In the performance of his duties and exercise of his powers by or under
this Act, the Director shall be subject to such general or special directions, as the
Central Government may, from time to time, give.
(3) The officers and other employees appointed under this section shall be
required to assist the Director.
4. (1) The Director may, with the previous approval of the Central Government,
by order in writing, delegate all or any of his powers and duties under this Act to any
officer subordinate to him subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the
order.
(2) Subject to any general or special direction given or condition imposed by the
Director, any person, authorized by the Director to exercise any powers, may exercise
those powers in the same manner and to the same effect as if they had conferred on that
person directly by this Act and not by way of delegation.
5. ( 1) The Central Government shall, within three months from the date of
commencement of this Act, constitute the National Board for Plant Life Preservation
consisting of —
(a) the Union Minister of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare as Chairperson;
(b) the Union Minister of Environment, Forests and Climate Change as
Vice-Chairperson;
(c) three Members of parliament of whom two shall be from the House of
the People and one from the Council of States—members;
(d) Member, Planning Commission in-charge of Forests and Wild Life—
members;
(e) five persons to represent non-Governmental organisations to be
nominated by the Central Government—members;
(f ) ten persons to be nominated by the Central Government amongst
eminent conservationists, ecologists and environmentalists—members;
(g) the Secretaries to the Government of India, in-charge of the Ministry or
Department of the Central Government dealing with Agriculture, Forests and Wild
Life—members;
(h) the Secretary to the Government of India, in-charge of the Department
of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance—member;
(i) the Secretary to the Government of India, Ministry of Tribal Welfare—
member;
(j) the Director-General of Forests in the Ministry or Department of the
Central Government dealing with Forests and Wild Life—member;
(k) the Director-General, Indian Council for Forestry Research and
Education, Dehradun—member;
(l) the Director, Botanical Survey of India—member;
Appointment
of Director and
other officers.
Power to
delegate.
Constitution of
the National
Board for Plant
Life
Preservation.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
Constitution of
State Board for
Plant Life
Preservation.
(m) the Director, National Institute of Oceanography—member;
(n) one representative each from ten States and Union territories by rotation,
to be nominated by the Central Government—member; and
(o) the Director of Agriculture Research who shall be the Member—Secretary
of the National Board.
(2) The term of office of the Members other than those who are members ex-
officio, the manner of filling vacancies referred to in clauses (e), (f) and (v) of sub-
section ( 1), and the procedure to be followed in the discharge of their functions by the
members of the National Board shall be such, as may be prescribed.
(3) The members (except members ex-officio) shall be  entitled to receive such
allowances in respect of expenses incurred in the performance of their duties as may be
prescribed.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, the office of a member of the National Board shall not be deemed to be an office
of profit.
6. (1) It shall be the duty of the National Board to promote the preservation and
development of plant life and forests, gardens, farms, parks or any place  where plant
life exists, by such measures as it thinks fit.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the  measures
referred to therein may provide for —
(a) framing policies and advising the Central Government and the State
Governments on the ways and means of promoting plant life preservation and
effectively controlling, felling and illegal trade of plants and their products;
(b) making recommendations on the setting up of the management of
national parks, sanctuaries and other protected areas and on matters relating  to
restriction of activities in those areas;
(c)  carrying out or causing to be carried out impact assessment of various
projects and activities on plant life or its habitat;
(d) reviewing from time to time, the progress in the field of Plant life
preservation in the country and suggesting measures for improvement life in the
country;
(e) preparing and publishing a status report at least once in two years on
Plant life in the country.
7. ( 1) The State Government shall, within a period of six months from the
date of commencement of this Act, constitute a State Board for Plant Life
Preservation consisting of the following members, namely:—
(a) the Chief Minister of the State and in case of the Union territory, either
Chief Minister or Administrator, as the case may be—Chairperson;
(b) the Minister of Agriculture and Minister of Forests—Vice Chairpersons;
(c) three members of the State Legislature or in the case of a Union territory
with Legislature, two members of the Legislative Assembly of that Union
territory—members;
(d) three person to represent non-governmental organisations dealing
with plant life to be nominated by the State Government—members;
(e) ten persons to be nominated by the State Government from amongst
Functions of
the National
Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
Procedure to be
followed by the
Board.
eminent conservationists, ecologists and environmentalists including at least two
representatives of the Scheduled Tribes and two agriculturists—members;
(f ) the Secretary to the State Government or the Government of the Union
territory, as the case may be, in-charge Agriculture—member;
(g) the Secretary to the State Government, Department of Tribal W elfare—
member;
(h) the Secretary of Health— member;
(i) an officer of the State Police Department not below the rank of
Inspector—General-member;
( j) a representative of the Botanical Survey of India —member;
(2) The term of office of the members other than those who are members
ex-officio  and the manner of filling vacancies referred to in clauses (d) and (e) of
sub-section ( 1) and procedure to be followed shall be such, as may be prescribed.
(3) The member (except members  ex-officio ) shall be entitled to receive such
allowances in respect of expenses incurred in the performance of their duties as
may be prescribed.
8. (1) The Board shall meet atleast twice a year at such place as the State
Government may direct.
(2) The Board shall regulate its own procedure (including the quorum).
(3) No act or proceeding of the Board shall be invalid merely by reason of the existence
of any vacancy therein or any defect in the constitution thereof or any irregularity in the
procedure of the Board not affecting the merits of the case.
9. It shall be the duty of the State Board to advise the State Government,—
(a) in the selection and management of species of plants to be declared as
protected;
(b) in formulation of the policy for protection and Preservation of the plant life
and specified plants;
(c) in any matter relating to the amendment of any Schedule;
(d) in relation to the measures to be taken for harmonizing the needs of the tribal
people and farmers and others depending on farms and plants for their livelihood,
with the protection and Preservation of plant life; and
(e) in any other matter connected with the protection of plant life which may be
referred to it by the State Government.
10. No person shall fell, cut or maim any plant except as provided under rules made
under this Act.
11. (1) No person shall cultivate specified plants, which experts have declared to be
dangerous to human life either by consumption or use or by mere proximity, except under
and in accordance with a license granted by the District Collector or any other officer
authorized by the State Government in this behalf.
(2) The Central Government shall not permit the cultivation of specified plants declared
by experts to be dangerous to the eco-system or to human life.
(3) Any person, establishment or company that finds plant in his property shall report
the same to the District Collector.
(4) The District Collector shall maintain a record of the plants identified and/or reported
to him under sub-section (2).
5
10
15
Duties of State
Board.
Prohibition of
felling plants.
Cultivation of
specified plants
without license
prohibited.
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
12. (1) Every complaint for violation of provisions of sections 10 and 11 shall be
made to the District Magistrate in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The District Magistrate shall upon receipt of complaint made under sub-section (1)
dispose of the complaint in such manner as may be prescribed.
13. (1) The District Magistrate shall, upon hearing of complaint made under
sub-section (1) of section 12 found the person against whom the complaint is made guilty of
offence punishable under this Act, impose a fine which may extend upto rupees ten thousand:
Provided that if the person against whom the complaint is made is a Company or
establishment the amount of fine may extend upto rupees twenty five thousand.".
14. (1) The Central Government may, by notifica tion in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Complaints to
be heard and
decided by
District
Magistrate.
Offences
punishable with
fine.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15

7
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The protection of plants on the same lines as laws that protect rare animal and
bird species is the need of the hour. Protection of commercial and medicinal plants
many of which are being felled and destroyed in the name of urbanization, construction
and industrialization requires immediate attention. Plants, like humans and animals,
are living things. It is plants that provide man and animals essential food, medicines
and shelter, etc. It is, therefore, absolutely essential that they be protected.
The survival of mankind depends on the survival of the plants and trees on earth.
The plants provide not only food, medicine, shade, spices and cover but above all it is
the plants that provide oxygen which is essential for life. Without plants, the environment
and human life on this earth cannot exist. Their presence is inevitable for clean air,
food and water in this world. Plants also contribute to our economy. People of many
countries rely on plant products for their livelihood and income. Plants-people
relationships is so much interlinked that we need them to survive. Hence the need is to
protect plants from wanton destruction and felling.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide for —
(a) constitution of a National Board and State Boards for Plant Life
Preservation to frame policies and advise the Central Government and the State
Governments on the ways and means of promoting plant life preservation and
effectively controlling felling and illegal trade of plants and their products;
(b) prohibit felling of plants;
(c) prohibit cultivation of specified plants without license.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MULLAPPALLY RAMACHANDRAN
December 4, 2017.

8
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the appointment of a Director of Plant Life
Preservation and other officers and employees. Clause 5 provides for the constitution
of the National Board for Plants Life Preservation to frame policy promoting plant life
preservation and effectively controlling felling and illegal trade of plants and their
products. It also provides for appointment of representatives of non-governmental
organizations, etc. to the National Board. Clause 7 provides for the constitution of the
State Board for Plant Life Preservation. The expenditure relating to States shall be
borne from the Consolidated Fund of the State concerned. Whereas the expenditure in
respect of the Union territory shall be borne from the Consolidated Fund of India. The
Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve recurring expenditure of rupees three crore per
annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees five crore is also likely to be
involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 4 of the Bill empowers the Director of the National Board for Plants Life
to delegate all or any of his powers and duties under this Act to any officer subordinate
to him subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the order. Clause 10
provides for rules for making prohibition on felling plants. Clause 14 empowers the
Central Government to make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. As the
delegation of powers shall relate to matters of details only, the delegation of legislative
power is of normal character.
9

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for protection of plants in the country and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Mullappally Ramachandran, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—3709LS—24.01.2018.