Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
                   
                                                       
          
Bill  No. 24 of  2024
THE RESIDENTIAL SCHOOLS (FOR SCHEDULED CASTES 
AND SCHEDULED TRIBES) BILL, 2024
By
Aൽඏ. Cඁൺඇൽඋൺ Sඁൾ඄ඁൺඋ Aඓൺൽ, M.P.
A
BILL
 to provide for setting  up of residential schools for children belonging to the
 Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto.
 
Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Residential Schools (for Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes) Act, 2024.
 ( 2) It extends to the whole of India.
 ( 3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Short title, extent and commencement.

   2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, "appropriate Government"' 
means in the case of a State, the Government of that State and in all other cases, the 
Central Government;
   3. (1) The Central Government shall set up a residential school in every area having 
such high population of the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes  as it may deem 
appropriate.  
      (2)  The residential school  shall cater to the schooling need of children  belonging to 
the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes only.
     ( 3)  The residential school shall  conduct  classes from nursery to twelfth standard.
    (4)  The medium of instruction shall be  English, Hindi and the language  of the State  
in which the school  is located.
     (5)  No fees  or other expenses, whatsoever,  shall be charged from any student and the 
education shall be imparted free of cost to the children.
   4.  The appropriate Government shall provide land free of cost for setting up of 
residential  schools within its territorial jurisdiction and shall not charge any money for 
providing essential services like electricity and water.
  
   5. ( 1) The residential schools shall be affiliated to Central Board of Secondary Education, 
New Delhi and shall follow the curriculum prescribed by it. 
    ( 2) The  students shall also be given training in vocational courses of their choice.  
6. The residential schools shall have all  basic infrastructure  facilities like  playground, 
library, laboratories, hostels, dining facilities, etc. 
7. (1) The Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the  purposes  of this Act.
    (2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Deﬁnition.
Appropriate 
Government to 
provide land 
for setting up of 
residential schools.
Residential schools 
to be aﬃliated to 
CBSE.
Power to make 
rules.
Central 
Government to 
set up residential 
schools for the 
Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled 
Tribes.
Residential schools 
to have basic 
facilities.

STATEMENT  OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 Certain areas of our country have large population of the Scheduled Castes and the 
Scheduled Tribes.  But there are not enough educational facilities in those areas.  The children 
belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, being generally poor, cannot 
afford good education in private schools and the number of good Government schools are 
limited in number.
 Therefore, it is proposed that free residential schools should be set up exclusively 
for children belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes with all facilities in those 
areas where the population the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes is significantly 
high.
 Hence this Bill.
       Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                                 CHANDRA SHEKHAR AZAD
   June 26, 2024.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
 Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to set up residential schools exclusively for children belonging 
to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in areas where their concentration is high. 
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of 
India. It is likely to involve an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees three hundred 
crore. 
 A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore would also be 
involved.
 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
  Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government to make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of the Bill.  As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the 
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
 

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for setting  up of residential schools for children belonging to the 
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Adv. Chandra Shekhar Azad, M.P .)