THE WITNESSES (PROTECTION OF IDENTITY) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI RABINDRA KUMAR JENA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for protection of identity to threatened witnesses in criminal cases
involving serious offences, procedure and mechanism for such protection
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Witnesses (Protection of Identity) Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
   Bill No. 250 of  2015
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "close relative" includes spouse, parents, grandparents, sons,
daughters, grandchildren, brothers and sisters;
(b) "identity" in relation to a person includes name, sex, names of parents,
occupation and address of such person;
(c) "judge" means the Presiding Judge of a Court of Session or the Judge
of a Court of equivalent status or of a Special Court;
(d) "serious offence" means an offence which is described as triable by a
Court of Session in the First Schedule to the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
and includes any offence which is required to be tried by a Court of Session or
any other equivalent designated court or a special court, by law;
(e) "threatened witness" means any witness, in respect of whom, there is
likelihood of danger to the safety of his life or life of his close relatives or
serious danger to his property or property of his close relatives, by reason of
his being a witness;
(f) "victim" means any person who has suffered physical, mental,
psychological or monetary harm or harm to his property as a result of the
commission of any offence; and
(g)  "witness" means any person who is acquainted with the facts and
circumstances, or is in possession of any information or has knowledge,
necessary for the purpose of investigation, inquiry or trial of any crime involving
serious offence, and who is or may be required to give information or make a
statement or produce any document during investigation, inquiry or trial of
such case and includes a victim of such serious offence.
(2) Words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall have the meaning as assigned to them in that
Code.
3. The provisions of this Act shall apply to—
(a) investigation, inquiry and trial of serious offences;
(b) victims of serious offences, the recording of whose statements at the
trial in the Court of Session has not commenced; and
(c) threatened witnesses in relation to serious offences whose identity
has not been revealed to the accused or whose statements have not been
recorded during investigation or during inquiry before the Magistrate at the
date of commencement of this Act.
CHAPTER II
W
ITNESS IDENTITY PROTECTION  ORDER
PART- I
IDENTITY PROTECTION DURING INVESTIGATION
4. (1) During the course of investigation of any serious offence, if the
Investigating Officer is satisfied that for the purpose of effective investigation of the
case, it is necessary to protect the identity of any threatened witness, he may, through
the Public Prosecutor or the Assistant Public Prosecutor, as the case may be, apply in
writing to the Judicial Magistrate of First Class or Metropolitan Magistrate, as the
case may be, for seeking an identity protection order.
(2)In every application made under sub-section ( 1), the true identity of the
threatened witness and such other particulars as may lead to the identification of the
Definitions.
Application.
2 of 1974
2 of 1974
Application for
seeking Identity
protection order.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
threatened witness shall not be mentioned, and instead a pseudonym or a letter of
English alphabet shall be mentioned to identify the threatened witness, but the true
identity and other particulars shall be disclosed to the Magistrate.
(3) Every application under sub-section ( 1)—
(a) shall be accompanied by relevant material and documents which are
evidence that the witness is a threatened witness and need a grant of identity
protection order, and
(b) may be accompanied by a certificate of an officer of the rank of
Superintendent of Police or above certifying that the witness is a threatened witness.
5. (1) The Magistrate shall, upon receipt of an application under section 4, hold
a preliminary ex parte inquiry in camera to determine whether the witness is a
threatened witness as claimed in the application and whether there is necessity to
pass a protection order, and shall follow the procedure laid down in this section for
such determination.
(2) The Magistrate may require the prosecution to place before him any material
or document which has not been already submitted, and which he considers relevant
for the disposal of the application.
(3) The Magistrate shall hear the prosecution and, in his discretion, may examine
any person including the witness who is subject of the application orally, and shall
record the substance of the statement.
(4) During the course of the preliminary inquiry, no prosecutor, officer of the
Court or other person present or involved in the preliminary hearing shall disclose or
reveal or leak out any information regarding the true identity of the witness, or any
other particulars likely to lead to the identification of witness.
(5) During the course of the preliminary inquiry, no oral evidence shall be given,
and no question may be put to any person, if such evidence or question relates
directly or indirectly to the true identity of the witness who is subject of the application.
(6) While considering the application, the Magistrate shall have regard to the
following:—
(i) the general right of the accused to know the identity of witness;
(ii) the principle that witness anonymity orders are justified only in
exceptional circumstances;
(iii) the gravity of the offence;
(iv) the importance of the evidence of threatened witness in the case;
(v) whether the statement of witness, if any, under sub-section ( 3) as to
why he is a threatened witness and as to why there is necessity to pass a
protection order, is reliable; and
(vi) whether there is other evidence which corroborates the evidence of
threatened witness in respect of the offence.
6. (1) If, after consideration of—
(a) the application and all material and documents submitted in support
of the application under section 4; and
(b) the statement of any person recorded, if any, under sub-section (3) of
section 5;
and, after hearing the prosecution, the Magistrate is satisfied that—
(i) the witness who is subject of the application is a threatened witness;
Ex parte
preliminary
inquiry by the
Magistrate.
Order by the
Magistrate.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(ii) withholding the identity of threatened witness until the investigation
is completed and final report of charge sheet is submitted in the court, shall not
be contrary to the interests of justice; and
(iii) the need for passing a protection order outweighs the general right
of the accused to know the identity of the witness, he shall pass a reasoned
judicial order that until the investigation is completed and the police report
referred to in sub-section (2) of section 173 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973 or charge sheet under any other law is forwarded to the Magistrate or
Judge, the identity of threatened witness shall not be reflected or mentioned
in—
(a) any document prepared or any statement recorded under
sections 161 and 164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 or any other
statement recorded during the course of investigation, including the case
diary;
(b) the police report or charge sheet referred to above and documents
forwarded along with the police report or charge sheet;
(c) any other document forwarded to the Magistrate or Judge in
any proceeding in relation to such offence;
(d) any proceeding before the Magistrate or before any other Court,
during investigation, in relation to such offence.
(2) If, however, after such consideration and hearing as referred to in sub-
section (1), the Magistrate is satisfied that—
(a) the witness who is the subject of the application is not a threatened
witness; or
(b) withholding the identity of such a witness shall—
(i) be contrary to the interests of justice, or
(ii) not outweigh the right of the accused to know the identity of
the witness,
he shall, by a reasoned judicial order, dismiss the application.
7. (1) The true identity of witness who is subject of the application shall not be
mentioned or reflected in any order sheet or proceeding under this part.
(2) It shall not be lawful for any person to print or publish in any manner any
matter in relation to any proceeding under this Part.
PART- II
I
DENTITY PROTECTION AFTER COMPLETION OF INVESTIGATION
8. (1) If, after the Police Report referred to in sub-section (2) of section 173 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 or charge sheet referred to in any other law is
forwarded to the Magistrate or Judge, as the case may be, but before the examination
of witnesses begins to commence at the trial, including inquiry, the Assistant Public
Prosecutor or the Public Prosecutor, as the case may be, is of the opinion that it is
necessary to protect the identity of a threatened witness, whether or not, identity
protection in respect of such threatened witness was sought or ordered at the stage
of investigation under Part-I, he may, move an application in writing to the Judicial
Magistrate of First Class or Judge, before whom the case is pending, seeking an
identity protection order.
(2) The application referred to in sub-section ( 1) may also be moved by the
threatened witness, if such a witness intends to seek a protection order.
Prohibition of
mentioning
identity of
witness.
2 of 1974
2 of 1974
Application for
Identity
Protection.
2 of 1974
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
(3) The provisions of sub-sections ( 2) and ( 3) of section 4 shall apply
mutatis mutandis to the application made under this section.
(4)  Where an application filed under sub-section ( 1) before the Magistrate
or Judge, as the case may be, has been rejected at any time under Part-I or this Part,
such rejection, shall not preclude a fresh application being filed before the Magistrate
or Judge, if fresh circumstances have arisen after the rejection of the earlier application
for the grant of a protection order.
9. (1) The Magistrate or Judge, as the case may be, shall, upon receipt of an
application under section 8, hold a preliminary inquiry in camera to determine whether
the witness is a threatened witness as claimed in the application and whether there is
necessity for the passing of a protection order and shall follow the procedure laid
down in this section for such determination.
(2) The Magistrate or Judge, as the case may be, may require the prosecution or
the threatened witness who has moved the application under section 8, to place
before him any material or document which has not already been submitted, and
which he considers relevant for the disposal of the application.
(3) The Magistrate or the Judge, as the case may be, shall hear the prosecution,
and, subject to provisions of sub-sections ( 4) and ( 5) of this section, the accused,
and may examine any person including the witness who is subject of the application,
orally and shall record the substance of the statement.
(4) The Magistrate or Judge, as the case may be, shall, on the basis of the
information which has come before him under sub-section ( 1) of section 8 or
sub-sections (2) and (3), inform the accused or his pleader as to the apprehensions of
the witness and as to why he is a threatened witness and the necessity for passing a
protection order and, for that purpose, give a hearing to the accused before passing
an order of protection:
Provided that the Magistrate or Judge shall not disclose the identity of the
witness or any other particulars which may lead to the identification of the said
witness:
Provided further that if the accused or his pleader wants to elicit further
information from the prosecution of the threatened witness on the question of
likelihood of danger to the life or property of the said witness or his close relatives,
such accused or his pleader may be permitted to furnish a list of questions to be
answered by the prosecution or the said witness but no question or information
which may lead directly or indirectly to the identification of the said witness shall be
permitted.
(5) The Magistrate or Judge, as the case may be, while examining the witness or
any other person under sub-section (3) or hearing the submissions of the prosecutor
or the applicant witness shall not allow the accused and his pleader to remain present
during such inquiry.
(6) The provisions of sub-sections ( 4) to ( 6) of section 5 shall apply
mutatis mutandis to the preliminary inquiry under this Part.
10. (1) If, after consideration of—
(a) the application and all materials and documents submitted in support
of the application by the parties; and
(b) the statements, if any, recorded under sub-section (3) of section 9 and
after hearing the submissions of the prosecutor or the applicant witness, as the
case may be, and the accused, the Magistrate or Judge, as the case may be, is
satisfied that—
Preliminary
Inquiry by
Magistrate or
Judge.
Order by the
Magistrate or
Judge.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
(i) the witness who is subject of the application is a threatened
witness;
(ii) withholding the identity of threatened witness until the
Judgement in trial is given and if any appeal or revision is presented
against the judgement, until the decision in the appeal or revision, as the
case may be, is given, shall not be contrary to the interests of justice; and
(iii) the need for passing a protection order outweighs the general
right of the accused to know the identity of the witness,
he shall pass a reasoned judicial order that until the judgement in trial is given and if
any appeal or revision is presented against the judgement, until the decision of the
appeal or revision, as the case may be, is given, the identity of threatened witness
shall not be reflected or mentioned in,—
(a) any document produced before the Magistrate or Judge, or before an
appellate or revisional Court, in relation to such case;
(b) any proceeding (including judgement and order) before the Magistrate
or Judge, or before an appellate or revisional Court, in relation to such case;
(c) any copy of documents required to be supplied to the accused as
specified in sections 207 and 208 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 or
under any other law.
(2) If, however, after such consideration and hearing as referred to in
sub-section (1), the Magistrate or Judge, as the case may be, is satisfied that—
(a) the witness who is subject of the application is not a threatened
witness, or
(b) that withholding the identity of such a witness shall—
(i) be contrary to the interests of justice, or
(ii) not outweigh the right of the accused to know the identity of
the witness,
he shall, by a judicial reasoned order, dismiss the application.
11. (1) The true identity of witness who is subject of the application shall not be
mentioned or reflected in any order sheet or proceeding under this part.
(2) It shall not be lawful for any person to print or publish in any manner any
matter in relation to any proceeding under this Part.
CHAPTER III
P
ROTECTION OF WITNESSES AND VICTIMS AT THE TRIAL
12. (1) When in respect of a threatened witness, an order for identity protection
has been passed under sub-section ( 1) of section 10, his statement in the Court
during trial shall be recorded as per the procedure laid down in the Schedule I, by
using two-way closed—circuit television or video link in such a manner that the
identity of the witness is not disclosed to the accused and his pleader:
Provided that the accused and his pleader shall, subject to the provisions of
sub-section (2), be entitled to hear the voice of the witness during recording of the
statement.
(2) The Presiding Judge may, on his own or on an application made by the
prosecution or the threatened witness, if he is so satisfied, direct that while recording
the statement referred to in sub-section (1), the voice of the witness shall be distorted,
and in that event, the accused or his pleader shall be entitled to hear the distorted
voice:
Prohibition of
mentioning
identity of
witness.
2 of 1974
Recording of
statements of
threatened
witnesses at the
trial by closed-
circuit
television.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
Provided that the undistorted voice-recording shall be kept in a sealed cover
and the Presiding Judge shall have the exclusive right to access the undistorted
voice.
(3) When the statement is recorded as mentioned in sub-section (1), the public
generally, including the media personnel, shall not have access to, or be or remain, in
the room or other places used by the court for the purpose of recording of the
statement.
(4) Where the statement of the threatened witness is recorded under sub-sections (1)
and (2), it shall not be lawful for any person to print or publish in any manner whatsoever,
the identity of the threatened witness whose statement is so recorded.
13. Where in the case of trial of a serious offence, no application for a protection
order has been made or having been made, has been refused but where the victim
seeks that he may be permitted to depose without seeing the accused either physically
or through television or video link to avoid trauma, the Court may, except for enabling
the victim to identify the accused either physically or through television or video
link, direct that examination of the witness shall be conducted by using two-way
closed—circuit television or video link and two-way audio system in the manner
specified in the Second Schedule.
14. (1) The technical personnel operating the two-way television or video link
and the two-way audio system and the court master or stenographer of the Judge
referred to in the Schedule I and II, shall be administered an oath of secrecy in respect
of the identity and other particulars of the threatened witness.
(2) It shall not be lawful for any of the persons referred to in sub-section (1) to
reveal the identity of the witness to any other person or body.
CHAPTER  IV
D
ISTRICT WITNESS PROTECTION AUTHORITY
15. (1) Every State Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the
Official Gazette, establish a District Witness Protection Authority for every district
for carrying out purposes of this Act.
(2) The Authority shall consist of—
(a) the Superintendent of Police of the district, who shall be Chairperson,
ex-officio; and
(b) not exceeding five officials of the police department, to be appointed
by State Government, as members.
16. (1) Every District Witness Protection Authority shall formulate a Witness
Protection Programme to ensure safety and welfare of witnesses.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of foregoing provision, the Witness
Protection Programme shall include—
(a) making necessary arrangements to protect the witness or allow him to
establish a new identity;
(b) relocating the witness;
(c) providing accommodation to the witness;
(d) providing financial assistance to the witness;
(e) permitting persons involved in the administration of the Witness
Protection Programme to use assumed names in carrying out their duties and to
have documentation supporting those assumed names; or
(f) doing any other thing permitted under the Witness Protection
Programme to ensure the safety of the witness.
Recording of
statements of
victim at the
trial of serious
offences where
protection order
has not been
sought or has
been refused.
Oath of secrecy
to be
administered to
certain persons
referred to in
Schedules I and
II.
District Witness
Protection
Authority.
Witness
Protection
Programme.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

8
CHAPTER V
MISCELLANEOUS
17. Any person who is aggrieved by an order passed under section 10, may
appeal against such order to the High Court within thirty days from the date of order:
Provided that the High Court shall dispose of the appeal as expeditiously as
possible and preferably within thirty days from the date of service of notice on
respondent.
18. Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section ( 2) of section 7,
sub-section (2) of section 11 and sub-section (2) of section 14, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description which may extend to two years and shall also be
liable to fine which may extend upto rupees twenty thousand.
19. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained in any provision of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973 or any other law for the time being in force.
20. ( 1) Every High Court may, with the previous approval of the State
Government, make rules for the purpose of enforcement of the provisions of this Act
in the Court of the Magistrate or of the Judge.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the provision of
sub-section (1), such rules may provide for—
(a) the manner in which and the places at which the statement of
threatened witnesses referred to in section 12 and the Schedule I and the
statement of victim referred to in section 13 and the Schedule II may be recorded
by using two way closed-circuit television or video link and two-way audio
system;
(b) the appointment, control and making available technical staff necessary
for installation and operation of closed-circuit television and video link system,
and for screening the victim and other witnesses from accused.
(3) All rules made under this section shall be published in the Official Gazette.
Appeal.
Offences.
Overriding effect
of Act.
Power of High
Court to make
rules.
2 of 1974
5
10
15
20
25

SCHEDULE  I
(See section 12)
1. There shall be a two-way closed-circuit television or video link and a two-
way audio system established between the room from which the Presiding Judge
functions (hereinafter called Room A) and another room (hereinafter called Room B).
2. In Room A, the Presiding Judge, the court master and the stenographer, the
public prosecutor, the threatened witness in whose favour a protection order under
section 10 has been passed and the technical personnel of the Court operating the
television or video link and the audio system, shall alone be present.
3. In Room B, the accused, his pleader and the technical personnel of the Court
operating the television or video link and the audio system, shall alone be present.
4. (a) The threatened witness shall be examined by the prosecutor who is in
Room A directly, and he may identify the accused on the video screen but the camera
in Room A shall not be focused on the threatened witness and his image shall not be
visible on the screen in Room B.
(b) The said witness who is in Room A shall be cross-examined by the accused
or his pleader who are in Room B through the two-way television or video link and the
two-way audio system, subject to the procedure stated in sub-sections (1) and (2) of
section 12.
9

SCHEDULE  II
(See section 13)
1. There shall be a two-way closed-circuit television or video link and a two-
way audio system established between the room from which the Presiding Judge
functions (hereinafter called Room A) and the other room (hereinafter called Room B).
2. In Room A, the Presiding Judge, the court master and stenographer, the
accused and the technical personnel operating the two-way television or video link
and the two-way audio system shall be present and the camera shall not be focused
on the accused except when the victim has to identify the accused.
3. In Room B, the victim, the public prosecutor and the pleader of the accused
shall be present and except as permitted under para 2, the image of the accused shall
not be shown on the screen in Room B.
4. The victim shall be examined by the prosecutor or cross-examined by the
pleader of the accused directly and the image of the accused who is in Room A shall
not be visible on the screen in Room B.
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The present judicial system has taken the witnesses completely for granted.
Witnesses are summoned to the Court to give evidence in serious crimes. However,
due to lack of security to witness and his family members they turn hostile. The
legislative measures to emphasis the protection of witnesses have become imminent
and inevitable need of the day.
The Law Commission of India in its 198th Report has also recommended for
Witness Identity Protection and Witness Protection Programmes in case of all serious
offences wherein there is danger to witnesses.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide for protection of identity of a threatened
witness in criminal cases involving serious offences to ensure effective criminal justice
delivery system in the country.
N
EW DELHI; RABINDRA KUMAR JENA
July 8, 2015.
11

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 12 of the Bill provides for recording of statements of threatened witnesses
at the trial by using closed-circuit television or video link. Clause 13 provides for
recording of statements of victim at the trial of serious offences by using closed-
circuit television or video link. Clause 15 provides that every State Government shall
establish District Witness Protection Authority. Clause 16 provides for providing
accommodation and financial assistance to the witnesses. The expenditure relating to
the States shall be borne out of the Consolidated Funds of the respective States.
However, the expenditure in respect of Union Territories shall be borne out of the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of
rupees two hundred crore would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved.
12

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for protection of identity to threatened witnesses in criminal cases
involving serious offences, procedure and mechanism for such protection
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Rabindra Kumar Jena, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2409LS(S3)—26.1 1.2015.