5
Short title, 
extent and 
commencement.
As introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 250 of  2022
THE JOURNALIST (PREVENTION OF VIOLENCE AND 
DAMAGE OR LOSS TO THE PROPERTY) BILL, 2022
By
Shri N.K. Premachandran, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for prevention of violence against journalists and protection of journalists, their 
institutions, properties and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
 B e it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third year of Republic of India as follows:— 
 1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Journalist (Prevention of Violence and Damage or 
Loss to the Property) Act, 2022. 
  ( 2) It extends to the whole of India.
  ( 3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “journalist” means a person whose principal avocation is that of a journalist and 
who is employed as such, either whole-time or part-time, in, or in relation to a visual 
or print media establishment, such as editor, a leader writer, news-editor, sub-editor, 
feature-writer, copy-tester, reporter, correspondent, cartoonist, news-photographer, 
news reader, news videographer but does not include any such person who is employed 
mainly in a managerial or administrative capacity;
(b) “institutions” includes any registered newspaper establishment, news channel 
establishment, news based electronic media establishment or news station establishment 
and all institutions of Journalist involved in discharge of his service as a Journalist;
(c) “offenders” means a person who either by himself or as a Member or Leader of 
group of persons commits or attempt to commit, abate, provoke or incite the commission 
of violence under this Act;
(d) “property” means any property movable or immovable, owned or in possession 
of or under the control of any journalist or any Institution for discharging his service or 
duty as a journalist; and
(e) “violence” means an act which causes any harm, injury or endanger of life or 
intimidation, obstruction or harassment or coercion or assault of criminal force or threat 
to journalist in discharge of his service or duties or causes to be the reason for damage 
or loss to the property or reputation of a journalist or an institution. 
 3. Whoever commits violence against a journalist shall be punished with imprisonment 
for one year or with imprisonment of either description of a term which shall not be less than 
one year and which may extend upto three years and shall also be liable to pay fine.
 4. In addition to the punishment specified under section 3, the offender shall be 
liable to pay compensation for damage or loss caused to the property of journalist or any 
Institution as may be determined by the Court and he shall also be liable to reimburse 
medical expenditure incurred by the journalist:
 Provided that if the offenders fails to pay the compensation and medical expenditure 
imposed, the same shall be recovered as if it were arrears of land revenue.
 5. Any offence committed under this Act shall be cognizable non-bailable and triable 
by the Court of Judicial Magistrate of First Class.
 6. Any case registered under section 3 shall be investigated by a Police Officer not 
below the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police in such manner as may be prescribed.
 7. The provision of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of provisions 
of any other law for the time being in force.
 8. The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Act No. 2 of 1974) shall 
apply to the proceedings as per the provisions of the Act.
 9. (1) The Central Government shall after taking consent of the Bar Council of India 
by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.
  ( 2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule 
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of 
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Violence against 
journalist to be 
punishable.
Compensation.
Cognizance of 
offence.
Investigation.
Act to 
supplement 
other laws.
Application 
of Code of 
Criminal 
Procedure.
Power to make 
rules.
Definitions.
40
45

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The violence against the Journalists are increasing. The journalist exposed to every 
kind of attack including police violence against the reporters and reprisals instigated by 
criminal groups or corrupt local officials. There have been consistent attacks on Journalists 
who question or criticise the ruling dispensation. The violence pervades the profession 
of journalism today. The Journalist in India face a range of threats including censorship, 
economic hardships and job insecurity. The journalists are routinely threatened, intimidated, 
arrested, booked and silenced. The situation adversely affect the right granted by  
Article 19(1) of the Constitution for freedom of speech and expression. The independent and 
fearless media is required to strengthen the democracy.
Hence the protection of Journalists, their institutions and property against violence is 
necessitated. The Bill, therefore, seeks, to provide for the prevention of violence against the 
Journalists, their institutions and property.
     New Delhi;                   N.K. PREMACHANDRAN 
November 19, 2022

4
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government and State Government to make 
rules for carrying out the purpose of this Bill.  As the rules will relate to matters of details 
only, the delegation of legislative powers is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to provide for prevention of violence against journalists and protection of journalists, their 
institutions, properties and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
(Shri N.K. Premachandran, M.P .)