1
Bill No. 250 of  2018
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE UNIFORM CIVIL CODE IN INDIA BILL, 2018
By
SHRI CHANDRAKANT KHAIRE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of the National Inspection and Investigation
Committee for preparation of Uniform Civil Code and its
implementation throughout the territory of India
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Uniform Civil Code in India Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Uniform Civil Code" means the common civil code or common law for every
citizen residing in India irrespective of religion and caste.
Definitions.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(b) "Committee" means the National Inspection and Investigation Committee
constituted under section 3; and
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, within a period of six months from the coming
into force of this Act, constitute a Committee to be known as the National Inspection and
Investigation Committee for the purpose of preparation of Uniform Civil Code and its
implementation in the country.
(2) The Committee shall consist of—
(a) a Chairperson, who has been a retired Chief Justice of India to be nominated
by the Central Government in such manner, as may be prescribed;
(b) the Union Minister of Home Affairs—ex-officio member;
(c) the Union Minister of Law and Justice—ex-officio member;
(d) two members who have been the retired Chief Justices of the High Courts,
to be nominated by the Central Government in such manner, as may be prescribed;
(e) one member, to be nominated by the Central Government in such manner, as
may be prescribed, from amongst persons of eminence having adequate knowledge
and experience in law.
(f) one member, to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner, as
may be prescribed, from amongst officers of the Indian Administrative Service - ex-
officio Secretary;
(3) The Chairperson and the members of the Committee shall hold office for a period
of three years.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of the
Chairperson and other members shall be such as may be prescribed.
(5) The Central Government shall provide such number of Officers and staff to the
Committee, as may be necessary, for its efficient functioning.
(6) The Committee shall have the power to regulate its own procedure.
4. (1) It shall be the duty of the Committee to take such steps, as it may deem appropriate,
for the codification and implementation of the Uniform Civil Code in the country.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the  Committee shall
ensure:—
(a) Uniform Civil Code in entire geographical territory of India;
(b) that the Uniform Civil Code is applicable for marriage, divorce, succession,
adoption, guardianship and partition of land and assets on all citizens without any
discrimination;
(c) right to equality as guaranteed under article 14 and prohibition of
discrimination of any citizen on the basis of religion, Caste and gender is referred to
under article 15 of the Constitution;
(d) gender equality in implementation of the Uniform Civil Code; and
(e) substitution of the personal laws (laws based on religious texts and  traditions)
by Uniform Civil Code.
5. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the Committee for carrying out the purposes of this
Act.
Constitution
of the
National
Inspection and
Investigation
Committee.
Functions of
the
Committee.
Central
Government
to provide
adequate funds
to the
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
6. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act, as may appear to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
7. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without Prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In 1840, on the basis of Lex Loci Report, Uniform Law was framed for crimes, evidences
and annexure but they left out some personal laws of the Hindus and the Muslims on
purpose. On the other hand, the British Indian Judiciary had facilitated application by the
British Judges under the English Laws. Besides, in those days many social reformers were
voicing to make laws to do away with the discrimination against women done under the Sati
and other religious customs.
In the Constituent Assembly, while on the one hand there were people like Dr. B.R.
Ambedkar who desired reforms in the society and wanted to accept the Uniform Civil Code,
there were also Muslim representatives who took side of retaining the Personal Laws based
on religious enshrines. Due to this there was opposition of the Uniform Civil Code by the
minority communities. As a result, regarding the Uniform Civil Code, only one line could be
added as article 44 under Part IV as Directive Principles of State Policy in the Constitution. In
this, it is stated that the State shall endeavour to secure for citizens a Uniform Civil Code
throughout the territory of India. Since the Uniform Civil Code has been included in the
Directive Principles of State Policy of the State, hence these laws cannot be implemented by
the Constitution.
Besides, due to its political anomaly no Government showed proper will power to
implement these constitutional provisions, because the minorities, especially the Muslims
believed that the Uniform Civil Code will lead to the violation of their personal laws. Hence,
only to compile the Hindu Laws, the Bills like the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, the Hindu
Succession Act, 1956, the Hindu Minority and Citizenship Act, 1956 and the Hindu Adoptions
and Maintenance Act, 1956 were passed which are collectively known as the Hindu Code
Bill. In this Bill, alongwith the Buddhist, Sikh, Jain, laws related to different religious
communities of the Hindus are included vide which the women have been given right to
divorce and succession and caste has been termed irrelevant for marriage. Also, polygamy
has been done away with.
In the present context, it seem our country is divided in three words in two classes on
Uniform Civil Code, namely political, social and religious. In the Shah Bano Case, the Supreme
Court decided that section 125 of the Indian Penal Code is applicable to all irrespective of
religion, caste or community. The court directed that Shah Bano must be provided with
living expenses. The then Chief Justice Y .V. Chandra said that Uniform Civil Code would end
the dissimilarities in the Indian law which would help in establishing national unity. Hence,
the Supreme Court had directed the Parliament to make law related to the Uniform Civil Code.
Sarla Mudgal Case Vs. the Union of India is the second example vide which the
Supreme Court under article 44 had again directed the Government. The Supreme Court said
that adopting Islam for marriage is a misuse of the personal laws. It said that a Hindu marriage
can be dissolved only under the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 which means after adopting Islam
the marriage done thereafter cannot be dissolved under the Hindu Marriage Act and it is a
crime under section 494(5) of the Indian Penal Code.
In John V ellamettam Vs. Union of India, the Supreme Court declared section 118 of the
Indian Succession Act, 1925 as unconstitutional. Justice Khare said, "It is mentioned in
article 44 that the State of India will strive to provide Uniform Civil Code to all citizens in its
entire. But it is said that article 44 as mentioned in the Constitution has not been implemented
properly. But the Uniform Civil Code would help in establishing national integration by
avoiding contradictions on the grounds of ideologies."
The decision to implement the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act
seems to be a step towards Uniform Civil Code since this Act permits the people of Muslim
community to adopt children whereas Muslims are not permitted or allowed to adopt children

5
under their personal laws. The Supreme Court has again asked the Government to implement
the Uniform Civil Code so as to end gender inequality and wrong traditions prevalent under
the personal laws.
Under the Uniform Civil Code a collection of laws will be prepared which will protect
the personal rights of all citizens without considering the religion, which seems to be the
need of the hour. In reality this is the foundation stone of the secularism. Such progressive
reforms will not only help to end discrimination against women but also help in strengthening
the secular structure and encourage integrity. In fact our social system is replete with injustice,
discrimination and corruption and are in conflict with our fundamental rights, hence it needs
to be reformed. As we know that there is Penal Code in our country which is equally applicable
to all without considering the religion, caste and domicile. But there is no uniform law in our
country with regard to divorce and succession and these subjects are controlled by the
personal laws. Hence the Uniform Civil Code should be ensured to all citizens residing in
areas where the population of entire geographical area resides.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; CHANDRAKANT KHAIRE
November  20, 2018.

6
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the National Inspection and
Investigation Committee. It also provides for the salary and allowances of the Chairperson,
members, officers and staff of the Committee. Clause 4 provides that the Committee shall take
steps for codification and implementation of the Uniform Civil Code in the country. Clause 5
provides that the Central Government shall provide adequate funds to the Committee. The
Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It
is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore would be involved
from the Consolidated Fund of India per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

7
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of the National Inspection and Investigation
Committee for prepa1ration of Uniform Civil Code and its
implementation throughout the territory of India
————
(Shri Chandrakant Khaire, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—2649LS(S3)—21-12-2018.