THE  TRIBAL  CHILDREN  AND  LACTATING  WOMEN  IN
JHARKHAND  AND OTHER  STATES  (REMOV AL  OF
HUNGER, MALNUTRITION AND PREVENTION OF
STARV ATION DEATHS) BILL, 2017
By
SHRI NISHIKANT DUBEY, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the removal of hunger and malnutrition and for the prevention of starvation
deaths of tribal children including adolescent and young girls and pregnant and
lactating women in tribal areas of the country particularly in Jharkhand
through a nodal agency at the National and State levels, by formulating
a National policy for the purpose and for matters connected therewith
and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Tribal Children and Lactating Women in Jharkhand
and other States (Removal of Hunger, Malnutrition and Prevention of Starvation Deaths)
Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
Bill No. 250 of 2017
Short title and
commencement.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "adolescent girl" means a female human being who has attained puberty and
is below the age of eighteen years;
(b) "appropriate Government" means in the case of  a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases the Central Government;
(c) "girl child" means a female human being who is below the age of twelve
years;
(d) "Nodal Agency" means the Nodal Agency constituted under section 4 for
the purposes of this Act;
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but not later than one year of the
commencement of this Act, formulate and publish in the Official Gazette,  a National Policy
for the overall protection and removal of hunger, malnutrition and prevention of starvation
deaths of tribal children and pregnant and lactating tribal women particularly in the tribal
areas of Jharkhand and shall take appropriate measures for the uniform implementation of
such Policy.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in
sub-section (1), the National Policy may include provision for,—
(a) conducting surveys, from time to time of the tribal children, pregnant women
and lactating mothers in the tribal areas of Jharkhand and other parts of the country
who are malnourished, anaemic and underweight and maintaining district-wise data
thereof in such manner and with such particulars as may be prescribed;
(b) conducting periodic medical examination of every child including girl child
and adolescent girls, pregnant as well as lactating mothers covered under this Act and
for taking such remedial measures as may be recommended by dieticians and medical
authorities;
(c) making it mandatory for the appropriate Government to ensure as well as
provide at least two healthy meals per day, milk, seasonal fruits, folic acid and multi-
vitamin tablets to every malnourished or anaemic and underweight children, girl child,
pregnant and lactating women covered under this Act;
(d) providing medical care to the children and women covered under this Act
and providing sanitary napkins and proper dresses to adolescent and grown up girls
covered under this Act by the appropriate Government in such manner as may be
prescribed.
4.  (1)The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Nodal Agency consisting of a Chairperson, such number of members representing various
fields, such number of officers and staff as may be prescribed, for the purpose of this Act.
(2) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
the Chairperson, members, officers and staff of the Nodal Agency and procedure to be
followed by the Nodal Agency in discharging its functions shall be such as may be prescribed.
(3) The Nodal Agency shall,—
(a) classify tribal areas in each State as high, medium or low burden area with
regard to malnutrition, anaemia, hunger, starvation deaths and such other issues as
may be prescribed;
(b) identify malnutrition, anaemia, hunger eradication targets and suggest
measures to overcome the problem of malnutrition, anaemia, hunger cases in tribal
areas of every State in a time bound manner; and
Definitions.
National
Policy for the
removal of
hunger,
malnutrition
and prevention
of starvation
deaths of tribal
children and
lactating
mothers.
Constitution of
a Nodal
Agency.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(c) recommend to the Central Government and State Governments having tribal
areas within their territorial jurisdiction with regard to the implementation of this
Act and framing of rules and regulations as it may consider necessary.
5. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite funds, from time to time, to the States and Union territories
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
6. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
7. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force dealing with the subject matter of this Act.
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter, have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Central
Government to
provide
requisite funds.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Our vast Nation, the second most populous in the globe after China has, unfortunately,
the highest number of malnourished and anaemic children including girl child, adolescent
girls, women including pregnant and lactating mothers. The problem is more acute in the
tribal areas of our country.
In Jharkhand alone, every monsoon over 40,000 children slip into malnutrition in tribal
dominated Santhal Pargana. Due to persistent hunger, anaemia amongst the girl child,
adolescent girls, pregnant women and lactating mothers is prevalent not only in Santhal
Pargana but also in almost all the tribal areas of the country. Starvation deaths, though
generally denied by the Government authorities, are also reported from time to time not only
in tribal areas of Jharkhand but also from other States too.
On record there are at least 15 schemes to augment the nutrition of children and
mothers in Santhal Pargana but on ground, due to lack of funds for these schemes, the road
out of hunger is paved with failures. Union Ministry of Women and Child Development
implements Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) Scheme to control malnourishment
through Anganwadis but it hardly reaches in tribal areas.
Hence, it is high time to pay more and concerted attention for the removal of hunger,
malnutrition, anaemia amongst the children, girl child including adolescent girls, pregnant
and lactating women in tribal areas of Jharkhand and other parts of the country so as to
prevent starvation deaths in such areas.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; NISHIKANT  DUBEY
November 27, 2017.

5
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for constitution of a Nodal Agency to identify areas
affected with  malnutrition, anaemia, hunger, starvation deaths and suggest measures to
overcome the problems in tribal areas.
Clause 5 of the Bill makes it mandatory for the Central Government to provide requisite
funds for carrying out the purposes of this Bill. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is not possible to quantify the expenditure at this
stage but it is estimated that a sum of rupees one lakh crore will involve as recurring expenditure
per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees fifty crore may also involve for creating assets
for implementation of the provisions of this Bill.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of  normal character.
6

GMGIPMRND—2683LS(S3)—19.12.2017.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the removal of hunger and malnutrition and for the prevention of starvation
deaths of tribal children including adolescent and young girls and pregnant and
lactating women in tribal areas of the country particularly in Jharkhand
through a nodal agency at the National and State levels, by formulating
a National policy for the purpose and for matters connected therewith
and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri  Nishikant Dubey,  M.P.)