1
THE ARTISANS (WELFARE) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI SUSHIL KUMAR SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of an Artisans Welfare Board for the welfare of the
artisans living in the rural areas and for matters connected therewith
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Artisans (Welfare) Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 251of 2015
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Board" means the Artisans W elfare Board established under section 3;
(b) "artisan" means any person engaged in handicraft manufacturing in rural
areas for earning his livelihood;
(c) "Fund" means the Artisan Welfare Fund constituted under section 5; and
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Board to be known as the Artisans Welfare Board for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Board shall consist of a Chairperson and such other members to be appointed
by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The headquarter of the Board shall be at New Delhi.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of
Chairperson and members shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. The Board shall—
(a) carry out studies, from time to time, about various artworks and traditional art
practices carried out in rural areas;
(b) set up art centres to increase employment opportunities for artisans and
preserve art and craft heritage;
(c) provide better tools, technologies and designs to artisans;
(d) take steps to develop entrepreneurship among artisans;
(e) expand market facilities to get fare price of artwork to artisans and organise
regular art exhibitions and art markets;
(f) facilitate online portal of art work collections to enable artisans to avail
better prices for their art products; and
(g) undertake such other tasks as may be assigned to it by the Central Government
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
 5. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Fund to be known as the Artisan Welfare Fund for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, credit adequate sums to the Fund.
(3) The Fund shall be administered by the Board for carrying out the purposes of this
Act.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Definitions.
Establishment
of Artisans
Welfare
Board.
Functions of
the Board.
Constitution
of Artisan
Welfare Fund.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In rural parts of India we find some sheer talented people who create extremely creative
products through their art. But unfortunately due to unavailability of resources, low market
exposure, lack of awareness, financial constraints and no institutionalization support, these
artisans face a lot of trouble as they neither get fair price for their products nor they are able
to showcase their artwork at a broader prospect.
The present Bill, therefore, seeks to provide institutional and financial support to
artisans to improve their social status and to promote and revive India's traditional and
cultural art in such a way that more employment and economic activities can be carried out.
Hence  this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SUSHIL KUMAR SINGH
August 8, 2015.
————
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117(3) OF THE CONSTITUTION
[Copy of letter No. 1/64/2015/Parl. dated 16 November, 2015 from Shri Santosh Kumar
Gangwar, M.P ., Minister of State of the Ministry of Textiles to the Secretary General,
Lok Sabha]
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Artisans of India Bill,
2015 by Shri Sushil Kumar Singh, M.P ., recommends the consideration of the Bill in
Lok Sabha under article 117(3) of the Constitution.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to constitute an Artisan Welfare Board. Clause 4 provides,
inter-alia, for setting up of art centres and facilitating of online portal to enable artisans to
avail a better price for their art products. Clause 5 provides for constitution of Artisan
Welfare Fund by the Central Government. It also provides that the Central Government shall
provide adequate sums to the Fund. The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that annual recurring expenditure of
about rupees hundred crore is likely to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers that Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of an Artisans Welfare Board for the welfare of the
artisans living in  rural areas and for matters connected therewith
————
(Shri Sushil Kumar Singh, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2330LS(S3)—27-11-2015.