 Bill No. 251 of 2022
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2022
By
SHRI N.K. PREMACHANDRAN , M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of
India as follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
 AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
Amendment of
article 201. 2. In article 201 of the Constitution, for the words “President shall
declare’’, the words, “President shall, within a period of six months from the
date of receipt of message regarding declaration by the Governor that he
reserves the Bill for consideration of the President, declare’’.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Article 201 of the Constitution specifically states that “When a Bill is
reserved by a Governor for the consideration of President, the President
shall declare either that he assents to the Bill or that he withholds assent
therefrom”. But no time stipulation is provided in the Constitution.
Due to the lack of time stipulation various Bills passed by the Legislature
of different States are pending for long time without a declaration. If no
decision is taken on the Bills passed by State Legislature it will adversely
affect the Legislative process. The declaration regarding the assent is prolonged
taking the advantage that there is no time stipulation. Hence it is necessary to
amend article 201 by inserting specific time limit for assents to the Bill by
the President.
Hence this Bill.
   NEW DELHI;                                  N.K. PREMACHANDRAN
November 21, 2022.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * *
    201. Bill reserved for consideration When a Bill is reserved by a Governor
for the consideration of the President, the President shall declare either that
he assents to the Bill or that he withholds assent therefrom:
     Provided that, where the Bill is not a Money Bill, the President may direct
the Governor to return the Bill to the House or, as the case may be, the Houses
of the Legislature of the State together with such a message as it mentioned
in the first proviso to Article 200 and, when a Bill is so returned, the House or
Houses shall reconsider it accordingly within a period of six months from the
date of receipt of such message and, if it is again passed by the House or
Houses with or without amendment, it shall be presented again to the President
for his consideration.
* * * * * *
4
Bills reserved
for
consideration.

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri N.K. Premachandran, M.P .)