1
THE MAINTENANCE OF CLEANLINESS BILL, 2016
By
SHRI MAHEISH GIRRI, M.P.
A
BILL
to prohibit littering, spitting and urinating in public places so as to ensure maintenance
of clean, hygienic and healthy atmosphere in and around public places and for matters
connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Maintenance of Cleanliness Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the Union territories only.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 252 of  2016
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:
(a) "local authority" includes a municipal committee, corporation or council, by
whatever name called, district board, cantonment board or any authority for the time
being entrusted by law with the control and administration of any matter within a
specified local area;
(b) "litter" means anything which is likely to dirt or cause or contribute to the
defilement of the place where it is thrown or left to stink;
(c) "public place" means any place to which the general public has, or is entitled
or permitted to have, access, with or without payment, and includes roads and highways,
streets, lanes, railway stations, hospitals, bank premises, theatres, court premises, race
course, circus, music halls, gymnasiums, swimming pools, dancing halls, markets,
shopping places, malls, parks, educational institutions and religious places; and
(d) "spitting" includes expectorating.
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, the spitting, littering, urinating, defecating, defiling or defacement in any manner
whatsoever, in any public place is hereby prohibited.
4. Whoever violates the provisions of section 3 shall be punished with fine,
which shall not be less than one thousand rupees but which may extend upto ten
thousand rupees:
Provided that while imposing a fine under this section, the risk of diseases or
injury resulting to persons or animals or damage to property shall be taken into
consideration by the local authority.
5. The local authority shall be responsible for the collection of fines under
section 4 and implementation of the provisions of this Act.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as may
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days, which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, Parliament agrees in making any modification in the rule or Parliament
agrees that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modifications
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
that rule.
Definitions.
Local
Authority to
collect fine
and
implement
the provisions
of this Act.
Power to
make rules.
Prohibition of
spitting,
littering, etc.
in public
place.
Penalty.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Taking cue from the vision set by the Honorable Prime Minister,  in the form of "Swachh
Bharat Abhiyaan", the present Bill seeks to prohibit certain activities like, spitting, urinating,
discarding garbage at public places. The model law that has been implemented by countries
like Singapore and United States makes such activities a punishable offence and the result is
quite evident and visible. There is need to imbibe the good practices in the general masses
and make them aware of the consequences of littering, which usually leads to various diseases.
"Cleanliness is next to godliness"—a phrase that should be the cornerstone of the
21st Century India, in order to make it one of the most beautiful nations and help in making
the practices of the public, known worldwide.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MAHEISH GIRRI
July  6, 2016.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative powers is of a normal character.
4

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to prohibit littering, spitting and urinating in public places so as to ensure maintenance of
clean, hygienic and healthy atmosphere in and around public places and for matters
connected therewith.
————
(Shri Maheish Girri, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2598LS(S3)—08.11.2016.