1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 252 of  2017
THE E-COMMERCE (REGULA TION) BILL, 2017
By
SHRI SHIV AJI ADHALRAO PATIL, M.P.
A
BILL
for protection of rights of consumers against marketing of products and services through
e-commerce/telephone/digital methods and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the E-commerce (Regulation) Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "e-commerce selling" means selling of products or services by digital means
including internet, websites, dialing a telephone number advertised for the purpose in
television, newspapers, magazines, hoarding and posters;
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
10

2
(b) "observation period" means a fixed time period given to a consumer to
examine the products purchased or services availed by him through e-commerce selling
without inviting any liabilities; and
(c) words and expressions, used but not defined under this Act, shall have the
same meaning as assigned to them under the Consumer Protection Act, 1986.
3. (1) Every consumer who purchases any product or opts for any service through
e-commerce selling shall have an observation period of fifteen days from the date of receiving
such product or service.
(2) The consumer shall have the right to return the product or the service to the
company offering the same within the observation period if he is not satisfied with the
quality and performance of the product or service, without giving any reason for returning
the product or refusing the service.
(3) The company which has offered the products or services shall refund the full
amount, if any, charged for the same within seven working days from the date of return of
product or refusal of service by the consumer within the observation period.
Explanation .—For the purpose of this sub-section "full amount" includes the
packaging cost, delivery cost and the cost of returning the product.
(4) Every consumer shall have the right to get a full refund of money including the
delivery charges, the cost of return or the installation charges, if the products or services on
purchase are found to be faulty.
4. (1) Every company shall give full and clear information including manufacturing
date, expiry or best before date, about the products and the services being offered through
e-commerce selling mode.
(2) Any condition, agreement or contract whatsoever, shall not be enforceable by the
company unless it gives the required information to the consumer, prior to purchase of the
product or services.
5. (1) Whoever contravenes the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term, which may extend upto one year or with
fine, which may extend upto ten lakh rupees or with both.
(2) Where a person committing a contravention off any of the provisions of this Act or
of any rule, made thereunder is a company, every person who, at the time the contravention
was committed, was in-charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of
business of the company as well as the company, shall be guilty of the contravention and
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall render any such person liable to
punishment, if he proves that the contravention took place without his knowledge or that he
exercised all due diligence to prevent such contravention.
Explanation.—for the purpose of this section:—
(i) "company" means anybody corporate and include a firm or other association of
individuals; and
(ii) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
7. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the  Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such orders shall be made after the expiry of the period of three years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
Right of
consumer to
return the
product or
service
purchase
through
e-commerce.
Companies to
give full and
clear
information to
consumer
regarding
products and
services.
Penalty.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
68 of 1986.5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
8. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of the
provisions in any other law, for the time being in force, relating to e-commerce selling.
9. (1) The Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
Act not in
derogation of
other laws.
Power to make
rules.
5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
With the passage of time and advancement in technology, the concept of buying
goods and services has undergone a tremendous change. India has an internet users base of
about 450 million as of July 2017. According to a study done by the Indian Institute of
e-Commerce, by 2020 India is expected to generate $100 billion online retail revenue out of
which $35 billion will be through fashion e-commerce. Online apparel sales are set to grow
four times in coming years. A new sector in e-commerce is online selling of complementary
and alternative medicine or prescription medicine. People are buying various goods without
even having seen or felt them. The technology has also shrinked the world as the goods
manufactured, anywhere in the globe, are available to a person just by clicking on e-commerce
website portals or by making a telephone call. The manufacturer of various goods are just
flashing out their advertisements in e-commerce websites or telephone numbers in television,
newspapers, magazines, hoarding, posters, etc. for the purpose of inviting customers to
purchase their goods and services. In view of the fact that the person who is buying goods
or services through this e-commerce selling does not get any chance of a face to face contact
with the person selling the goods and the opportunity to feel or examine it, hence there are
chances that he may fall into a false trap. Many cases have been reported of this nature
where the goods and services purchased by an individual do not match in quality and
appearance with those displayed on television, magazines, hoarding, etc. In such cases, if
the customer wants to return those goods or services, the supplier would not oblige him and
he has no legal backing to do so.
Many countries have enacted laws on e-commerce in order to protect the rights of the
customers. The year 2007 is regarded as the birth year of the Indian e-commerce industry, but
as of now, there is no law on e-commerce selling in our country. With a view to protect the
rights of the customers opting for e-commerce selling in our country, there is an urgent need
to have such a law.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide for the rights of the customer to return the goods
or services purchased through e-commerce within the observation period of fifteen days
without inviting any liabilities and imposing duties on the companies to provide full, fair and
complete information to the customer while selling goods and services through e- commerce
selling.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI. SHIV AJI  ADHALRAO  PATIL
November 27, 2017.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purpose of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
for protection of rights of consumers against marketing of products and services
through e-commerce/telephone/digital methods and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Shivaji Adhalrao Patil, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2720LS(S3)—20.12.2017.