1
THE CANTONMENTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
By
SHRI CHANDRAKANT KHAIRE, M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the Cantonments Act, 2006.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Cantonments (Amendment) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After Chapter IV of the Cantonments Act, 2006, the following Chapter and sections
thereunder shall be inserted, namely:—
"CHAPTER IV A
CONSTITUTION OF INSPECTION AND PROMOTION COMMITTEE
65A. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute an Inspection and Promotion Committee (hereinafter referred to as the Committee
for carrying out the functions assigned to it under this Act.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 252 of  2018
5 Insertion of new
Chapter IV A.
Constitution of the
Inspection and
promotion
Committee.
41 of 2006.
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
5
10
15
20
25
(2) The Committee shall consist of:—
(a) the Union Minister of Home Affairs, ex-officio Chairperson;
(b) the Union Minister of Defense, ex-officio member;
(c) Chief Minister of States with Cantonment Boards, ex-officio members;
(d) two members of Parliament, one from the House of the People and one from
the Council of States having experience in dealing with Cantonment Board area;
(e) three members, one each from Army, Air Force and Navy-members;
(f) an officer from Indian Administrative service or equivalent officer- Secretary;
(3) The Central Government shall provide such number of officers and staff to the
Committee as required for its efficient functioning.
(4) The Committee shall meet atleast two times in a month or as the Chairperson may,
in consultation with the Secretary decide.
(5) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
the officers and staff of the Committee shall be such as may beprescribed.
65B. The Committee shall,—
(a) undertake assessment of residents living below poverty line in the
Cantonment Board Areas and provide the benefit of Government schemes to
such residents;
(b) take measures to grant entitlement rights to inhabitants, or residents
of old grant bungalows of Cantonment Board areas;
(c) examine the problems of residents living below poverty line Cantonment
Board areas;
(d) review the need of land in public interest and the allocation of additional
land to meet the requirement of residents in general and to the residents living
below poverty line in particular; and
(e) undertake such other function as may be assigned to it, from time to
time for carrying out the functions under this Act.
Functions of
the
Committee.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
British came to India in the year 1600 as traders and gradually expanded their roots
across the country. Robert Clive started this policy of building cantonments in India. The
first cantonment was established in Barackpore in the year 1772. The definition of Cantonment
had acquired wider meaning by the beginning of the 19th century. It was being considered as
a stipulated area specially marked out for the use of the armed forces.
The First war of independence in the year 1857 triggered the construction of large
military establishments in India. Army personnel including their domestic workers and servants
and also foreign traders, Anglo-Indian, other European and local people (who were given
special facility and rights by Army policy-makers) were given the right to reside in them. The
British had formulated concepts and conditions such as Old Grant Bungalow (OGW), free
hold lease, perpetual i.e. permanent lease, temporary lease, etc. Civilians i.e. non-military
personnel were permitted to build bungalows subject to condition that they would provide
them to officers on reasonable rent. The bungalows or quarters in the cantonment area could
not be sold or rented to any person not belonging to the British Army.
During the present times, Cantonment Boards do not exist in Britain, America or any
other developed or developing countries. Seventy one years after the British had left India,
the inhabitants of these areas are still governed by old colonial British laws and rules such as
Governor General Orders (440) of 12 September, 1826. Eleven British laws are still applicable
to them. All the members of Parliament had given their consent during a discussion on
Motion Number 141 moved — in Parliament that all these Cantonment Board should be
discontinued. The 73rd Amendment to Constitution advocated Panchayati Raj institutions
in all the units of local governance. But it has not been implemented in Cantonment Board.
Army officers have been fulfilling basic needs such as cleanliness according to rules and
orders issued by local military authorities.
It is high time that around twenty lakh people residing in these Cantonment Boards
should be given the right to live with dignity and right to own property like other citizens of
the country. Then, only the people living in India can become part of "Swaraj". Also, a
commission or high-powered committee should be constituted to examine the problems of
each cantonment area, review unjust British Acts and conduct fresh review of the need of
land in public interest and allocation of additional land. Although the  namely thie Cantonment
Act, 2006 has been enacted to administer Cantonment areas with a view to impart greater
democratisation and development of the area. However, the concerns of inhabitant particular
the persons living below poverty line in the Cantonment areas still remain unaddressed. The
Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Cantonments Act, 2006 with a view to constitute an
Inspection and Promotion Committee to assess the inhabitants living below poverty line in
the Cantonment areas and provide them the benefits for Government schemes.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; CHANDRAKANT KHAIRE
November 20, 2018.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for constitution of the Inspection and Promotion Committee
to assess the inhabitants living below poverty line in the Cantonment areas and provide
them the benefit of Government schemes. It also provides for appointment of officers and
staff to the Committee. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees five hundred
crore  is likely to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees  one hundred crore is also likely to be involved.
4

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Cantonments Act, 2006.
————
(Shri Chandrakant Khaire, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—2639LS(S3)—21.12.2018.