Bill No. 252-F of  2015
THE  ARBITRATION  AND  CONCILIATION
(AMENDMENT)  BILL,  2015
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT—
LOK SABHA ON 17TH  D ECEMBER, 2015
RAJYA SABHA ON 23RD DECEMBER, 2015)
ASSENTED  TO
ON 31ST DECEMBER , 2015
ACT NO. 3 OF 2016

1
THE ARBITRA TION AND CONCILIATION (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2015
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT)
A
BILL
to amend the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of  India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015.
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 23rd October, 2015.
2. In the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act), in section 2,—
(I) in sub-section (1),—
(A) for clause (e), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(e) “Court” means—
(i) in the case of an arbitration other than international
commercial arbitration, the principal Civil Court of original
Short title
and
commence-
ment.
Amendment
of section 2.
26 of 1996.
Bill No. 252-F of 2015

2
jurisdiction in a district, and includes the High Court in exercise of
its ordinary original civil jurisdiction, having jurisdiction to decide
the questions forming the subject-matter of the arbitration if the
same had been the subject-matter of a suit, but does not include
any Civil Court of a grade inferior to such principal Civil Court, or
any Court of Small Causes;
(ii) in the case of international commercial arbitration, the
High Court in exercise of its ordinary original civil jurisdiction, having
jurisdiction to decide the questions forming the subject-matter of
the arbitration if the same had been the subject-matter of a suit, and
in other cases, a High Court having jurisdiction to hear appeals
from decrees of courts subordinate to that High Court;’;
(B) in clause (f), in sub-clause ( iii), the words “a company or” shall be
omitted;
(II)  in sub-section (2), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that subject to an agreement to the contrary, the provisions
of sections 9, 27 and clause (a) of sub-section (1) and sub-section (3) of section 37
shall also apply to international commercial arbitration, even if the place of
arbitration is outside India, and an arbitral award made or to be made in such
place is enforceable and recognised under the provisions of Part II of this Act.”.
3. In section 7 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 4), in clause (b), after the words
“or other means of telecommunication”, the words “including communication through
electronic means” shall be inserted.
4. In section 8 of the principal Act,—
(i) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(1) A judicial authority, before which an action is brought in a matter
which is the subject of an arbitration agreement shall, if a party to the arbitration
agreement or any person claiming through or under him,  so applies not later
than the date of submitting his first statement on the substance of the dispute,
then, notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of the Supreme Court or
any Court, refer the parties to arbitration unless it finds that prima facie no
valid arbitration agreement exists.”;
(ii) in sub-section (2), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that where the original arbitration agreement or a certified copy
thereof is not available with the party applying for reference to arbitration
under sub-section (1), and the said agreement or certified copy is retained by
the other party to that agreement, then, the party  so applying shall file such
application along with a copy of the arbitration agreement and a petition praying
the Court to call upon  the other party to produce the original arbitration
agreement or its duly certified copy before that Court.”.
5.  Section 9 of the principal Act shall be renumbered as sub-section (1) thereof, and
after sub-section ( 1) as so renumbered, the following sub-sections shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(2) Where, before the commencement of the arbitral proceedings, a Court
passes an order for any interim measure of protection under sub-section ( 1), the
arbitral proceedings shall be commenced within a period of ninety days from the date
of such order or within such further time as the Court may determine.
(3) Once the arbitral tribunal has been constituted, the Court shall not entertain
an application under sub-section (1), unless the Court finds that circumstances exist
which may not render the remedy provided under section 17 efficacious.”.
Amendment
of section 7.
Amendment
of section 9.
Amendment
of section 8.

3
6. In section 11 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-sections ( 4), ( 5) and ( 6), for the words “the Chief Justice or any
person or institution designated by him” wherever they occur, the words “the Supreme
Court or, as the case may be, the High Court or any person or institution designated
by such Court” shall be substituted;
(ii) after sub-section (6), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:—
“(6A) The Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the High Court, while
considering any application under sub-section ( 4) or sub-section ( 5) or
sub-section (6), shall, notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any
Court, confine to the examination of the existence of an arbitration agreement.
(6B) The designation of any person or institution by the Supreme Court
or, as the case may be, the High Court, for the purposes of this section shall not
be regarded as a delegation of judicial power by the Supreme Court or the High
Court.”;
(iii) in sub-section (7), for the words “the Chief Justice or the person or institution
designated by him is final”, the words “the Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the
High Court or the person or institution designated by such Court  is final and no
appeal including Letters Patent Appeal shall lie against such decision” shall be
substituted;
(iv) for sub-section (8), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(8) The Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the High Court or the
person or institution designated by such Court, before appointing an arbitrator,
shall seek a disclosure in writing from the prospective arbitrator in terms of
sub-section (1) of section 12, and have due regard to—
(a) any qualifications required for the arbitrator by the agreement
of the parties; and
(b) the contents of the disclosure and other considerations as are
likely to secure the appointment of an independent and impartial
arbitrator.”;
(v) in sub-section (9), for the words “the Chief Justice of India or the person or
institution designated by him”, the words “the Supreme Court or the person or
institution designated by that Court” shall be substituted;
(vi) for sub-section ( 10), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“(10) The Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the High Court, may
make such scheme as the said Court may deem appropriate for dealing with
matters entrusted by sub-section ( 4) or sub-section ( 5) or
sub-section (6), to it.”;
(vii) in sub-section ( 11), for the words “the Chief Justices of different High
Courts or their designates, the Chief Justice or his designate to whom the request has
been first made”, the words “different High Courts or their designates, the High Court
or its designate to whom the request has been first made” shall be substituted;
(viii) for sub-section ( 12), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:—
‘(12) (a) Where the matters referred to in sub-sections (
4), (5), (6), (7), (8)
and sub-section (10) arise in an international commercial arbitration, the reference
to the “Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the High Court” in those
sub-sections shall be construed as a reference to the “Supreme Court”; and
Amendment
of section 11.

4
(b) where the matters referred to in sub-sections (4), (5), (6), (7), (8) and
sub-section (10) arise in any other arbitration, the reference to “the Supreme
Court or, as the case may be, the High Court” in those sub-sections shall be
construed as a reference to the “High Court” within whose local limits the
principal Civil Court referred to in clause (e) of sub-section (1) of section 2 is
situate, and where the High Court itself is the Court referred to in that clause, to
that High Court.’;
(ix) after sub-section ( 12), the following sub-sections shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(13) An application made under this section for appointment of an
arbitrator or arbitrators shall be disposed of by the Supreme Court or the High
Court or the person or institution designated by such Court, as the case may
be, as expeditiously as possible and an endeavour shall be made to dispose of
the matter within a period of sixty days from the date of service of notice on the
opposite party.
(14) For the purpose of  determination of the fees of the arbitral tribunal
and the manner of its payment to the arbitral tribunal, the High Court may frame
such rules as may be necessary, after taking into consideration the rates specified
in the Fourth Schedule.
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that this
sub-section shall not apply to international commercial arbitration and in
arbitrations (other than international commercial arbitration) in case where parties
have agreed for determination of fees as per the rules of an arbitral institution.’’.
7. After section 11 of the principal Act, the following new section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“11A. (1) If the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient
so to do, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend the Fourth Schedule and
thereupon  the Fourth Schedule  shall be deemed to have been amended accordingly.
(2) A copy of every notification proposed to be issued under sub-section ( 1),
shall be laid in draft before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in disapproving
the issue of the notification or both Houses agree in making any modification in the
notification, the notification shall not be issued or, as the case may be, shall be issued
only in such modified form as may be agreed upon by the both Houses of Parliament.’’.
8. In section 12 of the principal Act,—
(i) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(1) When a person is approached in connection with his possible
appointment as an arbitrator, he shall disclose in writing any circumstances,—
(a) such as the existence either direct or indirect, of any past or
present relationship with  or interest in any of the parties or in relation to
the subject-matter in dispute, whether financial, business, professional
or other kind, which is likely to give rise to justifiable doubts as to his
independence or impartiality; and
(b) which are likely to affect his ability to devote sufficient time to
the arbitration and in particular his ability to complete the entire arbitration
within a period of twelve months.
Insertion of
new section
11A.
Amendment
of section 12.
Power of
Central
Government
to amend
Fourth
Schedule.

5
Explanation 1.—The grounds stated in the Fifth Schedule shall guide
in determining whether circumstances exist which give rise to justifiable
doubts as to the independence or impartiality of an arbitrator.
Explanation 2.—The disclosure shall be made by such person in the
form specified in the Sixth Schedule.”;
(ii) after sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(5) Notwithstanding any prior agreement to the contrary, any person
whose relationship, with the parties or counsel or the subject-matter of the
dispute, falls under any of the categories specified in the Seventh Schedule
shall be ineligible to be appointed as an arbitrator:
Provided that parties may, subsequent to disputes having arisen between
them, waive the applicability of this sub-section by an express agreement in
writing.
9. In section 14 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in the opening portion, for the
words “The mandate of an arbitrator shall terminate if ”, the words “The mandate of an
arbitrator shall terminate and he shall be substituted by another arbitrator, if ” shall be
substituted.
10. For section 17 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“17. (1) A party may, during the arbitral proceedings or at any time after the
making of the arbitral award but before it is enforced in accordance with section 36,
apply to the arbitral tribunal—
(i) for the appointment of a guardian for a minor or person of unsound
mind for the purposes of arbitral proceedings; or
(ii) for an interim measure of protection in respect of any of the following
matters, namely:—
(a) the preservation, interim custody or sale of any goods which
are the subject-matter of the arbitration agreement;
(b) securing the amount in dispute in the arbitration;
(c) the detention, preservation or inspection of any property or
thing which is the subject-matter of the dispute in arbitration, or as to
which any question may arise therein and authorising for any of the
aforesaid purposes any person to enter upon any land or building in the
possession of any party, or authorising any samples to be taken, or any
observation to be made, or experiment to be tried, which may be necessary
or expedient for the purpose of obtaining full information or evidence;
(d) interim injunction or the appointment of a receiver;
(e) such other interim measure of protection as may appear to the
arbitral tribunal to be just and convenient,
and the arbitral tribunal shall have the same power for making orders, as the
court has for the purpose of, and in relation to, any proceedings before it.
Amendment
of section 14.
Substitution
of new
section for
section 17.
Interim
measures
ordered by
arbitral
tribunal.

6
(2) Subject to any orders passed in an appeal under section 37, any order
issued by the arbitral tribunal under this section shall be deemed to be an order of the
Court for all purposes and shall be enforceable under the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908, in the same manner as if it were an order of the Court.”.
11.  In section 23 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(2A) The respondent, in support of his case, may also submit a counterclaim or
plead a set-off, which shall be adjudicated upon by the arbitral tribunal, if such
counterclaim or set-off falls within the scope of the arbitration agreement.”.
12.  In section 24 of the principal Act, after the proviso to sub-section (1), the following
proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided further that the arbitral tribunal shall, as far as possible, hold oral
hearings for the presentation of evidence or for oral argument on day-to-day basis,
and not grant any adjournments unless sufficient cause is made out, and may impose
costs including exemplary costs on the party seeking adjournment without any
sufficient cause.”.
13.  In section 25 of the principal Act, in clause ( b), at the end, after the words
“allegations by the claimant”, the words “and shall have the discretion to treat the right of
the respondent to file such statement of defence as having been forfeited” shall be inserted.
14.  In section 28 of the principal Act, for sub-section (3), the following sub-section
shall be substituted, namely:—
“(3) While deciding and making an award, the arbitral tribunal shall, in all cases,
take into account the terms of the contract and trade usages applicable to the
transaction.”.
15.  After section 29 of the principal Act, the following new sections shall be inserted,
namely:—
“29A. (1) The award shall be made within a period of twelve months from
the date the arbitral tribunal enters upon the reference.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this sub-section,  an arbitral tribunal shall be
deemed to have entered upon the reference on the date on which the arbitrator or all
the arbitrators, as the case may be, have received notice, in writing, of their
appointment.
(2) If the award is made within a period of six months from the date the arbitral
tribunal enters upon the reference, the arbitral tribunal shall be entitled to receive such
amount of additional fees as the parties may agree.
(3) The parties may, by consent, extend the period specified in sub-section (1)
for making award for a further period not exceeding six months.
(4)  If the award is not made within the period specified in sub-section (1) or the
extended period specified under sub-section (3), the mandate of the arbitrator(s) shall
terminate unless the Court has, either prior to or after the expiry of the period so
specified, extended the period:
Provided that while extending the period under this sub-section, if the Court
finds that the proceedings have been delayed for the reasons attributable to the
arbitral tribunal, then, it may order reduction of fees of arbitrator(s) by not exceeding
five per cent. for each month of such delay.
(5) The extension of period referred to in sub-section ( 4) may be on the
application of any of the parties and may be granted only for sufficient cause and on
such terms and conditions as may be imposed by the Court.
Amendment
of section 23.
Amendment
of section 24.
Amendment
of section 25.
Amendment
of section 28.
Insertion of
new sections
29A and 29B.
Time limit for
arbitral award.
5 of 1908.

7
(6) While extending the period referred to in sub-section ( 4), it shall be open
to the Court to substitute one or all of the arbitrators and if one or all of the
arbitrators are substituted, the arbitral proceedings  shall continue from the stage
already reached and on the basis of the evidence and material already on record, and
the arbitrator(s) appointed under this section shall be deemed to have received the
said evidence and material.
(7) In the event of arbitrator(s) being appointed under this section, the arbitral
tribunal thus reconstituted shall be deemed to be in continuation of the previously
appointed arbitral tribunal.
(8) It shall be open to the Court to impose actual or exemplary costs upon any
of the parties under this section.
(9) An application filed under sub-section (5) shall be disposed of by the Court
as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made to dispose of the matter
within a period of sixty days from the date of service of notice on the opposite party.
29B. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the parties to an arbi-
tration agreement, may, at any stage either before or at the time of appointment of the
arbitral tribunal, agree in writing to have their dispute resolved by fast track procedure
specified in sub-section (3).
(2) The parties to the arbitration agreement, while agreeing for resolution of
dispute by fast track procedure, may agree that the arbitral tribunal shall consist of a
sole arbitrator who shall be chosen by the parties.
(3) The arbitral tribunal shall follow the following procedure while conducting
arbitration proceedings under sub-section (1):
(a) The arbitral tribunal shall decide the dispute on the basis of written
pleadings, documents and submissions filed by the parties without any oral
hearing;
(b) The arbitral tribunal shall have power to call for any further information
or clarification from the parties in addition to the pleadings and documents filed
by them;
(c) An oral hearing may be held only, if, all the parties make a request or if
the arbitral tribunal considers it necessary to have oral hearing for clarifying
certain issues;
(d) The arbitral tribunal may dispense with any technical formalities, if an
oral hearing is held, and adopt such procedure as deemed appropriate for
expeditious disposal of the case.
(4) The award under this section shall be made within  a period of six months
from the date the arbitral tribunal enters upon the reference.
(5) If the award is not made within the period specified in sub-section ( 4), the
provisions of sub-sections (3) to (9) of section 29A shall apply to the proceedings.
(6) The fees payable to the arbitrator and the manner of payment of the fees shall
be such as may be agreed between the arbitrator and the parties.’’.
16.  In section 31 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section (7), for clause (b), the following clause shall be substituted,
namely:—
‘(b) A sum directed to be paid by an arbitral award shall, unless the award
otherwise directs, carry interest at the rate of two per cent. higher than the
current rate of interest prevalent on the date of award,  from the date of award to
the date of payment.
Explanation.—The expression “current rate of interest” shall have the same meaning
as assigned to it under clause (b) of section 2 of the Interest Act, 1978.’;
Fast track
procedure.
Amendment
of section 31.
14  of 1978.

8
(ii) for sub-section (8), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(8) The costs of an arbitration shall be fixed by the arbitral tribunal in
accordance with section 31A.”.
17.  After section 31 of the principal Act, the following new section shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘31A. (1) In relation to any arbitration proceeding or a proceeding under any of
the provisions of this Act pertaining to the arbitration, the Court or arbitral tribunal,
notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Civil Procedure,1908, shall have
the discretion to  determine—
(a) whether costs are payable by one party to another;
(b) the amount of such costs; and
(c) when such costs are to be paid.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this sub-section, “costs” means reasonable
costs relating to—
(i) the fees and expenses of the arbitrators, Courts  and witnesses;
(ii) legal fees and expenses;
(iii ) any administration fees of the institution supervising the
arbitration; and
(iv) any other expenses incurred in connection with the arbitral or Court
proceedings and the arbitral award.
(2) If the Court or arbitral tribunal decides to make an order as to payment of
costs,—
(a) the general rule is that the unsuccessful party shall be ordered to pay
the costs of the successful party; or
(b) the Court or arbitral tribunal may make a different order for reasons to
be recorded in writing.
(3) In determining the costs, the Court or arbitral tribunal shall have regard to all
the circumstances, including—
(a) the conduct of all the parties;
(b) whether a party has succeeded partly in the case;
(c) whether the party had made a frivolous counterclaim leading to delay
in the disposal of the arbitral proceedings; and
(d) whether any reasonable offer to settle the dispute is made by a party
and refused by the other party.
(4) The Court or arbitral tribunal may make any order under this section including
the order that a party shall pay—
(a) a proportion of another party’s costs;
(b) a stated amount in respect of another party’s costs;
(c) costs from or until a certain date only;
(d) costs incurred before proceedings have begun;
(e) costs relating to particular steps taken in the proceedings;
(f
) costs relating only to a distinct part of the proceedings; and
(g) interest on costs from or until a certain date.
Insertion of
new section
31A.
5 of 1908.
Regime for
costs.

9
(5) An agreement which has the effect that a party is to pay the whole or part
of the costs of the arbitration in any event shall be only valid if such agreement is
made after the dispute in question has arisen.’.
18. In section 34 of the principal Act,—
(I) in sub-section ( 2), in clause ( b), for the Explanation, the following
Explanations shall be substituted, namely:—
“Explanation 1.—For the avoidance of any doubt, it is clarified that an
award is in conflict with the public policy of India, only if,—
(i) the making of the award was induced or affected by fraud or
corruption or was in violation of section 75 or section 81; or
(ii) it is in contravention with the fundamental policy of Indian
law; or
(iii) it is in conflict with the most basic notions of morality or justice.
Explanation 2.—For the avoidance of doubt, the test as to whether there
is a contravention with the fundamental policy of Indian law shall not entail a
review on the merits of the dispute.”;
(II) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(2A) An arbitral award arising out of arbitrations other than international
commercial arbitrations, may also be set aside by the Court, if the Court finds
that the award is vitiated by patent illegality appearing on the face of the award:
Provided that an award shall not be set aside merely on the ground of an
erroneous application of the law or by reappreciation of evidence.”;
(III) after sub-section (4), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:—
“(5) An application under this section shall be filed by a party only after
issuing a prior notice to the other party and such application shall be
accompanied by an affidavit by the applicant endorsing compliance with the
said requirement.
(6) An application under this section shall be disposed of expeditiously,
and in any event, within a period of one year from the date on which the notice
referred to in sub-section ( 5) is served upon the other party.”.
19. For section 36 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“36. (1) Where the time for making an application to set aside the arbitral award
under section 34 has expired, then, subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), such
award shall be enforced in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908,  in the same manner as if it were a decree of the court.
(2) Where an application to set aside the arbitral award has been filed in the
Court under section 34, the filing of such an application shall not by itself render that
award unenforceable, unless the Court grants an order of stay of the operation of the
said arbitral award in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (3), on a separate
application made for that purpose.
(3) Upon filing of an application under sub-section (2) for stay of the operation
of the arbitral award, the Court may, subject to such conditions as it may deem fit,
grant stay of the operation of such award for reasons to be recorded in writing:
Amendment of
section 34.
Substitution
of new
section for
section 36.
Enforce-
ment.
5 of 1908.

10
Provided that the Court shall, while considering the application for grant of
stay in the case of an arbitral award for payment of money,  have   due   regard  to  the
provisions for grant of stay of  a money decree under the provisions of the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908.”.
20. In section 37 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), for clauses (a) and (b), the
following clauses shall be substituted, namely:—
“(a) refusing to refer the parties to arbitration under section 8;
(b) granting or refusing to grant any measure under section 9;
(c) setting aside or refusing to set aside an arbitral award under section 34.”.
21. In section 47 of the principal Act, for the Explanation, the  following Explanation
shall be substituted, namely:—
‘Explanation.—In this section and in the sections following in this Chapter,
“Court” means the High Court having original jurisdiction to decide the questions
forming the subject-matter of the arbitral award if the same had been the subject-
matter of a suit on its original civil jurisdiction and in other cases, in the High Court
having jurisdiction to hear appeals from decrees of courts subordinate to such
High Court.’.
22. In section 48 of the principal Act, for the Explanation to sub-section ( 2), the
following Explanations shall be substituted, namely:—
“Explanation 1.—For the avoidance of any doubt, it is clarified that an award
is in conflict with the public policy of India, only if,—
(i) the making of the award was induced or affected by fraud or corruption
or was in violation of section 75 or section 81; or
(ii) it is in contravention with the fundamental policy of Indian law; or
(iii) it is in conflict with the most basic notions of morality or justice.
Explanation 2.—For the avoidance of doubt, the test as to whether there is a
contravention with the fundamental policy of Indian law shall not entail a review on
the merits of the dispute.”.
23. In section 56 of the principal Act, for the Explanation, the following  Explanation
shall be substituted, namely:—
‘Explanation.—In this section and in the sections following in this Chapter,
“Court” means the High Court having original jurisdiction to decide the questions
forming the subject-matter of the arbitral award if the same had been the subject-
matter of a suit on its original civil jurisdiction and in other cases, in the High Court
having jurisdiction to hear appeals from decrees of courts subordinate to such
High Court.’.
24. In section 57 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), for the Explanation, the
following Explanations shall be substituted, namely:—
“Explanation 1.—For the avoidance of any doubt, it is clarified that an award
is in conflict with the public policy of India, only if,—
(i) the making of the award was induced or affected by fraud or corruption
or was in violation of section 75 or section 81; or
(ii) it is in contravention with the fundamental policy of Indian law; or
(iii) it is in conflict with the most basic notions of morality or justice.
5 of 1908.
Amendment
of section 37.
Amendment
of section 47.
Amendment
of section 48.
Amendment
of section 56.
Amendment
of section 57.

11
Explanation 2.—For the avoidance of doubt, the test as to whether there is a
contravention with the fundamental policy of Indian law shall not entail a review on
the merits of the dispute.”.
25. After the Third Schedule to the principal Act, the following new Schedules shall
be inserted, namely:—
‘THE FOURTH SCHEDULE
[See section 11 (14)]
Sum in dispute Model fee
Up to Rs. 5,00,000 Rs. 45,000
Above Rs. 5,00,000 and up to Rs. 45,000 plus 3.5 per cent. of the claim amount
Rs. 20,00,000 over and above Rs. 5,00,000
Above Rs. 20,00,000 and up to Rs. 97,500 plus  3 per cent. of the claim amount
Rs. 1,00,00,000 over and above Rs. 20,00,000
Above Rs. 1,00,00,000 and Rs. 3,37,500 plus  1 per cent. of the claim amount
up to Rs. 10,00,00,000 over and above Rs. 1,00,00,000
Above Rs. 10,00,00,000 and up to Rs. 12,37,500 plus  0.75 per cent. of the claim
Rs. 20,00,00,000 amount over and above Rs. 1,00,00,000
Above Rs. 20,00,00,000 Rs. 19,87,500 plus  0. 5 per cent. of the claim
amount over and above Rs. 20,00,00,000 with
a ceiling of Rs. 30,00,000
Note:— In the event, the arbitral tribunal is a sole arbitrator, he shall be entitled to an
additional amount of twenty-five per cent. on the fee payable as per the table set out
above.
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE
[See section 12 (1)(b)]
The following grounds give rise to justifiable doubts as to the independence or
impartiality of arbitrators:
Arbitrator’s relationship with the parties or counsel
1. The arbitrator is an employee, consultant, advisor or has any other past or present
business relationship with a party.
2. The arbitrator currently represents or advises one of the parties or an affiliate of
one of the parties.
3. The arbitrator currently represents the lawyer or law firm acting as counsel for one
of the parties.
4. The arbitrator is a lawyer in the same law firm which is representing one of the
parties.
5. The arbitrator is a manager, director or part of the management, or has a similar
controlling influence, in an affiliate of one of the parties if the affiliate is directly involved in
the matters in dispute in the arbitration.
6. The arbitrator’s law firm had a previous but terminated involvement in the case
without the arbitrator being involved himself or herself.
Insertion of
new Fourth
Schedule, Fifth
Schedule,
Sixth Schedule
and Seventh
Schedule.

12
7. The arbitrator’s law firm currently has a significant commercial relationship
with one of the parties or an affiliate of one of the parties.
8. The arbitrator regularly advises the appointing party or an affiliate of the
appointing party even though neither the arbitrator nor his or her firm derives a significant
financial income therefrom.
9. The arbitrator has a close family relationship with one of the parties and in the
case of companies with the persons in the management and controlling the company.
10. A close family member of the arbitrator has a significant financial interest in
one of the parties or an affiliate of one of the parties.
11.The arbitrator is a legal representative of an entity that is a party in the arbitration.
12. The arbitrator is a manager, director or part of the management, or has a similar
controlling influence in one of the parties.
13. The arbitrator has a significant financial interest in one of the parties or the
outcome of the case.
14. The arbitrator regularly advises the appointing party or an affiliate of the appointing
party, and the arbitrator or his or her firm derives a significant financial income therefrom.
Relationship of the arbitrator to the dispute
15. The arbitrator has given legal advice or provided an expert opinion on the dispute
to a party or an affiliate of one of the parties.
16. The arbitrator has previous involvement in the case.
Arbitrator’s direct or indirect interest in the dispute
17. The arbitrator holds shares, either directly or indirectly, in one of the parties or an
affiliate of one of the parties that is privately held.
18. A close family member of the arbitrator has a significant financial interest in the
outcome of the dispute.
19. The arbitrator or a close family member of the arbitrator has a close relationship
with a third party who may be liable to recourse on the part of the unsuccessful party in the
dispute.
Previous services for one of the parties or other involvement in the case
20. The arbitrator has within the past three years served as counsel for one of the
parties or an affiliate of one of the parties or has previously advised or been consulted by
the party or an affiliate of the party making the appointment in an unrelated matter, but the
arbitrator and the party or the affiliate of the party have no ongoing relationship.
21. The arbitrator has within the past three years served as counsel against one of the
parties or an affiliate of one of the parties in an unrelated matter.
22. The arbitrator has within the past three years been appointed as arbitrator on two
or more occasions by one of the parties or an affiliate of one of the parties.
23. The arbitrator’s law firm has within the past three years acted for one of the parties
or an affiliate of one of the parties in an unrelated matter without the involvement of the
arbitrator.
24. The arbitrator currently serves, or has served within the past three years, as
arbitrator in another arbitration on a related issue involving one of the parties or an affiliate
of one of the parties.

13
Relationship between an arbitrator and another arbitrator or counsel
25. The arbitrator and another arbitrator are lawyers in the same law firm.
26. The arbitrator was within the past three years a partner of, or otherwise affiliated
with, another arbitrator or any of the counsel in the same arbitration.
27. A lawyer in the arbitrator’s law firm is an arbitrator in another dispute involving the
same party or parties or an affiliate of one of the parties.
28. A close family member of the arbitrator is a partner or employee of the law firm
representing one of the parties, but is not assisting with the dispute.
29. The arbitrator has within the past three years received more than three appointments
by the same counsel or the same law firm.
Relationship between arbitrator and party and others involved in the arbitration
30. The arbitrator’s law firm is currently acting adverse to one of the parties or an
affiliate of one of the parties.
31. The arbitrator had been associated within the past three years with a party or an
affiliate of one of the parties in a professional capacity, such as a former employee or
partner.
Other circumstances
32. The arbitrator holds shares, either directly or indirectly, which by reason of number
or denomination constitute a material holding in one of the parties or an affiliate of one of
the parties that is publicly listed.
33. The arbitrator holds a position in an arbitration institution with appointing authority
over the dispute.
34. The arbitrator is a manager, director or part of the management, or has a similar
controlling influence, in an affiliate of one of the parties, where the affiliate is not directly
involved in the matters in dispute in the arbitration.
Explanation 1.—The term “close family member” refers to a spouse, sibling, child,
parent or life partner.
Explanation 2.—The term “affiliate” encompasses all companies in one group of
companies including the parent company.
Explanation 3.—For the removal of doubts, it is clarified that it may be the practice in
certain specific kinds of arbitration, such as maritime or commodities arbitration, to draw
arbitrators from a small, specialised pool. If in such fields it is the custom and practice for
parties frequently to appoint the same arbitrator in different cases, this is a relevant fact to
be taken into account while applying the rules set out above.
THE SIXTH SCHEDULE
[See section 12 (1)(b)]
NAME:
CONTACT DETAILS:
PRIOR EXPERIENCE (INCLUDING EXPERIENCE WITH ARBITRA TIONS):
NUMBER OF ONGOING ARBITRA TIONS:
CIRCUMSTANCES DISCLOSING ANY PAST OR PRESENT RELATIONSHIP WITH OR
INTEREST IN ANY OF THE PARTIES OR IN RELATION TO THE SUBJECT-MATTER IN
DISPUTE, WHETHER FINANCIAL, BUSINESS, PROFESSIONAL OR OTHER KIND,
WHICH IS LIKELY TO GIVE RISE TO JUSTIFIABLE DOUBTS AS TO YOUR
INDEPENDENCE OR IMPARTIALITY (LIST OUT):

14
CIRCUMSTANCES WHICH ARE LIKELY TO AFFECT YOUR ABILITY TO
DEVOTE  SUFFICIENT TIME TO THE ARBITRATION AND IN PARTICULAR
YOUR ABILITY TO FINISH THE ENTIRE ARBITRATION WITHIN TWELVE
MONTHS (LIST OUT):
THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE
[See section 12 (5)]
Arbitrator’s relationship with the parties or counsel
1. The arbitrator is an employee, consultant, advisor or has any other past or present
business relationship with a party.
2. The arbitrator currently represents or advises one of the parties or an affiliate of
one of the parties.
3. The arbitrator currently represents the lawyer or law firm acting as counsel for one
of the parties.
4. The arbitrator is a lawyer in the same law firm which is representing one of the
parties.
5. The arbitrator is a manager, director or part of the management, or has a similar
controlling influence, in an affiliate of one of the parties if the affiliate is directly involved in
the matters in dispute in the arbitration.
6. The arbitrator’s law firm had a previous but terminated involvement in the case
without the arbitrator being involved himself or herself.
7. The arbitrator’s law firm currently has a significant commercial relationship with
one of the parties or an affiliate of one of the parties.
8. The arbitrator regularly advises the appointing party or an affiliate of the appointing
party even though neither the arbitrator nor his or her firm derives a significant financial
income therefrom.
9. The arbitrator has a close family relationship with one of the parties and in the case
of companies with the persons in the management and controlling the company.
10.  A close family member of the arbitrator has a significant financial interest in one of
the parties or an affiliate of one of the parties.
11. The arbitrator is a legal representative of an entity that is a party in the arbitration.
12. The arbitrator is a manager, director or part of the management, or has a similar
controlling influence in one of the parties.
13. The arbitrator has a significant financial interest in one of the parties or the
outcome of the case.
14. The arbitrator regularly advises the appointing party or an affiliate of the appointing
party, and the arbitrator or his or her firm derives a significant financial income therefrom.
Relationship of the arbitrator to the dispute
15. The arbitrator has given legal advice or provided an expert opinion on the dispute
to a party or an affiliate of one of the parties.
16. The arbitrator has previous involvement in the case.
Arbitrator’s direct or indirect interest in the dispute
17. The arbitrator holds shares, either directly or indirectly, in one of the parties or an
affiliate of one of the parties that is privately held.
18. A close family member of the arbitrator has a significant financial interest in the
outcome of the dispute.

15
19. The arbitrator or a close family member of the arbitrator has a close relationship
with a third party who may be liable to recourse on the part of the unsuccessful party in the
dispute.
Explanation 1.—The term “close family member” refers to a spouse, sibling, child,
parent or life partner.
Explanation 2.—The term “affiliate” encompasses all companies in one group of
companies including the parent company.
Explanation 3.—For the removal of doubts, it is clarified that it may be the practice in
certain specific kinds of arbitration, such as maritime or commodities arbitration, to draw
arbitrators from a small, specialised pool. If in such fields it is the custom and practice for
parties frequently to appoint the same arbitrator in different cases, this is a relevant fact to
be taken into account while applying the rules set out above.’.
26.  Nothing contained in this Act shall apply to the arbitral proceedings commenced,
in accordance with the provisions of section 21 of the principal Act, before the commencement
of this Act unless the parties otherwise agree but this Act shall apply in relation to arbitral
proceedings commenced on or after the date of commencement of this Act.
27. (1) The Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Ordinance, 2015, is hereby
repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the principal
Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under
the corresponding provisions of the principal Act, as amended by  this Act.
Ord. 9 of 2015.
Act not to
apply to
pending arbitral
proceedings.
Repeal and
savings.

A
BILL
to amend the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.
————
(As passed by the Houses of Parliament)
GMGIPMRND—4013RS—06.01.2016.