1
THE PROMOTION OF SANSKRIT LANGUAGE BILL, 2019
By
SHRI RAJENDRA AGRAW AL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for promotion of Sanskrit language including its compulsory teaching in
schools, appointment of Sanskrit teachers, establishment of Board for Promotion
of Sanskrit language and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the promotion of Sanskrit Language Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 252 of  2019
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "Board" means the Board for Promotion of Sanskrit Language constituted
under section 8; and
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3.  From such date, as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette specify, the Sanskrit language shall be taught as a compulsory subject in all schools.
4.  The appropriate Government shall, immediately after issuance of the notification
under section 3, issue directions for compulsory teaching of Sanskrit language in all schools
from such class onwards as it may determine, within its jurisdiction.
5.  Subject to such rules, as may be prescribed, the appropriate Government shall
ensure appointment of such number of teachers with such qualifications, as may be specified,
for teaching Sanskrit language in schools.
6.  Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the provisions of this Act shall
apply to minority institutions only if the management of such institutions convey to the
appropriate Government their willingness to include the Sanskrit language in their school
curriculum.
7.  The appropriate Government shall derecognize a school, which does not comply
with the provisions of section 4:
Provided that such school shall be given reasonable opportunity of being heard before
any decision on derecognition is taken.
8.  (1) From such date, as the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette appoint, there shall be constituted a Board for the Promotion of Sanskrit
Language.
(2) The Board shall consist of a Chairperson and not more than four members to be
appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of the
service of the Chairperson and other members of the Board shall be such as may be
prescribed.
9.  (1) The Board shall perform such functions for the promotion of Sanskrit language
as it may consider necessary for the purpose.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the Board shall—
(i) monitor the progress of promotion of Sanskrit language in the country;
(ii) take steps for collection and safekeeping of Sanskrit manuscripts from
different parts of the country;
(iii) organize workshops and fairs in different parts of the country with a view to
popularize Sanskrit language especially among the youth; and
(iv) encourage the translation of Sanskrit books in various Indian languages.
10.  The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the States for carrying out the purposes of this
Act.
Definitions.
Appropriate
Government to
issue directions
for compulsory
teaching of
Sanskrit
language in
schools.
Appointment
of Sanskrit
language
teachers.
Compulsory
teaching of
Sanskrit
language in
schools.
Act to apply
to minority
educational
institutions in
certain
situation.
Derecognition
of schools for
non-
compliance of
the provisions
of the Act.
Board for the
Promotion of
Sanskrit
Language.
Functions of
the Board.
Central
Government to
provide fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
11.  The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
12.  (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to
make rules.
5
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
“The Sanskrit language is of a wonderful structure, more perfect than Greek,
more copious than Latin and more exquisitely refined than either. Human life would
not be sufficient to make oneself acquainted with any considerable part of Hindu
literature.”
Tha above lines by William Jones clearly denote that Sanskrit has not been just
the language of India or Indians, but a transnational language with a global footprint. It
is also said to be the mother of all languages. It has been the vehicle of Indian thoughts
for millions. Sanskrit contains literature of exemplary value and the finest Indian minds
found the expression in it. Famous Indian Sanskrit scholars like Aryabhatta, Sushruta,
Charaka, Bhaskaracharya among others have excelled in field such as maths,
physiology, surgery, science, philosophy, astronomy, sociology, anthropology etc.
Sanskrit literatures are source of fundamental and behavioural knowledge of different
fields and have inspired many in all generations. No wonder great Indian sages like
Sri Aurobindo and Swami Vivekananda viewed Sanskrit language as the most perfect
medium for expressing spiritual and philosophical ideas. Sri Aurobindo, while speaking
of the importance of the Sanskrit language for India, says: “It is of the utmost value to
a nation, a human group-soul to preserve its language and make it a strong and living
cultural instrument. A nation, race or people which loses its language cannot live its
whole life or real life.”
It is highly deplorable that such a language, which has a vast literature, is being
neglected in its own country. Although, it is included in the Eighth Schedule to the
Constitution, enough has not been done to promote it. In a situation where the new
generation is running away from its own roots and has developed a contempt for the
cultural traditions of our country, the importance of teaching Sanskrit becomes crucial.
The time has come when we must make sincere efforts to make the new generation aware
of the great traditions and thoughts of India. Accordingly, it is proposed in the Bill to
make teaching of Sanskrit compulsory in schools to enable our children to identify
themselves with noble traditions and thoughts of our country.
The Bill also envisages creation of a Board for the promotion of Sanskrit language.
The proposed Board will not only oversee the progress being made for the promotion
of Sanskrit language, but will also take other pro-active measures including translation
of  Sanskrit epics and plays in other Indian languages and safekeeping of priceless
Sanskrit manuscripts lying in various parts of the country.
Hence, this Bill.
N
EW D ELHI; RAJENDRA AGRAW AL
October  25,  2019
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for appointment of Sanskrit language teachers in all
schools. Clause 8 provides for creation of a Board for promotion of Sanskrit language.
Clause 10 provides for payment of adequate funds to the States for carrying out the purposes
of the Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand crore
per annum will be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

MGIPMRND—3022LS(S-3)—14.11.2019.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for promotion of Sanskrit language including its compulsory teaching in schools,
appointment of Sanskrit teachers, establishment of Board for Promotion of Sanskrit
language and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto
————
(Shri Rajendra Agrawal, M.P .)