1
THE VIOLENT AND INDECENT ONLINE GAMES (PROHIBITION ON
DISTRIBUTION, SALE AND ADVERTISEMENT) BILL, 2017
By
DR. SHRIKANT E. SHINDE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for prohibition on distribution, sale and advertisement of online games
showing violence and indecency in their operations in the country and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Violent and Indecent Online Games (Prohibition on
Distribution, Sale and Advertisement) Act, 2017.
(2) It shall extend to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into effect with immediate effect.
Bill No. 253 of  2017
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in case of a State, the Government of that
State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "online games" means a video game that is either partially or primarily played
through the internet or another computer network;
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this act;
(d) "sale" includes giving on rent or allowing free access to online game on
internet;
(e) “videogame” means an electronic game that involves interaction with a user
interface to visual feedback on a television screen or computer monitor; and
(f) words and expressions used in this Act but not defined and defined in the
Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition) Act, 1986 and the Indian Penal Code,
1860 shall have the meaning respectively assigned to them in these Acts.
3. (1) No person shall distribute, sell or advertise such online games in the country
which contain violence, bloodshed and indecent material or representation.
(2) The Central Government shall not allow import of such online games in the country
which are showing violence and indecency.
4. (1) It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to monitor the contents of
online games available with in its territorial jurisdiction and notify such online games which
contain violence and indecency.
(2) The appropriate Government shall from time to time, issue directions to the concerned
authority and the police about the procedure to be followed in monitoring violent and
indecent online games in the market in such manner as may be prescribed.
5. If any portal or website is selling, offering free downloading or free play of any violent
or indecent online games, the Central Government shall block such portal or the website:
Provided that the Central Government shall not block any portal or website without
giving the representatives of such portal or website a reasonable opportunity of being
heard.
6. It shall be the responsibility of each parent to check the content of the online game
they are giving to their children or the games being acquired by children themselves and
evaluate the ratings given on these online games.
7. Every school shall design or create curricula to guide/advice children to reduce their
total screen time and the type of games to be played.
8. Every new online game launched in the country in any manner shall be subject to the
approval of Chidren Films Society of India.
9. Whoever contravenes or attempts to contravene or abets the contravention of the
provisions of this Act shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term, which may extend to
seven years or with fine, which may extend to fifteen lakh rupees or with both.
Definitions.
60 of 1986.
45 of 1860.
Appropriate
Government
to monitor
the contents
of games.
The Central
Government
to block the
portals/
websites
selling violent
and indecent
games.
Parents to
check the
contents of
games.
Schools to
issue
guidelines to
students on
games.
Online Games
to be launched
with the
approval of
Children
Films Society
of India.
Penalty.
Prohibition
on
distribution,
sale and
advertisement
of violent and
indecent
video games.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

3
10. (1) Where a person committing a contravention of any of the provisions of this Act
or of any rule, direction or order made thereunder is a company, every person who, at the time
the contravention was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for
the conduct of business of the company as well as the company, shall be guilty of the
contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person
liable to punishment if he proves that the contravention took place without his knowledge or
that he exercised all due diligence to prevent such contravention.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where a contravention of
any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule, direction or order made thereunder has been
committed by a company and it is proved that the contravention has taken place with the
consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director,
manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other
Officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of the contravention and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.— for the purpose of this section:—
(i) “company” means anybody corporate and include a firm or other association
of individuals; and
(ii) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
11. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficult:
Provided that no such orders shall be made after the expiry of the period of three years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
12. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the
provisions in any other law, for the time being in force, relating to violent and indecent video
games/online games.
13. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before  each House of Parliament, while it is in  session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions, aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have affect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Offences by
companies.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Children in today’s world are growing in a totally different kind of environment. The
tools for play and entertainment are online games many of which are  violent and indecent.
Blue whale, Pokemon Go, San Andreas, Duke Nankeen, Max, Payne, Elite Warriors, Hitman,
Commandos, Dooms are all names of most popular online games in the market right now. All
these are war or killing games which children are exposed to from their tender age of three
years and above. These games are highly engaging and interactive unlike watching television
programmes.
Indian Association of Biological Psychiatry raised concern  over children’s addition to
violent online games such as “Blue Whale”. There is a need for vigilance on the part of
parents and Government agencies to take precautionary measures in order to save children
from ill effect of video or online games. These online video games are extremely violent and
compel children to take extreme steps including attempt to suicide or indulge in self-
injurious behaviour. As per a study by Lowa State University researchers found children
who repeatedly play violent video games are learning thought patterns that will stick with
them and influence behaviours as they grow older. Researchers also found that over time
children start to think more aggressively. And when provoked at home, school or in other
situations, children will react much like they do when playing a violent video game.
Apart from this, there are host of free video games / online games available on internet
many with warning that the games may contain explicit scenes of blood and gore. According
to medical experts, recurrent viewing of scenes of blood and gore causes defiance in child so
with slight provocation, anger or hostility, the defiance is often directed at parents. It further
says that children also develop insensitivity to pain and bloodshed in the absence of adequate
inputs from parents and teachers about the basic human right of letting other persons to live.
These children become less caring and less helpful towards their peers.
As a result, the new kid on the block is an angry young child. He devotes hours before
screen playing these violent and indecent games. Most of the parents do not check the
contents of the games and just give into the demands of the children which come very cheap
at fifty rupees a game. Parents here have an important role to play. Psychologists have found
that when parents limit the time as well as the type of game their children play, children are
less likely to show aggressive behaviour. It is otherwise also reflecting bad on the kids as
instead of going to play out door games, they are sitting hours together before the Television
or computer screen. Children are not born violent; they are made violent. They become
conditioned to associate violence with fun, as part of normal life. The end result of unmonitored
video violence is that we are training an army of kids. There were several incidents in other
countries where children went into unprovoked shooting spree killing many innocents. The
same is the case with indecent games which are, at times, marked for adults but land in the
hands of children due to apathy of the shop keeper in selling those games to right kind of
persons. These games allow player to watch strip shows, depict nudity, sexual conduct and
other contents harmful to minors. These types of games are also available for free download
from internet. There is an urgent need to ban these games containing violence, bloodshed
and incedent material from the reach of the children and save the future of the society.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SHRIKANT E. SHINDE
November 27, 2017
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 13 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out purposes of the Bill. As the matters will relate to details only, the delegation of powers
is of a normal character.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for prohibition on distribution, sale and advertisement of online games
showing violence and indecency in their operations in the country and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Shrikant E. Shinde, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2629LS(S3)—20-12-2017.