1
THE CERVICAL CANCER (AWARENESS AND COMPULSORY
V ACCINATION) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI MAHEISH GIRRI, M.P .
A
BILL
to create awareness amongst masses to prevent cervical cancer amongst girls, provide
for compulsory vaccination against cervical cancer and for matters connected
therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  ( 1) This Act may be called the Cervical Cancer (Awareness and Compulsory
Vaccination) Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the Union territories only.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "cervical cancer" means a disease caused by sexually acquired infection with
Human Papillomavirus (HPV) in women;
Bill No.  253  of  2016
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Definitions.
5
10

2
(b) "local authority" includes a municipal committee, corporation or council, by
whatever name called, district board, cantonment board or any authority for the time
being entrusted by law with the control and administration of any matter within a
specified local area;
(c) ‘‘prescribed’’ means prescribed rules under this Act; and
(d) ‘‘vaccination’’ for the purpose of this Act means the injection of Human
Papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine and includes preventive healthcare for the administration
of such vaccines to cure cervical cancer.
3. The Central Government shall provide free vaccination to every girl child between
the age of nine and fourteen years in such manner as may be prescribed.
4. The Central Government shall take such steps, as may be necessary, for creating
awareness through means of mass media and by organising seminars, amongst masses
regarding the preventive healthcare treatment for cervical cancer.
5. Every local authority shall be responsible for implementation of the provisions of
this Act.
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to such State Governments which offers to implement
similar schemes in their respective States.
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made,
before the House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modifications in the rule or both the houses agree that the
rules should not be made, the rules shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under the rule.
(Shri Dushyant Chautala, M.P .)
Central
Government
to provide
free
vaccination.
Central
Government
to create
awareness.
Local
Authority to
implement
the provisions
of this Act.
Central
Government
to provide
adequate
funds.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Cervical cancer is the fourth most frequent cancer occurring in women. It is the only
cancer that is curable. It is also the number one reason for causing deaths of women in India.
This form of cancer is curable by preventive treatment, vaccination and also afterwards in
the form of medication. The appalling facts are that ninety-nine per cent. of the women don't
even know the advent of the cervix which leads to their death. Over one hundred countries
have gained immunisation against cervical cancer in the form of preventive care.
The high mortality rate from cervical cancer can be tackled by administering vaccinations
and effective prevention healthcare treatment.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MAHEISH GIRRI
July 6, 2016.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that Central Government shall provide free vaccination to
every girl child between the age of nine to fourteen years. Clause 4 provides that Central
Government shall create awareness amongst masses regarding preventive healthcare
treatment of cervical cancer. Clause 6 provides that Central Government shall provide adequate
funds to the State Governments for implementing similar schemes in the States. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
estimated that a sum of rupees one hundred crore per annum will be involved as recurring
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.  A non-recurring expenditure of rupees five
hundred crore will also be involved.
S3\F\BILL 2016\LS\34LS ENG
44

5
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of normal character.

GMGIPMRND—2628LS(S3)—08-11-2016.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to create awareness amongst masses to prevent cervical cancer amongst girls, provide for
compulsory vaccination against cervical cancer and for matters connected
therewith.
————
(Shri Maheish Girri, M.P.)