1
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 254 of 2016
THE DRUGS AND COSMETICS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI MAHEISH GIRRI, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 2 of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act),—
(i) the existing clause ( aaa) shall be renumbered as clause ( aab) and before
clause (aab) as so renumbered, the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(aaa) "Central Authority" means the Central Authority for Regulation,
Control, Registration and Licensing of e-pharmacies constituted under section
33-OB;";
(ii) after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(ba) "e-pharmacy" refers to an online pharmacy of a company or a hospital
or a dispensary which through internet dispense with or sell drugs or compound
medications in accordance with the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940;";
Amendment
of section 2.
23 of 1940.
23 of 1940.
5
10
15
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(iii) after clause (h), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(ha) "prescription" includes the name of the doctor and hospital or clinic,
details of the disease, drugs prescribed and any other relevant information;";
and
(iv)  after clause (i), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(j) "State Authority" means the State Authority for Regulation, Control,
Registration and Lincensing of e-pharmacies constituted under section 33-OD.".
3. After section 33-O of the principal Act, the following Chapter and section thereunder
shall be inserted, namely:—
"CHAPTER IVB
R
EGULATION, CONTROL, REGISTRA TION AND LICENSING OF E-PHARMACIES
33-OA. With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint, no person or establishment shall operate or own an
e-pharmacy without prior registration with the Central Authority or the State Authority,
as the case may be:
Provided that every person or establishment, operating or owning an e-pharmacy
prior to the coming into force of this Act, shall apply to the Central Authority or the
State Authority, as the case may be, for registration within a period of ninety days from
the date of commencement of this Act in such form and manner as may be
prescribed.
33-OB. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute an Authority to be known as the Central Authority for Regulation, Control,
Registration and Licensing of e-pharmacies in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(2) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and staff, as
it considers necessary, for the efficient functioning of the Central Authority.
33-OC. The Central Authority shall—
(a) frame guidelines in consultation with the Central Drugs Standard Control
Organisation for the purpose of registration and licensing of e-pharmacies;
(b) recommend to the Central Government the rules and the regulations to
be framed for regulation, control, registration and licensing of e-pharmacies in
the country; and
(c) undertake such other functions as may be assigned to it by the Central
Government for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
33-OD. (1) Every State Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute an Authority to be known as the State Authority for Regulation, Control,
Registration and Licensing of the e-pharmacies within its jurisdiction in such manner
as may be prescribed.
(2) The State Government shall appoint such number of officers and staff, as it
considers necessary, for the efficient functioning of the State Authority.
33-OE. The State Authority shall—
(a) ensure the implementation of the guidelines framed by the Central
Authority under section 33-OC;
Compulsory
registration of
e-pharmacies.
Constitution
of Central
Authority for
Regulation,
Control,
Registration
and Licensing
of
e-pharmacies.
Functions of
Central
Authority.
Constitution
of State
Authority for
Regulation,
Control,
Registration
and Licensing
of
e-pharmacies.
Functions
of  State
Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
35
30
40

3
(b) appoint such number of Drug Controllers being not less than one to
ensure that the documents and provisions required for e-pharmacies are being
complied with by the e-pharmacies;
(c) maintain an offline and online database of all licensed e-pharmacies
within its jurisdiction;
(d) work in coordination with the Central Authority constituted under
section 33-OB for effective implementation of the provisions of this Act;
(e) make regular inspections of the website of the e-pharmacies; and
(f) undertake such other functions as may be assigned to it by the State
Government for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
33-OF. For the purposes of registration under this Act, every e-pharmacy shall
submit the following documents to the Central Authority or the State Authority, as the
case may be,—
(a) application form;
(b) challan or receipt of the fee deposited;
(c) declaration form;
(d) key plan or the Blue print;
(e) site plan or the Blue print;
(f) certified copy of the constitution of the firm;
(g) affidavit of non-conviction of Proprietor or Partners or Directors under
Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940;
(h) certified copy of  Registration Certificate of Pharmacy Council of India
or Experience Certificate of the registered pharmacist or competent person and
qualification certificates;
(i) bio-data form;
(j) affidavit of registered pharmacist or competent person regarding full
time working with the firm duly attested by a Notary; and
(k) the name and details thereof of the online portal of the e-pharmacy.
33-OG. The Central Authority or the State Authority shall, in accordance with the
report submitted by the Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation or Drug Control-
ler, as the case may be, and after detailed inspection of the documents grant the license
to the e-pharmacy.
33-OH. (1) No e-pharmacy shall sell or supply drugs except in accordance with
the prescription of a registered medical practitioner.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section ( 1), the scanned copy of the prescription
duly signed and stamped by the registered medical practitioner shall be uploaded on
the website of the e-pharmacy which shall be verified by the pharmacist of the
e-pharmacy in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that only one prescription shall be valid for one online order of drugs.".
Documents
required for
registration of
e-pharmacies.
23 of 1940.
Grant of
license to
e-pharmacy.
Conditions for
sale and supply
of drugs by
e-pharmacy.
5
10
15
20
25
35
30

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Mushrooming of e-commerce websites for every commodity and services of daily use
has become quite evident today. Now-a-days, various e-commerce websites are also selling
medicines online. However, there is no law to govern the functioning of these online
pharmacies. Due to various exploitative practices that can take place for the purpose of
drug-abuse, regulatory framework needs to be set up to ensure that the practices carried on
by these sites are not contrary to the parent act i.e. the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 with a view to
provide for—
(a) compulsory registration of the e-pharmacies in the country;
(b) constitution of the Central Authority and the State Authority for regulation,
control, registration and licensing of e-pharmacies;
(c) documents required for registration of e-pharmacies in the country;
(d) grant of license to e-pharmacies in the country; and
(e) conditions for sale and supply of drugs by e-pharmacies.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MAHEISH GIRRI
July 6, 2016.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of Central Authority for Regulation,
Control, Registration and Licensing of e-pharmacies. It also provides for the constitution of
State Authority for Regulation, Control, Registration and Licensing of e-pharmacies. It further
provides for appointment of Drug Controllers being not less than one and maintenance of an
offline and online database of all licensed e-pharmacies by the State Government within its
jurisdiction. The expenditure relating to States shall be borne from the Consolidated Funds
of the respective States. However, the expenditure relating to Union territories shall be borne
by the Central Government. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees twenty five
crore will be involved per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of twenty five crore is also likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that every person or establishment, operating or owning
an e-pharmacy prior to the coming into force of this Act, shall apply for registration within a
period of ninety days from the date of commencement of this Act to the Central Authority or
the State Authority, as the case may be, in such form and manner as may be prescribed. It also
provides that the Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Central Authority for Regulation, Control, Registration and Licensing of e-pharmacies in
such manner as may be prescribed. It further provides that every State Government shall, by
notification in the Official Gazette, constitute an Authority to be known as the State Authority
for Regulation, Control, Registration and Licensing of the e-pharmacies within its jurisdiction
in such manner as may be prescribed. It furthermore provides that the scanned copy of the
prescription duly signed and stamped by the registered medical practitioner shall be uploaded
on the website of the e-pharmacy which shall be verified by the pharmacist of the e-pharmacy
in such manner as may be prescribed by rules made by the Central Government or the State
Government, as the case may be. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.
6

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE DRUGS AND COSMETICS ACT, 1940
(NO. 23 OF 1940)
* * * * * * *
3. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,—
* * * * * * *
(aaa) "cosmetic" means any article intended to be rubbed, poured, sprinkled or
sprayed on, or introduced into, or otherwise applied to the human body or any part
thereof for cleansing, beautifying, promoting attractiveness, or altering the appearance,
and includes any article intended for use as a component of cosmetic;
* * * * * * *
(b) "drug" includes—
(i) all medicines for internal or external use of human beings or animals and
all substances intended to be used for or in the diagnosis, treatment, mitigation
or prevention of any disease or disorder in human beings or animals, including
preparations applied on human body for the purpose of repelling insects like
mosquitoes;
(ii) such substances (other than food) intended to affect the structure or
any function of the human body or intended to be used for the destruction of
vermin or insects which cause disease in human beings or animals, as may be
specified from time to time by the Central Government by notification in the
Official Gazette;
(iii) all substances intended for use as components of drug including
empty gelatin capsules; and
(iv) such devices intended for internal or external use in the diagnosis,
treatment, mitigation or prevention of disease or disorder in human beings or
animals, as may be specified from time to time by the Central Government by
notification in the Official Gazette, after consultation with the Board:
* * * * * *
(h) "patent or proprietary medicine" means,—
(i) in relation to Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani Tibb systems of medicine all
formulations containing only such ingredients mentioned in the formulae
described in the authoritative books of Ayurveda, Siddha or Unani Tibb systems
of medicine specified in the First Schedule but does not include a medicine
which is administered by parental route and also a formulation included in the
authoritative books as specified in clause (a);
(ii) in relation to any other systems of medicine, a drug which is a remedy
or prescription presented in a form ready for internal or external administration of
human beings or animals and which is not included in the edition of the Indian
Pharmacopoeia for the time being or any other Pharmacopoeia authorised in this
behalf by the Central Government after consultation with the Drugs Technical
Advisory Board constituted under section 5;
(i) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
* * * * * *
Definitions.
7

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940
————
(Shri Maheish Girri, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2657LS(S3)—08-11-2016.