1
Bill No. 254 of  2018
THE FREEDOM OF LITERATURE BILL, 2018
By
DR. SHASHI THAROOR, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend certain enactments to guarantee and protect literary freedom
in the country.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1)  This Act may be called the Freedom of Literature Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
CHAPTER II
AMENDMENTS TO THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860 (45 OF 1860)
1. Section 292 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter referred to as the Penal Code)
shall be omitted.
2. In section 293 of the Penal Code, for the words "under the age of twenty years any
such obscene object as is referred to in the last preceding section", the words, "under the
age of eighteen years any obscene object" shall be substituted.
3. Section 295A of the Penal Code shall be omitted.
4. Section 298 of the Penal Code shall be omitted.
CHAPTER III
AMENDMENT TO THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973 (2 OF 1974)
6. For section 95 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, (hereinafter referred to as the
Code of Criminal Procedure) the following section shall be substituted, namely:
"95. (1) The State Government may, by notification, temporarily prohibit the
publications, circulation or distribution of any document for a period of thirty days, on
the grounds that it attracts provisions of section 124A or section 153A or section 153B
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
(2) The State Government may, within a period of fifteen days of an notification under
sub-section (1), make an application to the High Court to permanently prohibit the publication,
circulation and distribution of the document, on the grounds that attracts provision under
section 124A or section 153A or section 153B of the Indian Penal Code, 1860."
(3) In this section and in section 96,—
(a) "document" includes any book, newspaper, painting, drawing, photograph,
or other visible representation; and
(b) "newspaper" and "book" have the same meaning as in the Press and
Registration of Books Act, 1867 (25 of 1867).".
7. For section 96 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:—
"96. ( 1) The High Court shall dispose off an application made under
sub-section (2) of section 95 within three months from the date of filing of such
application.
(2) The High Court may extend the temporary prohibition on the circulation and
distribution of the document under sub-section (1) of section 95 till the determination
of the application.
(3) No Court shall entertain any application to ban any document, except an
application filed by the State Government under sub-section (2) of section 95.".
CHAPTER IV
A
MENDMENT TO THE CUSTOMS ACT, 1962 (52 OF 1962)
8. In section 11 of the Customs Act, 1962, after sub-section ( 2), the following
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
"(3) Notwithstanding anything in the sub-sections (1) and (2), the import of any
book shall not be prohibited by the Central Government, except on the ground that the
circulation of the book is likely to cause a breach of public order, despite taking
reasonable measures to prevent the same.".
Power of the
High Court to
determine the
prohibition of
documents.
15 of 1860.
2 of 1974.
45 of 1860.
25 of 1867.
2 of 1974.
Omission of
section 292.
Amendment
of section 293.
Omission of
section 295A.
Omission of
section 298.
Substitution of
new section
for section 95.
Power to
prohibit the
publication
and
circulation of
documents.
Substitution of
new section
for section 96.
45 of 1860.
52 of 1962.Amendment
of section 11.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
CHAPTER V
AMENDMENT TO THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000
(21 OF 2000)
12. For section 67 of the Information Technology Act, 2000, the following section shall
be substituted, namely:—
"67. Whoever publishes child pornography or transmits in the electronic form
any obscene material to a person without such person's consent, shall be punished on
first conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
five years and with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees and in the event of a
second or subsequent conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to ten  years and also with fine which may extend to two lakh
rupees.".
CHAPTER VI
A
MENDMENT TO THE INDECENT REPRESENTATION OF WOMEN (PROHIBITION)
ACT, 1986 (60 OF 1986)
13. In section 2 of the Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition Act, 1986, for
sub-section (c) the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
"(c) "indecent representation of women" means the derogatory depiction of
women or any depiction or publication which encourages or justifies the abuse or
suppression of women;".
Substitution of
new section
for section 67.
Publishing of
information
which is
obscene in
electronic
form.
Amendment
of section 2.
60 of 1986.
21 of 2000.
5
10
15
20

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Literary freedom or the freedom to express through works of literature is an integral
component of the freedom of speech and expression under article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution
of India. Authors must be guaranteed the freedom to express their work without fear of
punitive action by the State or by sections of society.
The spirit of questioning and dissent is essential for social, cultural and political
reform and for the overall enhancement of a constitutional democracy. The exceptions to the
freedom of speech and expression must be strictly and narrowly defined. The recognition of
the importance of dissent and expression of opinions, which may be irreverent or even
unpopular, by the law is essential to prevent the legal process from being used to suppress
reform and progress of society.
Literary freedom includes the right to criticize and question all bodies of thought,
including ones based on religious belief and cultural traditions. The State must recognize the
right of an adult to consume literature of his or her choice, even if such works of literature are
frowned upon by social norms. The laws must preserve and deepen constitutional morality
and must not act as a tool to enforce majoritarian morality.
Banning works of literature is not congruent with the essence of democracy, and
violates the right to information of individuals. Such powers must be exercised in exceptional
situations, with sufficient judicial oversight to prevent censorship based on political
expediency. Provisions in various enactments such as the Indian Penal Code, Code of Criminal
Procedure Customs Act, Young Persons (Harmful Publications) Act, Information Technology
Act and the Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition) Act, shall be omitted and
amended, in order to ensure and guarantee literary freedom in India.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SHASHI THAROOR
November 19, 2018.
4

5
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
(45 OF 1860)
* * * * *
292. (1) For the purposes of sub-section (2), a book, pamphlet, paper, writing, drawing,
painting, representation, figure or any other object, shall be deemed to be obscene if it is
lascivious or appeals to the prurient interest or if the effect, or (where it comprises two or
more distinct items) the effect of any one of its items, is, if taken as a whole, such as to tend
to deprave and corrupt persons who are likely, having regard to all relevant circumstances, to
read, see or hear the matter contained or embodied in it.]
(2) Whoever—
(a) sells, lets to hire, distributes, publicity exhibits or in any manner puts into
circulation, or for purposes of sale, hire, distribution, public exhibition or circulation,
makes, produces or has in his possession any obscene book, pamphlet, paper, drawing,
painting, representation or figure or any other obscene object whatsoever, or
(b) imports, exports or conveys any obscene object for any of the purposes
aforesaid, or knowing or having reason to believe that such object will be sold, let to
hire, distributed or publicly exhibited or in any manner put into circulation, or
(c) takes part in or receives profits from any business in the course of which he
knows or has reason to believe that any such obscene objects are, for any of the
purposes aforesaid, made, produced, purchased, kept, imported, exported, conveyed,
publicly exhibited or in any manner put into circulation, or
(d) advertises or makes known by any means whatsoever that any person is
engaged or is ready to engage in any act which is an offence under this section, or that
any such obscene object can be procured from or through any person, or
(e) offers or attempts to do any act which is an offence under this section, shall
be punished on first conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to two years, and with fine which may extend to two thousand
rupees, and, in the event of a second or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to five years, and also with fine which
may extend to five thousand rupees.
Exception.—This section does not extend to—
(a) any book, pamphlet, paper, writing, drawing, painting, representation or
figure—
(i) the publication of which is proved to be justified as being for the public
good on the ground that such book, pamphlet, paper, writing, drawing, painting,
representation or figure is in the interest of science, literature, art or learning or
other objects of general concern, or
(ii) which is kept or used bona fide for religious purposes;
(b) any representation sculptured, engraved, painted or otherwise represented
on or in—
(i) any ancient monument within the meaning of the Ancient Monuments
and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958 (24 of 1958), or
Sale, etc., of
obscene
books, etc.

6
(ii) any temple, or on any car used for conveyance of idols, or kept or used
for any religious purpose.
293. Whoever sells, lets to hire, distributes, exhibits or circulates to any person under
the age of twenty years any such obscene object as is referred to in the last preceding
section, or offers or attempts so to do, shall be punished on first conviction with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to three years, and with fine which may
extend to two thousand rupees, and, in the event of a second or subsequent conviction, with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and also with
fine which may extend to five thousand rupees.
* * * * *
295A. Whoever, with deliberate and malicious intention of outraging the religious
feelings of any class of citizens of India, by words, either spoken or written, or by signs or by
visible representations or otherwise, insults or attempts to insult the religion or the religious
beliefs of that class, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
298. Whoever, with the deliberate intention of wounding the religious feelings of any
person, utters any word or makes any sound in the hearing of that person or makes any
gesture in the sight of that persons or places any object in the sight of that person, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or
with fine, or with both.
* * * * *
E
XTRACT FROM THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE CODE, 1963 (2 OF 1974)
95. (1) Where—
(a) any newspaper, or book, or
(b) any document
wherever printed, appears to the State Government to contain any matter the publication
of which is punishable under section 124A or section 153A or section 153B or section 292 or
section 293 or section 295A of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), the State Government may,
by notification, stating the grounds of its opinion, declare every copy of the issue of the
newspaper containing such matter, and every copy of such book or other document to be
forfeited to Government, and thereupon any police officer may seize the same wherever
found in India and any Magistrate may by warrant authorise any police officer not below the
rank of sub-inspector to enter upon and search for the same in any premises where any copy
of such issue, or any such book or other document may be or may be reasonably suspected
to be.
(2) In this section and in section 96,—
(a) —newspaper and—book have the same meaning as in the Press and
Registration of Books Act, 1867 (25 of 1867);
(b) —document includes any painting, drawing or photograph, or other visible
representation.
(3) No order passed or action taken under this section shall be called in question in any
Court otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of section 96.
Sale, etc., of
obscene
objects to
young person.
Deliberate and
malicious act
intended to
outrage
religious
feelings of any
class by
insulting its
religion or
religious
beliefs.
Uttering
words, etc.,
with
deliberate
intent to
wound
religious
feelings.
Power to
declare certain
publications
forfeited and
to issue search-
warrants for
the same.

7
96. (1) Any person having any interest in any newspaper, book or other document, in
respect of which a declaration of forfeiture has been made under section 95, may, within two
months from the date of publication in the Official Gazette of such declaration, apply to the
High Court to set aside such declaration on the ground that the issue of the newspaper, or
the book or other document, in respect of which the declaration was made, did not contain
any such matter as is referred to in sub-section (1) of section 95.
(2) Every such application shall, where the High Court consists three or more Judges,
be heard and determined by a Special Bench of the High Court composed of three Judges
and where the High Court consists of less than three Judges, such Special Bench shall be
composed of all the Judges of that High Court.
(3) On the hearing of any such application with reference to any newspaper, any copy
of such newspaper may be given in evidence in aid of the proof of the nature or tendency of
the words, signs or visible representations contained in such newspaper, in respect of which
the declaration of forfeiture was made.
(4) The High Court shall, if it is not satisfied that the issue of the newspaper, or the
book or other document, in respect of which the application has been made, contained any
such matter as is referred to in sub-section ( 1) of section 95, set aside the declaration of
forfeiture.
(5) where there is a difference of opinion among the Judges forming the Special Bench,
the decision shall be in accordance with the opinion of the majority of those Judges.
* * * * *
E
XTRACT FROM THE CUSTOMS ACT, 1962
(52 OF 1962)
11. (1) If the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary so to do for any of the
purposes specified in sub-section (2), it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, prohibit
either absolutely or subject to such conditions (to be fulfilled before or after clearance) as
may be specified in the notification, the import or export of goods of any specified the import
or export of goods description.
(2) The purposes referred to in-subsection (1) are the following:—
(a) the maintenance of the security of India;
(b) the maintenance of public order and standards of decency or morality;
(c) the prevention of smuggling;
(d) the prevention of shortage of goods of any description;
(e) the conservation of foreign exchange and the safeguarding of balance of
payments;
(f) the prevention of injury to the economy of the country by the uncontrolled
import or export of gold or silver;
(g) the prevention of surplus of any agricultural product or the product of fisheries;
(h) the maintenance of standards for the classification, grading or marketing of
goods in international trade;
(i) the establishment of any industry;
(j) the prevention of serious injury to domestic production of goods of any
description;
(k) the protection of human, animal or plant life or health;
(l) the protection of national treasures of artistic, historic or archaeological value;
Application to
High Court to
set aside
declaration of
forfeiture.
Power to
prohibit
importation
or
exportation
or goods.

8
(m) the conservation of exhaustible natural resources;
(n) the protection of patents, trademarks and coyprights;
(o) the prevention of deceptive practices;
(p) the carrying on of foreign trade in any goods by the State, or by a corporation
owned or controlled by the State to the exclusion, complete or partial, of citizens of
India.
(q) the fulfilment of obligations under the Charter of the United Nations for the
maintenance of international peace and security;
(r) the implementation of any treaty, agreement or convention with any country;
(s) the compliance of imported goods with any laws which are applicable to
similar goods produced or manufactured in India;
(t) the prevention of dissemination of documents containing any matter which is
likely to prejudicially affect friendly relations with any foreign State or is derogatory to
national prestige;
(u) the prevention of the contravention of any law for the time being in force;
and
(v) any other purpose conducive to the interests of the general public.
* * * * *
E
XTRACT FROM THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000
(21 OF 2000)
* * * * *
67. Whoever publishes or transmits or causes to be published in the electronic form,
any material which is lascivious or appeals to the prurient interest or if its effect is such as to
tend to deprave and corrupt persons who are likely, having regard to all relevant circumstances,
to read, see or hear the matter contained or embodied in it, shall be punished on first conviction
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two three years and
with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees and in the event of a second or subsequent
conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five years
and also with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees.
* * * * *
E
XTRACT  FROM  THE  I NDECENT  R EPRESENTA TION  OF  W OMEN  (P ROHIBITION ) A CT , 1986
(60  OF  1986)
* * * * *
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,--
(a) * * * * *
(c) "indecent representation of women" means the depiction in any manner of
the figure of a woman, her form or body or any part thereof in such a way as to have the
effect of being indecent, or derogatory to, or denigrating, women, or is likely to deprave,
corrupt or injure the public morality or morals;
Punishment
for publishing
or
transmitting
obscene
material in
electronic
form.
Definitions.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend certain enactments to guarantee and to protect literary freedom
in the country.
————
(Dr. Shashi Tharoor, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—2275LS(S3)—21.12.2018.