Short title, extent 
and commencement.
Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Bill No. 254 of 2022
THE SOCIAL MEDIA AND OVER-THE-TOP PLATFORM 
REGULATORY BOARD BILL, 2022
By
Sඁඋං Kඎඇඐൺඋ Pඎඌඁඉൾඇൽඋൺ Sංඇ඀ඁ Cඁൺඇൽൾඅ, M.P.
A
BILL
to establish a Social Media and Over-The-Top Platform Regulatory Board to regulate the 
content shown by individuals, art, cultural organizations in social media in the name of 
creativity through art, music, films, cinema, OTT cinema, advertisement, standup comedy, 
poetry, social media, cultural staging, theatrical staging and for matters connected 
therewith.
Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Social Media and Over-The-Top Platform Regulatory 
Board Act, 2022.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “anarchy” means promotion of social and cultural malpractices in the country 
in the name of creativity, distortion of Indian culture, attack on the unity and integrity 
of the country, nurturing and support of terrorist and jihadi ideology, depiction and 
support of anti-national ideologies, staging mundanity against any particular religion 
out of prejudice, support and any other kind of creative activity which is against Indian 
culture, life values, spirit of public welfare, philanthropy, coexistence, harmony, the 
spirit of Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam and world peace; 
(b) “creativity” means arts, literature, films, cinema, visual and audio poetry 
programmes presented through Over-the-Top media platform;
(c) “Over-The-Top platform” means a media service that offer access to the film 
and television content provided over the internet connection at the request and to suit 
the requirement of individual consumer;
(d) “media” means any data, text, sound, image, graphics, music, photography, 
advertisements, video, website and podcasts;
(e) “Board” means the Social Media and OTT Regulation Board established under 
section 3; and
(f) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official gazette, 
constitute a Board to be known as the Social Media and Over-The-Top Platform 
Regulatory Board for regulation of anarchy in the fields of film, cinema and 
Over-The-Top platform.
(2) The headquarters of the Board shall be at Mahoba in the State of Uttar Pradesh.
(3) The Board shall consist of not less than seven members to be appointed by 
Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that the Board shall consist of,–
(a) one member each from North, South, East, West and Central India who 
have at least fifteen years of experience in the field of art and culture; and 
(b) two other members who have at least twenty years of experience in classical 
Indian literature or its staging. 
(4) The Chairperson of the Board shall be selected by consensus of the members of the 
Board.
(5) The meeting of the Board shall be compulsorily held at least once every month and 
the Central Government may make such provisions as may be necessary for review of the 
work and coordination amongst the various Ministries.
(6) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of 
services of members appointed under this section shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. The Board shall,–
(a) inspect all cinema, art, cultural and communication mediums;
(b) organize seminars, workshops, counselling sessions from time to time to 
understand the creation of cinema, motion picture in which persons and organizations 
who create anarchy in the name of creativity may also be invited;
Deﬁnitions.
The Social Media 
and Over-The-
Top Platform 
Regulatory 
Board.
Functions of 
Board.

(c) from time to time, issue guidelines for regulation of anarchy;
(d) motivate person and group of persons and institutions for creative development 
in accordance with Indian values;
(e) work as complementary arrangement with other commissions and boards of 
other art, culture, cinema under the Board for film certification constituted under the 
Cinematography Act, 1952; and
(f) such other function as may be prescribed. 
5. If any person publishes any social media content on the OTT or such other platform 
harming the unity and integrity of the country, hurting social harmony, acting with prejudice 
against a particular religion, supporting terrorist and jihadi ideology, he shall be liable for 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than twenty years and fine of rupees two 
crore.
6. The Central Government shall after due appropriation made by the Parliament in this 
regard provide the requisite funds from time to time for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
7. The Central Government, for the purpose of carrying out any of the provisions of 
this Act or the rules made thereunder, within the territorial jurisdiction of any State included 
under this Act, may give such directions to the Government of that State as may appear to 
it to be necessary.
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry out the 
provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both the Houses agree in making any modification in the rule 
or regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule 
or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as 
the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.
Power to make 
rules. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Indians have not only done subtle and extensive research on all the possible dimensions 
of life, but also created science and highly specialized techniques for this, based on the 
fundamental understanding of philosophy and towards this understanding, it has also 
been proved that there is no proven end of learning. The proof of this is obtained from 
the declaration “Ekam Sadvipra Bahudha Vadanti”, in which instead of curbing creative 
freedom, it was encouraged, but on this basis harmful freedom was also regulated, the basis 
of which was practical understanding with Indian cultural values.
In the tradition of Indian thought, the first thinkers were called poets and the expression 
made by them was called poetry. And the Upanishads were revealed and the original thinkers 
were called Kavikritu, but with time they were called poets who depicted literature and art, 
which is a common word for this in our language today. But in the development of literature 
and art, spirituality never lost its control over creativity, although morality, intellectualism 
and materialism were present in more and less form in many periods, but the controlling 
spirituality of all of them remained intact. Maharishi Valmiki ji created many classical 
works like moral oriented Ramayana, V ed Vyas ji intellectually oriented Mahabharata and 
Kalidas created many classical compositions like Abhijnanshakuntalam etc., after which 
the tradition of this type of creativity continued for a long time in India, which deviated in 
the medieval period and came till the British period. There were concerted state efforts to 
erase this tradition from public mind. But in the nineteenth century, at the individual level, 
creativity according to Indian values re-appeared in the society and this was possible only 
through the life force of the never-ending Indian culture. This change in the field of creation 
was so extensive that it not only influenced the genres of literature, art, poetry and drama but 
also jolted the political awareness and set patterns of leaders and legendary personalities etc.
However, in the last few decades and especially in the last few years, there is again 
a deviation in the values of this creativity due to certain reasons. The main reason of the 
disinterest as well as ignorance from the excellent values of Indian poetry, art etc. of the 
creative workers engaged in the field of creativity is due to some specific reasons. While 
the creativity in respect of Indian values, the intimacy of human relations and the high 
materiality is also practiced by converting the same into spirituality, the proofs of which are 
found in abundance in crafts, architecture, scriptures, books, etc., these days the movies, 
OTT platforms, music albums, bring forth uncontrolled display of body and language which 
is definitely against artistic harmony and Indian values. It denotes ignorance about the 
creativity of art etc. This deviation can be checked by establishing constant communication 
slowly.
The second major reason is very serious and that is due to anti-national ideology and 
religious frenzy. Presently, in the name of creativity, efforts are being made to nurture 
anarchy and hysteria in the society and the country, and support for terrorist and jihadi 
ideology whereas ridicule and hatred towards a particular religion are also being promoted. 
This is a big threat to the country and there is an urgent and imperative need to curb it 
rationally.
Through this bill, the development of creative sense with lofty, rational, continuously 
active and spiritually controlled values of Indian culture in cinema, art etc. can be rapidly 
ensured.
Hence this Bill.
Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                             KUNWAR PUSHPENDRA SINGH CHANDEL
November 21, 2022

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the Media and Over-The-Top Platform 
Regulatory Board. It further provides for appointment of members of the Board. Clause 6 
provides for the Central Government to provide funds. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will 
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. A recurring expenditure of about 
rupees ten crore per annum is likely to be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five crore is also likely to be involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
__________
A
BILL
to establish a Social Media and Over-The-Top Platform Regulatory Board to regulate the 
content shown by individuals, art, cultural organizations in social media in the name of 
creativity through art, music, films, cinema, OTT cinema, advertisement, standup 
comedy, poetry, social media, cultural staging, theatrical staging and 
for matters connected therewith
_________
(Shri Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel, M.P .)