Bill No. 254 of 2024
THE PREVENTION OF SLAUGHTER AND PRESERV ATION OF 
CATTLE BILL, 2024 
By
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab, M.P.
a
BILL
to prohibit the slaughter of cattle and for the preservation of improvement of the  
breeds of cattle and to endeavour to organize agriculture and animal husbandry  
in terms of article 48 of the Constitution of India by enacting  
a comprehensive legislation.
 Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
 1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Slaughter and Preservation of Cattle  
Act, 2024. 
 ( 2) It extends to the whole of India.
 ( 3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title, extent 
and commencement.
As introduced in Lok Sabha
5

 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires—
(a) "Aayog" means the Go-Seva Aayog established under Section 12 of this Act;
(b) " Beef"  means flesh of the cattle in any form;
(c) " Beef products" include extraction from beef;
(d) "Cattle" means cow, calf of a cow and bull, bullock of all ages and he or she 
buffalo of all ages;
(e) "GauShala " means a shelter established for the protection and preservation  
of cattle registered as such with the Animal Welfare Board or under the State or  
Central Act;
(f) " Government" means the Central Government;
(g) "Premises" means and includes any premises, vessel or vehicle;
(h) " Prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(i) "Slaughter" means killing by any method whatsoever and includes maiming and 
infliction of physical injury which in the ordinary course will cause death; and
(j) "Uneconomic Cattle" includes stray, unprotected, infirm, disabled, diseased or 
barren Cattle.
 3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law, custom, or usage to the contrary, 
no person shall slaughter or cause to be slaughtered, or offer or cause to be offered for 
slaughter or otherwise intentionally kill or offer or cause to be offered for killing any cattle.
 ( 2) Notwithstanding anything in any other law for the time being in force or  any  custom  
or  usage to be contrary, no person shall slaughter or cause to be slaughtered or offer or cause  
to be offered for slaughter any cattle, unless he has obtained permit in respect of such cattle  
in writing from the Competent  Authority appointed for the area as may be prescribed:
 Provided that the killing of cattle accidentally or in self-defence shall not be deemed to 
be slaughter under the Act unless proved otherwise.
 4.  (1) A permit under sub-section (2) shall be issued by the Competent  Authority  only 
after it has, for reasons to be recorded in writing, certified that—
(a) any cattle operated upon for vaccine lymph, serum or for any experimental or 
research purpose at an institution established, conducted or recognized by the Central 
Government; or
(b) any cattle which is suffering from any disease which is certified by a Veterinary 
Officer authorized by the State Government as being contagious and dangerous to other   
cattle;
(c) any cattle, slaughter of which is certified by a Veterinary Officer public health; 
and
(d) any cattle , slaughter of which is certified by a Veterinary Officer, to be necessary 
on the ground that it is suffering from an incurable disease as terminally ill.
 (2) (a) No permit under section 3 shall be issued without certification of the Veterinary 
Officer of the area or such other officer of  the  Animal  Husbandry  Department  as  my  be  
prescribed.
 ( b) any cattle slaughtered under sub-section (b), (c), (d) of section 2, shall be disposed 
of under the supervision of the Competent Authority in such manner as may be  prescribed.
 ( c) the Provision of Prevention of Cruelty to Animal Act, 1960 or any other act time 
being in force relating to destruction of suffering animals shall so applicable under this Act.
2
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
5
Prohibition of 
slaughter of cattle.
Definitions.
Permit, how to be 
issued.

 ( d) the Aayog, may, at any time for the purposes of satisfying itself as to be legality or 
propriety of the action taken by the Competent Authority under this section, call for and 
examine the record of any case and may pass such order thereon as it may deem fit.
 ( e) subject to the provisions herein contained, any action  taken  by  the  Competent 
Authority or under this section shall be final and conclusive and shall not be called in 
question in any Court.
 5. Whoever contravenes  or attempts  to  contravene  or abets the contravention  of any 
of the provisions contained under section 3 shall be punishable  with imprisonment  for  a 
term  which may extend to ten years, or with fine which may extend to Five Lakhs rupees, 
or with  both.
 6.  No person shall transport or offer for transport or cause to be transported by whatever 
means any cattle from any place for slaughter.
 Provided that, the transport of any cattle, in the manner prescribed by the Central 
Government, for bona-fide agricultural or animal husbandry purpose shall not be construed 
as an offence under this section.
 Carrying cattle to grazing filed or for agricultural work within the particular local area 
shall not be considered as an offence under this section.
 7.  No person shall purchase, sell or otherwise dispose of or cause to be purchased, sold 
or otherwise disposed of, cattle for slaughter or knowing or having reason to believe that 
such cattle shall be slaughtered.
 8.  Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, no  
person  shall  possess,  sale  or transport for sale or cause to be sold or transported beef or 
beef products in any form except for such medicinal purposes as may be prescribed.
 9. (1)Whosoever contravenes or attempts  to contravene or abets the contravention of 
the provisions of this Chapter shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term of three 
years which may extend to seven years or with fine which may extend to three lakh rupees 
or with both.
 ( 2) Whoever after conviction of an offence under the provisions of this Act is again 
found to be guilty of any offence under the provisions shall be punished with double the 
punishment provided for the said offence of the second and subsequent conviction.
 10. (1) Whoever causes bodily pain, disease or infirmity to any cattle is said to  
cause hurt.
 ( 2) Whoever intentionally causes hurt to any cattle shall, on conviction, be punished 
with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and with fine which 
may extend to ten thousand rupees.
 ( 3) Whoever abets the commission of any offence under sub-section (2), shall be guilty 
of abetment of the said offence and shall be liable for the same punishment as is provided 
for the said offence.
 11.  (1) Whoever intentionally causes grievous injuries to any cattle shall, on conviction, 
be punished with rigorous imprisonment for  a term which shall not  be less than one year 
but  may extend to seven years and with fine which may extend to one lakh  rupees.
       Explanation.— For the purpose of this section grievous injury shall include:— 
 ( i) permanent  privation of sight of either eyes,
 ( ii) permanent privation of the hearing of either ear, 
 ( iii) privation of any member or joint,
 ( iv) fracture  or dislocation of a bone or  tooth,
 ( v) any hurt that endangers life or which causes the sufferer severe bodily pain and 
3
10
5
15
20
25
30
40
35
Penalties.
Restriction on 
transport of cattle.
Prohibition of sale 
or purchase.
Prohibition of 
possession, sale or 
transport of beef and 
beef products  
Penalty.
Punishment for  
causing hurt.
Punishment  for  
grievous injuries to  
any cattle.
45

ultimately renders unfit or  unserviceable.
 ( 2) Whoever abets the commission of an offence under sub-section (1) shall be guilty of 
abetment of the said offence and shall be liable for the same punishment as is provided for 
the said offence.
 12. (1) The Aayog shall consist of the following persons namely:
(a) One person having special knowledge or practical experience in welfare of 
cattle shall be nominated by the Government as Chairpersons of Aayog.
(b) One non-official member having special knowledge or practical experience in 
welfare of cattle to be nominated as vice chairperson by the  Government.
(c) Nominated Members of the Aayog shall be as follows:—
(i) One representative nominated by Animal Welfare Board of India.
(ii) Two persons actively engaged in Gouseva nominated by the Government.
(iii) Three persons having knowledge in Ayurveda, Panchagavya  and Organize  
Farming nominated by the Government.
(iv) Five representatives to be nominated by the Government in consultation 
with/on recommendation of the Chairperson of the Aayog, from amongst the  
Gaushalas, Animal Welfare NGOs, Dairy Co-operative, Goushala Federation or 
Association.
(d) The Government shall appoint an officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary 
as the Secretary of the Aayog.
 13. Subject to such rules as may be made by the Government in this behalf, the 
Aayog may appoint such number of other officers and employees as may be necessary 
for the exercise of its powers and the discharge of its functions and may determine  the  
terms  and conditions of service of such officers and other employees by regulations 
made by it with the previous approval of the Government.
 14. The Funds of the  Aayog shall consist of grants made to it from time to time by 
the Government  and of contributions, donations, subscriptions, bequests and gifts.
 15. The Aayog shall perform the following functions, namely,—
(i) supervise and ensure proper implementation of the rules with respect to 
preservation of cattle;
(ii) to advise the government for welfare of cattle and work  for development of  all 
indigenous species of cattle;
(iii) work  for  the  scientific  use  of  dung  and  urine  of  Uneconomic Cattle  and  
work  for development of all indigenous species of cattle;
(iv) formation or establishment of pinjrapoles, rescue homes, animal shelters, 
sanctuaries  and the like where cattle may find a shelter when they have become old and 
useless or when they need  protection;
(v) work for promotion of and assistance to Gaushalas or Gosadans and Activate 
defunct Goshalas and encourage  for founding treatment  centres for the welfare of  cattle;
(vi) to assist in the working and functioning of the Goshalas, established and run 
by the voluntary organizations, for the purposes of providing financial assistance, 
training in the field of scientific rearing of various breeds of cattle as also for the proper 
utilization of dwelling and urine of the cattle for agriculture and domestic, including 
propagation and use of bio-gas plant based on the dung of cattle;
(vii) exercise supervision over Gaushalas and Gosadans to check malafide diversion 
of funds provided by the commission as also of the lands or properties belonging  to  the  
4
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
5
45
Constitution of the 
Aayog.
Employees of the 
Aayog.
Funds of the 
Aayog.
Functions of the 
Aayog.  

5
Goushalas or Gosadans and other voluntary organizations, and bring to the notice of the 
State Government specific instances for appropriate action;
(viii) develop pastures and associates with other institutions and bodies, whether 
private or public, for the said purposes;
(ix) apply for and obtain tracts of land from the Government or other persons by 
way of allotment, gift, lease or purchase for the purposes of developing pastures of 
growing fodder, establishing fodder banks, Goshalas and such other constructions there 
on as may be necessary for the purpose of this Act;
(x) Educate, campaign and make people aware about the economic benefits which 
can be derived out of cattle, in co-ordination with Nationalised Banks and Institutions;
(xi) Procure fodder and make available for use of cattle in the areas affected by 
famine, drought or other natural calamities and to  set up camps for  the  aforesaid  
purposes in  the affected areas;
(xii) Work in collaboration  with  Agriculture  and Veterinary  Universities  or  the 
organizations of the Central/State Governments engaged in the task of research in the  
fields of breeding and rearing cattle and organic manure/Bio-Gas and  also  collaborate  
with research projects of Indian System of Medicine like Ayurvedic and Panchagavya 
conducted by various public or private organizations for conducting research on the 
Biogenic products of the cow for medicinal purposes;
(xiii) Promote schemes to encourage more and more use of organic manure and 
recommend  to the Government suitable measures including incentive schemes for  
use of dung or  urine of cattle in organic  manure by farmers to  minimize the use of 
chemical fertilizers;
(xiv) Formulate and submit schemes for consideration of the Government for the 
establishment of cottage industries in the rural areas, based on biogas product of cattle 
as also based on skins, hides or bones of the naturally dead cattle for the purposes of 
manufacture of various products;
(xv) Take into custody the abandoned, stray, rescued, confiscated or seized cattle 
from the concerned local bodies, other competent authorities or courts after due 
authorization in accordance with law in force, for the time being and maintain them or 
get them maintained properly;
(xvi) Organize demonstrations, meetings and seminars pertaining to development 
of indigenous species of cattle, organic farming, developed bullock driven agricultural 
implements  and carts and arrange  for  publicity  and   extension programmes  regarding 
benefits from the cattle through all medias like Television, Radio, Newspapers and also 
shall publish advertisements, books, journals, audio and video clips, newsletters etc;
(xvii) Examine any other matter that may be referred to it by the government and 
submit its report thereon.
 16.  The Aayog may, subject to the previous approval of the Central Government make 
such regulations as it may think fit for the administration of its affairs and for carrying out 
its functions.
 17. (1) For the purpose of this Act a Police Officer not below the Rank of Sub-Inspector 
or the Competent Authority or person authorized in writing in that behalf by the competent  
authority (hereinafter in this section referred to as  "the  authorized  person") shall have 
power to enter and search  any  premises  where  the  Competent  Authority  or  the authorized 
person has reason to believe that an offence  under  this  Act  has been, or is likely to be 
committed.
 ( 2) Every person in occupation of such place shall allow the Competent Authority or 
the authorized person such as access to that Premises as may be necessary for the aforesaid 
purpose and shall answer to the best of his knowledge and belief any question put to him by 
the Competent Authority or the authorized  person.
10
5
15
20
25
30
40
35
45
Power of Aayog to 
make regulations 
Power of search, 
seizure and arrest.  
50

6
 ( 3) The Competent Authority or any person authorized in writing in that behalf by the 
Competent Authority, or any Police Officer not below the Rank of Sub-Inspector, as the case 
may be, if of the opinion that an offence under this Act has been committed or is likely to be 
committed, may seize any materials or carcasses or cattle or vehicle or conveyance, which 
have been or likely to be used in commission of the offence, from the premises so inspected 
and may detain or arrest any person suspected to have committed such offence.
 ( 4) After the seizure under sub-section ( 3), he shall report such seizure, without 
unreasonable delay before the Judicial Magistrate or Court having jurisdiction to try the 
offence.
 ( 5) On receipt of the report, records relating to premises and materials used or intended 
to be used in the commission of the offence, the Magistrate or may on his being satisfied 
that an offence has been committed or intended to be committed under this Act, may release 
the materials including vehicle except cattle on production of a Bank guarantee equal to 
the value as estimated by him pending disposal of the criminal proceedings instituted in 
respect of the alleged offence, and on the execution of Bank guarantee by the owner thereof 
of a bond for the production of the property so released as and when so required before 
the magistrate having jurisdiction to try the offence on account of which the seizure had  
been made.
 ( 6) On conviction, the vehicle or any conveyance or bank guarantee so furnished and 
cattle so seized under this Act shall stand forfeited in the manner as may be prescribed.
 ( 7) For the  purpose of enforcing the provisions  of this Act the  Competent  Authority 
or the authorized person, in exercising the powers of search, seizure and  arrest  under  this  
section, follow, as far as may be, the provisions of Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 
2023.
 18.  The Government may, for the purpose of speedy disposal of disputes under this Act 
by notification, designate any Court as the Special Court for one or more districts.
 19. Any person aggrieved by any order passed under section 7 may, within  thirty days 
from the date of receipt of such order appeal to the Sessions Judge having jurisdiction over 
the area in which the property to which such order relates has been seized.
 20.  Whoever abets any offence punishable under this Act or attempts to commit any 
such offence, shall be punished with the punishment provided in this Act for such an  
offence.
 21. Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 
2023 an offence punishable under this Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable.
 22. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other 
law for the time being in force.
 23.  (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing  
the difficulty: 
 Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years 
from the commencement of this Act. 
 ( 2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament.
 24.  ( 1) The Central Government, in consultation with the State Governments, may  
by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of  
this Act. 
 ( 2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may 
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
5
45
Constitution of 
Special Court.
Appeals.
Abetment.
Savings. 
Offences to be 
cognizable and 
non-bailable.
Power to remove 
difficulties.
Power to make 
rules.

7
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and if, before the expiry 
of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule 
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be 
of no effect, as the case may be, so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall 
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
 
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
 Article 48 of the Constitution provides that the State shall endeavour to organize 
agriculture and animal husbandry on modern and scientific lines and shall, in particular, 
take steps for preserving and improving the breed, and prohibiting the slaughter of cows and 
its progeny.  It may be observed that article 48 casts a duty upon the Government to prohibit 
slaughter of cows and progeny.
 Cow and its progeny are the mainstay of agriculture and rural economy of the country. 
Cows are considered sacred in our tradition and there is a good reason for that. Its milk is 
beneficial and nutritious for children and the sick persons. It serves the nation in many fields 
of life.
 However it is a fact that cow is subjected to cruelty and atrocity. It is in the interest of 
the nation to take effective steps to prevent cruelty to cows by prohibiting slaughter of cows, 
which is the extreme form of cruelty. It is, therefore, necessary to have legislation not only 
for banning slaughter of cow but also for providing protection, shelter and care to cow and 
its progeny in the country.
 The Bill seeks to provide for establishment of cow shelters for taking care of stray and 
abandoned cows and for prohibition of slaughter of cow and its progeny in the country.
 Hence this Bill.
   New Delhi;                                                         BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB 
November 7, 2024   
8

9
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 12 of the Bill provides for Constitution of the Aayog and appointment of  
officers and staff for the Aayog. Clause 14 requires the Central Government to provide, 
requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this legislation. The Bill, if enacted, will 
involve expenditure recurring and non-recurring from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
However, it is not possible to assess the actual financial expenditure which is likely o be 
incurred at this stage.

10
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 24 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the provisions of the Act. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
a
BILL
to prohibit the slaughter of cattle and for the preservation of improvement of the  
breeds of cattle and to endeavour to organize agriculture and animal husbandry  
in terms of article 48 of the Constitution of India by enacting  
a comprehensive legislation.
(Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab, M.P .)