1
Short title and
commencement.
THE MAINTENANCE AND WELFARE OF PARENTS AND SENIOR
CITIZENS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
MS. SUSHMITA DEV,  M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior
Citizens (Amendment) Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 254 of  2017
5
AS  INTRODUCED IN LOK  SABHA

2
2. After Chapter II of the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens
Act, 2007, the following Chapters shall be inserted, namely:—
“CHAPTER IIA
RIGHTS OF SENIOR CITIZENS
“18A. The National Commission for Senior Citizens Constituted under section 18B
shall endeavor to protect and enforce the following rights of the senior citizen:—
(a) Right to life with Dignity and Non-Discrimination: No senior citizen shall be
denied the right to equality guaranteed by article 15 of the Constitution and be
discriminated against on the ground of his age creating any social or economic disability;
(b) Right to Legal Aid: Every senior citizen shall have access to an empanelment
of lawyers for the exclusive purpose of providing free legal aid to senior citizens
including taking up of court cases and providing any legal opinion;
(c) Right to Individual Autonomy: Every senior citizen as per the constitutional
mandate of the right to a dignified life shall have his privacy and individual autonomy
protected; and
(d) Right to Healthcare: Every senior citizen as a part of their right to life
guaranteed by article 21 of the Constitution shall be provided access to life saving
medicines, healthcare clinic in each district, health insurance policy and institutions
for ageing to promote geriatric healthcare for senior citizens with a special focus on
dementia and alzheimer's disease.
CHAPTER IIB
T
HE NA TIONAL COMMISSION FOR SENIOR CITIZENS
18B. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute a National Commission for Senior Citizens to exercise the powers conferred on,
and to perform the functions assigned to it under this Act.
(2) The Commission shall consist of—
(a) a Chairperson, committed to the cause of senior citizens, to be nominated by
the Central Government;
(b) five Members to be nominated by the Central Government from amongst
persons of ability, integrity and standing who have had experience in law or legislation,
geriatric medicine, psychology, urban design specialists, sociology, management of
an industry or organization committed to increasing the employment potential of
senior citizens, senior citizens voluntary organizations, administration, economic
development, health, education or social welfare:
Provided that at least two members of the Commission shall be senior citizens.
(c) a Member-Secretary to be nominated by the Central Government, who shall
be—
(i) an expert in the field of management, organizational structure,
sociological movement or Geriatric Medicine Specialist; or
(ii) an officer who is a member of a civil service of the Union or of an All-
India  service or holds a civil post under the Union with appropriate experience.
18C. (1) The Chairperson and every member shall hold office for such period, not
exceeding three years, as may be specified by the Central Government in this behalf.
(2) The Chairperson or a member (other than the Member-Secretary who is a member of
a civil service of the Union or of an All-India service or holds a civil post under the Union)
may, by writing and addressed to the Central Government, resign from the office of Chairperson
or, as the case may be, of the member at any time.
Insertion of
new Chapters
IIA and IIB.
56 of 2007.
Constitution of
the National
Commission
for Senior
Citizens.
Term of office
and conditions
of service of
Chairperson
and Members.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(3) The Central Government shall remove a person from the office of Chairperson or a
member referred to in sub-section (2) if that person—
(a) becomes an undischarged insolvent;
(b) gets convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which in the
opinion of the Central Government involves moral turpitude;
(c) becomes of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court;
(d) refuses to act or becomes incapable of acting;
(e) without obtaining leave of absence from the Commission, absent from three
consecutive meetings of the Commission; or
(f) in the opinion of the Central Government has so abused the position of
Chairperson or Member as to render that person's continuance in office detrimental to
the public interest:
Provided that no person shall be removed under this clause until that person has
been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.
(4) A vacancy caused under sub-section ( 2) or otherwise shall be filled by fresh
nomination.
(5) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of, the Chairperson and members shall be such as may be prescribed.
18D. (1) The Central Government shall provide the Commission with such officers
and employees as may be necessary for the efficient performance of it functions under this
Act.
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of, the officers and other employees appointed for the purpose of the Commission
shall be such as may be prescribed.
18E. The salaries and allowances payable to the Chairperson and Members and the
administrative expenses, including salaries, allowances and persons payable to the officers
and other employees referred to in section 18C, shall be paid out of the grants referred to in
sub-section (1) of section 18J.
18F. No act or proceeding of the Commission shall be questioned or shall be invalid on
the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy or defect in the constitution of the
Commission.
18G. (1) The Commission may, for efficient discharge of its functions, appoint such
committees as may be necessary for dealing with such special issues as may be taken up by
the Commission, from time to time.
(2) The Commission shall have the power to co-opt as members of any committee
appointed under sub-section ( 1) such member of persons, who are not members of the
Commission, as it may think fit and the persons so co-opted shall have the right to attend the
meetings of the committee and take part in its proceedings but shall not have the right to
vote.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to member appointed to the Committees shall
be such as may be prescribed.
18H.  (1) The Commission or a committee thereof shall meet as and when necessary
and shall meet at such time and place as the Chairperson may think fit.
(2) The Commission shall regulate its own procedure and the procedure of the
committees thereof.
Officers and
other
employees of
the
Commission.
Salaries and
allowances to
be paid out of
grants.
Vacancies, etc.,
not to
invalidate
proceedings of
the
Commission.
Committees of
the
Commission.
Procedure to
be regualted by
the
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(3) All orders and decisions of the Commission shall be authenticated by the Member-
Secretary or any other officer of the Commission duly authorized by the Member-Secretary
in this behalf.
18I. (1) The Commission shall perform all or any of the following functions, namely:—
(a) investigate and examine all matters relating to the safeguards provided for
senior citizens under the law except on issues of maintenance and welfare as provided
under this Act;
(b) present to the Central Government, annually and at such other times as the
Commission may deem fit, reports upon the working of those safeguards;
(c) make in such reports recommendations for the effective implementation of
those safeguards for improving the conditions of senior citizens by the Union or any
State;
(d) a universal and non-contributory old age pension to be established with a
minimum amount of monthly pension for senior citizens as to be prescribed by the
Central Government:
Provided that no senior citizen shall be forced to compulsorily retire from work
on attaining the eligibility for universal old age pension;
(e) recommend to the Central Government post retirement opportunities through
which senior citizens can generate income;
(f) look into complaints and take suo-moto notice of matters relating to—
(i) deprivation of rights of senior citizens;
(ii) non-compliance of policy decisions, guidelines or instructions aimed
at mitigating hardships and ensuring welfare and providing relief to senior citizens
and take up the issues arising out of such matters with appropriate authorities;
(iii) income or assets having been taken away against senior citizen's will
through coercive means;
(iv) abandonment of senior citizen without any visible form of support;
(v) vulnerability of senior citizen to any form of violence or sexual abuse;
(vi) cases of senior citizen living on the street or resorting to begging;
(vii) addition of senior citizen to any substance detrimental to personal
health;
(g) call for special studies or investigations into specific problems or situations
arising out of discrimination against senior citizens and identify the constraints so as
to recommend strategies for their removal;
(h) evaluate the progress of the welfare and development of senior citizens
under the Union and any State;
(i) fund litigation involving issues affecting a large body of senior citizens;
(j) make periodical reports to the parliament on any matter pertaining to senior
citizens and in particular various socio-economic activities; and
(k) any other matter which may be referred to it by the Central Government.
(2) The Central Government shall cause all the reports referred to in clause (b) of sub-
section (1) to be laid before each House of Parliament along with a memorandum explaining
the action taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the Union and
the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations.
Functions of
the
Commission. 5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

5
(3) Where any such report or any part thereof relates to any matter with which any
State Government is concerned, the Commission shall forward a copy of such report or part
to such State Government who shall cause it to be laid before the Legislature of the State
along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be taken on the
recommendations relating to the State and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any
of such recommendations.
(4) The Commision shall, while investigating any matter referred to in clause ( a) or
sub-clause (i) of clause (f) of sub-section (1), have all the powers of a civil court trying a suit
and, in particular, in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of
India and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office;
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and documents; and
(f)  any other matter which may be prescribed.
18J. (1) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament
by law in this behalf, pay to the Commission by way of grants such sums of money as the
Central Government may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Commission may spend such sums as it thinks fit for performing the functions
under this Act, and such sums shall be treated as expenditure payable out of the grants
referred to in sub-section (1).
18K. (1) The Commission shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records
and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by the
Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Audito-General of India.
(2) The accounts of the Commission shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in
connection with such audit shall be payable by the Commission to the Comptroller and
Auditor-General.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General and any person appointed by him in connection
with the audit of the accounts of the Commission under this Act shall have the same rights
and privileges and the authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and
Auditor-General generally has in connection with the audit of Government accounts and, in
particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected
vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of the
Commission.
(4) The accounts of the Commission, as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General or any other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report
thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government by the Commission.
18L. The Commission shall prepare, in such form and at such time, for each financial
year, as may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of its activities during the
previous financial year and forward a copy thereof to the Central Government.
18M. The Central Government shall cause the annual report together with a memorandum
of action taken on the recommendations contained therein, in so far as they relate to the
Central Government, and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of such
recommendations and the audit report to be laid as soon as may be after the reports are
received, before each House of Parliament.
Grants by the
Central
Government.
Accounts and
audit.
Annual report.
Annual report
and audit
report to be
laid before
Parliament.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
18N. The Central Government shall, after the appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, constitute a Fund from which capitals may be released to the State
Governments for executing the provisions of the Act to—
(a) fulfil the mandate of providing free and subsidised life saving medicines for
senior citizens;
(b) provide financial security for widows by allocating funds for their socio-
economic welfare;
(c) provide loans for purchase of houses and repair with repayment schedules
with minimal interest.
 18-O. The Central Government shall make a periodic review and monitor the progress
of the implementation of the progress of the Act by the State Governments.
18P. The Chairperson, the Members, officers and other employees of the Commission
shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal
Code, 1860 (45 of 1860).
18Q. The Central Government shall consult the Commission on all major policy matters
affecting women.
18R. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of Chapter IIB.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of, the Chairperson and Members under sub-section (5) of section 18B and of
officers and other employees under sub-section (2) of section 18C;
(b) allowances for attending the meetings of the Committee by the co-opted
persons under sub-section (3) of section 18F;
(c) other matters under clause (f) of sub-section (4) of section 18H;
(d) the form in which the annual statement of accounts shall be maintained under
sub-section (1) of section 18J;
(e) the form in, and the time at, which the annual report shall be prepared under
section 18K; and
(f) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be;  so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.".
Central
Government
to constitute
fund.
Power of
Central
Government
to review.
Chairperson,
Members and
Staff of the
Commission
to be public
servants.
Central
Government
to consult
Commission.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

7
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Madrid Plan of Action and the United Nations Principles for Senior Citizens
adopted by the United Nations General Assembly in 2002, the Proclamation on Ageing and
the global targets on ageing for the Year 2001 adopted by the General Assembly in 1992, the
Shanghai Plan of Action 2002 and the Macau Outcome document 2007 adopted by United
Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (UNESCAP) form the
basis for the global policy guidelines to encourage governments to design and implement
their own policies, from time to time to which India is a signatory.
Pursuant to the above international efforts, the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents
and Senior Citizens Act, 2007 was enacted which provides for more effective provisions for
the maintenance and welfare of parents and senior citizens guaranteed and recognised under
the Constitution. Despite of India's global commitments and given the increasing number of
senior citizens it is estimated that India will have over 240 million senior citizens by the year
2050 who will face challenges and needs that are different from those faced by previous
generations, the reasons being decline of the joint family, increased life spans and productivity,
etc. The need is to raise their concerns and to help create a more inclusive society that
supports and benefits from our senior citizens. It is also required to deal effectively with the
plight of senior citizens and fulfil the Constitutional mandate of improving the quality of life
of senior citizens without any discrimination and to protect and safeguard their right to
dignity, equality and security.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior
Citizens Act, 2007 with a view to constitute a National Commission for Senior Citizens would
help in protecting the social and economic interests of our senior citizens. It also seeks to
work towards the right to equal participation, equal recognition of law while promoting the
right to medical attention, right to affordable housing communities, right to social justice and
protection as well as to facilitate affordable and accessible services.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SUSHMITA  DEV
November 27, 2017

8
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to provide for the constitution of the National Commission
for Senior Citizens. It further provides for appointment of Committees by the Commission
and constitution a separate Fund by the Central Government to carry out the provision of
this Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. It is likely to involve an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore from
the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifteen crore is also likely to be involved.

9
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 2 of the Bill vide proposed section 18R empowers the Central Government to
make, by notification in the Official Gazette, rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
As the matters in respect of which rules may be made under the aforesaid provisions are
matters of procedure and administrative detail only, the delegation of legislative power is,
therefore, of a normal character.

LOK   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007.
————
(Ms. Sushmita Dev, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2658LS(S3)—20-12-2017.