1
THE WOMEN'S SEXUAL, REPRODUCTIVE AND MENSTRUAL
RIGHTS BILL, 2018
By
DR. SHASHI THAROOR, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend certain enactments to emphasise on the agency of a woman in her
sexual and reproductive rights and to guarantee menstrual equity for
all women by the State.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Women's Sexual, Reproductive and Menstrual
Rights Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill  No. 255 of  2018
Short title and
commencement.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
CHAPTER II
AMENDMENTS OF THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
2. In section 375 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860,—
(a) for the words "Fourthly.—With her consent, when the man knows that he is
not her husband and that her consent is given because she believes that he is another
man to whom she is or believes herself to be lawfully married", the words "Fourthly.—
With her consent, when the man knows that he is not the person she believes she has
given consent to engage in sexual intercourse or sexual acts and that her consent is
given because she believes that he is another man with whom she wants to engage in
sexual intercourse or sexual acts."; shall be substituted;
(b) Exception 2 shall be omitted; and
(c) after the proviso to Explanation 2, the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely:—
"Provided that the women's ethnicity, religion, caste, education, profession, clothing
preference, entertainment preference, social circle, personal opinion, past sexual conduct or
any other related grounds shall not be a reason to presume her consent to the sexual
activity."
CHAPTER III
A
MENDMENTS TO THE MEDICAL TERMINATION OF PREGNANCY ACT, 1971
3. For the short title of the Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1971 (hereinafter
referred to as the principal Act in this Chapter), the following short title shall be substituted,
namely:—
"This Act may be called the Legal Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1977."
4. For the long title of the principal Act, the following long title shall be substituted,
namely:—
"An Act to provide for the legal termination of pregnancies by both medical
and surgical methods by registered health care providers and medical practitioners
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto."
5. In section 2 of the principal Act, after clause (d), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
"(e) "registered health care provider" means—
(i) a registered medical practitioner; or
(ii) a practitioner who possesses any recognized medical qualification of
Ayurveda, Unani or Siddha as defined in clause (h) of section 2 of the Indian
Medicine Central Council Act, 1970 and whose name has been entered in the
Central Register or State Register of Indian medicine; or
(iii) a practitioner who possess any recognized medical qualification of
Homoeopathy as defined in clause (g) of section 2 of the Homoeopathy Central
Council Act, 1973 and whose name has been entered in the Central Register or
State Register of Homeopathy; or
(iv) a nurse or auxiliary nurse midwife who possesses any recognized
qualification in general nursing or auxiliary nurse midwifery as defined in section 10
of the Indian Nursing Council Act, 1947 and who has been enrolled as a nurse
or auxiliary nurse midwife in the Indian Nurses Register or the State Register;
and who has such training and experience to terminate the pregnancy as may be prescribed
by rules made under this Act.
Amendment
of section 375.
Amendment
of short title.
Amendment
of long title.
Amendment
of section 2.
45 of 1860.
34 of 1971.
48 of 1970.
48 of 1947.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
59 of 1973.

3
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(g) "termination of pregnancy" means a procedure to terminate a pregnancy by
using medical or surgical methods."
6. In section 3 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "registered medical practitioner", the words
"registered health care provider";
(b) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
"(2) Subject to the provision of sub-section (4), a pregnancy may be terminated.
(a) medically by a registered health care provider, who is affiliated to a place as
described under section 4, where the length of her pregnancy does not exceed twelve
weeks; or
(b) surgically by a medical practitioner where the length of her pregnancy does
not exceed twelve weeks; or
(c) by a registrered medical practitioner, where the length of the pregnancy
does not exceed twenty weeks, if not less than one registered medical practitioner is
of the opinion, formed in good faith, that,—
(i) the continuance of the pregnancy would involve a risk to the life of the
pregnant woman or of grave injury to her physical or mental health; or
(ii) there is a substantial risk that if the child were born, it would suffer
from such physical, mental or genetic abnormalities, as may be prescribed.
Explanation 1.—Where any, pregnancy is alleged by the pregnant woman to have
been caused by rape, the anguish caused by such pregnancy shall be presumed to constitute
a grave injury to the mental health of the pregnant woman.
Explanation 2.—Where any pregnancy occurs as a result of failure of any device or
method used by any woman or her partner for the purpose of limiting the number of children,
the anguish caused by such unwanted pregnancy may be presumed to constitute a grave
injury to the mental health of the pregnant woman by a registered medical practitioner; or
(d) where the length of pregnancy does not exceed twenty-four weeks and the
woman falls in the categories of a survivor of rape, person with disability or any other
related grounds as may by prescribed by a registered medical practitioner; or
(e) if not less than two registered medical practitioners are of the opinion,
formed in good faith, that the termination of pregnancy is necessitated,—
(i) to save the life of the pregnant woman; or
(ii) by the diagnosis of a fatal foetal abnormality incompatible with healthy
living and life as may be prescribed; and
(f) where a child survivor of rape is pregnant, if not less than two registered
medical practitioners are of the opinion that the termination of pregnancy will not
involve a risk to her life.
7. In section 4 of the principal Act, for the word "No", the words "Save as otherwise
provided in section 3(2)(a), no" shall be substituted.
8. For section 5 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted by,
namely:—
"5. (1) No person shall reveal the name and other particulars of a woman who
may intend to terminate her pregnancy or terminates her pregnancy as per this Act.
Amendment
of section 3.
Amendment
of section 4.
Amendment
of section 5.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Ban of
revealation of
identity of
women who
intend to
terminate
pregnancy or
terminate
pregnancy.

4
(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (a), such person shall be
punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine of minimum
five thousand rupees subject to a maximum of ten lakh rupees, or with both.
9. In section 6 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),—
(a) in clause ( a) for the words "registered medical practitioner", the words
"registered health care provider" shall be substituted; and
(b) after clause (a), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
"(aa) the training and experience to terminate pregnancy of registered
health care providers under sub-section ( e) of section 2; and
(ab) the categories of physical, mental and genetic abnormalities under
sub-clause (i) of clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 3; and
(ac) the additional categories of woman under clause (c) of sub-section (2)
of section 3; and
(ad) the categories of fatal foetal abnormality incompatible with
healthy living and life under sub-clause ( ii) of clause (d) of sub-section (2) of
section 3;".
10. In section 7 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),—
(a) in clause (a), for the words "registered medical practitioner ", the words
"registered health care provider" shall be substituted.
(b) in clause (b) for the words "registered medical practitioner", the words
"registered health care provider" shall be substituted.
11. In section 8 of the principal Act for the words "registered medical practitioner",
the words "registered health care provider" shall be substituted.
CHAPTER IV
A
MENDMENT TO THE RIGHT OF CHILDREN TO FREE AND COMPULSORY EDUCATION ACT, 2009
12. In the Schedule to the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act,
2009, in entry 2, in column (3) under the heading "Norms and Standards", after the words
and figures "(iii) separate toilet for boys and girls;", the words and figures "(iiia) sanitary
pads, preferably in the toilet for girls, which shall be provided at no cost to individuals who
may use such facility," shall be inserted.
CHAPTER V
M
ENSTRUAL EQUITY FOR ALL WOMEN
13. Every public authority, as defined by sub-section (h) of section 2 of the Right to
Information Act, 2005, shall make available sanitary pads, preferably in the toilet for
women, which shall be provided at no cost to individuals in the premises of the public
authority.
Amendment
of section 6.
Amendment
of section 7.
Amendment
of section 8.
Amendment
of Schedule.
Duty to provide
sanitary pads.
35 of 2009.
22 of 2005.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Women, the biological equal half in the procreation of human beings, had been confined
to just that for millenniums and even in that they had no autonomy. When they broke socio-
cultural shackles and went on to govern countries, fight wars and excel in professions,
these few exceptions were considered as enough representation. Society is content with
the minimal representation of women in different spheres, even though they constitute half
the population of the country. Women have been made vulnerable by the social construct
of patriarchy, leading to their exclusion in every other social space. Unless we account for
these inequalities and deconstruct patriarchal notions, we will fail in our constitutional
mandate to ensure everyone's right to access justice.
In furthering this equality, the autonomy of the woman must be rightfully restored to
her by granting her the agency over her sexual and reproductive rights. For this, marital rape
must be criminalized to eliminate the loss of a woman's sexual independence post marriage.
Further, unrelated facts about a woman's life such as caste, profession, clothing preference,
personal opinion and past sexual conduct, among others should not be factors in presuming
her sexual consent. By shifting from a 'No means No' to a 'Yes means Yes' regime, it transforms
us from an era of women having to actively fight for them to be treated with respect and
dignity to an era where they will be treated with respect and dignity.
Similarly, even with respect to reproductive rights, a woman must have the right to
terminate pregnancy as a norm rather than an exception. A woman's right to terminate
pregnancy should be only restricted to avoid female foeticide and when a foetus gains the
right to life after it becomes viable. In all other circumstances, including when the foetus or
the pregnant woman has any injury or threat to life, or when a woman is a rape survivor or
has a disability, she should have the right to terminate her pregnancy. There must be no
unnecessary distinction in the right to terminate pregnancy between married and unmarried
women. To ensure women, especially rural women, can successfully exercise this right, the
procedure must be relaxed accordingly. A major hurdle in the termination of pregnancy is
the social stigma attached to it, which should be removed by absolutely protecting the
privacy of a woman who intends to or terminates her pregnancy under the Medical
Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1971.
Another major source of inequality is the absence of access to menstrual hygiene
products that puts girls out of schools and women out of the work force, pushing them into
the vicious cycle of dependency. The absence of an equivalent reproductive process in
men has resulted in our failure to consider the lack of facility for women's menstrual hygiene.
We have failed to admit that this biological process is a role women play for the subsistence
of the human species as a whole. This disparity can be eradicated by obligating schools
and public authorities to supply sanitary pads free of cost to any girl or women in their
facilities.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SHASHI THAROOR
November 19, 2018.
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 12 of the Bill stipulates the provisions of sanitary pads free of cost by schools
under the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009. Clause 13
provides for provision of sanitary pads free of cost preferably in the toilet for women in
the premises of every public authority. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about Rupees one hundred crore per
annum, will be involved out of the Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
6

7
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
(45 OF 1860)
* * * *
375. A man is said to commit "rape"if he—
(a) penetrates his penis, to any extent, into the vagina, mouth, urethra or anus of a
woman or makes her to do so with him or any other person; or
(b) inserts, to any extent, any object or a part of the body, not being the penis, into the
vagina, the urethra or anus of a woman or makes her to do so with him or any other person;
or
(c) manipulates any part of the body of a woman so as to cause penetration into the
vagina, urethra, anus or any part of body of such woman or makes her to do so with him or
any other person; or
(d) applies his mouth to the vagina, anus, urethra of a woman or makes her to do so
with him or any other person, under the circumstances falling under any of the following
seven descriptions:—
First.—Against her will.
Secondly.—Without her consent.
Thirdly.—With her consent, when her consent has been obtained by putting her or
any person in whom she is interested, in fear of death or of hurt.
Fourthly.—With her consent when the man knows that he is not her husband and
that her consent is given because she believes that he is another man to whom she is or
believes herself to be lawfully married
* * * *
Fifthly.—With her consent when, at the time of giving such consent, by reason of
unsoundness of mind or intoxication or the administration by him personally or through
another of any stupefying or unwholesome substance, she is unable to understand the
nature and consequences of that to which she gives consent.
Sixthly.—With or without her consent, when she is under eighteen years of age.
Seventhly.—When she is unable to communicate consent.
Explanation 1.—For the purposes of this section, "vagina" shall also include labia
majora.
Explanation 2.—Consent means an unequivocal voluntary agreement when the woman
by words, gestures or any form of verbal or non-verbal communication, communicates
willingness to participate in the specific sexual Act:
Provided that a woman sho does not physically resist to the act of penetration shall
not by the reason only of that fact, be regarded as consenting to the sexual activity.
Exception 1.—A medical procedure or intervention shall not constitute rape.
Exception 2.—Sexual intercourse or sexual acts by a man with his own wife, the wife
not being under fifteen years of age, is not rape.
* * * *
Rape.

8
EXTRACT FROM THE MEDICAL TERMINATION OF PREGNANCY ACT, 1971
(34 OF 1971)
An Act to provide for the termination of certain pregnancies by registered medical
practitioners and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto
1. (1) This Act may be called the Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act. 1971.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) * * * *
(d) "registered medical practitioner" means a medical practitioner who
possesses any recognized medical qualification as defined in cl.(h) of Section 2 of
the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 (102 of 1956), whose name has been entered in
a State Medical Register and who has such experience or training in gynecology
and obstetrics as may be prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), a
registered medical practitioner shall not be guilty of any offence under that Code or any
other law for the time being in force, if any pregnancy is terminated by him in accordance
with the provision of this Act.
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (4), a pregnancy may be terminated by a
registered medical practitioner,—
(a) where the length of the pregnancy does not exceed twelve weeks if such
medical practitioner is, or
(b) where the length of the pregnancy exceeds twelve weeks but does not
exceed twenty weeks, if not less than two registered medical practitioners are of
opinion, formed in good faith, that,— ( i) the continuance of the pregnancy would
involve a risk to the life of the pregnant woman or of grave injury to physical or mental
health; or
(ii) there is a substantial risk that if the child were born, it would suffer
from such physical or mental abnormalities as to be seriously handicapped.
Explanation 1.—Where any, pregnancy is alleged by the pregnant woman to have
been caused by rape, the anguish caused by such pregnancy shall be presumed to
constitute a grave injury to the mental health of the pregnant woman.
Explanation 2.—Where any pregnancy occurs as a result of failure of any device or
method used by any married woman or her husband for the purpose of limiting the number
of children, the anguish caused by such unwanted pregnancy may be presumed to
constitute a grave injury to the mental health of the pregnant woman.
(3) * * * *
4. No termination of pregnancy shall be made in accordance with this Act at any place
other than,—
(a) a hospital established or maintained by Government, or
(b) a place for the time being approved for the purpose of this Act by Government.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
When
Pregnancies
may be
terminated by
registered
medical
practitioners.
Place where
pregnancy
may be
terminated.

9
5. (1) The provisions of Section 4 and so much of the provisions of sub-section (2) of
Section 3 as relate to the length of the pregnancy and the opinion of not less than two
registered medical practitioner, shall not apply to the termination of a pregnancy by the
registered medical practitioner in case where he is of opinion, formed in good faith, that the
termination of such pregnancy is immediately necessary to save the life of the pregnant
woman.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), the
termination of a pregnancy by a person who is not a registered medical practitioner shall be
an offence punishable under that Code, and that Code shall, to this extent, stand modified.
6. (1) * * * *
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:
(a) the experience or training, or both, which a registered medical practitioner
shall have if he intends to terminate any pregnancy under this Act; and
(b) such other matters as are required to be or may be, provided by rules made
under this Act.
(3) * * * *
7. (1) The State Government may, be regulations,—
(a) require any such opinion as is referred to in sub-section (2) of Section 3 to
be certified by a registered medical practitioner or practitioners concerned in such
form and at such time as be specified in such regulations, and the preservation or
disposal of such certificates;
(b) require any registered medical practitioner, who terminates a pregnancy to
give intimation of such termination and such other information relating to the
termination as may be specified in such regulations;
(c) * * * *
(2) * * * *
(3) * * * *
8. No suit for other legal proceedings shall lie against any registered medical
practitioner for any damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith
done or intended to be done under this act.
Power to make
rules.
Power to make
regulations.
Protection of
action taken in
good faith.
Sections 3 and
4 when not to
apply.

EXTRACTS FROM THE RIGHT OF CHILDREN TO FREE AND COMPULSORY EDUCATION ACT, 2009
(ACT NO. 35 OF 2009)
THE SCHEDULE
(See sections 19 and 25)
NORMS AND STANDARDS FOR A SCHOOL
Sl. No. Item Norms and Standards
1.* * *  * * *
2. Building All-weather building consisting of—
(i) at least one class-room for every teacher
and an office-cum-store-cum-Head teacher's
room;
(ii) barrier-free access;
(iii) separate toilets for boys and girls;
(iv )*  *
10

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend certain enactments to emphasise on the agency of a woman in her
sexual and reproductive rights and to guarantee menstrual equity for
all women by the State.
————
(Dr. Shashi Tharoor, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—2271LS(S3)—21-12-2018.