1
THE SPECIAL DRINKING WATER AND IRRIGATION DEVELOPMENT
FUND (FOR DARK ZONE AREAS) BILL, 2019
By
SHRI DEVJI M. PATEL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Special Drinking Water and Irrigation Development
Fund for supply of drinking water and developing irrigation facilities in the dark
zone areas and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Special Drinking Water and Irrigation Development
Fund (for Dark Zone Areas) Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) 'dark zone area' means any district, town, village or tehsil where the
groundwater is lower than the average level and has been declared as the dark zone
area by the State Government concerned or the Central Government, as the case may
be;
Short title
and
commencement.
Bill No.  255 of  2019
Definitions.
5
10
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(b) 'Fund' means the Special Drinking Water and Irrigation Development Fund
constituted under section 3; and
(c) 'prescribed' means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Fund to be known as the Special
Drinking Water and Irrigation Development Fund for the supply of drinking water and
development of irrigation facilities in dark zone areas.
(2) The Central Government shall, from time to time, after due appropriation made
by Parliament by law in this behalf, contribute such sums of money, fund as may be
necessary, to carry out the purposes of this Act.
4. (1) A State Government or Union territory Administration, as the case may be,
shall forward to the Central Government the details of the required infrastructure and the
estimated cost for supply of drinking water and the development of irrigation projects in
the dark zone areas falling in their respective territories, in such form and manner, as may
be prescribed.
(2) The Central Government on receipt of such details, shall release Funds to the
State Government or the Union territory Administration, as the case may be, for the
development of drinking water and irrigation facilities in the dark zone areas in such
manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The funds provided under sub-section (2) shall be used for the following purposes
in dark zone areas:—
(i) expeditious completion of ongoing drinking water and irrigation projects;
(ii) construction of small ponds for the use of farmers and others;
(iii) digging wells and bore wells;
(iv) installing electric pumps for drinking water and irrigation facilities;
(v) promoting use of simple and cost-effective techniques and institutional
devices as may be prepared or put in place on the basis of local technical skill and
materials available for the conservation of water;
(vi) renovation of old ponds, wells and water reservoirs;
(vii) afforestation along the banks of ponds, canals and water reservoirs;
(viii) development of horticulture;
(ix) rainwater harvesting in schools, Government buildings and private
buildings;
(x) conservation of natural drainage;
(xi) development of meadows at the panchayat and village level;
(xii) construction of canals and check dams; and
(xiii) development of barren and desert land.
(4) In case any State Government or the Union territory Administration fails to utilise
the funds for the purposes it was released or fails to forward the details under sub-section
(1), the Central Government shall withhold release of funds to such State Government or
the Union territory Administration, as the case may be.
5. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
Special
Drinking
Water and
Irrigation
Development
Fund.
State
Government/
Union
territory
Administration
to send
details of the
infrastructure
and cost
required for
the
development
of drinking
water and
irrigation
facility in
dark zone
areas.
Powers to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
5

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
More than one third area of the country is riddled with geological water crisis. In
certain parts of India, particularly in north-west India, the groundwater level is declining
by four centimeter every year. These States include several areas of Rajasthan, Delhi,
Haryana, Punjab and western Uttar Pradesh. Out of total 5,723 blocks in the country as
many as 839 blocks have been pushed to the dark zone due to exploitation of groundwater.
The condition of 226 blocks is critical whereas 550 blocks is semi-critical. The States of
Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan, Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu are facing severe water
crisis. Even the States of Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, West Bengal, Gujarat and Kerala are
not exception to this. To look at it State-wise, in Tamil Nadu out of 385 blocks, 33 are in
critical zone while 57 blocks are in semi-critical zone. In the State of Andhra Pradesh, out of
219 blocks, as many as 77 and 175 are in critical and semi-critical zones, respectively. In the
State of Haryana, out of 113 blocks, 11 blocks are critical while 5 blocks are semi-critical.
The State of Punjab is the worst hit where critical zone accounts for 5 blocks and semi-
critical zone comprises 4 blocks out of 137 blocks. In the State of Rajasthan, water is not
worth harnessing out of 236 blocks, as 164 blocks have been pushed to the excessive
harnessing zone and 34 blocks have reached the critical stage. In the year 1984, the level of
groundwater in 203 blocks was not alarming but in the year 2015, the number of secured
blocks have come down to 30.
The increase in the spread of dark zone areas is largely attributed to excessive
harnessing of groundwater. It is expedient and necessary to tap maximum amount of
rainwater to tackle such horrific situation.
The water table is continuously declining and is reaching the alarming scale in dark
zone area. The State Governments are facing funds crunch to do the needful or even make
proper arrangements for drinking water in these areas.
Therefore, there is a need to constitute a Fund for rainwater harvesting, development
of irrigation facility and providing safe drinking water to persons residing in the dark zone
areas.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; DEVJI M. PATEL
November 6, 2019.

5
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of Special Drinking Water and
Irrigation Fund for providing requisite funds for making available potable water and water
for irrigation purposes in the dark zone areas. Clause 4 provides for the release of funds to
the State Governments for making available drinking water and developing of irrigation
projects in the dark zone areas. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve recurring  annual
expenditure of five thousand crore rupees from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about one thousand crore rupees is also likely to be
involved.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Special Drinking Water and Irrigation Development
Fund for supply of drinking water and developing irrigation facilities in the dark
zone areas and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Devji M. Patel, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—3091LS(S3)—14-11-2019.