1
THE STRAY COWS (PROTECTION AND CONTROL) BOARD
BILL, 2017
By
SHRI KUNWAR PUSHPENDRA SINGH CHANDEL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Board for the protection and control of stray cows in
the country and for matters connected therewith.
BE  it enacted by the Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) The Act may be called the Stray Cows (Protection and Control) Board Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government, may by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. 255 of  2017
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) "Anna Board" means Stray Cows Board constituted under section 3;
(b) "stray cow" means cow left unattended by the gau palak or farmers in
public places for fodder and water and includes its progeny, bulls and bullocks;
(c) "gau palak" means persons rearing cows;
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Stray Cow Board to be known as the Anna Board for the protection and control of stray
cows in the country.
(2) The Anna Board shall consist of a Chairperson and ten other members, including
one member each from the States of Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh having special
experience for conducting various schemes of cattle rearing, and five gau palaks engaged
in farming and rearing cows for the last five years.
(3) The headquarters of the Anna Board shall at Mahoba in the State of Uttar Pradesh.
(4) The Anna Board shall hold quarterly review meeting in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(5) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service
of Chairperson and members of the Anna Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. The Anna Board shall,—
(a) Conduct a survey once in every year for five years to assess the number of
stray cows in the country;
(b) establish a cow promotion centre (cow hostel) in every village for protection
of stray cows with the facility of proper cleaning, fodder, water breed improvement;
(c) make arrangements for the collection of cow urine, panchgavya products
and installation of gobar gas plants;
(d) establish breed improvement centre for Tharparkar, Gir, Sahiwal and
Gangatiri breed of cows;
(e) encourage fodder for urea exchange system among the farmers; and
(f) establish cow sanctuaries through water conservation, plantation and pasture
on the basis of public partnership by the Forest Department of the State Government
concerned on the open and vacant land.
5. The Central Government shall provide market for the sale of foodgrains produced
with less quantity of water from natural agricultural system which is free from poisonous
chemicals with the use of the cow urine and cow dung based manure system.
6. (1) The Central Government shall provide the following financial assistance to
every gau palak—
(a) rupees one thousand per month per cow for rearing cows for a period of one
year;
(b) for the establishment of flour mill, oil ghani, fodder cutting machine and
pump technique for extracting water based on bullok energy; and
(c) rupees twelve hundred per month as incentives to the farmers making use
of oxes and bullock cart.
Definitions.
Constitution
of the Anna
Board.
Functions of
the Anna
Board.
Central
Government
to provide
market for
foodgrains.
Financial
Assistance to
cow rearers.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
7. The Central Government shall award rupees five lakh as an incentive to the Gram
Panchayat which has made full control on stray cows under its jurisdiction.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite funds to the State Governments for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
9. The Central Government may give such directions to the State Governments as
may appear it to be necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
Incentive to
Gram
Panchayat
having control
over stray
cows.
Central
Government
to provide
requisite funds.
Central
Government
to give
directions to
the State
Governments.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The very basis of the economy of the country is agriculture and the only source of
income of farmers in case of its becoming unprofitable is animal husbandry. But due to
drought prevalent for the last several decades in the economically backward areas of the
country, particularly in Bundelkhand, it has been very difficult to provide water and fodder
for animals. As a result, farmers abandon herds of their cows, far from their home, to survive
on their own in the process of unburdening themselves. This is also known as the 'Anna
Pratha' in the Bundelkhand region. This is a pan-India problem. Stray animals do considerable
harm to standing crops which brings loss to farmers and the social harmony is adversely
affected too. The traditions like 'Anna Pratha' also encourages smuggling of stray animals.
Due to unavailability of fodder and water, some of these stray animals also die untimely.
Along with this, stray cows take to the roads or highways causing heavy traffic snarls or
leads to accidents. With the control over stray cows, not only the income of farmers will
increase but will also curb their migration. It will further control smuggling, reduce harm to
cows and number of accidents occurring on roads, and will also result in social harmony in
society.
The Bill seeks to overcome the problem of traditions like 'Anna Pratha' to check
smuggling of cows and problem of stray animals in particular the drought affected region
and overall welfare of cow and its progeny and to reduce the burden of farmers.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KUNWAR PUSHPENDRA SINGH CHANDEL
November 27, 2017.

5
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of the Anna Board for the protection and
control of stray cows in the country. It also provides for appointment of Chairperson and
ten other members to the Board. Clause 4 provides for establishment of cow promotion
centre, etc. Clause 5 provides that the Central Government shall provide a market for the
sale of  foodgrains produced with the use of cow urine and cow dung. Clause 6 provides for
financial assistance to the gau palaks. Clause 7 provides for incentive of rupees five lakh to
a Gram Panchayat having control over stray cows in its jurisdiction. Clause 8 provides that
the Central Government shall provide funds to the State Governments for the purposes of
the Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees
twenty thousand crore will be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Board for the protection and control of stray cows in
the country and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2806LS(S3)—20-12-2017.