1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
DR. UDIT RAJ, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2015.
2. In article 124 of the Constitution, in clause (1), the following proviso shall be added
at the end, namely:—
"Provided that one-third of such Judges shall be appointed from amongst persons
belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.".
3. In article 216 of the Constitution, the following proviso shall be added at the end,
namely:—
"Provided that one-third of such Judges shall be appointed from amongst persons
belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.".
Short title.
Bill No. 255 of  2015
Amendment
of article 124.
Amendment
of article 216.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes have been considered as the weakest
sections of the society for ages. They have been ill treated, insulted and ignored.
Many steps taken by the Government to improve their standard of living have shown
some results. Provisions have been made for reservation in their favour in Government jobs
and also in educational institutions. However, their representation is limited. Demands have
been made from several quarters for reservation in favour of the persons belonging to the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in judiciary also. As such, it is proposed to
amend the Constitution with a view to making provisions for reservation in favour of persons
belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the Supreme Court and in
High Courts.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; UDIT  RAJ
November 13, 2015.
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * *
124. (1) There shall be a Supreme Court of India consisting of a Chief Justice of India
and, until Parliament by law prescribes a larger number, of not more than seven other Judges.
* * * *
216. Every High Court shall consist of a Chief Justice and such other Judges as the
President may from time to time deem it necessary to appoint.
* * * *
3
Establishment
and
Constitution
of Supreme
Court
Constitution
of High Courts.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Dr. Udit Raj, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2815LS—01.12.2015.