1
THE HOMOEOPATHY CENTRAL COUNCIL
 (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
DR. KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI, M.P .
A
BILL
further to amend the Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Homoeopathy Central Council (Amendment) Act,
2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as  the Central  Government may, by  notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 255  of  2016
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In section 12A of the Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973 (hereinafter referred
to as the principal Act),—
(i) in sub-section ( 1),— (a) in clause ( b), after sub-clause ( ii), the following
sub-clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(iii) admit a new batch of students in any course of study or training
(including post-graduate course of study or training),”;
(b) after the long line and before Explanation.— I, the following proviso shall
be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that the previous permission to admit a new batch of students
under sub-clause (iii) may be obtained for a period of five years, subject to the
provisions of this Act.”; and
(ii) in sub-section ( 7), for clauses ( a) to ( c), the following clauses shall be
substituted, namely:—
“(a) whether the proposed medical institution or the existing medical
institution seeking to open a new or higher course of study or training (including
post-graduate course of study or training), or to increase its admission capacity
or to admit a new batch of students in any course of study or training (including
post-graduate course of study or training), is in a position to offer the minimum
standards of medical education as prescribed by the Central Council under
section 20;
(b) whether the person seeking to establish a medical institution or the
existing medical institution seeking to open a new or higher course of study or
training (including post-graduate course of study or training), or to increase its
admission capacity or to admit a new batch of students in any course of study
or training (including post-graduate course of study or training) has adequate
financial resources under this Act;
(c) whether necessary facilities in respect of staff, equipment,
accommodation, training, hospital and other facilities to ensure proper
functioning of the medical institution or conducting the new or higher course
of study or training (including post-graduate course of study or training), or
increasing the admission capacity or in admitting a new batch of students in
any course of study or training (including post-graduate course of study or
training) have been provided or would be provided within the time limit specified
in the scheme;”.
3. In section 12B of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(4) Where any medical institution admits a new batch of students in any course of
study or training (including post-graduate course of study or training) without the previous
permission of the Central Government in accordance with the provisions of section 12A,
the medical qualification granted to any student of such new batch shall not be deemed to
be a recognized medical qualification for the purposes of this Act.”.
Amendment of
section 12A.
59 of 1973
Amendment of
section 12B.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973 provides for constitution of the Central
Council of Homoeopathy for regulation of the educational standards of Homoeopathic
Medical Colleges, maintenance of the Central Register of practitioners of Homoeopathy
and for matters connected therewith.
The Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973 was amended in the year 2002 to check
growth of sub-standard colleges, increase in admission capacity and starting of new courses
in such colleges. The permission of  the Central Government is mandatory for establishing
new colleges or starting new courses of study. The existing provision in the Homoeopathy
Central Council Act is, however, not enabling the Central Government to stop admissions in
colleges, which are not conforming to standards specified in the regulations made under
the said Act. Due to this, quality of Homoeopathy education is being compromised.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973 with
a view to—
(a) make provision for obtaining prior permission of the Central Government by all
Homoeopathy Medical Colleges for admission of new batches of students in any course of
study or training (including post-graduate course of study or training); and
(b) provide that the aforesaid permission by the Central Government may be obtained
for a period of five years in one go;
The proposed amendment will ensure quality of Homoeopathy education leading to
better healthcare through Homoeopathy system of medicine.
The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objectives.
N
EW D ELHI; KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI
July 8,  2016.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE HOMOEOPATHY CENTRAL COUNCIL ACT, 1973
(NO. 59 OF 1973)
* * * * * * * * * *
12A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for the time
being in force,—
* * * * * * * * * *
(ii) increase its admission capacity in any course of study or training (including the
post-graduate course of study or training),
* * * * * * * * * *
(7) The Central Council, while making its recommendations under clause ( b) of
sub-section (3) and the Central Government, while pasing an order, either approving or
disapproving the scheme under sub-section (4), shall have due regard to the following
factors, namely:—
(a) whether the proposed medical institution or the existing medical institution seeking
to open a new or higher course of study or training, would be in a position to offer the
minimum standards of medical education as prescribed by the Central Council under
section 20;
(b) whether the person seeking to establish a medical institution or the existing medical
institution seeking to open a new or higher course of study or training or to increase its
admission capacity has adequate financial resources;
(c) whether necessary facilities in respect of staff, equipment, accommodation, training,
hospital and other facilities to ensure proper functioning of the medical institution or
conducting the new course of study or training or accommodation the increased admission
capacity have been provided or would be provided within the time-limit specified in the
scheme.
* * * * * * * * * *
4
Permission for
establishment
of new
medical
institution,
new course of
study etc.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973.
————
(Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2648LS(S3)—09.11.2016.