Short title and 
commencement.
Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Bill No. 255 of 2022
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
Sඁඋංආൺඍං Sඎඉඋංඒൺ Sඎඅൾ, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1950.
Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, 2022. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 

2. In section 23 of the Representation of the People Act, 1950,–
(i) after sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be inserted:–
“(5A) The collected Aadhaar data shall be discarded within three hours of its 
intended use and in case of violation or any leak of the Aadhaar data, the Election 
Commission shall be liable for it and may be sued for compensation:
Provided that the Electoral Registration Officer may ask the person to permanently 
link only his Aadhaar Biometric Data to his Election Photo Identity Card (EPIC) and 
in case of affirmation, shall update the same in Electoral Roll in such manner as may 
be prescribed:
Provided further that it shall be the duty of Election Commission to keep the 
collected data safe and it shall not be used for any other purposes or to be shared to any 
other authority or institution or private entity.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub-section “liability” means that if 
any Employee of Election Commission violates provision of this act, the Election 
Commission shall be the tortfeasor or defendant in the court of law, representing the 
accused and paying liability as such.’’. and, 
(ii) after sub-section (6), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:–
“(6A) (1). The Electoral Registration Officer shall record biometric data of 
fingerprint and iris scan for every new entry, application, replacement request and 
alteration request for the EPIC and issue a unique identification number in case of any 
new entry, replacement request or alteration request: 
Provided that the Electoral Registration Officer shall first check whether Biometric 
data of the new entrant, while applying for EPIC is already available in the electoral 
roll or not.
(2) The biometric identification data along with the original EPIC may be used at 
the election booth to prevent electoral fraud including preventing multiple or duplicate 
entry of a person in electoral roll by initiation of identification through biometric data.’’.
Amendment of 
section 23.
43 of 1950.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In December 2021, Parliament passed The Election Laws (Amendment) Bill to amend 
the Representation of the People Act, 1950 and the Representation of the People Act, 
1951 and to give powers to Electoral Registration Officer to ask Aadhaar number during 
registration of V oter ID or any further updating. The purpose is to authenticate the entries 
in electoral roll and to identify registration of name of the same person in the electoral roll 
of more than one constituency or more than once in the same constituency. However, the 
Act doesn’t mention how exactly Aadhaar number would be used for the purpose. Even 
though, the submission is voluntary and doesn’t attract deletion of the person’s name from 
electoral roll upon non-submission of Aadhaar number but linking Aadhaar ID with V oter 
ID seems unsettling. Aadhaar number which has the same meaning as assigned to it in 
‘clause (a) of section 2 of the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies, 
Benefits and Services) Act, 2016.’ contains vast information about the person. It is that 
Unique Identification number which an Indian resident use in almost every official and 
unofficial work ranging from applying for jobs and Government schemes to book a hotel 
room and even to get an entry in a premises.
Given its importance, arises a need for securing its data; but UIDAI has eventually 
failed in doing so. In 2018, nearly 1.1 billion registered Citizens Aadhaar data was breached 
and sold for 500 rupees by criminals for 10 minutes. In June 2022 around 11 crore Indian 
farmers’ Aadhaar data was leaked from Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samman Nidhi website. 
Given the vastness of information linked to one’s Aadhaar ID and its unsettling record of 
being leaked, it seems perturbing to link it to V oter ID. Moreover, the Act doesn’t mention 
the use of one’s Aadhaar if the person hadn’t provided his Aadhaar ID while registering 
for the Electoral roll in past. The Act should have envisaged to give V oter ID a Unique 
Identification itself so as to permanently give a person a single unique number throughout 
his life which would remain same even if he replace his V oter ID multiple times at multiple 
places. This Bill tends to do the same.
The Bill makes it mandatory for Electoral Registration Officer to delete Aadhaar data 
of the person within three hours of its use from the main server but may permanently save 
Aadhaar biometric data with V oter ID upon taking consent from the concerned person. The 
Bill also provided that biometric data shall be required for new registration of V oter ID, any 
alteration or replacement request and every subsequent movement related to the person’s 
V oter ID and shall be updated in the Electoral Roll in the main server. The Bill intends to 
stop multiple entries via use of biometric data. Let’s put it this way. As linking Aadhaar ID 
with V oter ID could pose a threat to Privacy, the entire data minus biometric one shall be 
deleted within three hours of use. That biometric data once stored in main server shall come 
in handy when the person go for second entry in electoral roll as every new entry request 
requires biometric data submission. The main server would notify the Electoral Registration 
Officer if that person is already enrolled in Electoral roll, with the use of Biometric data. 
This way, Aadhaar number could be used to identify multiple entries and its deletion within 
three hours would put Privacy issues at bay. Use of Biometric data would pave way for 
establishing permanent unique identification of the person for life.

The menace of multiple or duplicate entries in the Electoral roll put democratic structure 
of the country at risk. Conducting free and fair election in the largest Democracy of the 
world is a task that requires reformed and novel practices which doesn’t undermine citizens 
rights but strengthen them in the process.
Hence this Bill.
Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                                                                                   SUPRIYA SULE
November 21, 2022

ANNEXURE 
Eඑඍඋൺർඍඌ ൿඋඈආ ඍඁൾ Rൾඉඋൾඌൾඇඍൺඍංඈඇ ඈൿ ඍඁൾ Pൾඈඉඅൾ Aർඍ, 1950
(Aർඍ Nඈ. 43 ඈൿ 1950)
*   *   *   *
23. *  *  *  *  *
(5) Every person whose name is included in the electoral roll may intimate his Aadhaar 
number to such authority in such form and manner as may be prescribed, on or before a date 
to be notified by the Central Government in the Official Gazette.
(6) No application for inclusion of name in the electoral roll shall be denied and no 
entries in the electoral roll shall be deleted for inability of an individual to furnish or intimate 
Aadhaar number due to such sufficient cause as may be prescribed:
Provided that such individual may be allowed to furnish such other alternate documents 
as may be prescribed: 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the expression “Aadhaar number” shall 
have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause (a) of section 2 of the Aadhaar (Targeted 
Delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016.
*   *   *   *
Inclusion 
of names in 
electoral rolls.

LOK SABHA
__________
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1950
_________
(Shrimati Supriya Sule, M.P.)