Bill No. 256 of 2015
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI SHRIRANG APPA BARNE, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of People Act, 1951.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Representation of People (Amendment) Act, 2015. Short title.
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. After section 61A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, the following
section shall be inserted, namely:—
‘‘61B. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or the rules made
thereunder or  in any other law for the time being in force, the giving and recording of
votes through online voting in such manner as may be prescribed, may be adopted in
such constituency or constituencies or from any place as the Election Commission
may specify.’’.
5
Insertion of
new section
61B.
43 of 1951.
Online voting
of elections.

STATEMENT OF OBJECT AND REASONS
India is one of the largest democracy in the world. About 75 crore population are
participating in the election process. The election process of our country has been appreciated
by one and all throughout the world. It has been free, fair and transparent. Earlier people
used to record their votes in slips and put those slips in ballot boxes which were later
transported to the counting centre for counting. The counting process used to take about
two days. The Election Commission did very well to introduce electronic coting machine.
Now, people have to record their votes in the electronic voting machine and only a few
voting machines are required to be carried to the counting centre and counting is finished on
the same day it is taken up. With the introduction of electronic voting machine, the irregularities
in the voting process has decreased manifold.
Likewise, computers are used in large numbers for many activities like banking, making
payment, booking of tickets, etc. The computers can also be used for online voting which
would be beneficial in many ways. The voter need not go to polling booth and the percentage
of voting would definitely increase as people are scared to come out in open because of
possible violence on the polling day. The Election Commission can device a mechanism
through which votes can be given and recorded online by the voters.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.
N
EW DELHI; SHRIRANG  APPA  BARNE
November 16, 2015.
3

GMGIPMRND—2938LS(S3)—01.12.2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of People Act, 1951.
————
(Shri Shrirang Appa Barne, M.P.)