Short title
and extent.
THE FREE AND COMPULSORY PRIMARY , SECONDARY , HIGHER
AND TECHNICAL EDUCATION BILL, 2018
By
SHRI SHIV AJI ADHALRAO PATIL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for free and compulsory primary, secondary, higher and technical education to
every child in order to eradicate their illiteracy and overall development and for
deterrent punishment to those who prevent their children from going to school and
pursuing their studies in any manner and for matters connected therewith and
incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Free and Compulsory Primary, Secondary, Higher and
Technical Education Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
Bill No. 256 of  2018
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State, and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "child" means a male or a female who has attained the age of four years but
has not attained the age of twenty-five years;
(c) "higher and technical education" means education beyond senior secondary
level and includes education in the fields of law, theology, medicine, technology,
business, music or art;
(d) "parent" in relation to a child includes guardian and every person who has
the actual custody of the child for the time being;
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(f) "primary and secondary education" means education in a school from primary
to senior secondary level.
3. (1) Notwithstanding any custom, usage or belief of any section of the society, every
parent shall compulsorily admit his children in a school, on completion of four years of age
in order to enable them to get primary education and shall not restrain him in any manner from
attending the school.
(2) No person including a parent shall engage a child in any household job or employ
a child in a manner which prevents the child from attending the school and deprives him from
primary, secondary, higher and technical education.
(3) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) or (2) shall be guilty of an
offence under this Act.
4. (1) The appropriate Government shall provide free and compulsory primary,
secondary, higher and technical education to every child, who is ordinarily residing within
its territorial jurisdiction.
(2) The appropriate Government shall establish adequate number of schools within
its territorial jurisdiction including special schools for physically challenged children at
such places as it may deem necessary with such basic facilities, as may be prescribed.
(3) If any child intends to pursue higher studies beyond the primary and secondary
educational levels, the appropriate Government shall provide free higher and technical
education to such child with all such facilities, as may be prescribed.
(4) The appropriate Government shall provide the following facilities to every student
enrolled in primary to secondary schools and in higher and technical educational
institutions:—
(i) free books, note books and stationery items;
(ii) free school uniforms;
(iii) free hostel facilities and meals;
(iv) free vocational training wherever necessary;
(v) scholarships in such cases, as may be prescribed; and
(vi) free transportation service between institute and hostel.
5. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide necessary funds to the State Governments, from time to time, for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
6. (1) If any person including a parent for any reason whatsoever, prevents or restrains
or in any manner obstructs the child from receiving primary, secondary, higher or technical
eduation, such person shall be liable to simple imprisonment for a term which may extend
upto six months and also with a fine which may extend upto fifty thousand rupees.
Definitions.
Appropriate
Government
to provide
free and
compulsory
primary,
secondary,
higher and
technical
education to
every child.
Compulsory
admission of
children in
school and
prohibition on
their employ-
ment.
Central
Government
to provide
adequate
funds.
Penalty.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
2

(2) Whoever employs a child resulting in obstructing him from attending the school
for primary and secondary education shall be liable to imprisonment for a term which shall
not be less than two years but may extend upto five years and also with fine which may
extend upto one lakh rupees.
7.  Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, the
offences under this Act shall be cognizable.
8.  The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the  validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Offences to
be cognizable.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
2 of 1974.
3

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Article 21A of the Constitution provides that it is the responsibility of the State to
provide free and compulsory education to all children of age six to  fourteen years. Although,
Government has taken many steps in this regard but they are inadequate. We have not been
able to provide education to all children even after seventy-one years of independence.
The ability to read and write is an essential element of human capability. Literacy is the
first step towards acquiring tools of learning and opening the doors for knowledge and
information. Education expands opportunities for human beings, empowers them to resist
oppression and to claim their rights.
Our education system is very expensive and all citizens cannot afford it. The poor
parents with meagre incomes are unable to send their children to school for primary, secondary,
higher and technical education. Therefore, it is necessary to provide textbooks, scholarships,
hostel facilities, etc. to the poor students so that parents are encouraged to send their
children to school to pursue higher  studies thereafter. Therefore, it is necessary to provide
for free and compulsory education at all levels including primary, secondary, higher and
technical education with scholarships to meritorious students.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SHIVAJI  ADHALRAO  PATIL
November 28, 2018.

5
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for free and compulsory education to children by opening
adequate number of schools including special schools for physically challenged children.
Clause 5 provides that Central Government shall provide necessary funds to the State
Governments for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of
rupees one hundred crore will be involved as recurring expenditure per annum from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
A sum of rupees fifty crore will also be involved as non-recurring expenditure.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only. The delegation of
legislative power is of normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for free and compulsory primary, secondary, higher and technical education to
every child in order to eradicate illiteracy and overall development and for deterrent
punishment to those who prevent their children from going to school and pursuing
their studies in any manner and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Shivaji Adhalrao Patil, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2249LS(S3)—21-12-2018.