1
THE ANDHRA PRADESH REORGANISATION (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2016
By
SHRI Y. V.  SUBBA REDDY, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act,  2014, after Part X, the following new Part
and sections thereunder shall be inserted, namely:—
Bill No. 256 of  2016
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Insertion of
new Part XA.
6 of 2014. 5
Short title and
commencement.

2
"PART XA
SPECIAL CATEGORY STA TUS TO THE SUCCESSOR STATE OF ANDHRA PRADESH
94A. Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, the
successor State of Andhra Pradesh shall be deemed to have been conferred the status of
special category State from the date of commencement of this Act for a period of fifteen
years or till it becomes a revenue-surplus state, whichever is later:
Provided that the Central Government may, if it considers necessary, by order,
publish in the Official Gazette, extend the period of Special Category Status after the expiry
of the said period of fifteen years.
94B. The Successor State of Andhra Pradesh shall, by virtue of being a Special
Category State, be provided the normal central assistance, the additional central assistance
and the special central assistance according to the Gadgil Mukherjee formula and, in
particular, the following benefits as long as the State enjoys the Special Category Status
with regard to distribution of tax revenues and grants—
(i) concession in excise and customs duties as prescribed by the Union Ministry
of Finance to industries and units set up in the successor State of Andhra Pradesh on
or after the commencement of this Act;
(ii) concessions in income tax and corporate tax rates, as determined by the
Union Ministry of Finance;
(iii) forty per cent. subsidy shall be given on working capital to industries and
units which are set up to expand their industries and units in the successor State of
Andhra Pradesh on or after the commencement of this Act; and
(iv) forty per cent. concession to all existing industries and units set up on or
after the appointed day in electricity charges for fifteen years in the successor State
of Andhra Pradesh.
94C. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget management limit in respect of the successor State of
Andhra Pradesh shall be fixed at five per cent. of State Gross Domestic Product.".
Special
Category
Status to the
State of
Andhra
Pradesh.
Special
Central
Assistance
and other
concessions,
grants and
subsidies to
the State of
Andhra
Pradesh.
Fiscal
Responsibility
and Budget
management
limit to be
fixed at five
per cent. of
State Gross
Domestic
Product.
5
10
15
20
25

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
While considering the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, the then honourable
Prime Minister assured on the Floor of Rajya Sabha in no uncertain terms that once the State
is bifurcated, State of Andhra Pradesh would be accorded the Special Category Status for
five years. And, while speaking on the Bill, the present honourable Urban Development
Minister had demanded for extending the period further and declared that if they came to
power Special Category Status would be extended to ten years.
The Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act was passed in February, 2014 and on
1st March, 2014, the Union Cabinet had also approved Special Category Status for Andhra
Pradesh. It is already more than two years since assurance was given. But, so far, there is not
even a single move from the Union Government to confer Special Category Status on Andhra
Pradesh.
The Raghuram Rajan Committee Report on ‘Evolving a Composite Development Index
of States' points out three sets of factors that influence State's development needs and
performance—local environmental factors, institutional capacity and infrastructure. And,
notably, according to the National Development Council criteria for according Special Category
Status, 'economic and infrastructure backwardness and non-viable nature of finances' are
the two important factors for declaring any State as Special Category. Andhra Pradesh
qualifies both the criteria—it has no institutional capacity, it is backward in economic and
infrastructure and has low resource base and hence not in a position to mobilize resources
for its developmental needs.
Although Fourteenth Finance Commission did not make a distinction between Special
Category States and General Category States while determining the norms and
recommendations, it did take into account the cost disability and fiscal capacity of the
States. And, the Union Government has not abolished the distinction between Special
Category States and the General Category States. It is evident from the Report of the
14th Finance Commission that Andhra Pradesh would be the only State, other than Special
Category States, which would be with revenue-deficit at the end of the Fourteenth Finance
Commission period i.e., 2019-20, and, potentially, afterward, at a time when Bihar, Odisha,
Rajasthan and similar other backward States would be thriving with revenue surplus. So,
Andhra Pradesh will continue to be the most fiscally disadvantaged State in the country.
In view of the above, it is all the more necessary to confer Special Category Status on
Andhra Pradesh to provide a level-playing field to the State and help it in growing along with
others and be a part of the growth story of the country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; Y .V.  SUBBA REDDY
February  10, 2016.
PRESIDENT'S  RECOMMENDATION  UNDER  ARTICLES  117(1)  AND  117(3)
OF THE CONSTITUTION
[Copy of letter No. 16017/02/2016-SR dated 26 April, 2016 from Shri Haribhai
Parathibhai Chaudhary, Minister of State in the Ministry of Home Affairs, to Secretary
General,  Lok Sabha].
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Andhra Pradesh
Reorganisation (Amendment) Bill, 2016 (Insertion of new Part XA) by Shri Y .V . Subba Reddy,
M.P., has recommended under articles 117(1) and 274(1) for introduction and under article
117(3) of the Constitution for the consideration of the Bill in Lok Sabha.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to provide Special Category Status to the successor State of
Andhra Pradesh by providing certain concessions, subsidies and other assistance to the
successor State of Andhra Pradesh. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India for conferring special status to the successor State
of Andhra Pradesh. As the sums of money which will be given to the successor State of
Andhra Pradesh as concessions and subsidy by appropriation, by law, made by Parliament,
cannot be stated now it is not possible to give the estimate of recurrring expenditure which
would be involved out of the Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved out of the Consolidated Fund of
India.
4

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014.
————
(Shri Y.V . Subba Reddy, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2940LS(S3)—09.11.2016.