5
Short title and 
commencement.
As introduced in Lok Sabha
 
Bill No. 256 of 2022
THE ENERGY CONSERV ATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022 
By
Shri Gaura v Gogoi, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Energy Conservation Act, 2001
 B e it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
 1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Energy Conversation (Amendment) Act, 2022. 
  ( 2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
 2. In section 2 of the Energy Conservation Act, 2001 (hereinafter referred to as the 
principal Act),–– 
(i) after clause (d), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:–– 
(da) “carbon credit certificate” means the certificate issued by the Central 
Government or any agency authorised by it under section 14AA;’’; and
Amendment of 
section 2.
10
52 of 2001.

2
5
10
15
20
25
30
Amendment of 
section 13.
Amendment of 
section 14.
(db) “carbon credit trading scheme” means the scheme for reduction of carbon 
emissions notified by the Central Government under clause (w) of section 14;’’; 
(ii) after clause (q), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:–– 
“(qa) “registered entity” means any entity, including designated consumers, 
registered for carbon credit trading scheme specified under clause ( w) of  
section 14;’’; and
(iii) after clause (u), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:–– 
“(ua) “virtual digital asset” means virtual digital asset as defined in sub-section  
(47A) of section 2 of the Income-Tax Act, 1961.’’.
 3. In section 13 of the principal Act after clause ( t), the following clause shall be 
inserted, namely:—
“(ta) empanel technical experts, particularly Indian Citizens, to promote energy 
efficiency and carbon credit trading activities undertaken to meet the objectives of the 
Act;”.
 4. In section 14 of the principal Act,—
(i) after clause (e), the following clause shall be inserted:—
“(ea) direct Energy Intensive Industries to maintain minimum requirement of 
carbon credit certificates to buy carbon credit certificates, and specify the minimum 
requirement”;
(ii) after clause (v), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:––
“(w) specify the carbon credit trading scheme; 
(x) establish mechanism to monitor and prevent illegal activities, involving 
carbon credit certificate by converting it into virtual digital asset;
(y) establish mechanism to adjust the supply of carbon credit certificates to be 
auctioned in the market and maintain a reserve of carbon credit certificates for the 
said objective; and
(z) specify minimum share of consumption of non-fossil sources by designated 
consumers as energy or feedstock, provided different share of consumption may 
be specified for different types of non-fossil sources for different designated 
consumers;”.
 5. After section 14A of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely:—
“14AA. (1) The Central Government, or any agency authorised by it shall maintain 
a Registry of carbon credit certificates. 
(2) The Central Government or any agency authorised by it may issue carbon credit 
certificate to the registered entity which complies with the requirements of the carbon 
credit trading scheme and extinguish the carbon credit certificates from the registry 
upon redemption and update the records:
Provided that the Central Government shall limit the issuance of carbon credit 
certificates, year on year, thereby reducing its availability in the carbon market. 
(3) The Central Government shall facilitate real time tracking of transaction of 
carbon credit certificates between registered entities, carbon emission projection and 
details of carbon credit certificates possessed by the registered entities and maintain the 
same on public domain. 
Insertion of new 
section 14AA.
Carbon Credit 
Certificate.
35
40

3
(4) The Central Government shall also designate an agency under clause ( d) of 
section (15) to ensure that the details possessed by the registered entities under sub-
section (2) are not manipulated.
(5) The registered entity shall be entitled to purchase or sell the carbon credit 
certificate in accordance with carbon credit trading scheme specified under clause ( w) 
of section 14.”.
 6. For section 16 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, 
namely:–– 
“16. (1) There shall be constituted a Fund for the purposes of promotion of 
efficient use of energy and its conservation by the State Government to be called 
the State Energy Conservation Fund and there shall be credited thereto—
(a) all grants and loans that may be made by the State Government or the 
Central Government or any other organisation or individual for the purposes 
of this Act; 
(b) all fees received by the State Government or the designated agency under 
this Act; 
(c) all sums received by the State Government or the designated agency from 
such other sources as may be decided by the State Government. 
(2) The Fund shall be utilised for meeting the expenses–– 
(a) of the designated agency in the discharge of its functions; and
(b) for the objects and purposes authorised by or under this Act. 
(3) The Fund created under sub-section ( 1) shall be administered by such person 
or authority and in such manner as may be prescribed by the rules made by the State 
Government: 
Provided that the State Government may appoint an Auditor to ensure that the Fund 
is utilised for the intended purpose. ”.
 7. In section 18 of the principal Act, before the existing Explanation, the following 
proviso shall be inserted, namely:–– 
“Provided that the Central Government shall not impose complete ban on the 
export of the carbon credit certificates to the foreign countries, that may affect India’s 
commitments or obligations to any international agreement.”.
 8. In section 26, for sub-section ( 1A), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:—
“(1A) If any person fails to comply with the directions issued under clauses (n) and 
(z) of section 14, he shall be liable to a penalty which shall not exceed ten lakh rupees 
for each such failure:                  
Provided that he shall also be liable to an additional penalty which shall not be less 
than twice the price of every metric ton of oil equivalent or the price of every carbon 
credit certificate whichever is less prescribed under this Act, which is in excess of the 
prescribed norms.”.
Substitution of 
new section for 
section 16.
Establishment 
of Fund by State 
Government.
Amendment of 
section 18.
Amendment of 
section 26.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 The establishment of the carbon market in India is a need of the hour. Making sure 
that the market falls in line with the global market trend is also equally important. A carbon 
market with a strong framework and checks and balances will last long withstanding 
economic shocks such as price rise and inflation. Because, industries/companies (registered 
entities) may pass on any increase in their costs to their consumers, thereby affecting the 
general public. While introducing the carbon trading concepts in India, the equal focus must 
be given to emission reduction of pollutants as given to the promotion of the use of non-
fossil fuel sources. 
 Incorporating global best practices is another important aspect of introducing the carbon 
market to India. The Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative is the first cap-and-invest regional 
initiative implemented in the United States. The RGGI caps and reduces power sector CO2 
emissions by issuing CO2 allowances, projecting the RGGI cap in CO2 allowances. The EU 
Emissions Trading System (ETS) works on the principle of ‘cap-and-trade’ too. The emission 
reduction is achieved by putting a limit/cap on the total amount of certain greenhouse gases 
emitted by the entities each year, which is reduced over me. This Bill seeks to incorporate 
necessary checks and balances in the Act, thus preventing delegation of too much power to 
the ruling dispensation which is dangerous for any democracy.
 The Energy Conservation (Amendment) Bill, 2022, inter alia, seeks to— 
(a) empower the Central Government to prevent illegal activities involving carbon 
credit certification by converting it into virtual digital assets; 
(b) give preference to Indian companies to establish the carbon market and 
implement the rules regarding the same, in India; 
(c) maintain a buffer stock of carbon credit certificates in India, to manage any 
economic shock in future; 
(d) establish a registry of carbon credit certificates; 
(e) give more powers to State Governments to monitor the utilization of the State 
energy conservation fund for the intended purpose of the Act; 
(f) ensure the penalty for the violators of the law does not become lenient over the 
years. 
 The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objectives.
     New Delhi;                                  GAURA V GOGOI  
November 21, 2022.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
 Clause 6 of the Bill provides for constitution of the State Energy Conservation Fund. It 
also provides for crediting of grant and loans to the fund by the Central Government. The 
Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
A recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore is likely to be involved per annum from 
the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees five crore is also likely to be involved.

6
ANNEXURE
Extracts from the Energy Conserv ation Act, 2001 
(Act No. 52 of 2001)
 *                         *                          *                         *                         *                        *
 16. ( 1) The State Government shall constitute a Fund to be called the State Energy 
Conservation Fund for the purposes of promotion of efficient use of energy and its 
conservation within the State.
  ( 2) To the Fund shall be credited all grants and loans that may be made by the State 
Government or, Central Government or any other organisation or individual for the purposes 
of this Act.
  ( 3) The Fund shall be applied for meeting the expenses incurred for implementing 
the provisions of this Act. 
  ( 4) The Fund created under sub-section (1) shall be administered by such persons or 
any authority and in such manner as may be specified in the rules made by the State Government. 
 
 *                         *                          *                         *                         *                        *
 18. The Central Government or the State Government may, in the exercise of its 
powers and performance of its functions under this Act and for efficient use of energy and 
its conservation, issue such directions in writing as it deems fit for the purposes of this Act 
to any person, officer, authority or any designated consumer and such person, officer or 
authority or any designated consumer shall be bound to comply with such directions. 
Explanation.— For the avoidance of doubts, it is hereby declared that the power to issue 
directions under this section includes the power to direct— 
(a) regulation of norms for process and energy consumption standards in any 
industry or building or building complex; or 
(b) regulation of the energy consumption standards for equipment and appliances.
 *                         *                          *                         *                         *                        *
 26. (1) *                       *                      *                       *                       *                   *
(1A) If any person fails to comply with the provisions of clause ( n) of  
section 14, he shall be liable to a penalty which shall not exceed ten lakh rupees 
and, in the case of continuing failure, with an additional penalty which shall not be 
less than the price of every metric ton of oil equivalent of energy, prescribed under 
this Act, that is in excess of the prescribed norms. 
  ( 2) Any amount payable under this section, if not paid, may be recovered as if it 
were an arrear of land revenue.
 *                         *                          *                         *                         *                        *
Establishment 
of Fund by State 
Government.
Power of 
Central 
Government 
or State 
Government to 
issue directions.
Penalty.

LOK SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Energy Conservation Act, 2001
(Shri Gaurav Gogoi, M.P.) 