Short title, extent 
and 
commencement.
Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
 Bill No 257 of 2022
THE ADVOCATES (PROTECTION) BILL, 2022
By
Sඁඋං N.K. Pඋൾආൺർඁൺඇൽඋൺඇ, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for prevention of violence against Advocates and protection
of Advocates, their institutions, properties and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
Bൾ  it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Advocates (Protection) Act, 2022.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Offic Gazette, appoint.

 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,– 
(a) “advocate” shall have the same meaning as provided under Section 2 (1) (a) of 
the Advocates Act, 1961;
(b) “institution” means all institutions discharging of legal services;
(c) “offender” means a person who either by himself or as a member or 
leader of group of persons commits or attempt to commit, abate, provoke or incite the 
commission of violence under this Act;
(d) “property” means any property movable or immovable, owned by or in 
possession of or under the control of any advocate or institution for discharging his 
service or duty as an advocate; and
(e) “violence” means an act which causes any harm, injury or endanger of life 
or intimidation, obstruction or harassment or coercion or assault or criminal force or 
threat to advocate in discharge of his service or duties or causes to be the reason for 
damage or loss to the property or reputation of an advocate or an institution.
3. Whoever commits violence against an advocate shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for two years or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to five years and shall also be liable to fine:
Provided that if offender fails to pay the compensation and medical expenditure im-
posed the same shall be recovered as if it were arrears of land revenue.
4. In addition to the punishment specified in Section 3, the offender shall be 
liable to pay compensation for damage or loss caused to the property of an advocate 
as may be determined by the Court and he shall also be liable to reimburse medical 
expenditure incurred by the advocate.
5. An offence committed under this Act shall be cognizable, non-bailable and 
triable by the Court of Sessions.
6. Notwithstanding anything contained in Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 the Police 
Officer not below the rank of Superintendent of Police shall investigate any offence under 
this Act.
7. Any advocate appearing for a party before the court or tribunal or authority 
including police shall be deemed to be an officer of such institution and entitled for protection 
available to such officers as public servant.
8. The provision of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of provisions 
of any other law for the time being in force
9. The provisions of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  shall apply to the 
proceedings as per the provisions of this Act.
10. (1) The Central Government shall, after taking consent of the Bar Council of India, 
by notification in Official Gazette, make rules for the purpose of this Act.
Deﬁnitions.
Punishment for 
committing 
violence againﬆ 
advocates.
Compensation 
for damages 
caused.
Oﬀence to be 
non-bailable.
Jurisdiction.
Power to make 
rules.
25 of 1961.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.

(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule 
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of 
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Eighth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of 
Offenders in Havana, Cuba, 1990 in which India was a participant has adopted the basic 
principles on the role of Lawyers. Clause 16 to 18 of the same guarantees for the functioning 
of Lawyer. 
The Supreme Court of India also observed that the bar is an extension of system of 
justice, an Advocate is an officer of Court. The recent  incidents  of  assault,  criminal  force,  
intimidation  and threats caused to Advocates while discharging their professional duties 
is also grave in nature. Advocates in due discharge of their professional duties also face 
the threat of malicious and frivolous prosecution by the rival parties including Police and 
other  authorities. The United Nations Human Rights Council on  Independence of Judges 
and Lawyers –A/HRC/RES/29/6 wherein, while acknowledging the fact that the principle of 
confidentiality in lawyers’ communication with clients is violated, and they are denied free 
access  to their clients and documents it was decided as follows:
“Calls upon all States to guarantee the independence of lawyers who promote and 
defend human rights. Provide assistance to human rights defenders, journalists and 
activists and their ability to perform  their functions accordingly, including by taking 
effective legislative, law enforcement and other appropriate measures that will enable 
them to carry out their professional functions without interference, harassment, threats or 
intimidation of any kind”.
The aforesaid United  Nations  Resolutions,  Supreme  Court  Judgments  and the recent 
incidents necessitated a legislation for the protection of advocates in the country.
The Bill therefore seeks to provide for the prevention of violence against the Advocates, 
their institutions and property.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                                                                                  N.K. PREMACHANDRAN
November 21, 2022.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of this Bill.  As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of 
legislative powers is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to provide for prevention of violence against Advocates and protection of Advocates, 
their institutions, properties and for matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto.
_______ 
(Shri N.K. Premachandran, M.P .) 