1
Short title.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
MS. SUSHMITA DEV, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2017.
2. In article 32 of the Constitution, for the words "Supreme Court" wherever they
occur, the words "Supreme Court in Delhi" shall be substituted.
3. In article 124 of the Constitution, for clause ( 1), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:
"(1) There shall be a Supreme Court of India consisting of a Chief Justice of
India and, until Parliament by law prescribes a larger number, of not more than thirty
judges in Delhi and of not more than five judges in Kolkata, Mumbai and Chennai.".
Bill No. 257 of  2017
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Amendment
of article 32.
Amendment
of article
124.
5
10

Substitution
of new
articles for
article 130.
4. For article 130 of the Constitution, the following articles be substituted, namely:—
"130. The Supreme Court shall sit in Delhi with Cassation Benches in Kolkata,
Mumbai and Chennai or in such other place or places, as the Chief Justice of India
may, with the approval of the President, from time to time, appoint.
130A. (1) The Supreme Court in Delhi shall exercise jurisdiction over matters
specified in articles 131, 132, 133 and 134.
(2) The Cassation Benches in Kolkata, Mumbai and Chennai shall exercise
jurisdiction over matters specified in articles 133 and 134.
(3) The Chief Justice of India shall determine the territorial jurisdiction of the
Cassation Benches in Kolkata, Mumbai and Chennai.
6. In article 133 of the Constitution,—
(a) in clause (1), for the words "Supreme Court" at both the places, the words
"Supreme Court and Cassation Benches" shall be substituted;
(b) in clause (2), for the  words "Supreme Court", the words "Supreme Court in
Delhi" shall be substituted; and
(c) in clause 3, for the words "Supreme Court" the words "Supreme Court and
Cassation Benches" shall be substituted.
7. In article 134 of the Constitution, for the words "Supreme Court" wherever they
occur, the words "Supreme Court and Cassation Benches" shall be substituted.
8. In article 134A of the Constitution, in the marginal heading, for the words, "Supreme
Court" the words "Supreme Court and Cassation Benches" shall be substituted.
Jurisdiction of
Supreme
Court in Delhi
and Cassation
Benches in
Kolkata,
Mumbai and
Chennai.
Seat of
Supreme
Court.
Amendment
of article 134.
Amendment
of article 133.
Amendment
of article
134A.
5
10
15
20
2

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The appellants are already burdened and are further shunned to face the ordeal of
having to travel thousands of kilometers to the seat of the Supreme Court in Delhi for their
trial and the consequent follow up of their cases. The costs borne by these appellants for
access to justice also increase drastically in having to approach Delhi. This financial burden
acts a deterrent for appellants to access this highest court of appeal. Their right to appeal is
inherent in the judicial system of India and must not be constrained and be reduced to an
illusory right.
The Indian Judicial System currently suffers from a heavy backlog at the moment, and
the creation of these Benches will help reduce the backlog and will also help increase the
efficacy of the Bench in Delhi. The plight of persons awaiting trial needs to be understood
and addressed. It is not just the wastage of time, but also an increased financial burden that
has to be borne by all parties involved.
Article 130 of the Constitution of India envisages that the Supreme Court shall sit in
Delhi or in such other place or places as the Chief Justice of India may with the approval of
the President from time to time appoint. The language of the article clearly indicates that
there was an intention of the Constituent Assembly to have more than one seat of the
Supreme Court.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Constitution with a view to establish Cassation
Benches of Supreme Court in Kolkata, Mumbai and Chennai.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SUSHMITA  DEV
November 28, 2017

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for establishment of Cassation Benches of Supreme Court
in Kolkata, Mumbai and Chennai. Clause 3 provides for the appointment of not more than
five judges in the Cassation Benches of Supreme Court in Kolkata, Mumbai and Chennai.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the consolidated Fund of India
in implementing the provisions of the Bill. It is likely to involve an annual recurring expenditure
of about rupees one thousand core from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees five hundred crore in likely to be
involved.
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
32. (1) The right to move the Supreme Court by appropriate proceedings for the
enforcement of the rights conferred by this Part is guaranteed.
(2) The Supreme Court shall have power to issue directions or orders or writs, including
writs in the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto and certiorari,
whichever may be appropriate, for the enforcement of any of the rights conferred by this
Part.
(3) Without prejudice to the powers conferred on the Supreme Court by clauses (1)
and (2), Parliament may by law empower any other court to exercise within the local limits of
its jurisdiction all or any of the powers exercisable by the Supreme Court under clause (2).
(4) The right guaranteed by this article shall not be suspended except as otherwise
provided for by this Constitution.
124. (1) There shall be a Supreme Court of India consisting of a Chief Justice of India
and , until Parliament by law prescribes a larger number, of not more than seven 2 other
Judges.
130. The Supreme Court shall sit in Delhi or in such other place or places, as the Chief
Justice of India may, with the approval of the President, from time to time, appoint.
133. (1) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court from any judgement, decree or final
order in a civil proceeding of a High Court in the territory of India if the High Court certifies
under article 134A—
(a) that the case involves a substantial question of law of general importance;
and
(b) that in the opinion of the High Court the said question needs to be decided
by the Supreme Court.]
(2) Notwithstanding anything in article 132, any party appealing to the Supreme Court
under clause (1) may urge as one of the grounds in such appeal that a substantial question
of law as to the interpretation of this Constitution has been wrongly decided.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in this article, no appeal shall, unless Parliament by law
otherwise provides, lie to the Supreme Court from the judgement, decree or final order of one
Judge of a High Court.
134. (1) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court from any judgment, final order or
sentence in a criminal proceeding of a High Court in the territory of India if the High Court—
(a) has on appeal reversed an order of acquittal of an accused person and
sentenced him to death; or
(b) has withdrawn for trial before itself any case from any court subordinate to
its authority and has in such trial convicted the accused person and sentenced him to
death; or
(c) certifies under article 134A that the case is a fit one for appeal to the Supreme
Court:
Remedies for
enforcement
of rights
conferred by
this Part.
Establishment
and
constitution
of Supreme
Court.
Seat of
Supreme
Court.
Appellate
jurisdiction of
Supreme
Court in
appeals from
High Courts
in regard to
civil matters.
Appellate
jurisdiction of
Supreme
Court in
regard to
criminal
matters.
5

6
Provided that an appeal under sub-clause ( c) shall lie subject to such provisions as
may be made in that behalf under clause (1) of article 145 and to such conditions as the High
Court may establish or require.
(2) Parliament may by law confer on the Supreme Court any further powers to entertain
and hear appeals from any judgment, final order or sentence in a criminal proceeding of a
High Court in the territory of India subject to such conditions and limitations as may be
specified in such law.
134A. Every High Court, passing or making a judgment, decree, final order, or sentence,
referred to in clause (1) of article 132 or clause (1) of article 133, or clause (1) of article 134,—
(a) may, if it deems fit so to do, on its own motion; and
(b) shall, if an oral application is made, by or on behalf of the party aggrieved,
immediately after the passing or making of such judgment, decree, final order or sentence,
determine, as soon as may be after such passing or making, the question whether a
certificate of the nature referred to in clause (1) of article 132, or clause (1) of article 133
or, as the case may be, sub-clause (c) of clause ( 1) of article 134, may be given in
respect of that case.]
Certificate
for appeal to
the Supreme
Court.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India
————
(Ms. Sushmita Dev, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2680LS(S3)—20-12-2017.