Amendment
of article 72.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
By
SHRI KRUPAL TUMANE,  M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2019.
2. In article 72 of the Constitution, after clause (3), the following clause shall be added,
namely:—
"(4) Nothing in this article shall apply to the punishment or sentence of any person
convicted of—
(i) waging, or attempting to wage war, or abetting waging of war against the
Government of India; or
(ii) conspiracy to wage war against the Government of India by means of criminal
force or show of criminal force within or outside India; or
(iii) collecting arms with intention of waging war against the Government of
India; or
(iv) concealing the existence of a design to wage war or facilitating the waging of
such war against the Government of India.".
Bill No. 257 of 2019
Short title.
5
10
15
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Article 72 of the Constitution empowers the President of India to grant pardon, etc.,
and to suspend, remit or commute sentence in certain cases.
However, cases like attack on Parliament House in the year 2001 and later attack on
Mumbai known as 26/11 attack in the year 2008 have been held as acts of waging war against
India by the Supreme Court. Afzal Guru, the convict in the case of attack on Parliament made
a clemency petition to the President. Ajmal Kasab, the accused of Mumbai attack, also made
a clemency petition to the President.
The acts of violence perpetuated by the above accused amount to waging war against
India and, therefore, should not be considered on par with other offences. The feeling of
law-abiding citizens of India is that the sentence be executed immediately and such convicts
should not be given the benefit of exceptional provision in the Constitution of India.
Therefore, the provision of President's discretion of pardoning or suspending the
sentence pronounced by the Supreme Court of India should not be available to persons
convicted of offence like waging of war against Government of India.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KRUPAL TUMANE
October 26, 2019

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * *
PART V
THE UNION
CHAPTER 1.—THE EXECUTIVE
The President and Vice-President
* * * *
72. (1) The President shall have the power to grant pardons, reprieves, respites or
remissions of punishment or to suspend, remit or commute the sentence of any person
convicted of any offence—
(a) in all cases where the punishment or sentence is by a Court Martial;
(b) in all cases where the punishment or sentence is for an offence against any law
relating to a matter to which the executive power of the Union extends;
(c) in all cases where the sentence is a sentence of death.
(2) Nothing in sub-clause (a) of clause (1) shall affect the power conferred by law on
any officer of the Armed Forces of the Union to suspend, remit or commute a sentence
passed by a Court Martial.
(3) Nothing in sub-clause (c) of clause (1) shall affect the power to suspend, remit or
commute a sentence of death exercisable by the Governor of a State under any law for the
time being in force.
* * * *
Power of
President to
grant pardons,
etc., and to
suspend, remit
or commute
sentences in
certain cases.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Krupal Tumane, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—3023LS(S3)—14-11-2019.