1
THE COMPULSORY TEACHING OF KNOWLEDGE
TRADITIONS AND PRACTICES OF INDIA IN
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS
BILL,  2018
By
SHRI PARVESH SAHIB SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory teaching of Knowledge Traditions and Practices of India as a
co-curricular subject from classes VII to X in school education in India in order to
enable students to know and understand India's glorious culture and traditions
and foster, strengthen and maintain Indian Culture and its civilizational
strength and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth year of  the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Teaching of Knowledge Traditions and
Practices of India in Educational Institutions Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill  No. 258 of  2018
Short title and
commencement.
AS  INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "Committee" means the Committee on Cultural Education constituted under
section 4;
(c) "conventional methods" means regular mode of teaching with help of textbook
and written examination;
(d) "educational institution" means an institution imparting primary, middle,
secondary or higher secondary level education to children by whatever name such
institution is called, but does not include a minority educational institution;
(e) "innovative methods" mean audio visuals, story-telling, poetry, skit and
drama, debates, discussions, field visits, project work and similar kind of activities;
(f) "internal assessment" means assessment and examination of student's
progress by internal staff of the school;
(g) "Knowledge Traditions and Practices of India" means the subject of
Knowledge Traditions and Practices of India taught as an optional subject in Classes
XI and XII in schools under the Central Board of Secondary Education;
(h) "practical assessment" means assessing through project works, assignments,
group discussions or any kind of relevant method other than written examination; and
(i) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) From such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, specify, the Knowledge Traditions and Practices of India shall be taught from Classes
VII to X as a part of their curriculum in all educational institutions affiliated to the Central
Board of Secondary Education.
(2) The curriculum and examination of compulsory teaching of Knowledge Traditions
and Practices of India shall differ from conventional methods of teaching followed for other
subjects.
(3) The compulsory teaching of Knowledge Traditions and Practices of India shall be
taught completely in a student friendly and with innovative and practical methods.
(4) There shall be no written examination for the Knowledge Traditions and Practices
of India and the progress of a student shall be measured through practical assessment
modes only.
(5) For Secondary School Certificate Examination (SSC) marks for the Knowledge
Traditions and Practices of India shall be awarded through internal assessment.
(6) For Classes XI and XII, the subject of Knowledge Traditions and Practices of India
shall continue to be offered as an optional subject for students of all streams in educational
institution affiliated with Central Board of Secondary Education in India.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Committee to be known as the Committee on Cultural Education for the purpose of
reviewing and re-framing a larger curriculum for the existing subject Knowledge Traditions
and Practices of India.
(2) The Committee shall review and include new activities in the syllabus of the subject
based on its existing theme.
(3) The Committee shall function under the purview of Ministry of Human Resource
Development, Government of India.
Definitions.
Compulsory
teaching of
Knowledge
Traditions and
Practices of
India.
Constitution
of Committee
on Cultural
Education.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(4) The Committee shall consist of—
(a) a Chairperson to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner
as may be prescribed;
(b) Secretary, Union Ministry of Human Resource Development—member-
Secretary;
(c) Secretary, Union Ministry of Culture—member, ex-officio;
(d) one member representing each of the following institutions, namely:—
(i) National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT);
(ii) Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE);
(iii) National Council for Teacher Education (NCTE);
(iv) Archaeological Survey of India;
(v) Indian Council for Cultural Relations;
(vi) Centre for Cultural Resources and Training;
(vii) Indira Gandhi National Centre for Arts;
(viii) Indian National Trust for Arts and Cultural Heritage;
(ix) National Mission for Manuscripts; and
(x) Sahitya Akademi;
(e) three eminent scholars having extensive teaching or research experience
in the fields such as Ancient History, Indian Philosophy and Subaltern Studies to be
appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed;
(f) four renowned artists having experience of not less than twenty years in the
field of performing arts such as Indian Dance, Indian Music, Indian Theatre and
Indian Painting to the appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may
be prescribed; and
(g) one eminent person having knowledge and practical experience in the field
of psychology, pedagogy and teaching aptitude to be appointed by the Central
Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(5) The Committee shall submit its report to the Union Ministry of Human Resource
Development, Government of India within one year from the date of its constitution.
(6) The Committee shall meet at least for five times in a year.
(7) The Committee shall meet at such time and places and shall observe such rules of
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings as may be prescribed.
5. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the provisions of this Act shall
apply to minority institutions only if the management of such institutions convey to the
appropriate Government their willingness to include the teaching of environmental education
text books in their school curriculum.
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the Committee on Cultural Education for carrying
out the purposes of this Act.
7. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
Application of
Act on
minority
educational
institutions in
certain
situations.
Central
Government
to provide
fund.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
8. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions afore-
said, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that
the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form
or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to
make rules.
Power to
remove
difficutly.
5
10
15

5
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Indian culture and traditions have been the core intellectual strength of India since
ages. The diversity and depth of our culture and knowledge traditions is established to be
the richest in the world. When Indian Culture has influenced and gained attention of scholars
from across the world since ages, it is important for own children to know and understand
how magnificent and glorious our knowledge traditions and cultural practices have been
since ancient times. Although a glimpse of that is provided in the subjects of social sciences,
it is not sufficient for them to understand such a humongous culture and knowledge system.
There needs to be a stand-alone study involving historical, sociological, anthropological,
psychological, philosophical and analytical approaches for understanding our culture,
traditions and knowledge systems.
The Central Board of Secondary Education had introduced an elective subject
"Knowledge Traditions and Practices of India" for Classes XI and XII in the year 2002. The
subject received an overwhelming response from educationist and teaching community all
over the country. The subject aims for the student to understand intellectual achievements
of Indian culture and knowledge traditions in ancient India. They can be found in several
fields of study ranging from scriptual, philosophical, scientific, technical, artistic and religious
sources. It also aims to highlight the multiplicity of thoughts, languages, lifestyles and
scientific, artistic and philosophical perceptions in India. The rich classical literacy sources
of India are repositories of  much of ancient wisdom and large stock of collective folklore
imagination.
The need is to extend the subject "Knowledge Traditions and Practices of India" for
Classes VII to X which is currently offered as an optional subject for Classes XI and XII by
Central Board of Secondary Education. This subject shall be taught in classes VII to X in
schools affiliated to Central Board of Secondary Education in India. The curriculum and
teaching methods for this subject friendly, innovative and practical methods such as audio
visuals, story-telling, poetry, skit and drama, debates, discussions, field visits, project works
or any kind of such activities. There will be no written examination for this subject and the
progress of a student will be measured through Practical Assessment methods. For Secondary
School Certificate Examination (SSC), marks shall be awarded through Internal Assessment.
For Classes XI and XII, this subject shall continue to be offered as an optional subject for
students of all streams in schools affiliated to Central Board of Secondary Education in India.
The need is also to constitute a high level committee for the purpose of reviewing and
reframing the curriculum for the existing subject "Knowledge Traditions and Practices". The
Committee shall include members from wide backgrounds having relevant knowledge and
experience with regard to Indian Culture and Knowledge Traditions. The syllabus of the
subject shall be enlarged based on the existing theme of the subject.
Efforts are required to make the subject fun-loving, interesting and yet productive. It
intends to shape the curriculum for this subject in such a manner that it does not add any
kind of burden on students. It seeks to empower students by giving them realization of how
great, diverse and magnanimous our culture is. Even in practical terms the multi-disciplinary
nature of this subject offers a bed-rock foundation for students to excel in any field that they
choose for their professional careers. Moreover, it exposes students to  India's such a rich
and diverse field of performing arts, handicrafts, temperature and much more which can
further widen their career options.

6
The comprehensive approach of the proposed Bill is to make students learn, know and
understand our Culture and knowledge traditions so that we can foster, strengthen and
maintain the richness and pride of Indian Culture. This will foster cultural affinity among our
citizens and also help India remain a strong cultural force in the world.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI;  PARVESH SAHIB SINGH
November 27, 2018.

7
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for constitution of Committee on Cultural Education for
the purpose of reviewing and re-framing a larger curriculum for the existing subject Knowledge
Traditions and Practices of India. It also provides for appointment of a Chairperson, eminent
scholars, renowned artists and eminent persons in the Committee. Clause 6 provides for
payment of adequate funds to the States for carrying out the purpose of the Act. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
estimated that a recurring expediture of about rupees one hundred crore will be involved per
annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved.

8
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

9
LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
 to provide for compulsory teaching of Knowledge Traditions and Practices of India as a
co-curricular subject from classes VII to X in school education in India in order to
enable students to know and understand India's glorious culture and traditions
and foster, strengthen and maintain Indian Culture and its civilizational
strength and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—2192LS(S3)—24-12-2018.