AS ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Short title and 
commencement.
5
Bill No. 258 of 2024
THE CHIEF ELECTION COMMISSIONER AND OTHER 
ELECTION COMMISSIONERS (APPOINTMENT, 
CONDITIONS OF SERVICE AND TERM 
OF OFFICE) AMENDMENT BILL, 2024
By
SHRI VISHALDADA PRAKASHBAPU PATIL, M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners 
(Appointment, conditions of service and term of office) Act, 2023.
Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Chief Election Commissioner and other Election 
Commissioners (Appointment, Conditions of Service and Term of Office) Amendment Act, 
2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. Section 5 of the Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners 
Appointment, conditions of service and term of office Act, 2023, hereinafter referred to as 
the principal Act, shall be omitted.
Omission of 
section 5.
49 of 2023 10

2
3. For section 6 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 
“(1) The Selection Committee shall for the purposes of selecting the Chief Election 
Commissioner or Election Commissioners and for preparing a panel of persons to 
be considered for appointment as such, constitute a Search Committee consisting 
of at least five persons of standing and having special knowledge and expertise 
in the matters relating to public administration, vigilance, policy making, law 
and election management or in any other matter which, in the opinion of the 
Selection Committee, may be useful in making the selection of the Chief Election 
Commissioner and the Election Commissioners:
Provided that not less than two members of the Search Committee shall be from 
amongst the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes or 
the Other Backward Classes or Minorities or Women.
(2) The term of the Search Committee referred to in sub-section (1), the payment 
and allowances payable to its members and the manner of selection of the panel of 
names shall be such as may be prescribed by the Selection Committee.”.
4. In section 7 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall 
be substituted, namely: — 
“(1) The Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners shall be 
appointed by the President on the recommendation of a Selection Committee consisting 
of—
(a) the Prime Minister—Chairperson;
(b) the Leader of Opposition in the House of the People—Member;
(c) a Union Cabinet Minister to be nominated by the Prime Minister—Member;
(d) the Leader of Opposition in the Council of States—Member;
(e)  the Chief Justice of India or any Judge of the Supreme Court of India to be 
nominated by him —Member”
Explanation.—For the purposes of removal of doubts, “the Leader of the Opposition 
in the House of the People” or “the Leader of the Opposition in the Council of 
States” shall, when no such leader has been so recognized, mean the Leader of the 
single largest opposition party in the House of the People or the Council of States, 
as the case may be.”.
Search 
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
Amendment of 
section 7.
Substitution of 
new section for 
section 6.

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 Article 324 of our constitution envisages the Election Commission of India (ECI) 
to be an independent constitutional body, vested with the superintendence, direction and 
control of the preparation of electoral rolls for, and the conduct of, all elections to Parliament 
and to the Legislature of every State and of elections to the offices of President and Vice-
President of India in the Election Commission. The Supreme Court of India has in various 
landmark cases underlined that free and fair elections to be part of the basic structure of 
our constitution. In the Constituent Assembly debates,  Dr. B.R. Ambedkar pointed out 
that the election machinery should be out of the control of the Government. Members of 
the Constituent Assembly agreed to leave the appointment mechanism of the ECI to the 
discretion of Parliament. With the unfolding of democratic processes in Independent India, 
several reforms were perceived to improve the working of the Election Commission of 
India. To this extent, the Goswami Committee, the National Commission on the Review of 
the Working of the Constitution, the Law Commission as well as reforms from the Election 
Commission have been proposed. In 1991, Parliament passed the Election Commission 
(Conditions of Service of Election Commissioners and Transaction of Business) Act. The 
Act set the salary of the Chief Election Commissioner (CEC) and Election Commissioners 
(ECs) at the same level as a Supreme Court judge. It did not provide for their appointment 
process, which continued to be decided by the President. In Anoop Baranwal vs. Union of 
India case during March 2023,  the Supreme Court declared that CEC and ECs’ appointment 
should be independent of Executive control and not done solely by the Executive. It 
mandated a selection process, which would hold until Parliament makes a law. The Court 
directed that the appointment should be done by the President on the recommendation of a 
Selection Committee. The Selection Committee will consist of: (i) the Prime Minister, (ii) the 
Leader of Opposition in Lok Sabha, and (iii) the Chief Justice of India. The Chief Election 
Commissioner and Other Election Commissioners (Appointment, Conditions of Service and 
Term of Office) Bill, 2023, was introduced in Rajya Sabha on August 10, 2023 and assented 
on December 28, 2023. It repeals the 1991 Act and provides for the appointment process and 
conditions of services for the CEC and ECs. 
The Act however has many issues and the Bill therefore, seeks to amend the Chief 
Election Commissioner and Other Election Commissioners (Appointment, Conditions of 
Service and Term of Office) Act, 2023 with a view to introduce following changes—
i. To ensure that suitable candidates apart from senior bureaucrats also have an 
opportunity to be a part of the ECI, given that CECs and ECs also perform quasijudicial 
functions. It is also to be noted that often qualifications of members of constitutional 
bodies and statutory bodies are not mentioned, allowing career experts an opportunity to 
introduce systemic reforms. For example, many Reserve Bank of India governors who were 
career economists introduced institutional changes. Section 5 of the principal Act has been 
proposed to be repealed with a view to expand the consideration of eligibility of candidates 
to lead the ECI, in order to maintain best practices for free and fair elections.
ii. In consonance of the proposed repeal of Section 5, the proposed amendments of 
section 6 broadens the ambit of the Search Committee. The membership of the Search 
Committee has also been made inclusive to reflect the considerations of all communities. 
iii. Amendments to Section 7 is to fulfill the aspirations of the constitution drafters. 
Upon careful perusal of the Constituent Assembly debates, the eloquent speeches of Pandit 
Hriday Nath Kunzruand Prof. Shibban Lal Saxena, underlined the need to appoint a person 
as the Chief Election Commissioner or the Election Commissioner who should be able to 
command confidence of a majority of both the Houses of Parliament. In principle, one could 
say that the CEC and ECs appointed should be such as to be acceptable across the political 
spectrum.  As mentioned above, the Anoop Barnwal case had instituted the judiciary to be 
a part of the selection process. A precedent can also be observed in South Africa with the 
President of its Constitutional Court as the Chairperson of the Selection Committee of the 
South African Election Commission. Such precedents are important given the fact that our 

constitutional drafters had adopted key constitutional aspects from South Africa, namely the 
election process of Rajya Sabha and process of constitutional amendment. 
It is, therefore, proposed to introduce a Bill to provide for establishing a comprehensive, 
transparent, objective and a non-partisan procedure for appointing the Chief Election 
Commissioner and  Election Commissioners, fulfilling the binding judgments from the 
Supreme Court as well as the vacuum outlined by the Goswami Committee, NCRCW and 
the Law Commission and importantly, the Election Commission of India.
Hence this Bill.
 
    Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                                                   VISHALDADA PRAKASHBAPU PATIL 
November 11, 2024.
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a Search Committee to shortlist 
prospective candidates for appointment as Chief Election Commissioner or Election 
Commissioners. It also provides for the fees and allowances payable to members of the 
Search Committee. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees 
fourty lakh per annum will be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty lakh is also likely to be involved.
5

6
ANNEXURE 
[EXTRACTS FROM THE CHIEF ELECTION COMMISSIONER AND OTHER 
ELECTION COMMISSIONERS (APPOINTMENT, CONDITIONS
 OF SERVICE AND TERM OF OFFICE) ACT, 2023]
(Act No. 49 of 2023)
        *                 *                *  *        * 
      5. The Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners shall be appointed 
from amongst persons who are holding or have held a post equivalent to the rank of Secretary 
to the Government of India and shall be persons of integrity, who have knowledge of and 
experience in management and conduct of elections.
        *                 *                *  *        *
      6. A Search Committee headed by the Minister of Law and Justice and comprising two 
other members not below the rank of Secretary to the Government of India, shall prepare a 
panel of five persons for consideration of the Selection Committee, for appointment as the 
Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners.
        *                 *                *  *        *
      7. (1) The Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners shall be 
appointed by the President on the recommendation of a Selection Committee consisting of—
(a) the Prime Minister—Chairperson;
(b) the Leader of Opposition in the House of the People—Member;
(c) a Union Cabinet Minister to be nominated by the Prime Minister—Member.
        Explanation.—For the purposes of removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that where the 
Leader of Opposition in the House of the People has not been recognised as such, the leader 
of the single largest party in opposition of the Government in the House of the People shall be 
deemed to be the Leader of Opposition.
      (2) The appointment of Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners 
shall not be invalid merely by reason of any vacancy in or any defect in the constitution of the 
Selection Committee.
        *                 *                *  *        *
Qualifications
of Chief
Election
Commissioner
and other
Election
Commissioners.
Search 
Committee.
Selection 
Committee.

LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to amend the Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners 
(Appointment, conditions of service and term of office) Act, 2023.
(Shri Vishaldada Prakashbapu Patil, M.P .)