Amendment
of section 2.
THE ANTIQUITIES AND ART TREASURES
 (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
By
SHRI LAVU SRI KRISHNA DEV ARAYALU,  M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Antiquities and Art Treasures Act, 1972.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Antiquities and Art Treasures (Amendment) Act,
2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, notification in
the Official Gazette, appointment.
2. In section 2 of the Antiquities and Art Treasures Act, 1972 (hereinafter referred to as
the principal Act), in sub-section (1),-
(a) in clause ( a), in sub-clause (I), for entry ( iv), the following entry shall be
substituted, namely:—
"(iv) any article, object or thing of historical interest including—
(a) rare collections and specimens of fauna, flora, minerals and
anatomy, and objects of paleontological interest;
Bill No. 258 of 2019
Short title
and
commencement.
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
52 of 1972.
5
10

2
(b) property relating to history including the history of science and
techology and military and social history, to the life of national leaders, thinkers,
scientists and artists and to events of national importance;
(c) products of archaeological excavations or of archaeological discoveries;
(d) elements of artistic or historical monuments or archaeological sites
which have been dismembered;
(e) archives, including sound, photographic and cinematographic archives;
( f ) any manuscripts, publications, artistic or literary work that has historical
or archaeological value singly or collectively;
(g) any work of art or sculpture in any material;
(h) any movable object or aggregate of things of artistic, historical or
archaeological value or from other areas of cultural heritage, in particular of
paleontological, ethnographic, numismatic or scientific value; and
(i) any such object or objects of any nature which, on religious or secular
grounds, is specifically designated by the competent authority as being of
importance for archaeology, prehistory, history, literature, art or science;
Explanation.—For the the purposes of sub-entry ( h), "aggregate of things" shall
mean several related cultural objects, in particular archival holdings, library holdings, estates,
collections or parts thereof;";
(b) after clause (d), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
"(da) "National Authority"  means the National Authority for the Protection
of Cultural Heritage constituted under section 3A;
(db) "national cultural object" mean any cultural object,—
(i) Created by the individual or collective genius of nationals of
India or persons of Indian origin and is an object of importance or has
been created within the territory of India by foreign nationals or stateless
persons resident within such territory;
(ii) found within the national territory;
(iii) acquired by archaeological, ethnological or natural science
missions, with the consent of the competent authorities of the country of
origin of such object;
(iv) received as a gift or purchased legally with the consent of the
competent authorities of the country of origin of such property;
(v) publicly owned and part of the collection of a public-law
institution preserving such object; and
(vi) where the competent authority is granted permission by the
lender or depositor to preserve a cultural object, such object shall also
temporarily be considered national cultural object for the duration of the
loan or deposit contract, as the case may be;"; and
(dc) "Register" shall mean the Register of Antiquity and National Cultural
Objects as maintained under section 3C;".
3. In section 3 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:—
"(2A) Every person shall, notwithstanding ownership of a antiquity or national cultural
object, surrender such antiquity or national cultural object, which as not been entered
Amendment
of section 3.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
into the register and for which a license has not been issued, to the National Authority
or any other institution as designated by the National Authority in such manner as
may be prescribed.
(2B) An antiquity or national cultural object which has been unlawfully excavated or
lawfully excavated but unlawfully retained shall be considered stolen and be
surrendered to the National Authority or any other institution as designated by the
National Authority.
(2C) No antiquity or cultural property documented as  appertaining to the inventory
of a museum or religious or secular public monument or similar institution in any
country which is stolen from such institution may be imported into the territory of
India:
Provided that where the antiquity may be reasonably subjected to destruction or
degradation or where the antiquity is reasonably suspected to be a national cultural
object then such an antiquity or national cultural property may be imported into the
territory of India."
4. After section 3, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
"3A. (1) The Central Government shall constitute an Authority, to be known as
the National Authority for the protection of Cultural Heritage, to exercise the powers
conferred upon, and to perform the functions assigned to it, under this Act.
(2) The National Authority shall consist of:—
(a) the Director General of the Archaeological Survey of India, Chairperson,
ex-officio;
(b) the Director General of the Department of Revenue Intelligence, member
ex-officio;
(c) an official from the Union Ministry of External Affairs not below the
rank of Joint Secretary, member ex-officio;
(d) a reputed archaeologist with considerable experience in identifying
stolen artifacts and treasures, part-time member;
(e) a reputed conservationist with more than ten years of experience;
(f) an officer of a Union law enforcement agency, to be appointed by the
Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
3B. (1) The National Authority shall,—
(a) take steps to ensure the repatriation of all stolen and illegally exported
national cultural objects;
(b) prevent the export of antiquity and national cultural objects that have
not been listed on the Register;
(c) prevent the export of antiquity and national cultural objects that may
reasonably be damaged or destroyed in the territory to which it is being exported;
(d) maintain the register as provided in section 3C;
(e) carry out a review of the status of national cultural objects that have
been leased or exported to another country;
(f) ensure the compliance of the provisions of the Act; and
(g) carry out such other function as notified by the Central Government.
Insertion of new
sections 3A, 3B
and 3C.
National
Authority for
the
protection of
Cultural
Heritage.
Functions of
National
Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
(2) The National Authority may, in consultation with the Central Government,
make regulations, consistent with the provisions of this Act and the rules made
thereunder, for the discharge of its functions and perform its duties under this
Act.
3C. (1) The National Authority shall maintain and update the Register of
Antiquity and National Cultural Objects in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Register maintained under sub-section (1) shall contain details of,-
(a) every  antiquity within the territory of India which license has been
issued; and
(b) every National Cultural object within or outside the territory of India or
owned by a religious community or by legal or real persons.".
5. In section 4 of the principal Act after the words " unless the Central Government on
an application made to it in this behalf, otherwise directs." the words "or unless the National
Authority on an application made to it in this behalf, otherwise directs." shall be inserted.
6. After section 26 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, namely:—
26A. (1) Any person who trades in antiquity shall not import, export or transfer
the ownership of such antiquity when they have reasonable cause to believe that it
has been stolen, illegally alienated, clandestinely excavated or illegally exported.
(2) Any person who is acting as an agent for the seller of antiquity shall not be
deemed to guarantee title to the property, unless he makes known to the buyer the full
name and address of the seller.
(3) Any person who trades in import, export or transfer of antiquity has reasonable
cause to believe that an item of cultural property has been illegally exported shall not
assist in any further transaction with that item, except with the agreement of the
country of export.
26B. (1) Any person who trades in export or transfer of antiquity product of a
clandestine excavation or has been acquired illegally or dishonestly from an official
excavation site or monument shall not assist in any further transaction with that object,
except with the agreement of the country where the site or monument exists.
(2) Any person who trades in import, export or transfer of antiquity is in possession of
the illegal antiquity as mentioned under sub-section (1), and the country where the site or
monument exists seeks its return within a reasonable period of time, such person shall take all
legally permissible steps to co-operate in the return of that object to the country of origin.
26C. (1) Any person who trades in import, export, transfer or ownership in cultural
property shall not exhibit, describe, attribute, appraise or retain any item of cultural
property with the intention of promoting or failing to prevent its illicit transfer or export.
(2) Any person who trades in import, export, transfer ownership shall not refer the
seller or other person offering the item to those who may perform such service.
26D. (1) Any person who trades in import, export, transfer ownership in antiquity
shall not dismember or sell separately parts of one complete item of cultural property.
(2) Any person who trades in import, export, transfer ownership in antiquity
shall ensure to the best of their ability to keep together items of antiquity that were
originally meant to be kept together.
26E. Any person who contravenes any of the provisions of sections 26A, 26B,
26C or 26D shall be punishable with imprisionment for a term which shall not be less
than one year but which may extend upto three years and with fine amounting to five
times the value of the antiquity or ten times the value of the national cultural object,
whichever is higher.".
Register of
Antiquity and
National Cul-
tural Objects.
Penalty.
Amendment
of section 4.
Insertion of
new section
26A.
Traders shall
not be
deemed to
guarantee
title of stolen
and illegal
antiquity.
Return of
illegally
excavated
object.
Prevention of
illicit transfer
and export.
Prevention of
dismemberment
of cultural
property.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Antiques and Art Treasures Act, 1972 was enacted to regulate the export trade in
antiquities and art treasures, to provide for the prevention of smuggling of, and fraudulent
dealings in, antiquities, to provide for the compulsory acquisition of antiquities and art
treasures for preservation in public places and to provide for certain other matters connected
therewith or incidental or ancillary thereto.
In other to facilitate the legal trade of antiquity and concomitantly ensure the
preservation of national cultural heritage the Antiques and Art Treasures (Amendment) Bill,
2019, Inter alia seeks to:—
(a) establish the National Authority for the protection of cultural heritage;
(b) preserve the tangible cultural heritage objects both within and outside the
territory of India;
(c) establish the Register of Antiquity and National Cultural Objects;
(d) enumerate the duties and conduct of traders of antiquity and cultural
heritage;
(e) ensure compliance of International conventions ratified by the country; and
(f) prevent the fragmentation of antiquity and National Cultural Object.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; LA VU SRI KRISHNA DEV ARAYALU
October, 29, 2019.
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill Vide proposed section 3A provides for the constitution of the
National Authority for the Protection of Cultural Heritage. It also provides for the appoint-
ment of part-time members to the Authority. It further provides for maintenance and updation
of the Register of Antiquity and National Cultural Objects by the Authority. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of  India. It is
estimated that a sum of rupees twenty crore will be involved as recurring expenditure per
annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees four crore is also likely to be involved.
6

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 4 of the Bill vide proposed sub-section (2) of section 3B provides that the
National Authority may, in consultation with the Central Government, make regulations,
consistent with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, for the discharge of
its functions and perform its duties under the Act. It also vide proposed sub-section (1) of
section 3C provides that the National Authority shall maintain and update Register of
Antiquity and National Cultural Objects in such manner as may be prescribed. As the matters
in respect of which rules and regulations may be made under the aforesaid provisions are
matters of procedure and administrative details, the delegation of legislative power is,
therefore, of a normal character.
7

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM ANTIQUITIES AND ART TREASURES ACT, 1972
[NO. 52 OF 1972]
* *  *
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "antiquity" includes—
(i)*  *  *
(ii)*  *  *
(iii )*  *  *
(iv) any article, object or thing of historical interest;
* * * *
(d) "licensing officer" means an officer appointed as such under section 6;
(e) "Registering officer" means an officer appointed as such under section 15;
* * * *
3. (1) On and from the commencement of this Act, it shall not be lawful for any person,
other than the Central Government or any authority or agency authorised by the Central
Government in this behalf, to export any antiquity or art treasure.
(2) Whenever the Central Government or any authority or agency referred to in sub-
section (1) intends to export any antiquity or art treasure such export shall be made only
under and in accordance with the terms and conditions of a permit issued for the purpose by
such authority as may be prescribed.
4. The Customs Act, 1962, shall have effect in relation to all antiquities and art
treasures, the export of which by any person (other than the Central Government or any
authority or agency authorised by the Central Government) is prohibited under section 3
save in so far as that Act is inconsistent with the provisions of this Act and except that
(notwithstanding anything contained in section 125 of that Act) any confiscation authorised
under that Act shall be made unless the Central Government on an application made to it in
this behalf, otherwise directs.
* * * *
26. (1) No prosecution for an offence under sub-section (1) of section 25 shall be
instituted except by or with the sanction of such officer of Government as may be prescribed
in this behalf.
(2) No court shall take congnizance of an offence punishable under sub-section (2) or
sube-section (3) of section 25 except upon complaint in writing made by an officer generally
or specially authorised in this behalf by the Central Government.
(3) No court inferior to that of a Presidency Magistrate or a Magistrate of the First
Class shall try any offence punishable under this Act.
* * * *
Definitions.
Regulation of
export trade in
antiquities and
art treasures.
Application
Act 52 of
1962.
Cognizance of
offences.
8

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Antiquities and Art Treasures Act, 1972.
————
(Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—3069LS—18.11.2019.