Bill No.  258 of 2015
THE NATIONAL CADET CORPS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI MAHEISH GIRRI, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the National Cadet Corps Act, 1948.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Cadet Corps (Amendment) Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. For section 6 of the National Cadet Corps Act, 1948, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:—
‘‘6. (1) Every able-bodied student of the male sex of any university shall be
enrolled as a cadet in the Senior Division and every able-bodied student of the male
sex of any school shall be enrolled as a cadet in the Junior Division if he is of the
prescribed age or over.
(2) Every able-bodied student of the female sex of any university or school shall
be enrolled as a cadet in the Girls Division if she is of the prescribed age or over.’’.
Amendment
of section 6.
Enrolment.
31 of 1948.
5

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
It is imperative to have a well-trained civilian as well as a trained cadet. Compulsory
NCC training to all able-bodied Under-Graduates will instill a strong sense of self-discipline,
character and leadership qualities among them. Such a step will provide our Armed forces
with trained volunteers, whose services can be utilized during civil or natural emergencies
like earthquake, 
Tsunami, cloudburst, hailstorm or floods in an efficient manner. Moreover,
Army trained cadets will also realize the importance of service being rendered by members of
Armed Forces. The training will make them smarter, fit, mature and motivated.
Training of girl cadets would lead to development of more confident, mature and
strong women force of our country who will propel India towards becoming a leading power
of the world. The Government should take effective steps for implementation of the proposal
that whoever enters the Under-Graduate level must compulsorily receive and qualify for
training.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to make NCC training compulsory to every able-bodied
student with a view to develop a more strong sense of loyalty, duty and self-discipline
among them and also prepare a trained manpower in reserve to meet any eventuality or
natural calamity.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MAHEISH GIRRI
November, 13, 2015.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE NA TIONAL CADET CORPS ACT, 1948
(31 OF 1948)
6. * * * * *
1. Every student of the male sex of any university may offer himself for enrolment as a
cadet in the Senior Division, and any student of the male sex of any school may offer himself
for enrolment as a cadet in the Junior Division if he is of the prescribed age or over.
2. Any student of the female sex of any university or school may offer herself enrolled
as a cadet in the Girls Division:
Provided that in latter case she is of the prescribed age or over.
* * * * *
4
Enrolment.

GMGIPMRND—2855LS(S3)—01.12.2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the National Cadet Corps Act, 1948.
————
(Shri Maheish Girri, M.P.)