Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 258 of 2017
THE ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (IDENTIFICATION AND
DEPORTATION) BILL, 2017
By
DR.  SHRIKANT  E.  SHINDE,  M.P.
A
BILL
to constitute a National Commission to identify and deport illegal immigrants in the
country and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Illegal Immigrants (Identification and Deportation)
Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) 'illegal immigrant' means any person who comes to India without any proper
and valid document issued by the designated Authority of the Government of India; and
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Definitions.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
3. The Central Government shall, by notification in the official gazette, constitute
a Commission to be known as the National Commission for Identification and Deportation of
Illegal Immigrants (hereinafter referred to as the National Commission) for carrying out
the purposes of this Act.
4. (1) The National Commission shall consist of,—
(i) a Chairperson who shall be a retired Judge of the Supreme Court to be
appointed by the President in such manner as may be prescribed; and
(ii) two other members to be appointed by the President in such manner as may
be prescribed.
(2) The Chairperson and other members shall hold office for a term of five years and
shall be entitled to such salaries and allowances as may be determined by the Central
Government.
5. The Central Government shall also set up a State Commission for a State or two or
more  States for identification and deportation of illegal immigrants.
6. (1) Every State Commission shall consist of,—
(i) a Chairperson who shall be a retired Judge of the High Court; and
(ii) four other members.
(2) The Chairperson and other members of the State Commission shall be appointed
by the Central Government in consultation with the Chairperson of the National Commission
in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The Chairperson and the other members shall hold office for a term of five years
and shall be entitled to such salaries and allowances as may be determined by the Central
Government.
7. Every State Commission shall,—
(i) carry out necessary exercise to identify illegal immigrants and their nationality
in their respective area; and
(ii) prepare and send list of all illegal immigrants in their respective area to the
district administration.
8. The National Commission and every State Commission shall exercise the powers of
a civil court in regard to discharge of its functions.
9. The National Commission may direct the respective State Government to:—
(i) stop all assistance being enjoyed by the illegal immigrants immediately;
(ii) impound the ration card in the possession of illegal immigrants;
(iii) terminate the services of illegal immigrants, in case such immigrants are
employed in any public sector and inform persons concerned in case they are employed
in private sector;
(iv) take such necessary action to recover loans borrowed by illegal immigrants;
(v) facilitate speedy hearing of cases against illegal immigrants; and
(vi) take immediate action for deporting them to the countries of their origin.
10. The State Government shall take such action as directed by the National Commission
within three months.
National
Commission
for
identification
and deporting
illegal
immigrants.
Appointment,
term and
salary of the
Chairperson
and Members
of the
Commission.
State
Commission.
Appointment,
term and
salary of
Chairperson
and other
members of
the State
Commission.
Functions of
the State
Commission.
Powers of the
Commissions.
National
Commission
to direct the
State
Government.
State
Government
to take action
on direction of
the National
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
11. (1) Any person, who has any complaint against a decision of any State Commission,
shall be entitled to represent to the National Commission, who shall hear the same and
dispose it of within one month.
(2)Every applicant, who represents to the National Commission under clause (1), shall
be given an opportunity of being heard before disposing of such application by the National
Commission.
12. The State Commission and the district administration shall ensure that no
inconvenience is caused to any bona fide citizen of the country during the enforcement of
the provisions of this Act.
13. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
14. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions, aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have affect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Representation
to the
National
Commission.
No
inconvenience
to bona fide
citizens.
Power to
make rules.
Savings.
5
10
15
20

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The influx of immigrants created a crisis of identity among the indigenous citizens of
our country. Their cultural survival is in jeopardy, their political control is weakened and their
employment opportunities are undermined by such illegal migration. It is found that though
the immigrants had settled in various States of our country, most of them failed to identify
themselves with the mainstream.
Due to the similar language spoken by illegal migrants from Bangladesh, Myanmar and
other neighboring countries and the indigenous language speaking citizen, it becomes difficult
to identify and deport the illegal migration from Indian soil. Illegal immigrants have increased
pressure on resources of our country and the Government has to increase the expenditure on
education and health facilities to the immigrants. Illegal immigrants are not only adding
number to our booming population but are indulging in anti-national activities. Most of the
illegal immigrants have got their names enlisted in the voting list illegally, thereby claiming
themselves as citizens of the country. The immigrant's population act as a vote bank for the
political parties. The NRC (National Register of Citizens) has taken initiatives for the detection
of illegal migrants. However, success of such initiatives will depend on the strong political
will. The dangerous consequences of large scale illegal migration from neighboring countries
required to be dealt effectively. No misconceived and mistaken notions of secularism should
be allowed to come in the way of doing so. Illegal migration from neighboring countries is no
longer a regional problem which can be pushed under the carpet. These migrants have now
settled in several States including the States of Rajasthan, Delhi, Madhya Pradesh and
Maharashtra.
This silent and invidious demographic invasion may result in the loss of the geo-strategic
importance of several bordering districts in the State of Assam, Tripura, Jammu & Kashmir,
West Bengal and other States. The influx of these illegal migrants is turning these regions
into a specific religion majority region which was unknown till now. It will then only be a
matter of time when a demand for their merger with neighboring country may be made. Thus
it is high time to solve the problems of illegal migration to save culture and identity of our
people in their own land and to save the nation from the threat of immigrants.
N
EW DELHI; SHRIKANT E. SHINDE
November 27, 2017.
4

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3, of the Bill provides for constitution of the National Commission for
identification and deporting of illegal immigrants from the country. Clause 4 provides for
salaries and allowances payable to the Chairperson and other members of the Commission.
Clause 5 provides for setting up of State Commission for a State or a group of States and
clause 6 provide for salaries and allowances payable to the Chairperson and other members
of State Commission.
The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about fifty crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore is also likely to be involved.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to frame rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. Since the rules  will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to constitute a National Commission to identify and deport illegal immigrants in the
country and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Shrikant E. Shinde, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2622LS(S3)—20-12-2017.