Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No.  259  of  2017
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE EMPLOYMENT BILL, 2017
By
DR. SHRIKANT E. SHINDE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide employment or means and resources for self-employment to atleast one
adult member of every family and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Employment Act, 2017.
(2)  It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “family” includes wife, husband and minor children; and
(b) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. It shall  be the duty of the Central Government to provide gainful employment to
atleast one adult member of every family.
4. Every unemployed person shall be entitled to receive monthly unemployment
allowance at such rate as may be prescribed, till he is provided with gainful employment.
5. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Board to be known as the Employment Advisory Board for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
(2) The Board shall consist of—
(a)  a retired Judge of Supreme Court -Chairperson;
(b) two representatives of the Central Government -Member Secretaries;
(c) one representative from Union Ministry -Member;
 of Labour and Employment
(d) two persons having experience in Labour Laws,
to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The Board shall meet at least once in a month:
Provided that the Chairperson may call for a meeting at any time in  consultation  with
the Member-Secretaries as and when the circumstance warrant so.
(4) The Salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
Chairperson and members of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
6. The Board shall—
(a) identify fields and areas for generation of employment and forward the information
to the Central Government;
(b) collect data of unemployed persons in every district;
(c) develop model for generation of self employment for the citizens;
(d) encourage businessmen for generation of employment; and
(e) undertake such other measures  for generation of self-employment for citizens as it
considers necessary.
7. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Fund to be known as the Employment Fund for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Central Government and State Government shall contribute to the Fund in
such ratio as may be prescribed.
8.  The Central Government shall, on the recommendation of the Board, take steps to
promote the interest of persons employed under this Act.
9. The Central Government shall provide subsidy and all other facilities or resources
for self-employment to every family, where it is not possible to provide employment to atleast
one dependent member of that family.
Definitions.
Central
Government
to provide
employment.
Functions of
the Board.
Grant of
unemployment
allowances.
Constitution
of
Employment
Advisory
Board.
Constitution
of
Employment
Fund.
Periodical
promotion to
employees.
Central
Government to
provide credit
and other
facilities to
dependent
member of
family.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

3
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid before each
House of the Parliament, as soon as may be after it is made. While it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may comprise in one session or more successive sessions, and
if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
session aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any such modification in the rule or both the
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall as the case may be, so, however,
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under the rule.
Power to
make rules.
5
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In India, poverty is one of the biggest problems. Even after sixty-nine years of
independence, we have not been able to contain the poverty. Although our country has
progressed in many fields, yet it has failed to improve the standard of living of the people.
There may be many reasons for poverty.
There are a large number of families where there is not even a single earning member
and most of them earn their livelihood by working as labourers, domestic servants, bonded
labours, etc. Majority of population lives below poverty line. Our country being a welfare
State should take necessary steps to improve the lot of the people and formulate schemes
and plans to eradicate poverty from the country.
In 2015, around 170 million people, or 12.4 per cent. of population lived in poverty. In
2012, the Indian Government stated 22 per cent. of its population is below its official poverty
limit. The World Bank, in 201 1 based on 2005's Purchasing Power Parties International
Comparison Program, estimated 23.6 per cent. of Indian population, or about 276 million
people, lived below $ 1.25 per day on purchasing power parity. According to United Nation's
Millennium Development Goals (MDG) programme 270 millions or 21.9 per cent. people out
of 1.2 billions of Indians lived below poverty line of $ 1.25 in 2011-2012.
According to Food and Agricultural Organisation estimates in ‘The State of Food
Security and Nutrition in the W orld, 2017” report, 190.7 million people are undernourished in
India. By this measure 14.5 per cent. of the population is undernourished in India. Also, 51.4
per cent. of women in reproductive age between 15 to 49 years are anaemic. Further according
to the report 38.4 per cent. of the children aged under five in India are stunted (too short for
their age), while 21 per cent. suffer from wasting, meaning their weight is too low for their
height. Malnourished children have a higher risk of death from common childhood illnesses
such as diarrhea, pneumonia and malaria. The Global Hunger Index 2016 ranks India at 97 out
of 118 countries on the basis of three leading indicators—prevalence of wasting and stunting
in children under 5 years, under 5 years child mortality rate, and the proportion of
undernourished in the population. With this in view, it is proposed to make a positive step
towards eradicating poverty. It is proposed that at least one adult member of every family
should be provided with employment and where it is not possible to provide employment,
the Government should encourage those who desire to set up their own business and
improve their capability of increasing production, like weavers, shoe makers etc. so that they
become self-sufficient and the family should be given all necessary facilities for decent and
reasonable living.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SHRIKANT E. SHINDE
November 27, 2017.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall provide employment to
atleast one adult member of every family. Clause 4 provides for payment of unemployment
allowances to every unemployed person at such rate as may be prescribed till he is provided
with gainful employment. Clause 5 provides for constitution of Employment Advisory Board.
Clause 7 provides for contribution of Employment Fund for carrying out the purposes of
this Bill. Clause 9 provides that the Central Government shall provide subsidy and all facilities
or resources for self-employment to a family where it is not possible to provide employment.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the consolidated Fund of
India in implementing the provisions of the Bill. It is likely to involve an annual recurring
expenditure of about rupees eight thousand crore from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of four thousand crore  is likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry out the
purposes of the Act. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide employment or means and resources for self-employment to atleast one
adult member of every family and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Dr. Shrikant E. Shinde, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2676LS(S3)—20.12.2017.