Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
                   
                                                       
          
Bill  No. 259 of 2024
THE ENROLLMENT OF THE CHILDREN OF GOVERNMENT 
EMPLOYEES IN GOVERNMENT SCHOOLS 
(PROMOTION) BILL, 2024
By
 Mඌ. Iඊඋൺ Cඁඈඎൽඁൺඋඒ,  M.P.
A
BILL
to improve the quality of government schools by incentivising government employees to 
enrol their students in such schools and or matters connected therewith 
and incidental thereto.
Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Enrollment of Children of Government Employees in 
Government Schools (Promotion) Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and commencement

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate government” means—
(i) in relation to a school established, owned or controlled by the Central 
Government, or the administrator of the Union territory, having no legislature, the 
Central Government;
(ii) in relation to a school, other than the school referred to in sub-clause (i), 
established within the territory of—
(a) a State, the State Government; and
(b) a Union territory having legislature, the Government of that Union 
territory;
(b)  “child with disability” includes— a child as defined under Section 2(ee) of the 
Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009
(c) “government employee” means— 
(i) all persons in the civil services of the Central Government or holding civil 
posts under that government and paid out of the Consolidated Fund of India;
(ii) and all government servants of States and the local authorities; and
(iii) Members of the Parliament and Members of Legislative Assemblies of 
States and the local authorities.
(d) “government school” means— a school as defined under sub-clause (1)f clause 
(n) of section 2 of the Right to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009;
(e) “local authority refers to means a Municipal Corporation or Municipal Council 
or Zila Parishad or Nagar Panchayat or Panchayat, by whatever name called, and 
includes such other authority or body having administrative control over the school 
or empowered by or under any law for the time being in force to function as a local 
authority in any city, town or village; and
(f) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. The appropriate government shall promote, among their employee for enrolling their 
children in government schools:
Provided that nothing in this Act shall restrict the Government employees to enroll their 
children to schools other than government schools. 
4. The appropriate government shall provide incentives to government employees 
who enroll their children to government schools for a continuous period of three years, 
including but not limited to,–
(a) increase in child education allowance, including for children with disabilities;
(b) increase in hostel subsidy, if applicable;
(c) relaxation in the transfer of the government employee in order to prevent 
disruption of the education of the child;
(d) additional leaves and preference during promotion and any other incentive 
as the appropriate Government deem fit for the promotion of government schools. 
5. The appropriate government shall confer, benefits to the children of the 
government employee who are enrolled in Government schools, including but not 
limited to,–
(a) priority for admissions in government colleges if the child has completed his 
higher education from the Government schools;
(b) access to government courses for skill development and training at subsidised 
rates;
(c) financial support for extracurricular activities includes representing the 
Definitions.
Promotion of 
Government 
Schools for 
Government 
Employees’ 
Children.
Incentives for 
the employees.
Benefits for 
children of 
government 
employees 
enrolled in 
Government 
Schools. 
35 of 2009

state or nation in competitions, both domestic and international; and
(d) such other benefits for the children as the appropriate Government may 
deem fit.
6. (1) For the purpose of this Act, the appropriate Government shall constitute a 
Committee to be known as the Government School Performance Evaluation Committee to 
evaluate the quality and performance of government schools under its jurisdiction.
(2) The Committee shall consist of –
 (a) The Education minister of the State, ex-officio Chairperson;
 (b) two senior government employees whose children are or have been enrolled in 
government schools, member
(c) two principals of government schools to be nominated by the State Government, 
member; and
(d) two Members of Civil Society working in the education sector, member
to be nominated by the appropriate Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The Committee shall meet at least four times in a year.
(4) The appropriate Governments may also, if required, set up district or zonal 
committees in their states if it deems fit for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(5) The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service 
of the officers and other employees appointed for the purpose of the Commission shall 
be such as may be prescribed.
7. (1) The Committee shall,– 
(a) conduct regular evaluations, prepare and submit reports on the functioning of 
Government school highlighting the actions required from the appropriate government, 
local authority and any other body overseeing government schools;
(2) regularly prepare Action Taken Reports to assess the suggested changes are being 
implemented in the Government schools;
(3) maintain a list of government employees whose children are enrolled in government 
schools; and
(4) coordinate with the appropriate government for the delivery of incentives and any 
other functions that the appropriate Government may deem fit.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by 
law in this behalf, provide adequate funds for the implementation of the provisions of 
the Act.
9. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, any other 
law for the time being in force.
10. (1) The appropriate Government may, subject to the condition of previous 
publication, by notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such 
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:-
(a) The kinds of incentives to be provided to government employees under section 4;
(b) The benefits to be enjoyed by children of government employees under section 5;
(c) The fees and allowances that may be paid to the members of the Government 
School Performance Evaluation Committee for attending its meetings under sub-section 
(2) of section 6;
(d) The quorum for meetings for the Committee set up under section 6.
(3) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
Government 
School 
Performance 
Evaluation 
Committee.
Powers, Duties 
and Functions of 
the Committee.
Central 
Government to 
provide funds.
Act not in 
derogation of 
any other law.
Power to make 
Rules.

period of thirty days, which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule. 
(4) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.
    

STATEMENT  OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In 2015, Hon’ble Justice Sudhir Agarwal of the Allahabad High Court observed in the 
case of Shiv Kumar Pathak and others v State of Uttar Pradesh and others (WRIT-A No. 
-57476 of 2013) that to improve the poor conditions of the government primary schools, 
the public administration that oversees the functioning of these schools must have a real 
interest in these schools. The judgement observed that if government servants are compelled 
to send their own children for primary education in government institutions, they will look 
into the standards of such schools so that their children are provided with the best facilities. 
The judgement ordered the Chief Secretary of the Uttar Pradesh government to ensure that 
children of government employees and all persons who receive any perk, benefit or salary 
etc. from the State exchequer or public fund are sent to primary schools run by the Uttar 
Pradesh Board of Primary Education. 
This Bill aims to incentivise government employees to send their children to government 
schools to encourage them to improve the quality of such schools.  Government schools 
could foster social cohesion and offer diverse social exposure to students from various 
classes by integrating children from different socio-economic backgrounds in the same 
educational environment. 
The Bill also empowers State Governments to set up a Government School Performance 
Evaluation Committee to assess the performance of government schools with a lens of how 
the administration can contribute to its better functioning. 
Hence this Bill.
       Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                            IQRA CHOUDHARY 
November 12,  2024

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 4 of the bill provides for incentives for government employees in order to 
motivate them to send their children to government schools to be provided by the appropriate 
government. Clause 5 of the bill also provides for benefits to the children of government 
employees to be provided by the appropriate government. Clause 8 stipulates that Central 
Government shall provide funds for implementation of this Act. The Bill, therefore, if 
enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. At this stage it is not 
possible to estimate the expenditure.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 10 of the Bill gives power to the appropriate government to make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the 
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to improve the quality of government schools by incentivising government 
employees to enrol their students in such schools and or matters 
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Ms. Iqra Choudhary, M.P .)