1
THE EDUCATION LOAN BILL, 2016
By
SHRI RAJESH RANJAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for education loan to students and for matters connected therewith.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Education Loan  Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India, except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 259 of  2016
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) "bank" means any nationalized or commercial bank and includes a private,
co-operative or foreign bank;
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under the Act; and
(c) "student" means a person who is pursuing any recognised course of study,
including any professional or vocational course in any college or institution or
university.
3.  (1) The Central Government shall, within six months of the commencement of
this Act, formulate a scheme for providing education loan at such rate of interest, as may
be prescribed, to students for following purposes, namely:—
(a) pursuing professional courses such as medical, engineering or vocational
course or education in any discipline in any recognised college or institution or
university; and
(b) pursuing research in any recognized research institute or university.
4. (1) An application for education loan shall be made by a student to any branch of
a bank in such form and manner as may be prescribed.
(2) An application made under sub-section (1) shall be disposed of within a period of
one month from the date of its receipt.
5. The Bank shall  make payment directly to the head of the college or institution or
university where the student is studying or seeking admission.
6. No bank shall,—
(i) refuse an education loan to a student on any ground;
(ii) insist or any sort of guarantee, mortgage or surety for the purpose of
disbursement of loan;
(iii) charge insterest more than the rate prescribed;
(iv) keep or withhold degree, diploma certificates, mark sheets in original; and
(v) initiate recovery process of the loan before the completion of one year of
securing a job by a student who has taken an education loan.
7. If any Bank violates the provisions of section 6, the Chairman and Managing
Director or other officer of the bank responsible for the violation, unless he proves that
such violation took place without his knowledge or that hew exercised all due diligence to
prevent, shall be deemed to be guilty of such violation and shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend upto six months or a fine upto rupees two lakh,
or both.
8. (1) The Central Government shall formulate a scheme for waiving off such loan, if
a student, even after five years of completing his course, fails to secure any employment.
(2)  Subject to such rules as may be made, the waiving off of loans shall be applicable
only to such bona fide students who do not get employment after completing their education.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Definitions.
Scheme for
education loan
to students.
Application
for loan.
Payment to be
made directly
to the
institution.
Head of the
institution to
deny
educational
loan.
Punishment.
Waiving off
loan.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
It is indeed a welcome step the educational loans are being given to students for
pursuing higher education. Economically poor students, who could not earlier afford the
cost of professional and higher education are also now in a position to pursue higher
education because of education loan. However, the policy of giving education loan is
deficient on many counts. It has no statutory backing or proper guidelines. Each bank has
its own guidelines and fixes its own criteria for disbursing loan. Many banks often refuse
the same on such frivolous and technical grounds. Guarantee and surety are always insisted
upon before granting the loan. The rate of interest on such loan also varies from bank to
bank. Students are harassed and have to run from pillar to post to get the loan disbursed.
Students pursuing studies in private institutions and seeking admission in management
quota are not given loan. Therefore, it is sought to ensure through the Bill that education
loan should not be denied to any student. Any person who violates the guidelines framed
for education loan shall be punished so that no bank dares to refuse loan to students.
Further, many students after completion of their course do not get jobs. Thus, they are not
in a  position to repay the loan taken. In such cases, a policy or scheme for waiving of loans
has been envisaged in the proposed Bill.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAJESH RANJAN
October 28, 2016

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the framing of a scheme for providing educational
loans to students. Clause 8 provides for framing of a scheme for waiving off educational
loan if, a student fails to secure any employment, five years after completion of his course.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
It is estimated that a sum of rupees two hundred crore will be involved as a recurring
expenditure per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees one hundred crore is also likely to
be involved.

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for education loan to students and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Rajesh Ranjan, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2927LS(S4)—17-11-2016.