As introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 259 of 2022
THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 
2022
By
Shri Sriniv as Kesineni, M.P.
a
BILL
to further amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2022.
 (2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, in section 125, after clause (2), the following 
clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
 “(2A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 24 and 25 of the Hindu 
Marriage Act, 1955, section 19 of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956, 
The Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on Divorce) Act, 1986, the Indian Divorce 
Act, 1869:—
(a) the Magistrate may award a lump sum amount for the maintenance as a  
one-time settlement in an order after due verification of the assets held by the 
Short title and 
commencement.
Amendment of 
Section 125.
5
10
2 of 1974.
25 of 1955.
78 of 1956.
25 of 1986.
4 of 1869.

husband, including the ascertainment of any immovable or movable property 
possessed by the husband;
(b) in case the award is in the form of a monthly allowance, the order shall be duly 
notified to the employer of the person liable to pay the monthly allowance if the 
person is employed and  the employers shall be directed to deduct from the salary 
of such person a sum equivalent to the amount of maintenance ordered by the court;
Explanation.—  The employer shall include Government entities under article 12 of 
the Constitution and the private entities. 
(c) the retirement funds of the husband working in an organisation to which the 
preceding clause applies shall be used for the purposes of fulfilling the maintenance 
award and the employer after receipt of the order under sub-section (2) shall deposit 
in court the details regarding the retirement funds of the employee in question; and 
(d) any property, whether movable or immovable, built, bought, or constructed 
during the course of marriage shall be equally divided between the two parties to 
the divorce.
 (2B) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), an aggrieved woman 
living in a shared household shall be entitled to interim maintenance without proof of 
marriage.
Explanation.—  For the purposes of this sub-section,—
(a) “aggrieved woman” and “shared household” shall have the same meaning as 
assigned to them in the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005; 
and
(b) “interim maintenance” shall be calculated for the aggrieved woman and the 
minor children, if any with the help of maintenance professionals appointed on 
a contractual basis by the court from a pool of eligible professionals, experts in 
family law and finance in accordance with cost of living index:
 Provided that if the applicant has moved a petition to seek maintenance under 
different laws, the same information shall be communicated by the applicant to the 
relevant courts through an affidavit, within thirty days of the institution of the petition:
 Provided further that the Court shall adjust or setoff the amount awarded in the 
previous proceedings, while determining whether any further amount is to be awarded 
in the subsequent proceeding:
 Provided also that the order passed in the previous proceedings requires any 
modification or variation, such modification or variation shall be made in the same 
proceeding.”.
2
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
43 of 2005.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Constitution makers had incorporated Directive Principles of State Policy (DPSP) 
with the vision to guide the law-making process in the country. Dr. B.R Ambedkar went 
on to state that the DPSP are the heart and soul of the Constitution. Article 39 states that 
“the state shall, in particular, direct its policies towards securing that the citizens, men and 
women equally, have the right to an adequate means of livelihood, that children are given 
opportunities and facilities to develop in a healthy manner and in conditions of freedom and 
dignity and that childhood and youth are protected against exploitation and against moral and 
material abandonment.”
Further Article 39 reinforces Article 15(3) of the Constitution of India which provides 
that: “Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any special provision for 
women and children.” Together the two Articles uphold the rights and subsequent duties of 
the state towards the vulnerable sections of the society. 
Presently, a women can claim maintenance under various laws ranging from Section 
125 of the Criminal Procedure Code (CrPC) and various sections of different personal laws. 
It is an established and widely acknowledged fact that economic prosperity and women 
empowerment go hand-in-hand. Moreover, a nation’s progress is judged as per its ability to 
enforce contracts. However, seven decades since independence, the women of our country 
still run from pillar to post to seek enforcement of their maintenance contracts.
Across the globe, developed countries have formulated stringent guidelines to ensure the 
enforcement of maintenance contracts. For instance, in Australia, the contracts are registered 
with the child support register and the amount is automatically deducted from the income tax 
installment of the payer. Further in Finland, the maintenance amount is revised every year 
depending on the shift in the cost-of-living index. In India, this can be adopted in relation 
to a purchasing index in consonance with the trend of inflation. Therefore, ensuring that the 
maintenance contracts are enforced and ensure a sustainable amount to the aggrieved women.
By virtue of judicial pronouncements and other steps, rights of women have been 
restored but it will become fruitful only when under lying thinking is changed and only if 
maintenance orders are properly enforced. It is imperative that the laws are framed to ensure 
the effective enforcement of the contracts, reduce burden of pending cases and ensure smooth 
procedure.  Only when women, who are the first teachers of a child, get their due, the nation 
can realise the dream envisioned by the constitution makers, of a just and equitable society. 
Hence this Bill.
  New Delhi;                                                   SRINIV AS KESINENI
November 21, 2022
3

ANNEXURE
Extracts From The Code Of Criminal Procedure, 1973 
(Act No. 2 of 1974)
 * * * * * 
125. (1) If any person having sufficient means neglects or refuses to maintain— 
(a) his wife, unable to maintain herself, or 
(b) his legitimate or illegitimate minor child, whether married or not, unable to 
maintain itself, or 
(c) his legitimate or illegitimate child (not being a married daughter) who has 
attained majority, where such child is, by reason of any physical or mental abnormality 
or injury unable to maintain itself, or 
(d) his father or mother, unable to maintain himself or herself, 
a Magistrate of the first class may, upon proof of such neglect or refusal, order such 
person to make a monthly allowance for the maintenance of his wife or such child, father or 
mother, at such monthly rate as such Magistrate thinks fit and to pay the same to such person 
as the Magistrate may from time to time direct: 
Provided that the Magistrate may order the father of a minor female child referred to in 
clause (b) to make such allowance, until she attains her majority, if the Magistrate is satisfied 
that the husband of such minor female child, if married, is not possessed of sufficient means: 
Provided further that the Magistrate may, during the pendency of the proceeding 
regarding monthly allowance for the maintenance under this sub-section, order such person 
to make a monthly allowance for the interim maintenance of his wife or such child, father 
or mother, and the expenses of such proceeding which the Magistrate considers reasonable, 
and to pay the same to such person as the Magistrate may from time to time direct: Provided 
also that an application for the monthly allowance for the interim maintenance and expenses 
of proceeding under the second proviso shall, as far as possible, be disposed of within sixty 
days from the date of the service of notice of the application to such person.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this Chapter,— 
(a) “minor” means a person who, under the provisions of the Indian Majority Act, 
1875 (9 of 1875) is deemed not to have attained his majority; 
(b) “wife” includes a woman who has been divorced by, or has obtained a divorce 
from, her husband and has not remarried. 
 (2) Any such allowance for the maintenance or interim maintenance and expenses of 
proceeding shall be payable from the date of the order, or, if so ordered, from the date of 
the application for maintenance or interim maintenance and expenses of proceeding, as the 
case may be.
(3) If any person so ordered fails without sufficient cause to comply with the order, any 
such Magistrate may, for every breach of the order, issue a warrant for levying the amount 
4
Order for 
maintenance of 
wives, children 
and parents.

due in the manner provided for levying fines, and may sentence such person, for the whole 
or any part of each month’s allowance for the maintenance or the interim maintenance and 
expenses of proceeding, as the case may be remaining unpaid after the execution of the 
warrant, to imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month or until payment if 
sooner made: 
Provided that no warrant shall be issued for the recovery of any amount due under this 
section unless application be made to the Court to levy such amount within a period of one 
year from the date on which it became due: 
Provided further that if such person offers to maintain his wife on condition of her 
living with him, and she refuses to live with him, such Magistrate may consider any grounds 
of refusal stated by her, and may make an order under this section notwithstanding such 
offer, if he is satisfied that there is just ground for so doing. 
Explanation.—  If a husband has contracted marriage with another woman or keeps a 
mistress, it shall be considered to be just ground for his wife’s refusal to live with him. 
(4) No wife shall be entitled to receive an allowance for the maintenance or the interim 
maintenance and expenses of proceeding, as the case may be, from her husband under this 
section if she is living in adultery, or if, without any sufficient reason, she refuses to live with 
her husband, or if they are living separately by mutual consent. 
(5) On proof that any wife in whose favour an order has been made under this section 
in living in adultery, or that without sufficient reason she refuses to live with her husband, or 
that they are living separately by mutual consent.
 * * * * * 
5

LOK SABHA
________
A
BILL
 to further amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
________
(Shri Srinivas Kesineni, M.P.) 