s 
To JIB INTRODUCED IN Lol( SABIl4 
.. \~ 
• 
Bill No. Z5 of 1985. 
THE HIGH COURT JUDGES (CONDITIONS OF 
SERVICE) AMENDMENT BILL, 1965 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the High Court Judges (Conditions of Service) 
ActJ 1954. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixteenth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the High Court Judges (Conditions Short . title and of SeI'Vlce) Amendment Act, 1965. commence-
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
ment. 
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In section 20 of the High Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Amend-
Act, 1954, far the first proviSO, the following proviso shall 'be su'bsti- ment of 
~"ted, nam~ly: _ section 20. 

"Provided that-
------(i) a Judge, who is a member of the Indian Civil Service 
«)r who has held any other pensionable civil post under the 
UniGn, shall, and 
(ii) a Judge, who has held any pensionable civil post 
under a State, may, 
continue to subscribe to the Provident Fund to which he was 
subscribing before his appointment as a Judge:". 
---

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS. __ 
Section 2G of the High Court Judg~s (Conditions of Service) Act, 
1954 provides that every Judge shall be entitled to subscribe to the 
General Provident Fund (Central Services). The first proviso to 
that section makes it obligatory on the part of a Judge, who is a 
member of the Indian Civil Service or has held any other pension-
able civil post under the Union Or a State, to continue to subscribe 
to the Provident Fund to which he was subscribing before his ap-
pointment as a Judge. The rate of interest for the State Provident 
Fund is, in some cases, lower than that for the General Provident 
Fund (Central Services). This places the judges who have held 
any pensionable civil post under a State in a disadvantageous posi-
tion since they would get less by way of interest by subscribing to 
the State Provident Fund. In order to remove this hardship, it is 
IlroPOSt'tl to amend the first proviso to section 20 of the Act so as to 
enable such judges to subscrlb~ at their option to the General Provi-
Jt;:nt Fund (Central Services) instead of to the State Provident Fund. 
l!!xisting provision in so far as it rdates to a Judge who is a member 
of the Indian Civil Service OJ' a Judge who has held any other pen-
sionable civil post under the Union is not intended to be altered. 
The Bill seeks to achieve the above object. -
.f 
NEW DELHI; JAISUKHLAL HATHI. 
The 30th March, 1965. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Bill seeks to amend the first proviso to section 20 of the High 
Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Act, 1954, so as to enable 
judges who have held pensionable civil post under a State to subs-
cribe, at their option, to the General Provident Fund (Central Ser-
vices) instead of to the State Provident Fund. Under the existing 
provision they have to continue to subscribe to the State Provident 
Fund. The Judges who prefer to subscribe to the General·Provident 
Fund would be entitled to interest on their deposits in the General 
Provident Fund (Central Services)~ at the rate prescribed by the 
Central Government from time to ~ime. It is not, however, possible 
to make an estimate of the amount of interest payable on such 
deposits. 
4 

ANNEX'U'Rle 
EXTRACT nOM ~ HIGH C~URT JUDGES (CONDmONS 01' Sama) Act, 
19M 
(28 or l~) 
• • • • 
ZOo Every Judge shall be entitled to subscribe to the General Pro- Provident 
vident Fund (Central Services): Pund. 
Provided that a Judge who is a member of the Indian Civil Ser-
vice or has held any other pensionable civil post under the Union or 
a State shall continue to subscribe to the Provident Fund to which 
he was subscribing before his appointment as a Judge: 
Provided further 'that a Judge who was appointed before the com-
mencement of this Act may continue to subscribe to the Provident 
Fund to which he was subscribing immediately before IUCh com-
mencement. 
• • • • 

LoK SAsH! 
.. .~ 
A "0\ 
Bn..L 
furthe to amend the High Court Judges (Conditions of Service) 
Act, 1954· 
; •• $ b « 
(ShriJai Sukh La1 Hatm, 
Minister of State in tM 
Ministry of Homs Affairs.) 