| As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

। ? ॥॥ 1998

8॥ 1४०. 25 of 1998

THE RESERVATION (SERVICES AND HIGHER EDUCATION) BILL, 1998
by
Suri G.M. Banarwatta, M.P.
A
BILL

provide for adequate reservation in posts and services under the Central Govern-
ment and its public sector undertakings and in higher educational institutions for
the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, other backward classes and back-
ward minorities and for matters connected therewith.

4 Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as

1. (1) This Act may be called the Reservation (Services and Higher Education) Act,

(2) It extends to the whole of India.
~ (3) It shall come into force at once.
_ 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —

(a) "appointing authority" means the authority empowered to make appointment
to a service or a post in the Central Government or its undertaking;

(b) "backward minorities" means and includes persons belonging to Muslim,
Christian, Sikh and such other minority communities who have been included in the

Short title,
extent and
‘commence-


Reservation in
posts and serv-
ices

Reservation in
higher
educational
institutions,

list of other Backward Classess and such other groups or communities as may
recognised by the Central Government or State Government as backward minorities
by notification in the Official Gazette;

(c) "Government establishment” means any office of the Central Government,
public sector undertaking or statutory authority established under an Act of Parliament
ora Corporation, an institution, an organisation or a society, engaged in any activities,
fifty-one per cent. of whose capital or recurring expenditure is contributed directly
or indirectly by the Central Government and shall include universities, affiliated
colleges and educational institutions owned or aided by the Central Government;

(4) “higher education” means education at a level higher than the secondary
evel and shall include professional and technical training;

(९) “other backward classes" means other castes, classes or such groups of
persons as may be recognised as other backward classes by the Central Government
by notification in the Official Gazette and shall include backward minorities;

(0 “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;

(g) "recruitment year" means the calendar year during which recruitment is
made;

(h) "Scheduled Castes" means the castes specified in the Constitution (Scheduled
Castes) Order, 1950 made by the President of India under article 341 of the
Constitution of India and as amended from time to time;

(i) "Scheduled Tribes" means the tribes specified in the Constitution (Scheduled
Tribes) Order, 1950 made by the President of India under article 342 of the
Constitution of India and as amended from time to time.

3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for tk2 time being in
force, Central Government shall reserve or cause to be reserved vacancies in posts and
services in Government establishments for persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the
Scheduled Tribes, other Backward Classes and backward minorities.

(2) The reservation for the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled
Tribes and Other Backwar¢ Classes shall be in the same manner as is being reserved by
the Central Government immediately before the commencement of this Act.

(3) While reserving the vacancies under sub-section (/), the Central Government
shall, as far as practical adhere to the percentage of the persons belonging to the Scheduled
Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward Classes, and each of the backward minorities,
as the case may be, is to the total population as recorded in the latest census.

(4) The vacancies reserved under this Act shall not be filled up by candidates #trer
than those for whom they have been reserved unless otherwise prescribed in order te deal
with any situation of non-availability of candidates to fill up the vacancies reserved for प्रा
various categories.

Explanation.—For the purpose of this Act, reservation shall include reservation in
promotion.

4. (J) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force and subject to the rights of the educational institutions of minorities pursuant to
article 30 of the Constitution of India, there shall be reservation of seats in higher educational



tutions for students belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, other
ard classes and for each of the backward minorities.

_ (2) The provisions of section 3 shall, as far as practical, apply to reservation of seats
‘in higher educational institutions.

§. In the matter of recruitment to reserved vacancies,—

. (a) the upper age limit prescribed for recruitment shall be relaxed by as many
_ years as may be prescribed;

(b) no fee be charged for competitive examination; and

(c) candidates shall be paid prescribed travelling allowance for appearing in
competitive examination or interviews thereof conducted by the Public Service
Commission, Staff Selection Board/Commistion or such other agency under the
control of Central Government.

6. Every appointing authority of Governme.it establishments and every authority
hat admits students in higher educational institutions shall furnish to the special officer

Reservations appointed under section 7, the Chairman of the National Commission for
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes and the Chairman of the National
mission for the Minorities, an annual report in the prescribed manner and within the
ribed period, on appointments/admissions made under this Act and maintain such
her records as may be prescribed.

7. (1) There shall be appointed a Special Officer for Reservations who shall be
d by the President.

(2) It shall be the duty of the Special Officer for Reservations to investigate all
s relating to reservations under this Act and report to the President upon the working
plementation of the Act at such intervals as the President may direct and the President
‘cause all such reports to be laid before each House of Parliament

8. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
‘ing out the purposes of this Act.

Relaxations in
recruitment.

Annual report.

Special Officer
for Reserva-
tions.

Power to make
ruks.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Bill seeks not only to codify the present policy of reservations available to the
Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the other Backward Classes but also to extend
reservation in posts and services and in higher educational institutions to persons belonging
to the backward minorities. The prevalent condition and the continuous declining trend in
the position of the minorities is appalling. The facts and the figures presented by the report
of the High-Power Panel on Minorities Constituted by Government of India irresistibly
demand reservation for minorities in posts and services and in admissions in higher
educational institutions. Only then can the imperatives of social justice be met to usher in
an equitable society.

Hence this Bill.

New Deut, G. M. BANATWALLA
March 23, 1998.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 7 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the office of a Special Officer
ions. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
lated Fund of India, It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of twenty-five
annum.

tis also like to involve a non-recurring expenditure of about rupees ten lakh.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
‘out the purposes of the Bill. Since the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

nN
BILL

to provide for adequate reservation in posts and services under the Central Government

and its Public Sector Undertakings and in higher educational institutions for the Sched-

uled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, other Backward Classes and backward minorities
and for matters connected therewith.

(Shri G.M. Banatwalla, M.P.)