Bill No. 35 of 19* 
THE DISPLACED PERSONS (COMPENSATION AND 
REHABILITATION) BILL, 1954. 
" 
(As INTRODUCED IN THE HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE) 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the payment of compensation and rehabilitation grants 
to displaced persons and for matters connected therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifth Year of the Republic of 
India, as follQws:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title.-This Act may be called the Displaced Persons S 
(Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1954. 
2. Definitions.-In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "compensation pool" means the compensation pool con-
stituted under section 13; 
(b) "displaced person" means any person who, on account 10 
of the setting up of the Dominions of India and Pakistan, or on 
account of civil disturbances or the fear of such disturbances in 
any area now forming part of West Pakistan, has, after the 1st 
day of March, 1947, left, or been displaced from, his place of 
residence in such area and who has been subsequently residing in IS 
India, and includes any person who is resident in any place now 
forming part of India and who for that reason is unable or has 
been rendered unable to manage, supervise or control any 
immovable property belonging to him in W est Paki~tan, and also 
includes'the sUCcessors-in-interest of any such person; 20 
. " 
(c) "evacuee property" means any prop'erty which has been 
declared or is deemed to have been declared' an evacuee property 
under the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1950 (XXXI 
of 1950); 

5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
2 
(d) "public dues", in relation to a displaced person, 
includes-
(i) arrears of rent in respect of any property allotted or 
leased to the displaced person by the Central Government 
or a State Government or the Custodian of evacuee property; 
(ii) any amount recoverable from the displaced person on 
account of loans granted to him by the Central Govern-
ment or a State Government or the Rehabilitation Finance 
Administration constituted under the Rehabilitation Finance 
Administration Act, 1948 (XII of 1948), and any interest on 
such loans; 
(iii) the amount of purchase money or any part thereof 
and any interest on such amount or part remaining unpaid 
and recoverable from the displaced person on account of 
transfer to him by the Central Government or a State 
Government of any property or any interest therein; 
(iv) any other' dues which may be declared by the 
Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
to be public dues recoverable from the displaced person; 
(e) "verified claim" means any claim registered under the 
Displaced Persons (Claims) Act, 1950 (XLIV of 1950) in respect 
of which a final order has been passed under that Act or under 
the Displaeed Persons (Claims) Supplementary Act, 1954 (12 of 
1954); . 
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act; 
(g) "West Pakistan" means the territories of Pakistan 
excluding the Province of East Bengal and includes the tribal 
areas of TO,chi and Kurram and such other tribal areas adjoining 
the North West Frontier Province as may be specified in this 
behalf by order of the Central Government; 
(h) all words and expressions used but not defined in this 
Act and defined in the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 
1950 (XXXI of 1950) have the meanings respectively assigned to 
them in that Act, 
CHAPTER II 
PAYMENT OF COMPENSATION AND REHABlLITATION GRANTS TO DISPLACED· 
PERSONS . 
3. Ap~ointtnent of Chief Settlement Commissioner, etc.-(l) The 
40 Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
appoint a Chief Settlement Commissioner, a Joint Chief Settlement 
Commissioner, a Deputy Chief Settlement Commissioner and as 
many settlement cPDlDli!isioners, additional settlement commissioners 
and settlement officers as many be necessary f.,r the purpose of per-
45 forming the functions assigned to them by or under this Act and 
Illa)", by Jene" •• or .pecial order, provide for tbe distribution or 
allocation of work to 'be performed by them under this. Act. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Joint Chief Settle-
ment Commissioner, the Deputy Chief Settlement Commissioner and 

e 
:all settlement commlSSloners, additional settlement commlSSloners 
.and settlement officers spall perform the functions assigned to them 
by or under this Act uncler the general superintendence and control 
.of the Chief Settlement Commissioner. 
4. Application for payment of compensation.-(1) Subject to any S 
rules that may be made under this Act, the Central Government may, 
from time to time, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify the 
class or classes of displaced persons entitled· to make applications for 
payment of compensation. 
(2) Any displaced person belonging to any of the classes specified 
in the notification issued under sub-section (1) may, within such time 10 
and in such form as may be prescribed, make an application in writ-
ing to the settlement officer having juri~diction over the proceeding 
for payment of compensation to him stating therein the amount of 
his verified claim, the amount, if any, of the public dues recoverable 15 
from him, the property, if any, allotted or leased to him by the Central 
Government or any State Government or the Custodian and such 
other particulars as may be prescribed. 
5. Determination of public dues by settlement officell8.-0n receipt 
'of an application under section 4, the settlement officer shall, after 20 
, making an inquiry in such manner as may be prescribed, pass an 
.order determining the amount of public dues, if any, recoverable 
from the applicant and shall forward the application and the record 
\ .of the case to the settlement commissioner. . . 
6. Determination of the amou~t of compensation.-(l) On receipt 
of an application for payment of compensation tqgether with the 25 
record of the case forwarded under section 5, the settlement com-
missioner shall make an inquiry in such manner as may be pres-
cribed and having due regard to the prescribed scales of compensa-
tion, the nature of the verified claim and other circumstances of the 
case, he shall ascertain the amount' of compensation to which the 
applicant is entitled. 
10 '0 
(2) On ascertaining the amount of compensation to which &n 
applicant is entitleq under sub-section (1), the settlement commis::, 
sioner shall deduct therefrom the following dues recoverable from 15 
the applicant, namely:-
(a) the amount, if any, of the public dues' recoverable from 
the applicant under section 5; 
(b) where any communication is received from any Tribunal 
under section 52 of the Displaced Persons (Debts Adjustment) 40 
Act, 1951 (LXX of 1951), the deQts payable by the applicant in 
accordance with the provisions of that Act; and 
(c) such other dues, if any, as may be prescribed. 
(3) After deducting the dues referred to in sub-section (2), the 
settlement commissioner shall make an order determining the net 45 
amount of compensation payable to the applicant. 
7. Form and manner of payment· of compensation.-(l) A dis· 
placed person shall be paid out of the compensation pool the amount 
of compensation determined under sub-section (3) of section 6 as 
being payable to him, and subject to any rules that may be made So 

s 
10 
15 
20 
4: 
under this Act, the settlement commISSIoner or any other officer 
or authority authorised by the Chief Settlement Commissioner in 
this behalf may make such payment in anyone of the following 
forms or partly in one and partly in any other form, namely:-
(a) in cash; 
(b) in Government bonds; . 
(c) by sale to the displaced person of any property from 
the compensation pool and setting off the purchase money against 
the compensation payable to him; 
(d) by any other mode of transfer to the displaced person 
of any property from the compensation pool and setting off the 
valuation of the property against the compensation payable to 
him; 
(e) by transfer of shares or. debentures in any company or 
corporation; 
(f) in such other form as may be prescribed; 
(2) For the purpose of payment of compensation under this Act~ 
the Central Government may, by rules, provide for all or any of the-
following matters, namely:- • 
(a) the classes of displaced persons to whom compensatt~m 
may be 'Paid; 
(b) the scales according to which, the form and manner in ; 
which, and the instalments by which, compensation may be 
paid to diffe.rent classes of dispJaced persons; 
(c) the valuation of all property, shares and debentures to-
be transferred to displaced persons; 
(d) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed. " 
8. Payment of compensation in cases of dispute.-Where there is' 
any dispute as to the person or persons who are entitled to the' 
30 compensation (including any dispute as to who are the successors-
in-interest of any deceased claimant to compensation) or as to the-
apportionment of compensation among persons entitled thereto, the' 
settlement commissioner may,- . 
35 
(a) after mAking an inquiry, in such manner as may be 
prescribed, decide such dispute: ' 
Provided that nothing in this clause shall debar any person 
aggrieved by such decision to have the dispute decided in a 
civil court; or 
(b) refer the parties to a civil court for the--decision of the 
dispute; 
4° and such decision of a civil court shall be binding on the settlement. 
commissioner. 
9. Special procedure for payment of compensation in certain-
cases.-Where any immovable property has been leased or allotted 
45 to a displaced person by the Custodian under the conditions pub-
lished-
(a) by the notification of the Government of Punjab in the 
Department of Rehabilitation No. 4891-S or 4892-8, dated the-
8th July, 1949; or 

5 
(b) by the notification of the Government of Patiala and 
East Punjab States Union in the Department of Rehabilitation 
No. 8R or 9R, dated the 23rd July, 1949, and published in the 
Official Gazette of that State, dated the 7th August, 1949, 
and such property is acquired under the provisions of this Act and· 5 
forms part of the compensation pool, the displaced person shall, so 
long as the property remains vested in the Central Government, con-
tinue in possession of such property on the same conditions as he held 
the property immediately before the date of the acquisition, and the 
Central Government may, for the purpose of payment of compensa- 10 
tion to such displaced person, transfer to him such property in such 
manner and in such rights and to such extent as may be prescribed. 
ExpZanation.-For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that 
the notifications of the Government of Patiala and East Punjab 
States Union Nos. 7R, SR and 9R, dated the 23rd July, 1949, and 15 
published in the Official Gazette on the 7th August, 1949, purporting 
to have been made under the provisions of the Patiala and East 
. Punjab States Union Evacuees (Administration of Property) Ordin-
ance, 2006 (Ordinance No. XIII of 2006) shall be deemed to have been 
issued under the provisions of the Patiala and East Punhlb States 20 
Union Administration of Evacuee Property Ordinance, 2006 (Ordi-
nance No. XVII of 2006) and the said notifications shall not be invalid 
and shall be deemed never to have been invalid merely by reason of 
• the fact that they were expressed to have been issued under the 
provisions of the said Ordinance No. XIII of 2006, and anything done 25 
or any action taken (including any lease or allotment granted or 
made) under the provisions of the said notifications shall, notwith-
·standing any defect in, or invalidity of, the said notifications, be 
deemed for all purposes to have been validly done or taken as if the 
said notifications were issued under the provisions of the aforesaid 10 
Ordinance No. XVII of 2006 and this section were in force on the day 
·(In which such thing was done or action was taken. 
10. Rehabilitation and other grants to displaced persons.-(1) The 
Central Government may, for the relief and rehabilitation of dis-
placed persons, direct payment of any rehabilitation grant or other lS 
gran~ o~t ~f t~e compc:~ation pool to a displaced person and to any 
publIc InstItution admInIstered for the benefit of displaced persons 
under such conditions and to such extent and in such form and 
manner as may be prescribed. 
(2) All payments mad~ before the co~encement of this Act by 
.the Central Government In respect of mamtenance allowance to dis- 40 
placed persons shall be deemed to have been validly made under sub-
section (1) and shall be recoverable by the Central Government out ()f the compensation pool. 
CHAPTER TIl 
COMPENSATION POOL FOR PURPOSES OF PAYMENT OF COMPENSATION AND 
REHABILITATION GRANTS TO DISPLACED PERSONS 
45 
11. Power to acquire evacuee property for rehabilitation of dis-
pl"ced persons.-(l) If the Central Government is of opinion that it 
is necessary to acquire an~ evacuee property ~or a Public purpose, SO 

6 
being a purpose connected with the relief _ and reha'bilitation of dis---
placed persons, including payment of compensation to such persons;, 
the Central Government may at any time acquire such evacuee pro-
perty by publishing in the Official Gazette a notification to the effect 
, that the Central Government has decided to acquire such evacuee· 
property in pursuance of this section. 
(2) On the publication of a notification under sub-section (1), the' 
right, title and interest of any evacuee in the evacuee property speci-
fied in the notification shall, on and from the beginning of the date 
to on which the notification is so published, be extinguished and the 
evacuee property shall vest absolutely in the Central Government free 
from all encum'brances. 
(3) It shall be lawful for the Central Government, if it so considers: 
necessary, to issue from time to time the notification referred to in 
is sub-section (1) in respect of- . 
(a) all evacuee property generally; or 
(b) any class of evacuee property; or 
(c) all evacuee property situated in a specified area; or 
(d) any particular evacuee property. 
20 (4) All evacuee property acquired under this section shall form 
part of the compensation pool. 
12. Compensation for evacuee property aCquired under this Act.-
There shall be paid to an evacuee compensation in res~t of his. 
property acquired under section 11 in accordance with such principles 
2S and in such manner as may be agreed upon between the Government 
of India and Pakistan. 
13. Compensation pool.-(l) For the purpose of payment of com-
pensation and rehabilitation grants tet displaced persons, there shall 
be constituted a compensation pool which shall consist of-
(a) all evacuee property acquired under section 11, including 
the sale proceeds of any such property and all profits and incdme 
accruing from such property; 
(b) such cash balances lying with the Custodian as may, by 
order of the Central Government, be transferred to the compensa-
tion pool; 
. (c) such cdntributions, in any form whatsoever, as may be 
made to the compensation pool by the Central Government or 
any State Government; 
(d) such other assets as may be prescribed. 
40' (2) The compensation pool shall vest in the Central Government 
free from all ~ncumbrance6 and shall be utilised in accardance with 
the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder. 
14. Exent.,ttIti Itf pteltlWty til i!¥n1pellMtI.ut ItOOI f'tiom processes: 
of courts.-NOp,r!ert y whjch fo~ part of the com. p,ns. . ation :pool 
45 af).d. wbiph is w~t in the Central GOwi'tUnent ut1der tlie ptQ~Ul1ons 
of tblS Act shall . liabl~ to be utoeef!ded antnSt ftJt any" clalff1 In Mty mannt!r wtiatSoeVt!r in t!xecill:lon of ahy -tieCt@e or Oft!et nt by 
any either process of any court or other authority. . 

7 
15. Management of compensation pool.-(1) The Central Govern-
ment may take such measutes as it considers necessary or expedient 
for the custody, management and disposal of the compensation poctl 
in order that it may be effectively utilised in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act. 5 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
fClI'egoing power, the Central Government may, for the purposes 
referred to in sub-section (1), by notification in the Official Gazette,-
(a) appoint such officers as it may deem fit (hereinafter 
referred to as managing officers); or JIO 
(b) constitute such authority or corporation as it may deem 
fit (hereihafter referred tC1 as managing corporation). 
(3) Every managing corporation shall be constituted under such 
name and shall consist of such number of pei'sdtls as ntay be 
specified in the notification, and every such corporation shall be a 15 
body corpo'rate having perpetual succession and a common seal and 
shall by the said name sue and be sued. 
16. Special provision for constitution of Welfare Corporation.-
(1) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 15, there shall be 
constituted a managing corporation to be called the Displaced Persons 20 
Welfare Corporation (heremafter referred to as the Welfare Corpora-
tion) for the purpose of rendering assistance to trusts entitled to 
compensation under this Act and performing such other functions 
as may be assigned to it by or under this Act. 
(2) The Welfare Corporation shall consist of a Chairman al\d such 2, 
number of other members, not less. than four and not exceeding ten, 
as the Central Government may think fit to appoint, and the mem-
bers (including the Chairman) shall hold office during the pleasure 
of the Central Government. 
(3) The Central Government may transfer to the Welfare Corpo- 30 
ration such amount out of the compensation pool, in any form 
whatsoever, as would be payable by way of compensation to the 
trusts entitled thereto under this Act and also such other property 
as the Central Government may, from time to time, think fit· to 
transfer to it; and all such property and income accruing therefrom 3~ 
shall form the Fund of the Welfare Corporation. 
(4) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Fund shall be applied 
by the Welfare Corporation, in such manner and subject to such 
conditions as may be prescribed, to-
(a) meeting the expenses in connection with the administra- 40 
tion of the Welfare Corporation; 
(b) rehdering assistanee to any trust entitled to compensation 
under this Aeti 
(c) proViding educational and medical faeUities generally 
for the benefit of displaced persons; 45 
(ell perlGnnino-sUch oth~ fUbCtions denetaily fbr the welfare 
ot displaCed pefoSoj;s as may tie prescfi~. 

8 
17. Functions and duties of man~ging officers· and managing 
corporations.-(1) All managthg officers or managing corporations 
shall perform such functions as may be assigned to them by or under 
this Act under the general superintendence and control of the Chief 
5 Settlement Commissioner. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made 
thereunder, a managing officer or managing corporation may take 
such measures as he or it considers necessary or expedient for the 
purpose of securing, administering, preserving, managing or disposing 
10 of any property in the compensation pool entrusted to him or it and 
generally for the purpose of satisfactorily discharging any of the 
duties impose~ on him or it by or under this Act and may, for any 
such purpose as aforesaid, do all acts and incur all expenses necessary 
or incidental thereto. 
15 (3) Any amount due to the Custodian in respect of any evacuee 
property acquired under this Act for any period prior to the date of 
the acquisition shall vest in, and be payable to, the Central Govern-
ment and shall be recoverable by the managing officer or managing 
corporation from the person liable to pay the same. 
20 18. Power to vary or cancel leases or allotment of any property 
acquired under this Act.-(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in 
any contract or any other law for the time being in force, the manag-
ing officer or managing corporation may cancel any allotment or 
terminate any lease or amend the terms of any lease or allotment 
25 under which any evacuee.property acquired .. under this Act is held 
or occupied by a person, whether such allotment or lease v:as granted 
before or after the commencement of this Act. 
(2) Where by reason of any action takeR under sub-section (1), 
any person has ceased to be entitled to possession of any evacuee 
30 property acquired under this Act, he shall, on demand by the manag-
ing officer or managing corporation, surrender possession of such 
property to such officer or corporation or to any person duly authoris-
ed by him or it in this behalf. 
(3) 1£ any person fails to surrender possession of any property on 
35 demand under sub-section (2), the managing officer or managing 
corporation may, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained 
in any other law for the time being in force, eject such person and 
take possession of such property and may, for such purpose, use or 
cause to be used such force as may be necessary. 
19. Power to transfer property out of the compensation pool.-
40 (1) Subject to any rules that may be made under this Act, the 
managing officer or managing corporation may transfer any property 
out of the compensation pool-
4S 
~o 
(a) by sale of such property to a displaced person or an 
association of displaced persons, whether incorporated or not, or 
to any other person, whether the property is sold by public 
auction or otherwise; 
(b) by lease or allotment of any such property to a displaced 
person or an association of displaced persons, whether incorporat-
ed or not; 

~ 
(c) in the case of a share of an evacuee in a company, by 
transfer of such share to a displaced person, notwithstanding 
-anything to the contrary contained in the Indian Companies Act, 
1913 (VII of 1913) or in the memorandum or articles of associa-
tion of such company; S 
(d) in such other manner as may be prescribed. 
(2) Every managing officer or managing corporation selling any 
immovable property by public auction under sub-section (1) shall be-
deemed to be a Revenue officer within the meaning of sub-section 
(4) of section 89 of the Indian Registration Act, 1908 (XVI of 1908). 10 
(3) Where the ownership of any property has passed to the buyer 
before the payment of the whole of the purchase money, the amount 
'Of the purchase money or any part thereof remaining unpaid and 
any interest on such amount or part shall, l'!otwithstanding anything 
to the contrary contained in any other law, be a first charge upon IS 
-the property in the hands of the buyer or any transferee from such 
buyer and may, on a certificate issued by the Chief Settlement Com-
missioner, be recovered in the same manner as an arrear of land 
l'evenue. 
20. Recovery of arrears.-Any sum due to the Custodian in respect 20 
·of any evacuee property acquired under this Act for any period prior 
to the date of the acquisition, or to the Central Government in 
l'espect of any property in the compensation pool may, on a certificate 
issued by the Chief Settlement Commissioner, be recovered in the 
:same manner as an arrear of land revenue. 25 
CHAPTER IV . 
ApPEAL, REVISION AND POWERS OF OFFICERS UNDER THE ACT 
21. Appeals to the Settlement Commissioner.-(l) Subject to the 
provisions of sub-section (2), any person aggrieved by an order of 
the settlem.ent officer under this Act ma-y, within thirty days from 10 
the date of the order, prefer an appeal to the settlement commis-
sioner in such form and manner as may be prescribed: 
Provided that the settlement commissioner may entertain the 
.appeal after the expiry of the said period of thirty days, if he is 
satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from 35 
filing the appeal in time. 
(2) No appeal shall lie from an order of the settlement officer 
under section 5 if the difference between the amount of public dues 
11S determined by the settlement officer and that as admitted by the 
applicant is less than one thousand rupees or such other amount 40 
not exceeding one thousand rupees as may be specified by the Central 
-Government in this behalf, by notification in the Official Gazette. 
(3) The settlement commissioner may, after hearing the appeal, 
confirm, vary or reverse the order appealed from and pass such 
·orders in relation thereto as he deems fit. 4S 
22. Appeals to the Chief SeU;lement Commissioner.-(l) Subject 
to the provisions of sub-section \2), any person aggrieved by an order 
-of the settlement commissioner or the additional settlement commis-
::;ioner under this Act may, 'within thirty days from the date of the 

10 
order, prefer an appeal to the Chief Settlement Commissioner in 
such form and manner as may be prescribed: 
. Provided that the Chief Settlement Commissioner may entertain 
the appeal after the expiry of the said period of thirty days, if he is 
5 satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from 
filing the appeal in time. 
(2) No app~al shall lie from any order of the settlement commis-
sioner passed in appeal under section 21. 
(3) The Chief Settlement Commissioner may ~ after hearing the-
10 appeal, confirm, vary or reverse the order appealed from and pass: 
such orders in relation thereto as he deems fit. 
23. Power of revision of the Chief Settlement Commissioner.-
(1) The Chief Settlement Commissioner may at any time call for 
the record of any proceeding under this Act in which the settlement 
IS officer or additional settlement commissioner or settlement com-
missioner or managing officer or managing corporation has passed' 
an order for the purpose of satiSfying himself as to the legality or 
propriety of any such order and may pass such order in relation there-
to as he thinks fit. 
20 (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power 
under SUb-section (1), if the Chief Settlement Commissioner is satis-
fied that any order for payment of compensation to a displac~ per-
son or any lease or allotment granted to such a person has. been 
obtained by him by means of fraud, false representation or conceal-
25 ment of any material fact, then, notwithstanding anything contained 
in this Act, the Chief Settlement Commissioner may pass an order 
directing that no- compensation shall be paid to such a person or 
reducing the amount of compensation to be paid to him, or as the 
case may be, cancelling the lease or allotment granted to him; and 
~o if it is found that a displaced person has been paid compensation 
which is not payable to him, or which is in excess of the amount I 
payable to him.· such amount or excess of the amount, as the case 
may be, may, on a certificate issued by the Chief Settlement Com-
missioner, be recovered in the same manner as an arrear of land 
~5 revenue. 
(3) No order which prejudicially affects any person shall be pass-
ed under this section without giving him a reasonable opportunity 
of being heard. 
24. Review and amendment of orders.-(l) Any person aggrieved 
by an order of the se.ttlement officer under section 5, from which no 
40 appeal is allowed under section 21, may, within thirty days from the-
date of the order, make an application in such form and manner as 
may be prescribed., to the settlemen~ officer for review of his order 
aild the decision of the settlement officer on such application shall, 
45 su.bject to the provisions of section 23, be final. 
(2) Clerical or arithmetiea1 miStakes in orders passed by a ~ttle­
ment officer or an additional settlement comrt1iseiOnet or. a settle-
ment c01:lllnissioner or the Chief Settlement Commissioner or errors 
itriMn~ ttteretii from any accttfl!tltlll Jlip or omisSion may I at. any time,' 
So fie ~~tM bv the ~rh~nt bfft~t or additionaI~tilemet1t 
~~ en. aettl~ertt CHtrumssfO~ or the Ch~fSi!ttletnent 
eiJlirinl!iStSrier; at Die Wt! In.,. bt!. . 

11 
ZS. Powers of Settlement Officers etc.-(l) The Chief Settlelllent 
Commissioner or the Joint Chief Settlement Commissioner or the 
Deputy Chief Settlement Commissioner or a settlement commissioner 
or an additional settlement commissioner or a settlement oilicer 
shall, for the purpose of making any inquiry or hearing any appealS" 
under this Act, nave the same powers as are vested in a civil court 
under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act V of 1908) when trying 
a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely:-
(a) summoning and enfdrcing the attendance of any person 
and examining him on oath; 10' 
(b) requiring the discovery and prodUction of any docu-
ment; 
(c) requisitioning any pUblic record from any court or office; 
(d) issuing commissions for the elCamination of witnesses; 
. (e) appointing guardians or next friends of persons who are IS: 
minors or of unsound mind; 
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed; 
and any proceeding before any such officer shall be deemed 
to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 
and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (Act XLV of 1860) and every 
such officer shall be deemed to be a civil court within the meaning 
of sections 480 and 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 
(Act V of 1898). 
20. 
(2) The Chief Settlement Cammissioner or any other officer 
hearing an appeal under this Act shall, subject to the provisions of 25 
this Act, have such further powers as are vested in a civil court 
under the Code of Civil Proceduce 1908 (Act V of 1908) when hear-
ing an -appeal. 
26. Finality of orders.---Save as otherwise expressly provided in 
this Act, every order made by any settlement officer, additional ~o· 
settlement commissioner, settlement commissioner, managing 
officer, managing corporation or the Chief Settlement Commissioner 
shall be final and shall not be called in question in any court by way 
of an appeal or revision or in any original suit, application or 
execution proceedings. 
CHAPTER V 
MISCELLANEOUS 
35· 
27. Power to transfer cases.-The Central Government or the 
Chief Settlement Commissioner may, by order in writing at any time, 
transfer any case pending before an officer appointed under this Act 40-
to another officer and the officer to whom the case is so transferred 
may, subject to any sJ?ecial direction in the order of transfer, proceed 
from the stage at WhiCh it was so transfelTed. 
!B. Cetta.tn 4isplaCed petsens Bet te be ejeeW let two years.-
'Where a displileed person is. in lawful possesSibn of my property • 4S 
Com~rised in. the comp~~sat~il ~l whieh is traDsf-:rred to. another 
petson- utlde't the proVISions Of thlS Act, then, notwithstanding any-
thing contained in any other law, the displaced~ petson shall, Without 

12 
prejudice to any other right which he may have in the property, be 
deemed to be a tenant of the transferee for a period of two years 
from the date of the transfer and shall not be liable to be ejected 
during that period: 
-S Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to a displaced 
person who fails to pay regularly rent of such property or mis-uses 
such property. 
. 29. Power to give dlreetlons.-The Central Government may give 
directions to any State Government as to the carrying into execution 
10 in the State of any of the provisions contained in this Act or of any 
rules or orders made thereunder. 
30. Delegation of powers.-(l) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, direct that any power e.xercisable 
by it under this Act shall, in such circumstances and under such 
. IS conditions, if any, as may-be specified in ~e direction, be. exercisable 
also by such officer or authority subordinate to the Central Govern-
ment or by the State Government or by such officer or authority 
subordinate to the State Government as may be specified in the 
notification . 
.. 20 (2) Subject to the provisions of this Act and of the rules and 
orders made thereunder, the Chief Settlement Commissioner may, 
by general or special order, delegate all or any of his powers under 
this Act to the Joint Chief Settlement Commissioner, the Deputy 
Chief Settlement Commissioner or any settlement commissioner, 
.25 subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the order. 
31. Penalty.-(l) Any person who furnishes in his application for 
payment of compensation any information which he knO\'{s, or has 
reason to believe, to be false or which he-does not believe to be true, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to two 
30 years or, with fine, or with both. 
(2) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable 
under this Act save upon complaint in writing made by an officer 
authorised by the Chief Settlement Commissioner by general or 
special order in this behalf. 
3S 32. Bar of jurlsdictlon.-Save as otherwise expressly provided in 
this Act, no civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit 
or proceeding in respect of any matter which the Central Govern-
ment or any of the officers appointed under this Act is empowered 
by or under this Act to determine, and no injunction shall be granted 
40 by any court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to 
be taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or under this Act. 
33. Oftlcers appointed under the Act to be public servants.-The 
Chief Settlement Commissioner, the Joint Chief Settlement Commis-
sioner, the Deputy Chief Settlement Commissioner and all settlement 
45 commissioners, additional settlement commissioners and settlement 
officers appointed under this Act shall be deemed to be public 
servants within the 'meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code 
(Act XLV of 1860). 

13 
34. Protection of action taken In good faltIL-No suit or other legal 
proceeding shall lie against the Central Govemmen t or any person 
appointed under this Act in respect of anything which is in good faith 
done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or of any rules 
Or orders made thereunder. , 
35. Validation of certain aetlon taken before the commencement 
of the Act.-Anything done or any action talten (wcluding any order 
made) by the Chief Settlement Commissioner, settlement commis-
sioners, additional settlement commissioners .or settlement officers for 
the purposes of payment of compensation or rehabilitation grants or 10 
other grants to displaced persons shall, in so far as it is not incon-
sistent with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been done 
or taken in the exercise of the powers conferred by or under this Act 
as if this Act were in force on the date on which such thing was done 
or action was taken. 15 
36. Power to make rules.-(l) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the pur-
poses of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the fol- 2() 
lowing matters, namely: - . 
(a) the form and manner in which, and the time within which, 
an application for payment of compensation may 'be made and 
the particulars which it may contain; 
(b) the classes of displaced persons who may apply for pay- 25 
ment of compensation and to whom compensation may be paid; 
(c) the scales according to which, the form and manner in 
which, and instalments by which. compensation may be paid to 
displaced persons; 
(d) the dues which may be deducted from the amount of 30 
compensation to which a displaced person is entitled; 
(e) the form and manner in which Government bonds may 
be issued to, displaced persons; 
(f) valuation of property, shares and debentures which may 
be transferred to displaced persons; , ' 
(g) the manner in which, the ext~nt to which, and the rights 
in which, property may 'be transferred to displaced persons 
under section 9; 
(h) the circumstances under which, the extent to which 
3S 
and the manner in which, rehabilitation grants and other grants 4(). 
may be paid to a displaced person; . 
(i) the principles a~cQrding to which, and the manner in 
which, compensation may be paid to an evacuee in respect of any 
evacuee property acquired under this Act; " 
W the powers, functions .and 'duties of managing officers and 4$ 
managing corporations; 
(k) the composition of Welfare Corporation and its powers functions and duties; , 

10 
IS 
14 
(l) the procedure for the transfer of property out of the 
compensation pool and the manner of realisation of the sale 
proceeds or the adjustment of the value of the property' trans-
ferred against the amount of compensation; 
(m) the procedure to be followed by settlement officers and 
!>ettlement commissioners in making inquiries under this Act; 
(n) the fonn and manner in which appeals and applications 
for review or revision may be preferred or made under this Act 
and the procedure for hearing such appeals or ap2lications for 
review or revision; . 
(0) the powers vested in a civil court which may be exer-
cised by an officer appointed under this Act; . 
(p) the form and manner in which records and books of 
accounts may be maintained under this Act; 
(q) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed 
under this Act. 

15 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
'Negotiations have been in progress with the Government of 
Pakistan for more than six years with a view to arrive at an equitable 
solution of the problem of immovable evacuee property. The Gov-
ernment of India have all through been of the view that the immo-
vable evacuee properties including agricultural land in India and 
Pakistan should be exchanged in lump on Government to Govern-
ment basis, the debtor cO'untry paying to the creditor for the differ-
ence between the values of such properties in the two countries. The 
proposals made by the Government of India from time to time have, 
however, been turned down by Pakistan. There has been a persistent 
demand from displaced persons that these properties should be trans-
ferred to them in permanent ownership. The properties have been 
fast deteriorating and many of them have already been declared 
unfit for habitation or have crumbled down. To halt further 
deterioration and to facilitate the rehabilitation of displaced persons 
from West Pakistan, this Bill provides that the right, title and 
interest of evacuees in evacuee properties in India should be acquired 
by Government. The compensation to be paid to displaced persons 
will be confined to the utilisation of the acquired evacuee property 
in India as well as any amount realised from Pakistan on account 
of the difference between the values of evacuee properties in the two 
countries. The loans so far advanced to displaced p~rsons from West 
Pakistan, the properties built by the Government for their rehabili-
tation and the provision made till May 1953 for their rehabilitation for 
the future under the Five Year Plan or otherwise will be utilised for 
rehabilitation by giving grants. The Bill provides for the payment of 
rehabilitation grants. ' 
" 2. The Bill provides for the ~ppointment of a Chief Settlement 
Commissioner, settlement commissioners and settlement officers 
who will determine and pay the amount of compensation and rehabi-
litation grant payable to persons having verified claims. Managing 
officers and managing corporations will be entrusted with the custody, 
managemen t and disposal of the assets in the pool. 
The Bill provides for the setting up of the DispJaced Persons 
Welfare Corporation for the purpose 'Of providing educational .and 
medical facilities to displaced persons' from West Pakistan and 
rendering assistance to institutions engaged in such activities. The 
paYPlents due to educational and medical trusts with verified claims 
will be placed at the disposal of this corporation along with other 
properties for being utilised for the above mentioned purpose. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 13th May, 1953. 
AJIT PRASAD JAIN. 

16 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
. . The Bill envisages the distribution as compensation and rehabili-
tation grants to displaced persons from West Pakistan of assets worth 
roughly Rs. 185 crores including acquired evacuee propertie~ worth 
about Rs. 100 crores. In addition evacuee agricultural lands in 
Punjab/Pepsu and other States wUl be acquired and utilised. 
2. Sub-clause (1) of clause 3 of the Bill provide for the 
appointment of Chief Settlement Commissioner, Joint Chief Settle-
ment Commissioner, Deputy Chief Settlement Commissioner and as 
many settlement commissioners, assistant settlement commissioners 
and settlement officers etc., as may be necessary fot the purpose of 
performing the functions assigned to them by or under the Bill. A 
Chief Settlement Commissioner and some settlement commissioners, 
settlement officers and valuation officers .are already functioning 
for the implementation of the Interim Compensation Scheme under 
which part compensation is being paid to certain priority categories 
of displaced persons. The services of these officers will be utilised 
for work under this BilL An expenditure of about Rs. 40 lakhs will 
be incurred on such officers and staff during· the current· financial 
year, and will be met out of the budget of the Ministry of Rehabili-
tation under Demand No. 57-Miscellaneous as already voted by the 
Parliament. 

.. 
17 
MEMORANDUM OF DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clauses 7(2) and 36 of the Bill empower the Central Government 
to make rules. The matters in respect of which such rules may be 
made are specified therein. The Central Government will also be 
empowered to issije notifications and· orders in certain cases. 
Payment of compensation and rehabilitation grants to nearly four 
lakhs of disp!aced persons by utilising th~ acquired evacuee pro-
perty and properties built for them by Government, after adjusting 
the rehabilitation loans and other benefits already taken, will be a 
highly complicated process. The practical difficulties are enhanced 
because the displaced persons have been in occupation of these pro-
perties for some years and final settlement has to be carried out so as 
to cause the least possible dislocation. The problems which will 
arise in the course of such payments will differ in different areas 
according to the nature of the properties available for distribution. 
Similarly, various classes of displaced persons will have to be 
differently dealt with acording to their needs and circumstances. In 
view of the magnitude and the complex nature of the problems, 
some of the provisions of the Bill have been framed in general terms 
only and· l~y down broad principles. Matters such as payment of 
compensation and rehabilitation grants, the manner of payment, 
whether "in the form of cash or property, the method of making appli-
f cations and inquiring into them and other matters of frocedure have 
been left to be regulated by' rules. Such delegation 0 the legislative 
power is of a normal character. 

HOUSE OF mE PEOPLE 
In tt' 
A 
BILL 
to' ptoviaerorr:stlr=~. t of compen!arion md . rehabU~atiOri 
grams. to ' _.' .persons and -for -1lIatt.eXS, coan~ 
thi:feWiEh. - . -. '" _:. :.:: - ' . . . " . .... . ... ' .... 
. . .; _.s.... .. ,-'; ...... :, .. ,'~". ,; .. ; :: "; ~.:."r:'.:. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (3) of &nicle 117 of 
the Constirution of India, recommended to the House of the 
People the consideratIOll of the Bill. 
• 
GIPD-loaPS-M of t.-'14·S-54-1710 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary_ 
(Shri AjitPrasad Jain. 
Minister for Rehabilitation.) 