DIU No. 35 of 1'55 
THE CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1955 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 

Bill No • .&5 of 1'55 
THE CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1955. 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BilL 
further to amend the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Code of Civil Procedure Short title 
(Amendment) Act 1955. and com-, mencement. 
5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In sub-section (1) of section 34 of the Code of Civil Procedure, Amen~ment 
1908 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), after the words ~,~o~ 
"further interest at such rate", the words "not exceeding six per of 1908. 
J 0 cent. per annum" shall be inserted. 
IS 
3. Sub-section (3) of section 35 of the principal Act shall be Amendment 
omitted. of section 35, Act V 
of 1908. 
t. In sub-section (1) of section 35A of the principal Act,- Amendment 
of section, 
(i) for the words "not being an appeal" the words "including 3t, Act V 
an execution proceeding but excluding an appeal" shall be substi- 0 1908. 
tuted; and 
(ii) the words "if the objection has been taken at the earliest 
opportunity and" shall be omitted. 

Azncndmcat 
oflec:tion 
39. Act V 
of 1908. 
Amendment 
efeection 
"7. Act V 
of 1908. 
2 
5. In section 39 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the 
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(3) Nothing in this section shall be construed as authoris-
ing a Court to send for execution any decree passed by it ex 
parte before the 26th day of January, 1950, against a defendant S 
who was not amenable, or had not submitted himself, to its 
jurisdiction to another Court to which the decree could not, 
under the law in force at the date of the decree, have been sent 
for execution, or as authorising such other Court to execute the 
decree". 
6. In section 47 of the principal Act, for sub-section (3) and the 
E~lanation, the following shall be substituted, namely:-
"(3) No Court executing a decree shall entertain any quesfion 
arising in a proceeding under this section 'between the parties 
10 
to the suit in which the decree was passed, or their representa- J 5 
tives, and relating to the exec~tion, discharge or satisfaction of 
the decree, if the question had been directly and substantially 
raised in a former proceeding relating to that decree between 
the same parties or their representatives and had been finally 
determined therein. 
(4) Where a question arises as to whether any person is or 
is not the representative of a party, such question shall, for the 
purposes of this section, be determined by the Court. 
20 
Explanation I.-For the purposes of this section, a plaintiff 
whose suit has been dismissed, a defendant against whom a suit 2S 
has been dismissed and a purchaser at a sale in execution of the 
decree are parties to the suit. 
E%planation II.-The expression "former proceeding" shall 
denote a proceeding which has been decided prior to the proceed-
ing in question, whether or not it was instituted prior thereto. 30 
Exp~tion III.-A question shall be deemed to have b~E!n 
raised in the former proceeding, if the matter in dispute had 
been alleged by one party and either denied or admitted, 
expressly or impliedly, by the other". 
Amencimeae 
of acc:tion 
60. Act V 
1. In the proviso to sub-section ,(1) of section 60 of the principal3S ' 
Act,-
of 1908. 
(a) in clause (i), after the words "one-half the remainder", 
the words "in execution of any decree other than a decree for 
maintenance" shall be inserted; 

v of 19S0. 5 
3 
(b) after clause (i), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(ia) one-third of the salary in execution of any decree 
for maintenance;" 
(c) in clause (j), after the words "to whom" the words and 
figures "the Air Force Act, 1950 or" shall be inserted. 
8. Section 68, section 69, section 70, section 71 and section 72 of Omiulon of 
the principal Act shall be omitted. ~::: ~ct 
V of 1908. 
- '9. In sub-section (1) of section 82 of the principal Act, after the Amenc!ment 
10 words "within the time so specified", the words "or within three 8~.se..:°V 
months from the date of the decree, where no time is so specified" of I9OB. 
shaH be inserted. 
,JO. In sub-section (1) of section 92 of the principal Act, after Amendment 
clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- ~t~~J 
I, "(cc) directing a trustee who has been removed or a person of 1908. 
who has ceased to be a trustee, to Beliver possession of any 
trust property in his possession to a new trustee;". 
11. In ~ection 102 of the principal Act, for the words "five ~=ent 
hundred rupees", the words "one thousand rupees" shall be lola, Act V 
~~~~~. of 1_ 
12. In section 109 of the principal Act, in claus.e (c), for the words :;n=:,enf 
"decree or order", the words "judgment, decree or final order" shall 109, A ct V 
be substituted. of 1908. 
, 13. In section 115 of the principal Act, the word "thereto" shall Amendment 
of section 2, be omitted. lIS. Act V 
of 1908. 
30 
U. In section 133 of the principal Act,- Amendment ofeection 
(a) for sub-section 
substituted, namely:-
(1), the following sub-section shall be 133. Act V 
of 1908. 
"( 1) The following persons shall be entitled to, exemption 
from personal appearance in Court, namely:-
(i) the President of India; 
(ii) the Vice-President of India; 
(iii) the Speaker of the House of the People; 
(iv) the Ministers of the Union; 

Amendment 
of section 
144, Act V 
of 1908. 
Amendment 
of the First 
Schedule to 
Act V of 
1908. 
Service of 
SUllUDonl 
by post. 
Power of 
Court to 
record 
admi8sion. 
4 
(v) the Governors, Rajpramukhs, Lieutenant Governors 
and Chief Commissioners of States; 
(vi) the Speakers of the State Legislative Assemblies; 
(vii) the Chairmen of the State Legislative Councils; 
(viii) the Ministers of States; and 
(ix) the persons to whom section 87B applies." 
(b) sub-section (2) shall be omitted; 
(c) in sub-section (3) the words "so exempted" shall be 
omitted. 
15. In sub-section (1) of section 144 of the principal Act,- 10 
(i) after the words "as a decree", the words "or an order" 
shall be inserted; and 
(ii) after the words "such decree", the words "or (·rder" shall 
be inserted. 
16. In the First Schedule to the principal Act,- 1 S 
(1) in Order V, after rule 20, the following rule shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"20A. (1) Where, for any reason whatsoever, the 
, summons is returned unserved in the first instance, th~ 
Court may, either in lieu of, or in addition to, the manner 20 
provided for service of summons in the foregoing rules, 
direct the summons to be served by registered post addressed 
to the defendant or his agent empowered to "lccept service 
at the place where the defendant or his agent ordinarily 
resides or carries on business or personally works for gain. 2S 
(2) An acknowledgment purporting to be signed by 
the defendant or the agent or an endorsement by a postal 
employee that the defendant or the agent refused to take 
delivery may be deemed by the Court issuing the summons 
to be prima facie proof of service." 30 
(2) in Order XII, after rule 3, the following rule shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"3A. Notwithstanding that no notice to admit docu-
ments has been given under rule 2, the Court may, at any 
stage of the proceeding before it, of its own motion, call 35 
upon any party to admit any document and shall, in such 
a case, record whether the party admits or refuses or neg-
lects to admit such document"; 

5 
(3) in Order XVI, after rule 1, the following rule shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(lA) Where any party to the suit has, at any time Prod.uction 
on or before the day fixed for the hearing of evidence filed o~ whltneSS(. 
" ' WIt out 
In the Court a llst of persons either for giving evidence or summons 
for producing documents, the party may, without applying ~~~~ 
for summons under rule 1, bring any such person, whose 
name appears in the list, to give evidence or to produce 
documen ts."; 
10 (4) in Order XX, for rule 1, the following rule shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"1. The Court, after the case has been heard, shall Judgment 
pronounce judgment in open Court, either at once or as when Pdro-, nounce . 
soon thereafter as may be practicable, on some future day; 
IS and when the judgment is to be pronounced on some future 
day, the Court shall fix a day for that purpose, of which due 
notice shall be given to the parties or their pleaders."; 
20 
30 
3S 
(5) in Order XXI,-
(a) rule 70 shall be omitted; 
(b) in rule 71, the words "or to the Collector or sub-
ordinate of the Collector, as the case may be" shall be 
omitted; 
(6) in Order XXV, for .rule 1, the following rule shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"1. (1) At any stage of a suit, the Court may, either fjWh:n secur:tJ 
f . . th 1" f d f d t or costs may o 1ts own mobon or on e app 1catIon 0 any e en an , be required 
order the plaintiff, for reasons to be recorded, to give from rltintur. 
within the time fixed by it security for the payment of all 
costs incurred and likely to be incurred by any defendant: 
Provided that such an order shall be made in all cases 
in which it appears to the Court that a sole plaintiff is, or 
(when there are more plaintiffs than one) that all the plain-
tiffs are, residing out of India and that such plaintiff does not 
possess or that no one of such plaintiffs possesses any sllfficien~ 
immovable property within India other than the property 
in suit. 
(2) Whoever leaves India under such circumstances as 
to afford reasonable probability that he will not be forth-
coming whenever he may be called upon to pay costs shall 
be deemed to be residing out of India within the meaning 
of the proviso to sub-rule (1)."; 

Procedure on 
application 
for admiIaion 
of appeal. 
Omission 
ofthc Third 
Schedule to 
Act V of 
1908· 
IS 
(7) in Order XXXIV, in rule 11,-
(a) sub-clause (ii) of clause (a) shall be omitted; 
(b) in clause (b),-
(i) the word 'and' at the end of sub-clause (i) shall 
be omitted; 
(ii) sub-clause (ii) shall be omitted. 
(8) in Order XXXVII, in rule 1, after clause (a), the follow-
ing clause shall be inserted, namely:-
"(b) any District Court or other Court specially empower-
ed in this behalf by the State Government;"; 10 
(9) in Order XLIV, rule 1 shall be re-numbered as sub-rule 
(1) thereof, and-
(a) in sub-rule (1) as so re-numbered., the proviso 
shall be omitted; 
(b) after sub-rule (1) as so re-numbered, the following IS 
sub-rule shall be inserted, namely:-
"(2) The Appellate Court, after fixing a day for 
hearing the applicant or his pleader and hearing him 
accordingly if he appears on that day, and upon a 
perusal of the application and of thE: judgment and 20 
decree appealed from, shall reject the application, un-
less it sees reason to think that the decree is contrary 
to law or to some usage having the force of law, or is 
otherwise erroneous or unjust."; .. 
(10) in Order XLVII,- 25 
(a) rule 2 shall be omitted; 
(b) in rule 7, in sub-rule (1), clause (a) shall be 
omitted. 
17. The Third Schedule to the principal Act shall be omitted. 
l( 
~":tl' f 18. Where, 'before the commencement of this Act, the execution 30 
:c=ra: ~f of a decree has been transferred to the Collector under section 68 
~r:inbY c~~: of the principal Act and is pending before the Collector on such 
lcctOl'lt. commencement, then, notwithstanding the omission of sections 68 
to 72 inclusive and the Third Schedule to the principal Act, the 
decree shall be executed by the' Collector in accordance with the 35. 
provisions of the said sections and the said Schedule, as if this Act 
had not been passed, 

; 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
"For some time past there has been general dissatisfaction about 
the increasing dilatoriness, expense and complication of our civil 
procedure and the administration of civil justice. There are delays 
at all stages-in the original court itself, during the stages at which 
the cases are taken up to the High Courts on interlocutory matters, 
during appeals and also in execution proceedings. This problem 
has been considered from time to time by various committees set 
up "by the State Governments and diverse suggestions have been 
made how best to tackle it. While a thorough overhaul of the Code 
of Civil Procedure is a difficult task which should be entrusted to 
an expert committee, some amendments of the Code appear to be 
desirable from the point of view of, reducing the delay and expense. 
2. This Bill seeks to achieve this object and the notes on clauses 
appended to the Bill explain some of the provisions thereof. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 29th April, 1955. 
H. V. PATASKAR. 

N otas on clauses 
Clause 2.-Section 34. which enables courts to award interest, 
does not impose a maximum limit. This clause proposes to limit 
the rate of interest which a Court can award on the decretal amount 
to six per cent. per annum. 
Cla'use 3.-It is proposed to take away the power of the Court 
to give interest on costs. 
Cla'USe 4.-This clause seeks to enlarge the powers of Courts 
in granting compensatory costs in respect of false or vexatious 
claims or defence. This is necessary to check frivolous litigation. 
Under the existing section 35A, Courts can grant compensatory 
costs, only if the objection has been taken at the earliest opportu-
nity. 
It is proposed to enlarge the powers of the Court firstly by enabling 
it to grant compensatory costs, if it is satisfied of the justice there-
of, even though the other party has not taken objection at the 
earliest opportun:ty, and secondly by making the section applicable 
to execution proceedings also. 
Cla'USe 5.-Courts in former Indian States were foreign courts 
before the commencement of. the Constitution Decrees passed by 
such foreign courts were not executable by courts in India Under 
section 39 of the Code. The position has become anomalous after 
the commencement of the Constitution. It is now sought to be 
m3de clear that ex parte decrees passed before the 26th January, 
1950 by such courts shall not be executed by courts in India under 
section 39 nor any ex parte decree passed before that date by any 
court in India shall be executed in any former Indian State. 
Clause 6.-Under the existing section 47, all questions arising 
between the parties to the suit or their representatives and relating 
to the execution, discharge and satisfaction of the decree are to be 
decided by the executing court and not by a separate suit. There 
have been conflicting decisions of the High Courts as to whether a 
purchaser at a sale in the execution of a decree is a party to the suit 
for the purposes of section 47. It is proposed to set at rest the 
conflict in these cases by expressly providing that a purchaser at a 
sale in execution of the decree shall be a party to the suit for the 
purposes of section 47. 
The principles of res judicata, including those of constructive 
res judicata, are expressly provided in the case of suits under sec-
tion 11. There is no such specific provision in regard to execution 
cases. Courts have, however, ap,plied the principles underlying 
section 11 to execution cases also. There is a difference of opinion 

9 
aMong ~he various I:Iigh Courts as to how far these principles can 
be applIed to execution cases. This clause seeks to provide express-
ly ~ow far the principles of res judicata should be applied to exe-
cution cases. 
Cl.ause 7.-In section 60, under clause (i) of the proviso to sub-
section (1), the future salary of a debtor is exempt from attach-
ment to the extent of the first one hundred rupees and one-half of 
the remainder, the object being to enable the judgment debtor to 
maintain himself and his dependents while he is trying to pay off 
the decretal amount. When, however, the decree itself "is for main-
tenance, there is really no reason why the exemption should be on 
such a liberal scale. It is, therefore, proposed to provide by an 
amendment that in the execution of decrees for maintenance, the 
salary of a debtor to the extent of two-thirds shall be attachable. 
Under clause (j) of, the proviso to section 60 (1), the pay and 
allowances of persons belonging to the Army and Navy are exempt 
from attachment. It is proposed to extend this privilege to mem-
bers of the Air Forces also. 
Cl.ause 8 and the Third Schedule.-5ections 68 to 72 provide that 
under certain circumstances execution of decrees by sale of im-
movable property may be transferred to the Collector. This might 
have worked well at a time when the Collectors were not SO over-
worked as now. Recent experience shows that the execution cases 
transferred to the Collectors have been delayed for years. It is 
therefore proposed to repeal those' sections and the connected 
Third Schedule. 
Clause 9.-Under the existing section 82, a decree against the 
Government or a public officer is not ~xecutable immediately after 
the decree has been passed. Th~ court has to specify the fime 
within which the decree has to be satisfied. It sometimes happens 
that, through mistake, the court does not specify the time in the 
decree. Such omission causes difficulties. To avoid such difficul-
ties, it has been provided that when the court does not specify any 
time-limit in the decree, three months from the date of the decree 
shall be taken to be the time-limit specified. 
Clause lO.-Section 92 relates to suits with regard to religious 
and charitable trusts. There. is uncertainty at present as to whe-
ther a court can in the same proceeding direct the restoration of 
possession to the new trustees of the trust properties from the 
trustee who is removed. In order to avoid fresh suits for such pur-
poses, it is desirable to empower the court expressly ~o pass a 
decree directing a trustee who has been removed to dehver posses-
sion of the trust property to a new trustee. 

10 
Clause 11.-Section 102 of the Code now rules out second appeals 
in all suits of the nature of small causes where the valuation is of 
five hundred rupees and, below. It is proposed to raise the limit 
to one thousand rupees. 
ClaUlSe 12.-8ection 109 of the Code has been amended to bring 
it in line with article 133 of the Constitution. 
Clause 13.-This clause seeks to restrict the revisional jurisdiction 
of the High Courts in respect of cases in which the aggrieved party 
has a remedy by way of appeal to any court. 
Clause l4.-Section 133 of the Code was declared ult'Ta vires 
by the Rajasthan High Court on the ground that it offends against 
article 14 of the Constitution. It is proposed to amend this section 
to make it constitutionally valid. 
Clause 15.-When the decision of a court is varied or reversed, 
restitution can be made under section 144 to the party affected. 
This section refers to decrees and does not apply in terms to orders. 
It is proposed to amend this section by making it applicable to 
orders also. 
Clause 16 
Clause 16(1).-This clause provides that summons may be serv-
ed by registered post under certain circumstances in addition to, 
or in lieu of" the ordinary procedure of serving summons. 
Clause 16(2).-This clause seeks to provide that where the parties 
themselves do not exchange notices as allowed by order XII rule 2, 
l! cOurt may of its own motion, record admission and denials. 
Clause 16(3).-This clause would enable a party to produce a wit-
ness without applying for summons under rule 1. This is open to 
the party even now; but an enabling provision will save the party 
from the apprehension of an adverse inference of partisanship. 
Clause 16(4).-This clause seeks to give a statutory direction to 
courts to pronounce judgments as early as possible after the hear-
ing of the case. 
Clause 16(5).-Tbis is a consequential change on account of the 
omission of sections 68 to 72 of the Code. 
Clause 16(6).-This clause seeks to enlarge the powers of courts to 
order the plaintiff to give security for costs whenever the court so 
thinks fit. 
Clause 16(7).-This amendment is consequential on the amend-
ment made by clause 3. 

II 
Clause l6(B).-Order XXXVII prescribes a summary procedure 
for trying suits based on negotiable instruments. At present, this 
power can be exercised only by the High Courts of Calcutta, Bombay 
and Madras in the Presidency towns. The proposed amendment will 
enable the State Governments to empower selected courts also to 
follow the summary procedure laid down in order XXXVII. 
Clause l6(9).-This clause merely provides that no pauper appeal 
should be rejected without hearing the applicant or its pleader. , 
Clause l6(10).-When the presiding officer of a court is transfer-
red, rule 2 of order XLVII imposes certain restrictions on the powers 
of his successor in the matter of hearing review applications. This 
causes certain difficulties. It is proposed to give the successor all 
the powers of review which his predecessor had. Rule 2 has there-
fore been omitted and the other amendment is merely consequential. 
Clause 17.-This amendment is consequential on the amendment 
made by clause 8. 
Clause lB.-When this Act comes into force, there may be some 
execution cases pending before the Collector. It is proposed that 
the Collector should dispose of those execution cases, notwithstand-
ing the omission of sections 68 to 72 and the Third Schedule. 

Interest 
Coats 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE, 1908 (ACT V OF 1908) . 
* '" • * 
34. (1) Where and in so far a~ a decree is for the payment of 
money, the Court may, in the decree, order interest at such rate as 
the Court deems reasonable to be ,paid on the principal sum adjudg-
ed, from the date of the suit to the date of decree, in addition to any 
interest adjudged on such principal sum for any period prior to the 
institution of the suit, with further interest at such rate as the Court 
deems reasonable on the aggregate sum so adjudged, from the date 
of the decree to the date of payment, or to such earlier date as the 
Court thinks fit. 
COSTS 
35. (1)-
* • ... ... '" * 
(3) The Court may give interest on costs at any rate not exceed-
ing six per cent. per annum, and such interest shall be added to the· 
costs and shall be recoverable as such. 
~r:::~ 35A. (1) If in any suit or other proceeding, not being an appeal, 
peer of falae any party objects to the claim or defence on the ground that the 
':w:::~~. claim or defence or any part of it is, as against the objector, false. 
defences. or vexatious to the knowledge of the party by whom it has been 
put forward, and if thereafter, as against the objector, such claim 
or defence is disallowed, abandoned or withdrawn in whole or in 
part; the Court, if the objection has been taken at the earliest oppor-
tun,ity and if it is satisfied of the justice thereof, may, after record-
ing its reasons for holding such claim or defence to be false or vexa-
tious, make an order for the payment to the objector by the party 
by whom such claim or defence has been put forward, of costs by way 
of compensation. 
. . . ... ... 
QUESTIONS TO BE DETERMINED BY COURT EXECUTIVE 
DECREE 
47. (1)-
• ... ... ... ... 
(3) Where a question arises as to whether any person is or is not 
the representative of a party, such question shall, for the purposes 
of this section, ~ determined by the Court. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, a plaintiff whose 
suit has been' dismissed and a defendant against whom a suit has 
been dismissed, are parties to the suit. 
12 

13 
ATTACHMENT 
60. (1) The following property is liable to attachment and sale in ~rorerty 
execution of a decree, namely, lands, houses or other buildings, goods, ::J:ent 
money, bank-notes, cheques, bills of exchange, hundis, promissory and sa!e in 
notes, Government securities, bonds or other securities for money, ~d=~ 
debts, shares in a corporation and, save as hereinafter mentioned, 
all other saleable property, moveable or immoveable, belonging to 
the judgment-debtor, or over which, or the profits of which, he has 
a disposing power which he may exercise f::>r his own benefit, whe-
ther the same be held in the name of the judgment-debtor or by an-
other person in trust for him or on his behalf: 
Provided that the following particulars shall not be liable to such 
attachment or sale, namely:-
* ... ... • • * 
(i) salary to the extent of the first hundred rupees and one-
half the remainder: 
Provided that where such salary is the salary of a servant of 
the Government or a servant of a railway company or local 
authority, and the whole or any part of the portion of such 
. salary liable to attachment has been under attachment, whether 
continuously or intermittently for a total period of twenty-four 
months, such portion shall be exempt from attachment until the 
expiry of a further period of twelve months and, where such 
attachment has been made in execution of one and the same 
decree, shall be finally exempt from attachment in execution of 
that decree; . 
(j) the pay and allowances of persons to whom the Army 
Act, 1950 applies, or of persons other than commissioned officers 
to whom the Indian Navy (Discipline) Act, 1934, applies; 
* ... ... • • * 
DELEGATION TO COLLECTOR OF POWER TO EXECUTE 
DECREES AGAINST IMlVIOVABLE PROPERTY 
• 
XXXIV of 
1934· 
68. The State Government may···· declare, by notification in Power. to 
the Official Gazette, that in any local area the execution of decrees ~:~fg: 
in cases in which a Court has ordered any immoveable property to transferring 
. . . 1 k' d h d to Collector be sold, or the executIon of any parhcu ar In of suc ecrees or execution 
the execution of decrees ordering the sale of any particular kind of certain 
of, or interest in, immoveable property, shall be transferred to the decrees. 
Collector. 
69. The provisions set forth in the Third Schedule shall apply to Provi~ion8 
all cases in which the execution of a decree has been transferred ~~~~~ 
under the last preceding section. to apply. 
70. (1) The State Government may make rules consistent with Rules of 
'd . . procedure. the aforesal provlslons- ,-
(a) for the' transmission of the decree from the court to the 

Jurisdiction 
of Civil 
Courts 
barred. 
Collector 
decmed to 
be acting 
judicially. 
14 
Collector, and for regulating the procedure of the Collector and 
his subordinates in executing the same, and for re-transmitting 
the decree from the Collector to the Court; 
(b) conferring upon the Collector or any gazetted subordi-
nate of the Collector all or any of the powers which the Court 
might exercise in the execution of the decree if the execution 
thereof had not been transferred to the Collector; 
(c) providing for orders made by the Collector or any 
gazetted subordinate of the Collector, or orders made on appeal 
with respect to such orders, being subject to appeal to, and revi-
sion by, superior revenue-authorities as nearly as may be as the 
orders made -by the Court, or orders made on appeal with res-
pect to such orders, would be subject to appeal to, and revision 
by, appellate or revisional Courts under this Code Or other law 
for the time being in force if the decree had not been transferred 
to the Collector. 
(2) A power conferred by rules made under sub-section (1) upon 
the Collector or any gazetted subordinate of the Collector, or upon 
any appellate or revisional authority, shall not be exercisable by 
the Court or by any Court in exercise of any appellate or revision_al 
jurisdiction which it has with respect to decrees or orders of the 
Court. 
71. In executing a decree transferred to the Collector under sec-
tion 68 the Collector and his subordinates shall be deemed to be act-
ing judicia)1Y. 
Whcrc't:'.ourt 72. (1) Where in any local area in which no declaration under sec-
may tion 68 is' in force the property attached consists of land or of a share authorise 
Collector in land, and the Collector represents to the Court that the public 
to stay sale of the land or share is objectionable and that satisfaction of the public salc of land. decree may be made within a reasonable period by a temporary 
ExcCution 
of decree •. 
alienation of the land or share, the Court may authorise the Collector 
to provide for such satisfaction in the manner recommended by him 
instead of proceeding to a sale of the land or share. 
(2) In every such case the provisions of section 69 to 71 and of 
any rules made in pursuance thereof shall apply so far as they are 
applicable. . 
82. (1) Where in a suit by or against the Government or by or 
against a public officer in respect of any such. act a.s aforesaid, a 
decree is passed against the Union of India or a State or as the case 
may be, the public officer, a time shall be specified in the decree with-
. in which it shall be satisfied; and, if the decree is not satisfied within 
, the time so specified, the Court shall report the case for the orders 
of tt.c State Government. 
* • • • * 

IS 
102. No second appeal shall lie in any suit of the nature cogni- , 
zable by Courts of Small Causes, when the amount or value ot ~!:~~ In 
the subject-matter of the original suit does not exceed five hundred uits. 
rupees. 
• • • • 
APPEALS TO THE SUPREME COURT 
109. Subject to such rules as may, from time to time. be made When appeal 
by the Supreme Court regarding appeals from the Courts of ~e to the 
India, and to the prOvisions hereinafter contained, an appeal shall ~~~~~c 
lie to the Supreme Court-
• '" 
III • 
(c) from any decree or order, when the case, as hereinafter 
provided, is certified to be a fit one for appeal to the Supreme 
Court. 
• • • • . 
115. The High Court may call for the record of any case which Revision, 
has been decided by any Court subordinate to such High Court and 
in which no appeal lies thereto, and if such subordinate Court 
appears-
(a) to have exercised a jurisdiction not vested in it by law, 
or 
(b) to have failed to exercise a jurisdiction so vested, or 
(c) to have acted in the exercise of its jurisdiction illegally 
or with material irregularity, 
the High CQurt may make such order in the case as it thinks fit. 
• 
III III III 
133. (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Offi- Exem tion 
cial Gazette, exempt from personal appearance in Court any per- of other 
hoe ank th .. f h G t t'tl h' persons. son w e r ,in e OpInlOn 0 suc overnmen • en 1 es 1m 
to the privilege of exemption. 
(2) The names and residences of the persons so exempted shall, 
from time to ~ime, be forwarded to the High Court by th c ~.;' 
Government and a list of such persons shall be kept in such Court, 
and a list of such persons as reside within the local limits of the 
jurisdiction of each Court subordinate to the High Court shall be 
kept in such subordinate Court. 
(3) Where any person so exempted claims the privileg'e of such 
exemption, and it is consequently necessary to examine him by 
commission, he shall pay the costs of that commission, unless the 
party requiring his evidence pays such costs. 
III III III • 

A 
for restitu-
tion 
16 
144. (1) Where and in so far as a decree is varied or reversed, 
the Court of first instance shall, on the application of any party 
entitled to any benefit by way of restitution or otherwise, cause 
such restitution to be made as will, so far as may be, place the 
pa~ties in the position which they would have occupied but for such 
decree or such part thereof as has been varied or reversed; and, 
for this purpose, the Court may make any orders, including orders 
for the refund of costs and for the payment of, interest, damages, 
compensation and mesne profits, which are properly consequential 
on such variation or reversal. 
• • • • 

THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
* * • • • • 
ORDER XX 
JUDGMENT AND DECREE 
1. The Court, after the case has been heard, shall pronounce Judgment 
judgment in open Court, either at once or on some future day, of when prono uneed. 
which due notice shall be given to the parties or their pleaders . 
• 
• 
• • 
ORDER XXI 
EXECUTION OF DECREES AND ORDER 
Payment under Decree 
* • • • 
• 
• 
70. Nothing in rules 66 to 69 shall be deemed to apply to any Saving of 
case in which the execution of a decree has been transferred to the celrtain sa ea. 
Collector. 
71. Any deficiency of price which may happen on a re-sale by Defaulting 
reason of the purchaser's default, ~nd all expenses attending such i:;::ble 
re.-sale, shall be certified to the Court or to the Collector or sub- for 1088 on 
ordinate of the Collector, as the case may be, by the officer or other re-sale. 
person holding the sale, and shall. at the instance of either the 
decree-holder or the judgment-debtor. be recoverable from the de-
faulting purchaser under the provisions relating to the execution 
of a decree for the payment of money. 
ORDER XXV 
Security for Costs 
1. (1) Where, at any stage of a suit, it appears to the Court that When 
a sole plaintiff is. or (when there are more plaintiffs than one) that ~eCUrityt lor cos s 
all the plaintiffs are residing out of India, and that such plaintiff may be 
does not, or that no one of such plaintiffs does, possess any suffi- fu,~~ti1f. 
cient immoveable property within India other than the property in 
suit, the Court may, either of its own motion or on the application 
of any defendant, order the plaintiff or plaintiffs, within a time fixed 
by it, to give security for the payment of all costs incurred and 
likely to be incurred by any defendant. 
(2) Whoever leaves India under such circumstances as to afford Residence 
reasonable probability that he will not be forthcoming whenever out of India. 
he may be called upon to pay costs shall be deemed to be residing 
out of India within the meaning of sub-rule (1). 
17 

18 
(3) On the application of any defendant in a suit for the payment 
of money, in which the plaintiff is a woman, the Court may at 
any stage of the suit make a like order if it is satisfied that such 
plaintiff does not possess any sufficient immoveable property within 
India. 
• • • • 
ORDER XXXIV 
Suits relating to Mortgages of Immovable Property . 
• • • • 
Payment of 11. In any decree passed in a suit for foreclosure, sale or re-
interest. demption, where interest is legally recoverable the Court may order 
payment of interest to the mortgagee as follows, namely:-
• ." • • 
(ii) on the amount of the costs of the suit awarded to the 
mortgagee,-at such rate as the Court deems reasonaQle 
from the date of the preliminary decree, and 
• • • • 
(b) subsequent interest up to the date of realization or actual 
payment at such rate as the Court deems reasonable, 
(i) on the aggregate of the principal sums specified in ,clause 
(~) and of the interest thereon as calculated in ac-
cordance with that clause; and " 
(ii) on the amount adjudged due to the mortgagee in respect 
of such further costs, charges and expenses u may 
be payable under rule 10. 
• • • • 
ORDER XLIV 
PAUPER APPEALS 
Who may 1. Any person entitled to prefer an appeal, who is unable to pay 
~~~r.as the fee required for the memorandum of appeal, may present an 
application, accompanied by a memorandum of appeal, and may be 
allowed to appeal as a pauper, subject, in all matters, including the 
presentation of such application, to the provisions relating to suits 
by paupers, in so far as those provisions are applicable: 
:nrc::li~tion Provided that the Court shall reject the application unless, upon 
for adrnJuioD a perusal thereof and of the judgment and decree appealed from, 
of appeal. it sees reason" to think that the decree is contrary to law or to 
some usage having the force of law, or is otherwise erroneollS or 
unjl1St. J ~ • 
• • • • 

• 
19 
ORDER XLVII 
REvIEW 
... ... ... 
2. An application for review of a decree or order of a Court, not To ;ho!D 
being a High Court, upon some ground other than the discovery of rEr re~~~n 
such new and important matter or evidence as is referred to in rule I may be made 
or the existence of a clerical or arithmetical mistake. or error ap-
parent on the face of the decree, shall be made only to theeJudge 
who passed the decree or made the order sought to be reviewed; 
but any such application may, if the Judge who passed the decree 
or made the order has ordered notice to issue under rule 4, sub-
rule (2), proviso (a), be disposed by his successor. 
• ... ... ... 
7. (1) An order of the Court rejecting the application shall not Order of 
be appealable; but an order granting an application may be objected :!~~_ 
to on the ground that the application was- lable. 
Objections to 
(a) in contravention of the provisions of rule 2, :ting 
• • ... ... application. 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE 
Execution of Decrees by Collectors 
1. Where the execution of a decree has been transferred to 
Collector under section 68, he may-
the Powersof 
.Co llector. 
(a) proceed as the Court would proceed when the sale of 
immoveable property is postponed in order to enable 
the judgment-debtor to raise the amount of the decree; 
or 
(b) raise the amount of the decree by letting in perpetuity, 
or for a term, on payment of a premium, or by mort-
gaging, the whole or any part of the property orderea 
to be sold; or 
(c) sell the property ordered to be sold or so much thereof as 
may be necessary. 
2. Where the execution of a decree, not being a decree ordering Procedure 
the sale of immoveable property in pursuance of a contract speci- 1: ~~~or 
ftcally affecting the same, but being a decree for the payment of cases. 
money in satisfaction of which the Court has ordered the sale of 
immoveable property, has been so transferred, the Collector, if, 
after such inquiry as he thinks necessary, he has reason to believe 
that all the liabilities of the judgment-debtor can be discharged 

Notice to 
be given to 
decree-
holders 
andto 
pe~ons 
havmg 
claims on 
property. 
Amount of 
decrees for 
payment of 
money to be 
ascertained, 
ad 
immoveable 
pro~ 
available 
for their 
satisfaction. 
20 
without a sale of the whole of his available immoveable property, 
may proceed as hereinafter provided. 
3. (1) In any such case as is referred to in paragraph 2, the Col-
lector shall publish a notice. allowing a period of sixty days from 
the date of its publication for compliance and calling upon-
(a) every person holding a decree for the payment of money 
against the judgment-debtor capable of execution by sale 
• of his immoveable property and which such decree-
holder desires to have so executed, and every holder of 
a decree for the payment of money in execution of 
which proceedings for the sale of such property are 
pending, to produce 'before the Collector a copy of the 
decree, and a certificate from the Court which passed 
or is executing the same, declaring the amount recover-
able thereunder; 
(b) every person having any claim on the said property to 
submit to the Collector a statement of such claim, and 
to produce the documents (if any) by which it is 
evidenced. 
(2) Such notice shall be published by being affixed on a conspi-
cuous part of the Court-house of the Court which made the original 
order for sale, and in such other places (if any) as the Collector 
thinks fit; and where the address of any such decree-holder or 
claimant is known, a copy of the notice shall be sent to him by post 
or otherwise. , 
4. (1) Upon the expiration of the said period, the Collector shall 
appoint a day for hearing any representations which the judgment-
debtor and the decree-holders or claimants (if any) may desire to 
make, ahd for holding such inquiry, as he may deem necessary for 
informing himself as to the nature and extent of such decrees and 
claims and of the judgment-debtor's immoveable property, and may 
from time to time, adjourn such hearing and inquiry. 
(2) Where there is no dispute as to the fact or extent of the 
liability of the judgment-debtor to any of the decrees or claims of 
which the Collector is informed, or as to the relative pl'iorities of 
such decrees or claims or as to the liability of any such property 
for the satisfaction of such decrees or claims, the Collector shall 
draw up a statement, specifying the amount to be recovered for the 
discharge of such decrees, the order in which such decrees and 
claims are to be satisfied, and the immovable property available 
for that purpose. 
• 

al 
(3) Where any such disp1,1te arises, the Collector shall refer the _. 
same, with a statement thereof and his own opinion thereon, to the 
Court which made the original order for sale, and shall, pending 
the reference, stay proceedings relating to the subject thereof. The 
Court shall dispose of the dispute if the matter thereof is within 
its jurisdiction, or transmit 'the case to a competent Court 'for dis-
posal, and the final decision shall be communicated to the Collector, 
who shall then draw up a statement as above provided in accord-
ance with such decision. 
5. The Collector may, instead of himself issuing the notices and 'tJ.~ 
holding the inquiry required by paragraphs 3 and 4, draw up a ~::~y 
statement specifying the circumstances of the judgment~ebtor and =eh~r:c:ea 
of his immoveable property so far as they are known to the Collec- inquiry. 
tor or appear in the records of his office, and forward such state-
ment to the District Court; and such court shall thereupon issue 
the notices, hold the inquiry and draw up the statement required 
by paragraphs 3 and 4 and transmit such statement to the Collector. 
6. The decision by the Court of any dispute arising under para- Bff~~ of 
graph 4 or paragraph 5 shall. as between the parties thereto, have ~~1O:8 ~ 
the force of and be appealable as a decree. dispute. 
7. (1) Where the amount to be recovered and the property avail- Scheme for 
able have been determined as provided in paragraph 4 or paragraph 5, ~?d=ror 
the Collector may,- payment 
(a) if it appears tha.t the amount cannot be recovered without 
the sale of the whole of the property available, proceed 
to sell such property; or 
(b) if it appears that the amount with interest (if any) in 
accordance with the decree, and, when not decreed, 
with interest (if any) at such rate as he thinks reason-
able, may be recovered without such sale, raise such 
amount and interest (notwithstanding the original order 
for sale)-
(i) by letting in perpetuity or for a term, on payment of a 
premium. the whole or any part of the said property; 
or 
(ii) by mortgaging the whole or any part of such property, 
or 
(iii) ,by selling part of such property; or 
(iv) by letting on farm, or managing by himself or another, 
the whole or any part of such property for any term 
not exceeding twenty years from the date of the order 
of sale; or 
of money. 

Z2 
(v) p~rtly by one of such modes, and partly by another or 
others of such modes. 
(2) For the purpose of managing the whole or any part of such 
property, the Collector may exercise all the powers of its owner. 
I • 
(3) For the purpose of improving the saleable value of the 
property available or any part thereof, or rendering it more suit-
able for letting or managing, or for preserving the property from 
sale in satisfaction of an incumbrance, the Collector may discharge 
the claim of any incumbrancer which has become payable or com-
pound the claim of any incumbrancer whether it has become pay-
able or not, and, for the purpose of providing funds to effect such 
discharge or composition, may mortgage, let or sell any portion of the 
property which he deems sufficient. If any dispute arises as to the 
amount due on any incumbrance with which the Collector propoSes 
to deal under this clause, he may institute a suit in the proper 
Court, either in his own name or the name of the judgment-debtor, 
to have an account taken, or he may agree to refer such dispute 
to the decision of two arbitrators, one to be chosen by each party, 
or of an umpire to be named by such arbitrators. 
(4) In proceeding under this paragraph the Collector shall be 
subject to such rules consistent with this Act as may, from time to 
time, be- made in this behalf by the State Government. 
Recovery of 8. Where, on the expiration of the letting or management under 
:ff=;; after paragraph 7, the amount to be recovered has not been realized, the 
letting or Collector shall notify the fact in writing to the judgment-debtor or 
management. his representative in interest, stating at the same time that, if the 
CoDector 
to render 
aocountl 
to Court. 
balance necessary to make up the said amount is not paid to the 
Collector within six weeks from the date of such notice, he will 
proceed to sell the whole or a sufficient part of the said property; 
and, if on the expiration of the said six weeks the said balance 
is not so- paid, the Collector shall sell such property or part 
accordingly. 
9. (1) The Collector shall, from time to time, render to the 
Court which made the original order for sale an account of all 
moneys which come to his hands and of all charges incurred by him 
in the exercise and performance of the 'powers and duties conferred 
and imposed on him under the provisions of this Schedule, and shall 
hold the balance at the disposal of the Court. 
(2) Such charges shan include all debts and liabilities from time 
to time due to the Government in respect of the property or any 
part thereof, the rent (if any) from time to time due to a superior 

23 
holder in respect of such property or part, and, if the Collector so 
directs, the expenses of any witnesses summoned by him. 
(3) The balance shall be applied by the Court-
(a) in providing for the maintenance of such members of the 
judgment-debtor's family (if any) as are entitled to be 
maintained out of the income of the property, to such 
amount in the case of each member as the Court thinks 
fit; and 
(b) where the Collector has proceeded under paragraph 1, in 
satisfaction of the original decree in execution of which 
the Court ordered the sale of immoveable property, or 
otherwise as the Court may under section 73 direct; or 
(e) where the Collector has proceeded under paragraph 2,-
(i) in keeping down the interest on incumbrances on the 
property; 
(ii) where the judgment-debtor has no other sufficient 
means of SUbsistence, in providing for his subsistence to 
such amount as the Court thinks fit; and 
(iii) in discharging rateably the claims of the original 
decree-holder and any other decree-holders who have 
complied with the said notice, and whose claims were 
included in the amount ordered to be recovered. 
(4) No other holder ot a decree for the payment of money shall 
be entitled to be paid out of such property or balance until the 
decree-holders who have obtained such order have been satisfied. 
and the residue (if any) shall be paid to the judgment-debtor or 
such other person as the Court directs. 
10. Where the Collector sells any property under this S('hedul~, Sales how 
he shall put it up to public auction in one or more lots, as he thinks ~~du~cd. 
fit. and may-
(a) fix a reasonable reserved price for each lot; 
(b) adjourn the sale for a reasonable time whenever, for 
reasons to be recorded, he deems the adjournment 
necessary for the purpose of obtaining a fair price for 
the property; 
(e) buy in the property offered for sale, and re-sell the same 
by public auction or private contract, as be thinks fit. 

Restriction, 
as to aliena-
tion by 
judgment-
debtor or his 
repreaenta-
tive, and 
prosecution 
ofremedies 
by decree-
holdera. 
Provision 
WhCR 
property 
lIin 
several 
districts. 
Powers of 
Collector 
to compel 
attcDdaOce 
aDd 
production. 
24 
11. (1) So long as the Collector can exercise or perform in res-
pect of the judgment-debtor's immoveable property, or any part 
thereof, any of the powers or duties conferred or imposed on him 
by paragraphs 1 to 10, the judgment-debtor or his representative in 
interest shall be incompetent to mortgage, charge, lease or alienate 
such property or part except with the written permission of the 
Collector, nor shall any Civil Court issue any process against sllch 
property or part in execution of a decree for the payment of money. 
(2) During the same period no Civil Court shall issue any pro-
cess of execution either against the judgment-debtor or his property 
in respect of aay decree for the satisfaction whereof provision has 
been made by the Collector under paragraph 7. 
(3) The same period shall be excluded in calculating the period 
of limitation applicable to the execution of any decree affected by 
the provisions of this paragraph in respect of any remedy of which 
the decree-holder has been temporarily deprived. 
12. Where the proPerty of which the sale has been ordered is 
situate in more districts than one, the powers and duties conferred 
and imposed on the Collector by paragraphs 1 to 10 shall 'be exer-
cised and performed by such one of the Collectors of the said dis-
tricts as the State Government may by general rule or special 
order direct. 
13. In exercising the powers conferred on him by paragraphs 1 
to 10 th~ Collector shall have the powers of a Civil Court to compel 
the attendance of parties and witnesses and the production of doc:u-
menu. . 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 
(Shri Han' V inayak Patas'kar 
Minister in chi Ministry of LafIJ.) 