Bill No. 2S of 1981 
4; 
THE FINAN(;E BILL, 1981 
(AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 

THE FINANCE BILLI 1981 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
1. Short tiUe and commencement. 
CHAPTER D 
RATES OF INCOMr..TAl 
2. Income-tax. 
CHAPTER III 
DlUCTTAXU 
Inco",,..tax 
3. wertton of new sectton lOA. 
4. Amendment of section 16. 
5. Amendment of section 32A. 
6. Amendment of section 33A. 
7. Amendment of section 36. 
8. Amendment of section 42. 
9. Amendment of seoUon 80D. 
10. Amendment of section 80RHA. 
11. Amendment of section 80M. 
12. Amendment of section 8OQQ. 
13. Amendment of section 86. 
14. Amendment of section 160. 
15. Insertion of new sectim 164A. 
16. Insertim of new sectim 167 A. 
17. Amendment of section 208. 
18. Amendment of section 252. 
19. .Amendment of section 253. 
20. Amendment of section 256. 
21. Amendment of section 269G. 
22. Insertion of new section 293A. 
23. Amendment of Ninth Schedule. 
24. Amendment of Eleventh Schedule. 
25. Consequential amendment. 

(If) 
CLAVSE! I' ecdtll-tar 
26. Amendment of section 21. 
27. Insertion of new section 21 M. 
28. Amendment of section 24. 
29. Amendment of section 26. 
30 • .Amendment of section 27. 
31. Amendment of section 41. 
32. Amendment of section 23. 
33. Amendment of section 25. 
34 • .Amendment of section 26. 
35. Amendment of section 2. 
Gift-teu 
Surtar 
36. Insertion of new sections 7A to 7D. 
37. Insertion of new section 9A. 
38. Amendment of section 10. 
39. Amendment of section 11. 
40. Amendment of section 12. 
41 • .Amendment of section 18. 
42. Insertion of new section 24AA. 
43. Amendment of First Schedule. 
In teresr-t1U' 
44. Amendment of Act 45 of 1974. 
Hotel-ree eipts tlU' 
45. Amendment of Act 54 of 1980. 
CHAPTER IV 
INDIRECT TAXES 
46. Amendment of Act 51 of 1975. 
47. AuxiliRry duties of customs. 
48. Amendment of Act 1 of 1944. 
49. Special duties of excise. 
50. Amendment of Act 58 of 1957. 
51. Amendment of Act 40 of 1978. 
52. Amendment of Act 16 of 1955. 
CHAPTER V 
MISCEl.I,AHEOUS 
53. Amendment of Act 38 of 1974. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE. 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE. 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE. 

10 
As INTRODUCED IN LOI SAIliA 
.CJIf 28'1'8 FEB8UUY, 198 L 
Bill No. 25 of 1981 
THE FINANCE BILL, 1981 
BILL 
to give e"ect to the fincmcial proposals of the Central Govermtlent 
for the finllllciaJ year 1981-82. 
8J: it enacted by Parliament in the Th1rty-second Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PIlELlMlNAilY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Finance Act, 1981. 
(2) Save as otherwise prov1ded in this Act, sectims 2 to 
45 and section 53 shall be deemed to bave come into force on 
tbe 1st day of April, 1981. 
CHAPTER n 
RATES OF II'fCOMr..TAX 
z. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3), 
for the aSBessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 
1981, income-tax shall be charged at the rates specified in 
Part I of the .First Schedule and shall be increased,-
~Ut1 ... 
COlIIDeaceMet. 
lacome-ta. 
15 (a) in the cases to which Paragraphs A, B. C and D of 
that Part apply, by a surcharge for purpoBeS of the Un10n; and 
(b) in the cases to which Paragraph E of that Part applies, 
by a surcharge, 
calculated in each case in the manner provided therein. 

2 
(2) In the oases to which Sub-Paragraph I or Sub-Paragraph II 
of Paragraph A of Part I of the First Schedule applies, where 
the assessee hu, in the previous year, any net agricultural 
Income exceeding six hundred rupees, in addiUoD to total income. 
and the total income exceeds twelve thousand rupees, then, - 6 
(0) the net agrtcultural Income sball be taken IIlto 
acOOUDt. In the manner provided In clmM (b) (that 18 to sq. 
as If the net agrJculturallDcome were oomprised In the 
total IIloome after the first eicbt thouaaod :rupees of the 
total Income but without belDg liable to ta), only for the 10 
Plrp088 of charging income-tax In respect of the total 
Inoome; and 
(b) the Income-tax chargeable shall be calculated u 
follows:-
(i) the total Income and the net agrtculturalllloome 16 
shall be agrepted aDd the amount of Income-tax aha11 
be determined In respect of the aarepte iDCome at the 
rates specified In Sub-ParacraPh lor, u the cue mq 
be, aab-Pangrapb B of the said Pangrapb A, u If 
such aggregate IDoome were the totallDcome: 20 
Provided that for the Plrpoaes of determJDJac the 
amount of iDCome-tax In acoordance with th .. aab-clmae, 
the provisions of clause (ii) of the provtao below alb-
Paragraph lor, as the case may be, Sub-Paragraph II 
of the said Paragraph A aDd the provisions relattag to 25 
surcharge on Income-tax In the said Sub-Paragraphs 
&ball DOt apply; 
(ii) the net agr1cultural IDcome shall be IIlcreued 
by a sum of eight thousand :rupees aDd the amount of 
Income-tax &ball be determined In l'Hp8Ot of the DIIt 30 
agr1cultural Income as 80 ID.creuecl at the rates specJ.f1eci 
In Sub-Paragraph lor, as the cue may be, Sub-
Paragraph II of the said Paragraph A, as If the net 
agricultural iDcome as 80 increased were the total tnoome: 
Provided that for the purposes of determining the 35 
amount of Income-tax In accordance with this BUb-clauae, 
the provisions of clause (i) and clause (ii) of the provtao 
below Sub-Paragraph lor, as the oue may be, Sub-
Paragraph II of the saidPangrapb A aDd the provlalou 
relatJDg to surcharge on Income-tax In the said Sub- 40 
ParagnphB shall not apply; 

3 
(iii) the amount of IDcome-tu detlermlDed III 
accordaaoe with 8Ub-clauae (i) aball be reduced by the 
IUDOUIlt of IDcome-tax determined. In acoordaDce with 
8Ub-clawle (it): 
5 ProTIded that where the IIWD 80 arrived at exceeds 
sixty per oem. of the amount by whJch the total 
income exceeds twelve thousand rupees, the excess shall 
be disregarded; 
(ill) the amount of Income-tax determlDed in 
10 accordance with sub-clauae (iii) shall be increased by 
a surcharge for p,trpoaes of the UlUon calculated at the 
rate of ten per cent. of such income-tax and the sum 
80 arrived at shall be the iDcome-tax in respect of the 
Iotal Income. 
15 (3) In cases to which the provisioos of Chapter XU or 
section 164 or section 164A or section 167 A of the Income-
tax Act, 1961 (hereinafter referred to as the Income-tax 
Act) apply. the tax chargeable shall be determined as pro-
vtded in that Chapter 01' that section, and with reference to 
20 the rates imposed by sub-section (1) or the rates as specified 
in that Chapter or section, as the case may be. 
25 
30 
35 
40 
( 4) III cases In which tax has to be deducted UDder 
sectloll8 193, 194, 1HA, 194B, 194BB, 194D &lid 195 of the 
mcome-tax Act at the rates in force, the deduction shall be 
made at the rates specified in Part D of the First Schec:Ule. 
(5) Subject to the provlsioll8 of sub-section (6). in cases 
in which Income-tax has to be calculated UDder the first provlao 
to sub-section (5) of section 132 of the Income-tax Act or 
charged UAder sub-section (4) of section 172 or sub-section (1) of 
section 174 or section 175 or sub-section (2) of section 176 
of the said Act or deducted. under section 192 of the sald Act 
from Income chargeable under the head ''Salaries'' or deducted 
under sub-section (9) of section 80E of the said Act from any 
payment referred to In the said sub-section (9) or in which the 
"advance tax" payable under Chapter XVD-C of the said Act 
has to be comp,lted, at the rate or rates In force, such Income-
tax or, as the case may be, "advance tax" shall be 80 calcula-
ted, charged, deducted or computed at the rate or rates 
specified in Part m of the Firat Scbecble: 
Provided that In cases to which the provisions of Chapter 
XU or section 164 or section 164A or section 167 A of the 
Income-tax Act apply, "advance tax" shall be computed with 
reference to the rates imposed by this sub-section or the rates 
as specified In that Chapter or section. as the case may be. 

4 
(6) In the cases to which aab- Paragraph I or aab- Paragraph 
D of Paragraph A of Part UI of the First Schedule applies, where 
the assessee has, in the previous year or, if by virtue of any 
provision of the Income-tax Act, inoome-tax is to be charged 
ID respect of the IDcome of a period other thaD the previous 5 
year, in such other period, any net agricultural income 
exceeding six hundred rupees, In addition to total income and 
the total Income exceeds,-
(i) in a case to which the said SUb-Paragraph I appl1es, 
f1fteen thousand rupees, and 10 
(if) in a case to which the said &1b-Paragraph n applies, 
twelve thousand rupees; 
then, In calculating Income-tax under the first prOViso to 
sub-section (5) of secttcm 132 of the Income-tax Act or In 
charging income-tax under sub-section (2) of section 174 or 15 
secticm 175 or sub- section (2) of Sectioo 176 of the said Act 
or In computing the ''advance tax" payable under Chapter XVU-C 
of the said Act, at the rate or rates in force. -
(a) the net agricultural income shall be taken into 
account, in the manner provided in clause (b) (that is to 20 
say, as if the net agricultural income were comprised in 
the total income after.-
(i) in a case to which the saJd Sub-Paragraph 1 applies. 
the first fifteen thousand rupees, and 
(if) in a case to which the said Sub-Paragraph n 25 
applies, the first eight thousand rupees, 
of the total in~ome but without being liable to tax), only 
for the purpose of calculating, charging or computing such 
income-tax or, 8S the case may be. "advance tax" in 
respect of the total income; and 30 
(b) such income-tax or. as the case may be. "advance 
tax" shall be so calculated. charged or computed as 
follows:-
(i) the total Income and the net agricultural income 
shall be aggregated and the amount of income-tax or 35 
"advance tax" shall be determined In respect of the 
aggregate income at the rates specified in Sub-Para-
graph lor, as the case may be. Sub-Paragraph D of 
the said Paragraph A, as if such aggregate Income were 
the total income: 40 

5 
Provided that in a case referred to in the said Sub-
Paragraph n, for the purposes of determining the amount 
of income-tax or ''advance tax" in accordance with this 
sub-clause, the provisions of clause (ii) of the proviso 
5 below the said Sub-Paragraph n and the provisions 
relating to surcharge on income-tax in the said Sub-
Paragraph n shall not apply; 
to 
(iI) the net agricultural income shall be increased,-
(A) in a case to which the said Sub-Paragraph I 
applles, by a sum of fifteen thousand rupeer. and 
(8) in a case to which the said Sub-Paragraph D 
applies, by a sum of eight thousand rupees, 
and the amount of income-tax or "advance tax" shall be 
determined in respect of the net agricultural income as 
J 5 so increased at the rates specified in the said Sub-
Paragraph lor, as the case may be, the said SUb-Para-
graph n, as if the net agrlcultural income as so increased 
were the total income: 
Provided that in a case referred to in the said Sub-
20 Paragraph n. for the purposes of determining the amount 
of income-tax or "advance tax" in accordance with this 
sub-clause. the provisions of clause (ii) of the proviso 
below the said Sub-Paragraph n and the prOVisions 
relating to surcharge on income-tax in the said Sub-
25 Paragraph n shall not apply; 
(iii) the amount of income-tax or "advance tax" 
determined in accordance with sub-clause (i) shall be 
reduced by the amount of income-tax or. as the case 
may be. "advance tax" determined in accordance with 
30 sub-clause (ii): 
Provlded that in a case referred to in the said Sub-
Paragraph n. where the sum so arrived at exceeds 
sixty per cent. of the amount by which the total income 
exceeds twelve thousand rupees. the excess shall be 
35 di~regarded; 
(iv) the amount of income-tax or "advance tax" 
determined in accordance with sub-clause (Ui) shall be 
increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union ~al­
culated at the rate of ten per cent. of such income-tax 
40 or, as the case may be, "advance tax" and the sum so 
arrived at shan be the income-tax or, as the case may 
be. "advanoe tax" in respect of the tota1income. 

6 
(7) For the purposes of this section and the First Schedule,-
(Ia) "company tn which the publ1c are substantially 
interested" means a company which is such 8 company 8S 
is referred to in section 108 of the Income-tax Act; 
Ib) "domestic company" means an IndlAll company. or 5 
any other compRny which. in respect of its Income Hable 
to Income-tax under the Income-tax Act for the assessment 
year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1981. has made 
the prescribed arrangements for the declaration and pay-
ment within India of the dividends (Including dividends on 10 
preference shares) payable out of such income in nocordance 
wtth the prOVisions of section 194 of that Act; 
(e) "industrial company" means a company which is 
mainly engaged in the business of generation or distri-
bution of electriCity or AllY other form of power or in the 15 
construction of ships or in the manufacture or processing 
of goods or in mining. 
fzplGnation. - For the purposes of this clause, a 
company shall be deemed to be mainly engaged In the 
business of generation or distribution of electricity 20 
or any other form of power or In the construction of 
ships or in the manufacture or processing of goods or 
in mmlng. if the income attributable to anyone or more 
of the aforesaid activities Included in ita total Income of 
the previous year (as computed before making any 25 
deduction under Chapter VIA of the Inoome-tax Act) Is 
not less than fifty-one per cent. of auoh total income; 
(d) ''insurance commission" means any remuneration 
or reward, whether by way of commis.ion or otherwise, 
for 1011cit1Dg or procuring in.urance buainess (inoludlng 30 
buainess relating to the continuance, renewal or revival 
of policies of insuranceh 
(e) ''net agricultural income", in relation, to a 
perlOn, means the total amount of agricultural Income. 
from whatever IOUrce derived, of that perlOn computed 35 
in accordance with the rules conta1Ded In Part IV of the 
Firat Schedule; 
(f) "tax-free .. curtty" mean. any BeOurity of the 
Cctral GovernlD8llt issued or declared to be income-tu 
free, or any seourtty of a State Government i •• ued 40 
income-tax free, the income-tax whereon 18 payable by the 
State Government; 
(A) all other words IDd apres.loIls uaed In this 
MoUon or In the Firat Schedule bat DOt def1aed in thi. aub-
IIect10a aw:I defined iD thelnoome-tax Act shall bave tile 46 
meanm,. re.peoUyely ••• Iped to them In that Act. 

7 
CHAPTER m 
DIRECT TAXES 
Income-tDx 
l After section 10 of the Income-tax Act, the following 
5 sectlon shall be Inserted, namely:-
'lOA. (1) Sub,ect to the provisions of this sectlon. 
any profits and gains derived by an assessee from an 
Industrial undertaking to which this section applies shall 
not be included In the total inoome of the 88sessee. 
10 (2) This sectlon applies to any industrial undertaking 
which fulfils all the following conditions, namely:-
(i) it has begun or begins to manufacture or produce 
articles or things during the previous year relevant to 
the assessment year oommenclng on or after the 1st 
15 day of Aprll. 1981 in any free trade zone; 
(ii) It Is not formed by the splitting up, or the recons-
truction, of a business already in existence: 
PrOVided that this condition shall not apply in respect 
of any Industrial undertaking which is formed as a 
20 result of the re-establishment, . reconstruction or 
revival by the assessee of the business of any such 
Industrial undertaking as Is referred to In section 33B, 
In the circumstances and within the period specified in 
that section; 
25 (iii) it is not formed by the transfer to a new busi-
ness of machinery or plant previously used for any 
purpose. 
ExplarIGtion • - The provisions of Explanation 1 and 
ExplGll4Uon 2 to sub-sectlon (2) of section 80-1 shall apply 
30 for the purposes of clause (iii) of this sub-section as they 
apply for the purposel of clause (ii) of that sub-section. 
(3) The profits and gains referred to in lub- section (1) 
shall not be included in the total income of the assessee in 
respect of the assessment year relevant to the previous 
35 year In which the industrial undertaldng beglna to manufac-
ture or produce articles or things (such assessment year 
being hereafter in this section referred to as the inltial 
asSeBsment year) and each of the four 88seSsment yean 
immediately succeeding the tnittal aSlessment year. 
InHrtion of 
new section 
lOA. 
Special 
paoYisioa 
in reaped 
of newly 
eatablillbed 
induatriel 
undeltekin .. 
ill hee trade 
zonea. 

8 
(4) Notwlthstandtng anything contained in any other 
provision of this Act. in computing the total Income of the 
assessee of the previous year relevant to the assessment 
year immediately succeeding the last of the relevant 
assessment years, or of any previous year relevant to any 5 
subsequent assessment year.-
(i) section 32, section 32A, section 33, section 35 
and clause (ix) of sub-section (1) of section 36 shall 
apply as if every allowance or deduction referred to 
therein and relating to or allowable for any of the relevant 10 
assessment years, in relation to any buUdtng, machinery, 
plant or furniture used for the purposes of the business 
of the undertaking in the previous year relevant to such 
assessment year or any expenditure incurred in such 
previous year had been given full effect to for that 15 
assessment year itself and accordingly sub-section (2) 
of section 32, clause (ii) of sub-section (3) of section 
32A. clause (ii) of sub-section (2) of section 33, sub-
section (4) of section 35 or the second proviso to clsf.1lse 
(ix) of sub-section (1) of section 36, as the case may be, 20 
shall not apply in relation to any such allowance or 
deduction: 
(ii) no loss referred to in sub-section 0) of section 
72 or sub-section (1) of section 74 and nn 
deficiency referred to In sub-section (3) of section ~oJ 25 
shall be carried forward or set off where such los8, or, 
as the case may be, deficiency relates to any of the 
relevant assessment years: 
(iii) no deduction shall be allowed under section 80HH 
or section BOHHA or section 8<H or section 80J where 30 
the industrial undertaking has begun to manufacture or 
produce articles or things during any previous year 
relevant to any of the relevant assessment years: and 
(iv) in computing the depreciation allowance under 
section 32, the written down value of any asset shall be 35 
computed as If the assessee had claimed and been 
actually allowed the deduction in respect of depreciation 
for each of the relevant assessment years. 
(S) Where an industrial undertaking In any free trade 
zone has begun to manufacture or produce articles or things 40 
in any previous year relevant to the assessment year 
commencing on or after the 1st day of April, 1977 but 
before the 1st day of April, 1981, the assessee may, at 
his option, before the expiry of the time allowed under 
sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 139, whether 45 

9 
fixed originally or on extension, for furnlshing the return 
of income for the assessment year commencing on the 1st 
day of AprU, 1981 furnish to the Income-tax OfIicer a 
declaration in writing that the provisions of sub-section (1) 
5 may be made applicable to him for each of the relevant 
assessment years as reduced by the number of assessment 
years which expired before the 1st day of Aprll, 1981 and if 
he does so, then, the provisions of sub- section (1) shall 
apply to him for each of such relevant assessment years 
10 and the provisions of sub-sectlon (4) shall also apply in 
computing the total income of the assessee for the assess-
ment year immediately succeeding the last of the relevant 
assessment years and any subsequent assessment year. 
(6) The proviSions of sub-sectlon (8) and sub-section (9) 
15 of section 80-1 shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to the 
Industrial undertaldng referred to in this section as they apply 
for the purposes of the industrial undertaking referred to in 
seetion 80- L 
Explanation. - For the purposes of this section,-
20 (i) "free trade zone" means the Kandla Free Trade 
Zone and the Santacruz Electronios Export Processing 
Zone and includes any other free trade zone whioh the 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazetta- specify for the purposes of this sectlon; 
25 (ii) "relevant assessment years" means the initial 
assessment year and four assessment years immediately 
suoceeding the initial assessment year. ' • 
4. In section 16 of the Income-tax Act, in clause (i), with 
effect from the 1st day of April, 1982,-
30 ( a) for the portion beginning with the words "a sum 
calculated" aDd ending with the words ''whichever is less", the 
following shan be substituted, namely:-
"a sum equal to twenty per cent. of the salary 
or five thousand rupees, whichever is less": 
35 (b) in the proviSO, clause (i) shall be omitted. 
I. In section 32A of the Income-tax Act, In clause (2) of 
the Explanation below sub-section (2), for the words "the 
buslne 88 of the undertaking does not exceed ten lakh rupees i 
and for thia purpose the value of any machinery or plant 
40 shall be,_", the following shall be substituted, namely:-
"the business of the undertaking does not exceed,-
(i) in a case where the previous year ends before the 
1st day of August, 1980, ten lakh rupees: and 
&-0 
Amendment of 
section 16. 
Amendment of 
section 32A. 

Amendment of 
section 33A. 
10 
(ii) in a case where the previous year enda after the 
31st day of July, 1980, twenty lakh rupees, 
and for this purpose the value of any machinery or plant 
shall be,-". 
I. In section 33A of the lucome-tax Act. In sub-secUon (7), 15 
for the proviso, the following proviso and E.rpICUl4tion 8baU 
be substituted with effect from the 1st day of Aprll. 1982, 
namely:-
'Provided that where sucb coat exceeds -
(i) forty thousand rupees per heetare In respect of 10 
land situate in a hUly area comprised In the district of 
DarJeellng: or 
(ii) thirty-five thousand rupees per hectare in respect 
of land situate In a bIDy area comprlBed in an area other 
than the district of Darjeellng: or 15 
(iii) thirty thousand rupees per beetarein. any 
other area, 
then. the excess shall be ignored. 
Explanation .• - For the purposes of this prOViSO, 
"district of DarjeeUng" meana the district of DarJeel1ng 20 
as on the 28th day of February, 1981, being the date of 
introduction of the Finance Bill, 1981 in the House of the 
People.' • 
1. In section 36 of the Income-tax Act, In sub-section (I), 
in clause (viii), In the second proviso, after the worda "time 
to time exceeds", the worda ''twice the amount of" shall be 
Inserted with effect from the 1st day of April. 1982. 
L In section 42 of the 1Dc0me-tax Act.-
Ca) in the opening portion, for the worda "the associa-
25 
tion or parttcipation in sucb buatneas of the Central 30 
Government", the worda "the auociatlon or participation 
of the Central Government or any person authorised by It 
in such buslnesa" shall be substituted; 
(b) in clause (b).-
(i) the word "aDd" occurrtac at the ead shall be 3& 
omitted; 

s 
11 
(U) the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:-
'Provided that In relation to any agreement entered 
into after the 31st day of March, 1981, this clause 
shall have effect subject to the modification that the 
words and figures "except 88sets on which allowance 
for depreciation is admissible under section 32" had 
been omitted; and '; 
(e) the following Explanation shall be inserted at the 
end, namely:-
10 ' E.rpJarl4tion.- For the purposes of this section, 
"mineral 011" includes petroleum and natural gas. ' • 
I. In section 80D of the Income-tax Act~ In sub- section (2), 
with effect from the 1st day of April, 1982,-
(ca) In clause (i), for the words "two thousand four 
15 hundred rupees", the words "four thousand eight hundred 
rupees" shall be substituted; 
20 
(b \ in clause (ii), for the words "six hundred rupees", 
the words "one thousand two hundred rupees" shall 
be substituted. 
JI. In section 80HHA of the Income-tax JI.ct,-
(ca) in sub-section (3),-
(i) for the words "in respect of each of the ten 
assessment years beginning with the assessment 
year relevant to the previous year In which the small-
25 scale industrial undertaking", the words ., of each of 
the ten previous years beginning with the previous 
year in which the industrial undertakIng" shall be 
substituted. 
(U) the followIng provIso shall be Inserted at the 
30 end, namely:-
"Provided that sucb deduction shall not be 
allowed in computing the total income of &by of the 
ten previous years aforesaId in respect of which 
the industrial undertaking is not a small-scale 
36 lndulltrial undertaking within the meaning of clause 
(b) of the ElplGll4ltiDn below sub-section (8). "; 
(b) in sub-section (8). in clause (b) of the E.rp'ClftGtiDfl t 
for the words ''the business of the undertaking does not 
exceed ten lakh rupee.; and for this purpose the value of 
A •• d •• tof 
section 8OHHA. 

Ameadmeat of 
sectioa s«*. 
Amendmeat of 
aection SOQQ. 
12 
any machinery or plant shall be.-". the following shall 
be substituted. namely:-
lithe business of the undertaking does not exceed, -
(1) in a case where the previous year ends 
before the 1st day of August, 1980. ten lakh 
rupees; and 
(2) in a case where the previous year ends after 
the 31st day of July. 1980, twenty lakh rupees. 
and for this purpose the value of any machinery or 
plant shall be,- ". 10 
ll. In section 80M of the Income-tax Act. in sub-
section (1), in clause (a). for the figures and word "27 and 
29". the figures and word "27. 29 and 33" shall be 
substituted with effect from the 1st day of April. 1982. 
12. In section 80QQ of the Income-tax Act,-
(eI) in sub-section(l), for the words "nine assessment 
years". the words "fourteen assessment years" shall be 
substituted; 
(b\ in sub-section (2\. -
15 
(i) for the words, figures and letters "section 20 
80RHA or", the words, figures and letters "section 
80RHA or section 80-lor" sball be substituted; 
(ii) for the words, figures and letter "section 
80J and ". the words, figures and letters "section 
80-1, secticm 80J and" shall be substituted. 25 
11. In section 86 of the Income-tax Act, In clauae (v), 
the following Explanation shall be lnserted, namely:-
"ErpltllteltiD1l • - For the purposes of this clause, in the 
case of an association of persons which is assessable 
under section 167A, each of the members of the 30 
association whose shares in the income or, as the case 
may be, I8rt of the income of such association are 
indeterminate or unknown, shall be deemed to be entitled 
to receive an equal slare in the total income or, as the 
CBse may be, such IIlrt of the total income of the 
aSSOCiation and the individual share of such member in 
suoh total income or, as tbe case may be, IIlrt of the 
total income shall be determined accordingly. ". 

6 of 1913. 
6 of 1913. 
13 
M. In section 160 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-seCtion 
(1), after clause (iv). the following clause and FxplanaUans 
shall be inserted. namely:-
'(II) in respect of income whIch a trustee appointed 
5 under an oral trust receives or is entiUed to receive on 
behalf or for the benefit of any person. such trustee or 
trustees. 
Explanation 1.- A trust which is not declared by a duly 
executed instrument in writing (Including any wakf deed 
10 which is valid under the Mussalman Wakf Validating Act. 
1913) shall be deemed, for the purposes of clause (ill). to 
be a trust declared by a duly executed instrument in writing 
if a statement In wrltlng. sIgned by the trustee or trustees, 
setting out the purpose or purposes of the trust. 
13 particulars as to the trustee or trustees. the beneficiary or 
beneficiaries and the trust property, is forwarded to the 
Income-tax Officer.-
(i) where the trust has been declared before the 1st 
day of June, 1981. within a period of three months from 
20 that day: and 
(ii) in any other case. within three months from the 
date of declaration of the trust. 
Explanation 2.- For the purposes of clause (v). "oral 
trust" means a trust which Is not declared by a duly 
25 executed instrument in writing (including any wakf deed 
which is valid under the Mussalman Wakf Validating Act. 
1913) and which is not deemed under Explanation 1 to be 
a trust declared by a duly executed instrument in writing. '. 
II. After section 164 of the Income-tax Act, the 
30 following section shall be inserted, namely:-
'164A. Where a trustee receives or is entitled to 
receive any income on behalf or for the benefit of any 
person under an oral trust, then, notWithstanding 
anythIng contained in Ilny other provision of this Act, 
35 tax shall be charged on such income at the maximum 
marginal rate. 
Explanation. - For the purposes of this section, -
(i) "maximum marginal rate" shall have the 
meaning assigned to it in Explanation 2 below sub-
section (3) of section 164; 
Amendment of 
section 160. 
InHrtion of 
new aection 
164A. 
Cbarae of 
tu in case of 
oral tnaat. 

III al!ltiGll of 
Dew eection 
167A. 
Charp of tu 
where ahara 
of ....... 
IIDkaowa. 
14 
(ii) "oral trust" shall have the meaning assigned 
to it In Erplan4tion 2 below sub-section (1) of 
se~tion 160. '. 
II. In Chapter XV of the Income-tax Act, after section 
167, and before the sub:-heading"E.--Erecutors ", the 
following sub-beading and section shall be inserted, 
namely:-
'DD.-Associations ofpers.ns- special uses 
167A. (1) Where the individual shares of the members 
5 
of an aAoclattOll of persona (other than a company or 10 
c~operative society) in tile Income of such aa8ociation 
are Indeterminate or unknown, tax.hall be charged on the 
total income of the aBsociation at the mu1mum marginal rate. 
(2) Where the individual shares of the members of an 
usoclation of persons (othel' than a company or 15 
~operattve society) in any part of the income of Reb 
"SOCiatiOll are indeterminate or unknown. the tnoome-
tax payable by the usoclation sball be the aggregate of-
(I, the amount of income-tax calculated on tbe 
aforesaid part of tbe total income, at tbe maximum 20 
marginal rate; and 
(ii) tbe amount of income-tax with whicb it would 
bave been chargeable bad tbe remaining part of tbe 
total income been its total income. 
Erpl4ft4tion .- For the purposes of tbis section, - 26 
(4) "maximum marginal rate" shall have the 
meaning assigned to it in ErplGnatfon 1. below 8ub-
section (3) of section 164; 
(b) the individual shares of the members of an 
association of persons in the income of such 30 
ASsociation shall be deemed to be indeterminate or 
unknown if sucb shaHs are indeterminate or unknown 
on tbe date of formation of sucb association or at any 
time thereafter. '. 
U. In sect:l.on 208 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-sectiQl 
(2), for clause (c), the following clauses shall be substituted 
with effect from the 1st day of June, 1981, namely:-
"(e) in the case of a Hindu undivkled 
family which at any time during the 
36 
previous year has at least one member 40 
whose total income of the previous year 
exceeds Rs. 16,000 Rs. 12,000; 
(el) in any other case Rs. 15,000.-. 

38 of 1949. 
15 
11. In section 252 of the Income-tax Act, for sub-s8cUon 
(2). the following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:-
"(2' A jldicial member shall be a person who has for 
at least ten years held a judicial office in the territory of 
5 India or wbo bas been a member of the Central Legal 
~rv1ce and has held a post in Grade I of that Service or 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
any equivalent or higher post for at least tbree years or who 
.has been an advocate for at least ten years. 
Explanation. - For the purposes of this sub-section. -
(i) in computing the period during which a persOll has 
held judicial office in the territory of India, there shall 
be included any period, after he has held any judicial 
offlce, during which the persOD has been an advocate 
or has held the offlce of a member of a tribunal or any 
post, under the Union or a State. requiring special 
knowledge of lawi 
(ii) in computing the period during which a person has 
been an advocate, there shall be included any period 
during which the person bas held judicial office or the 
office of a member of a tribunal or any post,under the 
Union or a State. requiring special knowledge of law 
after he became an advocate. 
(2A) An accountant member shall be a person who has 
for at least ten years been in the practice of accountancy 
as a chartered accountant under the Chartered Acoountants 
.Act, 1949. or as a registered accomtant under any law 
formerly in force or partly as a registered accountant and 
partly as a chartered accountant. or who has been a 
member of the Indian Income-tax Service, Group A and 
has held the post of Commissioner of Income-tax or any 
equivalent or higher post for at least three years. ". 
U. In section 253 of the Income-tax Act. in sub-sect1OD 
(6). for the words "ODe hundred and twenty-fiw rupees". the 
words "two hundred rupees" shall be substituted with effect 
35 from the 1st day of June. 1981. 
•• In sectian 256 of the Income-tax Act. in sub-seotion 
(1). for the words "one hundred and twenty-five rupees". the 
word. "two hundred rupees" shall be substituted with effect 
from the 1st day of June, 1981. 
40 21. In section 269G of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section 
(2). for the words "ODe hundred aod twenty-B.w rupees". 
the words "two hundred rupees" shall be substituted with 
effect from the 1st day of June, 1981. 
A.._.of 
HCtIoa 253. 
Amendnteat of 
aec:tioa 2i9G. 

I '1 
," .' r j 
Insertion of 
new section 
293A. 
Power to make 
exemption, etc., 
in relation to 
participation 
in the business 
of plOlipecUng 
for, extraction, 
etc., of mineral 
oils. 
Amendment of 
Ninth SChedule. 
16 
22. After section 293 of the Income -tax Act, the follow-
ing section shall be inserted, namely:-
'293A. (1) If the Central Government is satisfied that it 
is necessary or expedient so to do in the public interest, 
it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make an 5 
exemption, reduction in rate or other modification in 
respect of income-tax in favour of any class of persons 
specified in sub-section (2' or in regard to the whole or 
any part of the income of such class of persons. 
(2) The persons referred to in sub-section (1) are tbe 10 
follOWing, namely:-
(a) persons witb wbom the Central Government has 
entered into agreements for the association or par-
ticipation of that Government or any person autborised 
by tbat Government in any business consisting of the 15 
prospecting for or extraction or production of mineral 
oils; 
(b) persons rendering technical services in connec-
tion with any business conSisting of the prospecting 
for or extraction or production of mineral oils carried 20 
on by that Government or any person specified by that 
Government in this behalf by notification in the Official 
Gazette; and 
(c) employees of the persons referred to in clause (a) 
or clause (b). 25 
(3) Every notiflcation issued under this section sball be 
laid before es.ch House of Parliament. 
Explanation .- For the purposes of this section, "mineral 
oil" includes petroleum and natural gas. '. 
za. In the Ninth Schedule to the Income-tax Act, after 30 
item 32, the following Item shall be inserted witb effect from 
the 1st day of April, 1982, namely:-
"33. Electronic components and raw materials; computerR 
and peripherals; communication equipment; process 
control, instrumentation, industrial and professional 35 
grade electronic equipment. ". 
h. In the Eleventh Schedule to the Income-tax Act,-
(a) for the brackets, words, Agures and letters II/See 
sectioo 32A and secti~ &oJ (")J ", the brackets, wo;ds, 
figures and letters "LSee secti0lL32A, sectioo 8OCC(3)(ct(i), 40 
section8()..1(2) and section 80J(4) I" shall be substituted; 

17 
(b) item 8, itemf:! 11 to 21 (both inclusive) and items 26 
and 29 shall be omitted with eftect from the 1st day of 
April, 1982. 
21. The following 1tmendments (being amendments of a con- Consequential 
5 sequential nature) shall be made in the Income-tax Act, namely:- IImendments. 
(a) In sub- section (3) of section BOP, for the words, figures 
and letters "section 80HHA, section 8OJ". the words. 
figures and letters "section 80HHA, section 80-1, section 
8OJ" shall be substituted; 
10 (b) in the Fxplanatiotl below sub-section (2) of section 273, for 
the word ''prOViso'', lit both the places where it occurs, the words 
"first proviso" shall be substituted. 
" t al th~ tax 
21. In section 21 of the We~th-tax Act, 1957 (hereln-
15 after referred to as the Wealth-tax Act),-
(a) In sub-section (1). the following Explanation shall 
be inserted. namely:-
"Explanation .- A trust which 18 not declared by a 
duly executed instrument in wrlting (induding a valid 
20 deed of wakf) shall be deemed, for the purposes of thIs 
sub-section, to be a trust declared by a duly executed 
instrument In writing if a statement in writing,slgned 
by the trustee or trustees. setting out the purpose 
or purposes of the trust, particulars as to the trustee 
25 or trustees, the beneficiary or beneficIaries and the 
trust property, is forwarded to the Wealth-tax Omoer,-
30 
(i) where the trust has been declared before the 
1st day of June, 1981, within a period of three 
months from that day; and 
(ii) In any other case, within three months from 
the date of declaration of the trust. " ; 
(b) in sub-section (4),-
(i) for the words ''Notwithstandlng anything contalned 
In this section", the words "NotwithstandIng anyth1ng 
35 contained in the foregoing provislons of this section" 
shall be substituted; 
(ii) in Explanation 2 , for the words "for the pUrposes 
of this sub-sectlon in any case, not being a case referred 
to in the prov iso". the words, brackets, figure and letter 
40 "for the purposes of this sub-aection or sub-secftbn 
(4A) in any case, DOt being a case referred to in the 
proviso to this sub-section" sball be substituted; 
.Amendment of 
section 21. 

Insertion of 
a_ IM!CtiOD 
21AA. 
Asseslllleat Wllea __ t. 
are held by 
Cfttaill 
••• oct.tioGa 
ofpel8DD .. 
18 
(e) after 8ub-section(4), the followttg sub-section 
sball be werted, namely:-
'(.fA) Notwithstanding anythIng contained In this 
sectlon, where the assete chargeable to tax under this 
Act are held by a trustee under an oral trust, the 5 
wealth-tax shall be levied upon aDd recovered from 
such trustee in the like manner and to the same extent 
88 It would be leviable upon and recoverable from an 
individual who Is a citizen of India and resident In India 
for the purposes of this Act, and - 10 
(a) at the rates specified In Part I of Schedule I; 
or 
fbl at the rate of three per cent. , 
whichever course would be more beneficial to the revenue. 
FJp'''PllltioH • - For the pn-POS88 of this sub-secUon, 15 
"oral trust" means a trust which Is DOt declared by a 
duly executed I.n&trument In writing (Induding a Valid 
deed of wakf) aid whJ ch is DDt deemed under the 
EJp'aJI4lion to sab-eect1on (1) to be a trust declared 
by a duly executed lnstrumeut In wrltlng. '. 20 
11. After section 2lA of the Wealth-tax Act, the followlDg 
section shall be inserted, D&JDely:-
"21AA. (1) Where aseeta chllrgellble to tax uPr this 
Act are held by an aaaoclation of per1!lODS, other than a 
company or co-operative socIety, and the Individual 
shares of the members of the uJd aeeoclation In the 
income or assets or both of the aa.l.d aBaociatlon on the 
date of Ita formation or at any time thereafter are 
indeterminate or unkDDWll, the wealtb-tax shall be levied 
upon and recovered from such asaoclatlon In the like 
manner and to the same extent as It would be levlatie 
upon and recoverable from an individual who ia a citizen 
of India and resident In india for the purposes of this Act, 
and-
25 
30 
(4) at the rates apeclfted in Part I of Schedule I; or 35 
(b) at the rate 01. three per cent •• 
whichever course would be more beneficial to the revenue. 
(2) Where any bwllne8S or profession carrIed on by 
an .. aoclatlon of per.,ns referred to In Bub-section (1) 
bas been dl.contlnued or where such ae.,cl.atloo of persons .0 
Is dISsolved, the Wealth-tax Offlcer 8hall make an asseSI-
mellt of the aet wealth of tbe auoclatlon of peraoDS as If 

19 
no such discontinuance or dfssolutton had taken place and 
all the provisions of this Act, 1ncludlDg the provl81ons 
relating to the levy of penalty or any other sum charge-
able under any provision of this Act, 80 far &I may be, 
5 shall apply to such assessment. 
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions 
of sub-sectlon (2), if the Wealth-tax Officer or the 
Appellate Assistant Commissioner or the Commissioner 
(Appeals) In the course of any proceedings under this Act 
10 In respect of any such association of persons as Is referred 
to In sub-section (1) Is satisfied that the association of 
persons waa gunty of any of the acts specified In section 
18 or section leA. he may impose or direct the Imposl-
tion of a penalty in accordance wIth the provisions of the 
15 aaJ.d sections. 
(4) Every person who was at the time of such dis-
continuance or dissolution a member of the association 
of persons. and the legal representative of any such 
person who is deceased. shall be Jointly and severally 
20 liable for the amount of tax. penalty or other sum 
payable, and aU the prOVisions of this Act. 80 far as 
may be, shall apply to any such assessment or impo-
sition of penalty or other sum. 
(5) Where such dlsoontllll1&DC8 or dIssolution takes 
25 pace after any proceedings In reapect of an assessment 
year have commenced, the proceedings may be oonUnued 
against the persons referred to In sub-section (4) from 
the stage at which the proceedingS stood at the time of 
such discontinuance or dissolution, and all the provisions 
30 of this Act sba1I, SO far as may be. appy acoordlngiy. 
Explanation. -- Notwithstanding anything contalDed In 
secUon 6, In computing 1I1e net wealth for the purp0888 
of this section In any case, any aS8ets referred to In 
clause8 (xv), (xiii) • (xlii). (xliii). (uiv), (nv), (x%1li). 
35 {xxvii). (uvUi) and (nil') of 8ub-sectlon (1) of that section 
lllball not be excluded:'. 
II. In section 24 of the Wealth-tax Act. In sub-secUon 
(4), for the words "one hundred and twenty-five rupees". 
the words "two hundred rupees" shall be subatltuted with 
40 affect from the 1st day of June, 1981. 
21. In section 26 of the Wea1th-tax Act. In 8ub-sectlon 
(2). for the words "one hundred aDd tweDty-flve rupees", 
the words "two bulldred rupee8" IIhall be 8ubstltuted with 
affect from the 1st day of June, 1981. 
Amendment of 
section 24. 
Alnendmeat of 
sec:tioa 26. 

Amendment of 
section 27. 
Amendment of 
section .41. 
Amendment of 
section 23. 
Amendment of 
section 25. 
Amendment of 
section 26. 
Amendment of 
section 2. 
20 
II. In section 27 of the Wealth-tax Act, In sub-section 
( 1), fo r the words "one hundred and twenty-five rupees", 
the words "two hundred rupees" shall be substituted with 
effect from the 1st day of June, 1981. 
SL In section 41 of the Wealth-tax Act, after sub-section 
(3), the .. folloWing sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(4) Where an association of persons referred to In 
section 2lAA Is di ssolved, notices under this A ct In 
respect of any matter relating to the association 
5 
may be served on any person who was a member of 10 
the association immediately before its dissolution. ". 
GifHax 
12. In section 23 of the Gift-tax Act, 1968 (hereinafter 
referred to as the Gift-tax Act), in sub-section (4), for the 
words "one hundred and twenty-five rupees" ,the words 
"two hundred rupees" shall be substituted with effect from 
ihe 1st day of June, 1981. 
33. In section 25 of the Gift-tax Act. in sub-sectlon(2) , 
for the words "one hundr~ and twenty-five rupees", the 
words "two hundred rupees" shall be substltuted with effect 
from the 1st day of June. 1981. 
M. In section 26 of the Gift-tax Act, In sub-section ( 1) , 
for the words "one hundred and twenty-five rupees", ihe 
words "two hundred rupees" shall be substituted with effect 
from the 1st day of June, 1981. 
Surtcu 
•• In the Companles (Profits) Surtax Act, 1964 
(hereinafter referred 10 as the Co.mpanles (profits) 
Surtax Aril. In section 2, -
15 
20 
25 
(a) clause (1) shall be re-numbered as clause (lA) 30 
'and before the clause as so re-numbered, the follOWing 
clause shall be Inserted, namely:-
t (1) "advance surtax" means the surtax payatie 
under sectlon 7A;'; 
fb) after clause (7), the following clause shall be 
lnserted, .!lamely:-
'(7A) "regular USB.ama" meana an assellment 
made under section 6;1. 
35 
18 of 1958. 
/" , 
7 of 196'1. 
j 
.1 
\ 

5 
21 
•• In the Companies (Profits) Surtax Act, after section 
7, the following secUOJlS shall be Inserted, namely: -
'7A.( 1) In this section,-
(a) "chargeable amount", in relation to any previous 
year, means 80 much of the chargeable profits of the 
previous year as exceed the statutory deductlonj 
(b) . "current ch8.rgeatie amount", in relation to 
the advance Surtax payatie by a company during any 
Ananclal year, means the chargeable amount of the 
10 company of the period which would be the previous 
year for the assessment year Immediately following 
that fl D8.Ilclal year. 
(2) Surtax sball be payatie, in accol'dance with the 
provislons of thls sectlon, in advaDCe during the finanCial 
15 year In respect of the chargeable amount of the period 
Mllch would be the previous year for the lmmecUately 
following assessment year. 
(3) The amount of advance surtax payaJ:ie by an 
assessee in the flnandal year shall be computed as 
20 follows:-
r II) the chargeatie amount of the latest previous 
year In respect of which the asselillee has been 
asllessed by way of regular assessment shall first 
be ascertained; 
25 (b) in a case where the chargeable amount of the latest 
prevJous year Lbeing a year later than the previous year 
referred to in clause (a)J on the basis of which a provi-
sional assessment bas been made Wider section 7 exceeds 
the chargeable amount referred to in clause (a), the 
30 chargeable amount referred to in clause (a) shall be sub-
stituted by the chargeable amount on the basis of which 
~uch proviSional assessment has been made; 
(e) surtax shall be calculated on the chargeable amount 
referred to in clause (a) or, as the case may be, in clause 
35 (b), at the rates specified in the Third Schedule. 
(4) Subject to the provisions of this section, advance sur-
tax shall be payable in three equal instalments on the follow-
ing dates during the financial year. namely :-
7'-
40 
(a) the 15th day of June, the 15th day of September and 
the 15th day of December. in the case of an assessee whose 
In.ertioo of 
new .ec:tion. 
7A to 7D. 
Advance 
pll)'m .. t of 
.urtu. 

chargeable amount to the extent of 76 per ctllt. thereof or 
more is derived from a source or sources for wb1ch the 
previous y.r (relevant to the uaessm8llt year next follow-
ing the financial year aforesa1c:Oenda OIl or before the Slat 
_~~~~~ 6 
(b) the 15th day of September, the 16th day of December 
and the 15th day of March. In any other 08se: 
Provided that where, In re8pect of any Cla8. of a.ae8sees, 
the,Board baa, In exercwe of the powers conferred by the 
proviso to sub-section (1) of sectloG 211 of the Inoome-tax 10 
Act. authorised the paymaat of the lallt lnatalmEd of advance 
tax on the 15th ~ of March during the fJDanclal y.r Instead 
of on the 15th day of December, the last instalD"EIlt of advance 
surtax In the caae of euoh U8eaS888 ahall also be payable on 
the 15th day of March during the financial year. 16 
(5) Every company shall. In each flnancJaI year. on or 
before the date OIl wbleb the first Instalment. or where It has 
not previously been a.se.sed by way of regular asse .. meat 
under this Act, OIl or before the date on whJch the laat instal-
ment, of advance surtax la due In it. case under sub-section 20 
(4), if it Is likely to have any current chargeable amouat. 
send to the Inoome~ Officer,-
(a) where it has be-. previously aa8e •• ed by way of 
regular assesament under thi8 Act. a statement of advance 
surtax payable ~ l& computed in the manner laid down In 26 
sub-section (3). or 
(b) where It baa not prevloualy bam assessed by way of 
regular a8 .. ssm_ UDder thl8 Act. an estimate of -
(i) the curreat cbargeable amoUDt. and 
(if) the advanoa surtax payable by it on the amouat 30 
specified in (f) above calculated in the manner laid down 
in sub-seetlon (31, 
and shall pay such amount of advance surtax,-
(0 In a 08se falUng under clauae (a), as accords with the 
statement In equal1nstalments on th~ dates applicable In its 36 
case under aub-section (4) ~ and 
(II) in a case falllDg under clause (II). aa accords with 
the estimate In equa1in8talments on 8uch of the dates appU-
cable in its case as have not expired, or in one sum if only 
the last of such dates bas not aplred. 40 

23 
(6) Where a company wb1ch is required to Bend a statement 
under clause (a) of sub-section (5) estimatee on or before the 
date on which the first instalment of advance surtax is due in 
its case under sub-sectioD (4) that, by reaSOD of its current 
5 chargeable amount being likely to be less than the chargeable 
amount OD which advance surtax is payable by it \D1der sub-
section (5) or for any other reason, the amount of advanoe 
surtax computed in the manner laid down in sub-sectlon(3) 
on the current chargeable amount would be less than the 
10 amount of advance surtax payable by it under sub-sectiOll (S), 
it may send to the Income-tax Offioer, in lieu of such state-
ment, an estimate of -
(t) the ourrent chargeable amount, and 
(ti) the advance surtax payable by it on the current 
15 ohargeable amount calculated in the manner laid down In 
sub-section (3), 
and shall ~y such amount of advance surtax as accords with 
its estimate in equal instalments on the dates appUcable in 
its case under sub-section (4) • 
20 (7) Where a company'which has sent a statement under 
clause (a) of sub-section (5) estimates on or before the date 
on which the last instalment of advance surtax is due in its 
case that. by reason of its current chargeable amount being 
likely to be less than the chargeable amount on which advance 
25 surtax is payable by it under sub-section (5) or for any other 
reason, the amount of advanoe surtax oomputed in the manner 
laid down in sub-section (3) on the ourrent chargeable amount 
would be less than the amount of advance surtax payable by 
it under sub-sectlon(5). it may, at its option, send to the 
30 Inoome-tax Offioer an estimate of -
(f) the current chargeable amount. and 
(ti) the advance surtax payable by it on the current 
chargeable amount calculated in the manner laid down in 
sub-section (3). 
35 and shall pay such alT'ount of advance surtax as accords with 
its estimate in equal instalments on such of the dates appli-
cable in its case under sub-SectiOD (4) as have not expired, 
or in one sum if only the last of such dates has not expired. 
(8) In the case of any company whlch 1s llatii.e to pay 
40 advance surtax under sub-section (5) or sub-section (6) or, 
a. the case may be, sub-section (7), if, by reaSOD of the 

Interest 
payable by 
GOV-mIII_t. 
24 
current chargeable amount being likely to be greater than the 
chargeable amount on which the advance surtax so payable by 
it has been computed or for any other reason, the amount of 
advance surtax computed in the manner lald down in sub-
section (3) on the current chargeable amount (which shall be 5 
estimated by the company) exceeds the amount of advance 
surtax so payable by it by more than twenty per cent. of the 
latter amount, it shall. on or before the date on which the 
last instalment of advance surtax is payable by it, send to 
the Income-tax Officer an estimate of - 10 
(i) the current chargeable amount, and 
(ii) the advance surtax payable by it on the current 
chargeable amount calculated in the manner laid down in 
sub-section (3), 
and shall pay such amount 01 advance surtax as accords with 15 
its estimate on such of the dates applicable in its case under 
sub-section (4) as have not expired, by instalments which 
may be revised according to sub-section (9) : 
Provided that where in respect of any company the Commis-
sioner has. in exercise of the powers conferred by the first pro- 20 
viso to SUb-section (4) of section 209A. or the first provis~ to 
sub-section (3A) of section 212, of the Income-tax Act. extended 
the date for furnishing the estimate referred to in the said sub-
section (4) or. 8S the case may be, the said sub-sectlon(lA) Rnd 
the company has paid the advance surtax which it is liable to pay 25 
under sub-section (5) or sub-section (6) or, as the case may be. 
sub-section (7) on or before the date on which the last instal-
ment of advance surtax is due in its case, the company shall 
pay. on or before the date as so extended, the amoll.nt by 
which the advance surtax already paid by it falls short of the 30 
advance surtax payable in accordance with Its estimate. 
(9) The p.ompany may send a revised estimate of the 
advance surtax payable by 1t on or before anyone of the dates 
specified In sub-section (4) and adjust any excess or deficiency 
in respect of any instalment already paid in a subsequent 35 
instalment or in subsequent instalments. 
(10) Every statement or estimate under this section shall 
be sent in the prescribed form and verified in the prescribed 
manner. 
7B. The Central Government shall pay simple interest 40 
at twelve per cent. per annum on the amount by which the 
aggregate sum of any instahrents of advance tax paid during 
any financial year in which they are payable under section 7 A 
exceeds the amount of the tax determined on regular assess-

5 
10 
25 
ment, from the 1st day of April next following the said 
financial year to the date of the regular assessment for the 
assessment year immediately following the said financial 
year. 
7C. (1) Where, in any financial year, a company has paid 
advance surtax under section 7A on the basis of its own esti-
mate (including revised estimate), and the advanoe surtax 
80 paid is 1e88 than eighty-three and one-third per cent. of the 
assessed surtax, simple interest at the rate of twelve per 
cent. per annum from the 1st day of April next following the 
said financial year up to the date of the regular assessmellt 
shall be payable by the company upon the amount by which 
the advance surtax so paid falls short of the assessed surtax. 
(2) Where, on making the regular assessment, the Income-
15 tax Officer finds -
(a) that any such company as Is referred to in clause 
(4) of sub-section (5) of section 7 A has not sent the 
statement referred to In that olause or the estimate in 
lieu of such statement referred to in sub-section (6) of 
20 that section; or 
(b) that any such company as is referred to in clause 
(b) of sub-section (5) of section 7A bas not sent the esti-
mate referred to In that clause, 
simple interest at the rate of twelve per cent. per annum 
25 from the 1st day of April next follOWing the financial year 
in which the advance surtax was payable in accordance with 
the said sub-section (5) or sub-section (6) up to the date of 
the regular assessment shall be payable by the company 
upon the amount equal to the assessed surtax. 
30 (3) Where, on making the regular assessment, the 
Income-tax Officer finds that any company which is required 
to send an estimate under sub-secUon (8) of section 7 A has 
not sent the estimate referred to therein, simple interest at 
the rate of twelve per cent. per annum from the 1st day of 
35 April next folloWing the financial year in which the advance 
surtax was payable in acoordance with the said sub-section (8) 
up to the date of the regular assessment shall be payable by 
the company upon the amount by which the advance surtax 
paid by it falls sbort of the assessed surtax. 
40 (4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub-
sections, where provisional assessment is made under 
section 7-
(I) interest shall be calculated in aooordance with the 
provisions of sub-section (I) or sub-section (2) or, as the 
IDt_t 
~.l.by 
........ 

IIIterwt 
pay..,le by 
..... eeill 
c .. of 1Iftd~ 
eatilDlite. etc. 
Inaertion of 
..... section 
9A. 
False eatimete of • 
Mf ... to 
pay,lIdv8Dce 
aarta. 
case may be, sub-section (3) up to the date on which the 
surtax provisionally assessed 1s paid. and 
(tt) thereafter interest shall be calculated at the rate of 
twelve per cent. per annum on the amount by whioh the 
surtax provisionally assessed falls short of the assesled 6 
surtax. 
(5) In suoh cases and 1Dlder such circumstances as may be 
prescribed, the Inoome-tax Officer may reduce or waive the 
interest payable by the comapDf under this section. 
(6) Where, as a result of an order under sect10D 11, or 10 
section 12, or section 13, or section 17, or section 18 read 
wJth section 260 or 8ection 262 of the Income-tax Act, the 
am01Dlt on which interest was payable UDder this s80tion has 
been reduced, the interest shall be reduced accordingly aod 
the exoes8 interest paid, If any, shall be refUDded. 
(7) In this section and section 9A, "assessed surtax" 
lJIeans the surtax determined on the basi,. of the regular 
assessment without making any deduction therefrom. 
7D. Where, on making the regular assessment, the 
Income-tax Officer finds that any company bas under section 20 
7 A underestimated the advance surtax payable by it and thereby 
reduced the amount payable in either of the first two instal-
ments, he may direct that the company shall pay simple interest 
at twelve per cent. per annum for the period during which the 
payment was deficient, on the dIfferenoe between the amount 25 
paid in each such instalment and the amount whioh should 
have beal paid, baving regard to the aggregate advanoe surtax 
actually paid during the year. 
E.rp'anaUon .- For the purposes of this section, any 
instalmalt due beiore the expiry of sm months from the 30 
commencement of the previous year in respect of whioh it 
is to be paid shall be deemed to have beoome due fifteen days 
after the expiry of the said six months. I. 
II. In the Companies (Profits) Surtax Act, after section 
9, the following section shall be inserted, namely:-
"9A. (1) It the Income-tax Officer, in the course of BDY 
proceedings in connection with the regular aS88ssment for 
any aS88ssment year, Is satisfied that any assessee -
3& 
(4) has tarnished UDder clause (.) of aub- section (5) 
of sectlon 'fA a statement of advance. surtax payable by 40 
hlJD whloh be knew or had realm to believe to be 
untrue, or 

27 
(b) has without reasonable cause faUed to furnish a 
statement of the advance surtax payable by him in 
accordance with the provisioos of clause (4) of sub-
section (5) of sectioo 7A, 
15 he may direct that such assessee shall, in addition to the 
amount of surtax, if any, payable by him, pay by way of 
penalty a sum -
(t) which, in the case referred to in clause (a). shall 
not be less thaD ten per cent. but shall not exceed one 
10 and a half times the amount by which the surtax actually 
paid during the financial year immediately preceding the 
assessment year under the provisions of section 7}. 
falls sbort of -
(1) eighty-three and one-third per cent. of the 
assessed surtax. or 
(2) the amount which would have been payable by 
way of advance surtax if the assessee had furnished a 
correct and complete statement in accordance with 
the provisions of clause (4) of sub-section (5) of 
20 section 7 A, 
whichever is less; 
(ii) which, in the case referred to in clause (b). shall 
not be less than ten per cent. but shall not exceed one 
and a half times of eighty-three and one-third per cent. 
26 of the assessed surtax. 
(2) U the Income-tax Officer, in the course of any 
proceedings in connectioo with the regular assessment for 
any assessment year, is satisfied that any assessee -
(4) has furnished under olause (b) of sub- section (5) 
30 or sub-sectioo (6) or sub-sectioo (7) or sub-section (9) 
of section 7 A. an estimate of the advance surtax payable 
by him which he knew or had reason to believe to be 
untrue, or 
(b) has furnished under sub-section (8) of section 
315 7 A. an estimate of the advance surtax payable by him 
which he knew or had reason to belleve to bd untrue, or 
(e) bas without reasonable oause faUed to furnish an 
estimate of the advanoe surtax payable by him in 
aooordance with the provlsfms of clause (b) of sub-
40 section (5) of section 7A, or 

28 
(d) has without reasonable cause failed to furnish 
an estimate of advance surtax payable by hlm in 
accordance with the provisioos of sub-section (8) of 
section 7A., 
he may direct that such assessee shall, in addition to the 5 
amount of surtax, if any, payable by him, pay by way of 
penalty a sum -
(i) which, in the case referred to in clause (a), shall 
not be less than ten per cent. but shall not exceed one 
and a half times the amount by which the surtax actually 10 
paid during the financial year Immediately preceding 
the assessment year under the provisions of section 
7 A falls short of -
(1) eighty-three and one-third per cent. of the 
assessed surtax, or 15 
(2) where a statement under clause (a) of sub-
section (5) of section 7A was furnished by the 
assessee, the amount payable under such statement, 
whichever is less; 
(ti) which, in the case referred to in clause (b), shall 20 
not be less than ten per cent. but shall not exceed one 
and a half times the amount by which the surtax actually 
paid during the financial year immediately preceding the 
assessment year under the provisions of section 7 A falls 
short of eighty-three and one- third per cent. of the 25 
assessed surtax; 
(iii) which, in the case referred to in clause (c). shall 
not be less than ten per cent. but shall not exceed one 
and a half times of eighty-three and one-third per cent. 
of the assessed surtax; and 30 
(tv) which, in the case referred to in clause (di, shall 
not be less than ten per oent. but shall not 
exceed one and a half times the amount of surtax pay-
able in accordance with a statement under clause (a) or 
an estimate under clause (b) of sub-section (5) of 3S 
section 7 A or an estimate In lieu of a statement under 
sub-section (6) of that section falls short of etghty-
three and one-third per cent. of the assessed surtax. 
E.rpIGft~n ._Where the Commissioner has, in 
exercise of the powers conferred by the first proviso to sub- 40 
sectim (4) of section 209A, or the first proviso to sub-
sectim (lA) of section 212, of the Income-tax Act, extended 

29 
the date for furnishing the estimate referred to in the sa id 
sub-section (4) or. as the case may be, the said sub-section 
(lA) and the date so extended falls beyond the financial year 
Immediately preceding the assessment year. then, the amount 
5 of surtax paid by the assessee on or before the date so extended 
shall. for the purposes of clause (ii) of sub-section (2) also be 
regarded as surtax actually paid during that financial year. ". 
.. In section 10 of the Companies (Profits) SUrtax Act, 
after the words and figure ''under section 9", the words. 
10 figure and letter "or section 9A" shall be inserted. 
.. In section 11 of the Companies (Profits) SUrtax Act, 
In sub-section (1), after the words "fine Imposed by the 
Income-tax aftcer, ". the words, figure and letter "or 
objecting to the interest levied by the Income-tax Officer 
15 under section 7D, " shall be msened. 
•• In section 12 of the Companies (Profits) SUrtax Act. 
in sub- section (6). for the words "one hundred and twenty-
five rupees". the words ''two hundred rupees" shall be 
substituted with effect from the 1st day of June, 1981. 
20 el. In section 18 of the Companies (Profits) SUrtax Act. 
25 
30 
for the figures and word "220 to 229". the figures and word 
"218 to 229" shall be substituted. 
It. In the Companies (Profits) Surtax Act, after section 
24A. the following sectioll :Jhall be inserted. namely:-
'24AA. (1) U the Central Government is satisfied that it 
Is necessary or expedient so to do in the public Interest. It 
may. by notification in the Official Gazette, make an 
exemption. reduction in rate or other modification in 
respect of surtax In favour of any class of foreign com-
panies specified in sub-section (2) or in regard to the 
whole or any part of the chargeable profits of such class 
of companies. 
Explanation .• -For the purposes of this sub-section, 
''foreign company" shall have the meaning assigned to it 
35 in clause (4) of section 80B of the Income-tax Act. 
(}) The foreign companies referred to in sub- section 
(I) are the follOwing, namely:-
(ca) foreign companies with whom the Central 
Government has entered into agreements for the 
40 association or partlclpation of that Government or any 
person authorised by that Government In any business 
cOlUlistlng of the prospecting for or extraction or 
Production of mineral oUs; and 
Amendmeat of 
sectiOll 1o. 
Amendment of 
section 11. 
Amendment of 
section 12. 
Amendment of 
section 18. 
IDsertion of 
new section 
24AA. 
Power to make 
ellemption,etc., 
in relation to 
partiCipation in 
the busineaa of 
plOspectin& for, 
ntr.:tion, etc., 
of mineral oils. 

Amendment of 
Firat Schedule. 
Amend.eat of 
Act 45 of 1974. 
Amendment of 
Act 54 of 198()' 
A_eadmeat of 
Act 51 of 1975. 
30 
(b) foreign companies rendering technical servioes 
in connection with any business conslattng of the 
prospectlDg for or extraction or production of mineral 
oUs carrted OIl by that Government or lIllY persOll 
specified by that Government in this behalf by noun-
cation In the aficia) Gazette. 
(3) Every notlfication issued under this section shall be 
laid before each House of Parliament. 
Explanation. - For the purposes of this 8actim, 
''mineral oU" Includes petroleum and natural gas. '. 
Q. In the First Schedule to the Companies (Proftts)SUrtax 
Act, in rule I, the following Elp'ClnGtion shall be added at the 
end, namely:-
"ExplGJl4ltion • - Notwithstanding anything cOlltained in 
Rny clause of this rule. the amount of any Income or profits 
And gains which ia required to be excluded from the total 
Income under that clause shall be only the amount of such 
Income or profits and gains AS computed in accordance 
with the provisions of the Income-tax Act (except Chapter 
VIA thereof). and in a case where any deduction ia required 
to be allowed in respect of any auch Income or profits and 
gains under the said Chapter VIA, the amount of such 
income or profits and gaina computed as aforesaid as 
reduced by the amwnt of such deduction. ". 
... In section 16 of the lnterest-tax Act, 1974:, in sub-
section (6). for the words "008 hundred and Itwenty-five 
rupees". the words ''two lundred rupees" shall be substituted 
With effect from the 1st day of June, 1981. 
Hotel-receipts tAr 
.. In section 19 of the Hotel- Receipts Tax Act, 1980, in 
sub-section (6). for the words "ODe hundred and twenty -five 
rupees", the words "two hundred rupees" shall be substltuted 
with effect from the 18t day of June, 1981. 
CHAPTER IV 
IfllDIIECT TAXES 
•. The Customs Tariff Act. 19'75 (hereinafter referred 
to as the CUstoms Tariff Act). shall be amended in the maDDer 
apec1fied in the Second Schedule. 
6 
10 
20 
25 
30 
35 

31 
Q. (1) In the case of goods mentioned In the First Schedule 
to the Customs Tariff Act, or in that Schedlle, as amended 
from time to time, there shall be levied and collected as an 
auxiliary «lIty of customs an amount e~al to twenty-five per 
5 cent. of the value ofthe goods as determined in accordance 
S2 of 1962. with the provisions of section 14 of the Customs Act, 1962 
(hereinafter referred to as the Customs Act). 
(2) Sub-section (1) shall cease to have effect after the 31st 
day of March, 1982, except as respects things done or omitted 
10 to be done before such cesser; and section 6 of the General 
10 of 1897. Clauses Act, 1897, shall apply upon such cesser as if the said 
sub-section had then been repealed by a Central Act. 
0) The auxiliary duties of customs referred to in sub-
section (1) shall be in addition to any duties of customs 
15 chargeable on such goods under the Customs Act, or any 
other law for the time being in force. 
(4) The provisions of the Customs Act and the rules and 
reillations made thereunder, including those relating to 
refunds and exemptions from wUes, shall, as far as may 
20 be, apply in relation to the levy and collection of the auxiliary 
duties of customs leviable under this section in respect of 
any goods as they apply in relation to the levy and collection 
of the duties of customs on such goods under that Act or those 
rules and regulations, as the case may be. 
25 ... The Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 (hereinafter 
referred to as the Central Excises Act), shall be amended in 
the manner specified in the Third Schedule. 
... (1) In the case of goods chargeable with a duty of excise 
under the Central Excises Act, as amended from time to time, 
30 read with any notification for the time being in force issued 
by the Central Government in relation to the duty so chargeable, 
there shall be levied and collected a special wty of excise 
equal to ten per cent. of the amount so chargeable on such 
goods. 
35 (2) &tb-section (1) shall cease to have effect after the 31st 
day of March, 1982, except as respects things done or omitted 
to be done before such cesser; and section 6 of the General 
10 of 1897. Clauses Act, 1897, shall apply upon such cesser as if the laid 
sub-section had then been repealed by a Central Act. 
40 (3) The special duties of excise referred to in sub-sectioo 
(1) .hall be in addltion to any dtties of excise chargeable on 
such goods under the Central Excises Act, or any other law 
for the time being in force. 
Auxiliary 
duties of 
cuatoaa •• 
Ameadmeot of 
Act 1 of 1944. 
Special dati_ 
of .Ilrr.i .... 

ADlestdmestt of 
Act 58 of 1957. 
ADleadmestt of 
Act 40 of 1978. 
~mendmesttof 
Act 16 of 1955. 
Am.dmeatof 
Act 38 m 1974. 
32 
(4) The provisions of the Central Excises Act and the rules 
made thereunder, including those relating to rel1nds and 
exemptions from mties, shall, as far as may be, apply in 
relation to the levy and collection of the special duties of excise 
leviable under this section in respect of any goods as they 5 
apply in relatim to the levy and collection of the duties of excise 
on aJ.ch goods under that Act or those rules, as the case may 
be. 
10. In the First Schedule to the Additional ntties of Excise 
(Goods of Special Importance) Act, 1957, in Item No.4, under 10 
"II. MGnufcu:tured tobacco _", for the entry in the third column 
against sub-item (2), the entry "One hundred and ten per cent. 
ad lIalor. plus ten rupees per thousand. II shall be substituted. 
11. In section S of the Additional Duties of Excise (Textiles 
and Textile Articles) Act, 1978, in sub-section (1), for the 15 
words ''ten per cent. ", the words "fifteen per cent. " shall 
be substituted. 
12. The Medicinal and Tonet Preparations (Excise Duties) 
Act, 1955, shall be amended in the manner specified in the 
Fourth Schedule. 20 
CHAPTER V 
Mlsa:U.ANEOUS 
... In the Compulsory Deposit Scheme (Income-tax Payers) 
Act, 1974,-
(a) in section 3,in sub-section (l). for the figures, 
letters and words "1st day of April, 1982 ", the figures, 
letters and words "1st day of April, 1984" shall be 
sUbstituted: 
fb) in section 4, in sub-section (ll, in clause (iii), for the 
figures, letters and words "1st day of April, 1982", the 
figures, letters and words "1st day of Aprn, 1984" shall 
be aubstituted: 
(c) in 8ection 8, with effect from the 1st day of June, 
1981, -
25 
30 
(1) after sub-aection (n, the following sub-section 36 
shall be inserted, namely:-
"(IA) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-
8ection ( 1) , -
(a) the amount of compulsory deposit made by 
or recovered from an individual, or 40 

5 
33 
(b) the amount of compulsory deposit made by 
or recovered from any person who is assessable 
under the lnoome-tax Act in respect of the total 
income of an individual, on behalf of such individual, 
shall, to the extent it has remained unpaid, be re-
payable, together with interest thereon,-
(i) where such individual has attained the age 
of seventy years before the 1st day of April, 1981, 
on the 1st day of June, 1981; and 
10 (ii) in any other case, on the 1st day of the 
financial year immediately succeeding the financial 
year in which Slch individual attained seventy 
years of age. "; 
(ii) in sub-section (2), after the words, brackets and 
15 figure "under sub-section (l)~', the words, brackets, 
figure and letter "or sub-section (lA)~' shall be inserted. 
Declaration under tile Provisional 
Collection of Talts Act, 1931. 
It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the public 
20 interest that the provisions of clauses 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 
51 and 52 of this Bill shall have immediate effect under the 
16 of 1931. Provisional Collection of Taxes Act, 1931. 

THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
(Stt section 2) 
PART 1 
INCOME-TAX AND SURCHARGE ON INCOME-TAX 
Sub-Pcuqraph I 
In the case of every individual or Hindu undivided family or 
unregistered firm or other association of persons or body of 
individuals, whether incorporated or not, or every artificial 
5 
Juridical person referred to in sub-clause (vii) of clause (31) of 10 
section 2 of the Income-tax Act, not being a case to which 
Sub-Paragraph n of this Paragraph or any other Paragraph of 
this Part Ilpplies,-
Rates of f"'''tne-taI 
(1) where the total income 
does not exceed Rs. 8, 000 
(2) where the total income 
exceeds Rs. 8,000 but does not 
exceedRs.15,OOO 
(3) where the tutal income 
exceeds Rs. 15,000 but does not 
exceed Rs.20,OOO 
(4) where the total Income 
exceeds Rs. 20,000 but does not 
exceed Rs. 25,000 
(5) where the total income 
exceeds Rs. 25,000 but does not 
exceed Rs.30.000 
(6) where the total income 
exceeds Rs. 30,000 but does not 
exceed Rs. 50,000 
Nil; 
15 per cent. of the amount by 
which the total income exceeds 
Rs. 8,000; 
Rs. I, 050 plus 18 per cent. of 
the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs. 15,000; 
Rs. 1,950 plus 25 per cent. of 
the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs. 20,000; 
Rs. 3,200 plus 30 per cent. of 
the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Ra. 25. 000; 
Rs. 4,700 plus 40 per cent. of 
the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs. 30, 000; 
(7) where the total income Rs. 12.700 plus 50 per cent. of 
exceeds Ra. 50,000 but does not the amount by which the total 
exceed R8. 70, 000 income exceedB RB. 50, 000; 
34 
15 
20 
25 
30 

(8) where the total income 
exceeds Rs. 70,000 but does not 
exceed Rs. I, 00, 000 
35 
Rs. 22,700 plus 55 per cent. of 
the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs. 70,000; 
(9) where the total income 
5 oxceeds Rs. 1,00,000 
Rs. 39,200 plus 60 per cent. of 
the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs. 1. 00, 000: 
Provided that for the purposes of this Sub-Paragraph, -
(i) no income-tax shall be payable on a total income not 
exceeding Rs. 12, 000; 
10 (iil where the total income exceeds Rs. 12,000 but does 
nol exceed Rs. 16,250, the income-tax payable thereon shall 
not exceed thirty per cent. of the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs. 12,000. 
Surcharge on ,"come-tcu 
15 The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the 
preceding provisions of this Sub-Paragraph shall be increased 
by a surcharge for purposes of the Union calculated at the rate 
of tcn per cent. of such income-tax. 
Sub-p arl1Araph II 
20 In the case of every Hindu undivided family which at any time 
25 
30 
35 
during the previous year bas at least one member whose total 
income of the previous year relevant to the assessment year 
commencing on the 1st day of April, 1981 exceeds Rs. 12,000, -
Ratts of Utcomeo(u 
(1) where the total income 
~oes not exceed Re. 8, 000 
(2) where the total income 
exceeds Rs. 8, 000 but does not 
exc.eed Rs. 16,000 
(3) where the total income 
exceeds Rs. 16,000 but does DOt 
exceed Re. 20, 000 
(4) where the total income 
exceeds Rs. 20,000 but does not 
exceed Re.25,OOO 
Nil; 
22.per ceot. of the amount by 
which the total income exceeds 
Rs. 8,000; 
RS.l,540 plus 27 per cent. of 
the amount by which the total 
Income exceeds RB. 16, 000; 
Rs. 2,890 plus 35 per cent. of 
the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs. 20,000; 

(5) where the total income 
exceeds Rs. 25,000 but does not 
exceed Rs.30,OOO 
(6) where the total income 
exceeds Rs. 30,000 but does not 
exceed Rs.50,OOO 
(7) where the total income 
exceeds Rs.50,OOO 
36 
Rs. 4,640 plus 40 per cent. of 
the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs. 25,000; 
Rs. 6,640 plus 50 per cent. of 
the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs. 30,000; 
Rs. 16,640 plus 60 per cent. of 
the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs. 50,000: 
5 
Provided that for the purposes of this Sub-Paragraph, - 10 
(i) no income-tax shall be payable on a total income not 
exceeding Rs. 12,000; 
(ii) where the tota1mcome exceeds Rs. 12,000 but does not 
exceed Rs.17, 610, the income-tax payable thereon shall not 
exceed forty per cent. of the amount by which the total income 15 
exceeds fts.12.000. 
The amount of income-tax computed In accordance with the 
preceding provisions of this Sub-Paragraph shall be increased 
by a surcharge for purposes of the Union calculated at the rate of 20 
ten per cent. of l:Iuch income-tax. 
ParaAraph B 
In the case of every co-operative society,-
Rates of income-tal' 
(1) where the total income 
does not exceed Rs. 10,000 
(2) where the total income 
exceeds Rs. 10,000 but does not 
exceed Rs.20,000 
(3) where the total income 
exceeds Rs.20,OOO 
15 per cent. of the total 
iDCome; 
Rs. 1,500 plus 25 per cent. of 
the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs. 10,000; 
25 
Rs. 4,000 plus 40 per cent. of 30 
the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs. 20,000. 

37 
The amolUlt of income-tax COIIlPIted in accordance with the 
preceding provisions of this Pa!'ltl1'Rph shall be increased by a 
surcharge for purposes of the Union calculated at the rate of 
5 ten per cent. of such income-tax. 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
Parasraph C 
SlIb..p,nasraph I 
In the case of every registered firm. not being a case to 
which Sub-Paragraph II of this Paragraph applies.-
Ratts of inco,"e~ta.x 
(1) where the total income Nil; 
does not exceed Rs. 10.000 
(2) where the total inoome 
exceeds Rs.I0,OOO but does not 
exoeed RI. 25. 000 
(3) where the total income 
exceeds Rs. 25.000 but does not 
exceed Rs.50.000 
(4) where the total income 
exoeeds Rs. 50.000 but does not 
exceedRa.l.00.000 
(5) where the total income 
exceeds Rs.l,OO,OOO 
5 per cent. of the amount by 
which the total income 
exceeds Rs. 10.000; 
Rs. 750 pillS 7 per cent. of the 
amount by which the total 
inoome exceeds Rs. 25. 000; 
Rs. 2.500 pillS 15 peT cent. of 
the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs. 50,000; 
Rs. 10.000 pIllS 24 per cent. 
of the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs. 1.00.000. 
SurcharQt on income-tax 
1'he amount of income-tax computed In accordance with the 
preceding provisions of this Sub-Paragraph shall be increased 
by a surcharge for purposes of the Union calculated at the rate 
of ten per cent. of such income-tax. 
In the case of'every registered firm whose total income 
includes income derived from a prf)fesslon carried On by it and 

38 
the lDcome 80 included Is not less tbAD fifty-one per cent. of 
such total income,-
Rates of iflCOlle-ttu 
(1) where the totallDoome 
does not exceed' 10,000 
(2) where the tot. in\ }ome 
exceeds Rs.lO, 000 but does not 
exceed Re. 25, 000 
Nil; 
" per oent. of the amuunt by 
which the total income exceeds 
Rs. 10,000; 
5 
(3) where the tota11ncome 
exceeds Rs. 25,000 but does not 
exceed Ra. 50, 000 
Rs. 800 pillS 7 per cent. of the 
amount by which the total income 10 
exceeds Rs. 25,000; 
(4) where the total income 
exceeds Re. 50,000 but does not 
exceed Re. 1,00,000 
(5) where the total income 
exceeds Ra. 1, 00, 000 
Rs. 2, 350 pillS 13 per cent. of the 
amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs. 50,000; 
Rs. 8,850 pillS 22 per cent. of 
the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000. 
SurcharRt on income-tILt 
The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the 
15 
preceding provisions of this Sub-Paragraph shall be increased 20 
by a surcharge for purposes of the Union calculated at the rate 
of ten per cent. of such income-tax. 
Explanation. - For the purposes of this Paragraph, "regis-
tered firm" includes an unregistered firm assessed as a regis-
tered firm under clause (b) of section 183 of the Income-tax Act. 25 
rar~raph D 
In the case of every local authority,-
Rale of income-la.r 
On the whole of the total income 50 per cent. 
SllrcharRe on income-lax 
The amount of income-tax computed at the rate hereinbefore 
specified shall be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the 
Union calculated at the rate of ten per cent. of such income-
tax. 
30 

5 
39 
In the case of a company,-
Rllts.fiX 
L In the case of a domestic· y, -
(1) where the company i8 
a company in which the public 
are substantially interested,-
-/ 
# 
(i) in a case where the 45 per cent. of the total income; 
total income does not exceed 
10 Rs.l,OO,OOO 
(ii) in a case where the 55 per cent. of the total income; 
total income exceeds 
RB. 1,00,000 
(2) where the company is 
15 not a company in which the 
public are substantially 
interested, -
20 
25 
(i) in the case of an 
industrial company,_ 
(a) where the total 
income does not exceed 
Rs.2,OO,OOO 
(b) where the total 
income exceeds 
Rs. 2, 00, 000 
(H) in any other case 
Provided tbat-
55 per cent. of the total income; 
60 per cent. of the total income; 
65 per cent. of the total income: 
{tJ the income-tax payable by a domestic company, being 
a company in which the public are substantially interested, 
30 the to*-l income of which exceeds Re. 1,00,000, sball aot 
exceed the aaregate of-
(0) the income-tax which would bave been payable by 
the company If Ita total 1Dcome bad been ae. 1,00, 000 
(the 1ncome of Ra. 1,00,000 for this purpo .. heiDI oom-
3S puted •• 11 lucb tacome Included iDCome froID Y&l'tou. 

sources in the same proportion as the totallDcome of 
the compllllY); and 
(b) eighty per cent. of the amount by which Its total 
iDcome exceeds Rs. 1,00,000; 
(II)" the Income-tax i .• vable by a domestic company, DOt 5 
heir • a company In whI, tll,be public are substantially 
inte .. 'ted, which Is an .'1 1trial company BDd the total 
\ . 
1neon Ie i,' which exoeeds I\s. 2, 00, 000, shall not exceed 
the am;.. , _., of-
(A) .\ In" .. ;ome-tax which would have been payable by 10 
the com~, .i'lf its total income had been Rs. 2,00,000 
(the income of Rs. 2,00,000 for thIs purpose beiDI com-
puted as if such income included income from various 
sources In the same proportion as the total income of 
the company); and 15 
(b) eighty per cent. of the amount by which its total 
income exceeds Rs. 2,00,000. 
II. In the case of 8 company other than a domestic company,-
(i) on so much of the total 
income 8S consists of-
(A) royalties received 
from an Indian concern in 
pursuance of an agreement 
made by it with the Indian 
concern after the 31st day 
of M.arch, 1961 but before 
the 1st day of April, 1976, 
or 
(b) fees for rendering 
technical services received 
from an Tndian concern in 
pu rsuance of an agreement 
made by it with the lDd1an 
concern after the 29th day 
of February, 1964 but 
before the 1st day of April, 
1976, 
and where such agreement has, 
in eithet case, been approved 
by the Central Government 
(ii) on the balance, U any, 
of the total income 
SwchArAt on income-t4% 
50 per cent. ; 
70 per cent. 
The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the 
preceding provisions of this Paragraph shall be increased by a 
surcharge calculated at the rate of seven and a half per cent. 
of such income-tax. $ ~ i 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 

41 
PART n 
Rates for deduction of at SOUTee in cert4in cases 
In every case in which vfi' the provisions of-~ctions 193, 
194:. 194A, 194B, 194BB" ) an~5 of the !rne-tax Act, 
5 tax is to be deducted at tl. " ,8 i rce, de, ,In shall be 
made from the income subject tea:; c~io. . 'following rates:-
10 1. In the case of a person 
15 
20 
25 
other than a company-
(a) where the person is 
res ident in India-
(i) on income by way of 
interest other than "Interest 
on securities" 
(ii) on income by way of 
winnings from lotteries and 
crossword puzzlef! 
(iii) on income by way of 
winnings from ho!' .f, races 
(ill) on incom~ . :i way of 
insurance oomJYll.~8ion 
(v) on incollit by way of 
interest payable on -
(A) any security. other 
than a tax-free security, of 
the Central or a State Govern-
ment; 
30 (B) any debentures or 
other securities for money 
issued by or on behalf of 
any local authority or a oor-
poration established by a 
36 Central, State or Provincial 
Act; 
(C) any debentures issued 
by a company where such 
de bentures are listed in a 
40 recognised stock exchange in 
India in accordance with the 
orne-tax 
10 per cent. 
30 per cent. 
30 per cent. 
10 per cent. 
10 per cent. 
Rate of 
surchar~e 
Nil; 
:1 per (,-ent. , 
3 per cent; 
Nil; 
Nil; 

42 
Income-tax 
Rate of 
income-tar 
Rate of 
surcharge 
'i }, Securities Contracl' a . ,'~-
lation) Act, 1956, 'I ·te~ 
rules made thereur. ~."". 
(vi) on any other 1nC~-~' .. "! • 
(excluding interest paYIll~ '''.~ , n.. (' on a tax-free security) :" 
(b) where the person is not 
resident in India-
(i) on the whole income 
(excluding interest payable 
on a tax-free security) 
20'per cent. 2 per cent.; 
income-tax at 30 per cent. and 
surcharge at 3 per cent. of the 
amount of the Income, 
5 42 of 1956-
10 
or 15 
(ii) on income by way of 
interest payable on a tax-
free security 
2. In the case of a oompany-
(CI) where the company Is a 
domestic company-
income-tax and surcharge on 
income-tax In respect of the 
income at the rates prescribed 
in Sub-Paragraph I of Paragraph 
A of Part m of this Schedule, 20 
if such income had been the total 
income, 
whichever is higher; 
15 per cent. 1.5 per oent. 
25 
(i) on income by way of 20 per cent. 0.5 per ceDt. ; so 
interest other than "Interest 
on securitie8" 
(ti) on any other Income 
(excludiag interest payable 
on a tax-free security) 
(b) where the company is DOt 
a domestic compaDJ-
(i) on income by .".y of 
divldeQda paYJble by lAY 
dome.1e company 
21.5 per oent. 0.5 per cent.; 
35 
as per cent. Hi!; 
40 

"'co~e~. 
f . ll't una. Income-tax 
III n (9) 01, of Rate of 
e . NilJ.,-tax surcharge 
. , "'" _____________________ w~ ~.~~------------
5 
(il) on income by way of 
royalty payable by an Indian 
concern in pursuance of an 
agreement made by it with 
the Indian concern after the 
31st day of March, 1976, 
10 where such royalty is In 
consideration for the transfer 
of all or any rights (lDcludlng 
the granting of a licence) In 
respeot of copyright in any 
15 book on a subject referred to 
in the proviso to sub-section 
(IA )of section U5A of the 
Income-tax Act, to the Indian 
concern 
20 (iii) .on income by way of 
royalty Lnot being royalty 
of the nature referred to in 
Bub-item (b) (i}Jj payable 
by an Indian concern In 
25 pursuance of an agreement 
made by It with the IndlaD 
concern and which has been 
approved by the Central 
Government, -
30 (A) where the agreement 
Ia made after the 31st day 
of March, 1961 but before 
the 1st day of Aprll. 1976 
(8) where the agreement 
35 18 made after the 31at day 
of March, 1976-
40 
(1) on 10 muoh of the 
amount of suoh lDOome u 
oonal8ta of lump 8WD oon-
atderatJon for the transfer 
.~ ., 
/ .,. 
40 PIer cent( 
~h tb!, ...... -
Nil; 
50 per oent. 1. 25 per cent. ; 
20 per cent. Nil; 

44 
,:J' -----------
Ae-t • ." . ..-_ Income- tax 
, . T va...,f Rate of 
( ,1 '"i~.x surcharge 
. I' J\ 1... '~'. JI 
,;./.l Ice&o'"", ----.---
outFid~ india of, r ~ .. . ':W . 
lmpartingof into'~' 
outside india in re\in .... ' 
of. any data. docum"jl.. 
tlan, drawing or specifi-
cation relating to any 
patent, invention. model, 
design. secret formula or 
process, or trade mark or 
similar property 
(2) on the balance. if 
any, of such income 
(ill) on 1Dcome by way of 
fee8 for technical services 
payable by an Indian concern 
to pursuance of an agreement 
made by it with the Indian 
concern and which has been 
approved by the Central 
Qovernment-
(A) where the agreement 
Is made after the 29th day 
of February. 1984 but 
before the 1st day of 
April. 19'76 
(8) where the agreement 
18 made after the 318t day 
of March. 1976 
(II) on income by way of 
interest payable on a tax-
free aecurity. 
(1.'t) OD aD)' other 1Dcom e 
40 per cent. Nil; 
60 per cent. 1.25 per cent.; 
40 per cent. Nil; 
'44 per cent. l.l per cent. ; 
TO per cem. 1. 75 per cent. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
36 

5 
10 
15 
20 
45 
PART III 
Rales for calculating or ChUrgil;~' COme-~tll in certain caSfS, deducting 
inceflle-Ial from inco",t c/J . Ie undh. the head "Sala .. tes" or CBt)' 
payment rtferrea to in SIl,6f In " (9) of' seclion 80£ an ~ computing 
I. advanCt' lax·. '. \"".,,'" :11. 
~e Nil"j 
\.,'" In cases in which income-te,;' 1 ~''''''"'''''';-;'lated under the 
first proviso to sub-section ( 5~ .. "- ... ~~ t I the Income-tax , _r cen . 
Act or charged under sub-section (4,1ch t .. 172 or sub-section 
(2) of section 174 or section 175 or i. 1#~don (l) of section 176 
of the said Act or deducted under se~ 192 of the said Act from 
income chargeable under the head "Salaries" or deducted under sub-
section (9) of section 80E of the said Act from any payment 
referred to in the sald sub-sectlon (9) or in which the "advance 
tax" payable under Chapter XVII-C of the said Act has to be 
computed, at the rate or rates in force, such income-tax or, 
as the case may be, "advance tax" (not being "advance tax" in 
respect of any income chargeable to tax under Chapter XU or 
section 164 or section 164A or section 167 A of the Income-tax Act at 
the rates as specified in that Chapter or section), shall be so calcula-
ted. charged, deducted or computed at the following rate or rates:-
Paragraph A 
Sub-P aragraph I 
In the case of every individual or Hindu undivided fam ily 
or unregistered firm or other association of persons or body 
25 of individuals, whether incorporated or not, or every artiflctal 
juridical person referred to in sub-clause (vii) of clause (31) of 
section 2 of the Income-tax Act. not being a case to whh:h Sub-
Paragraph D of thls Paragraph or any other Paragraph of this 
Part applies,-
30 Rates of inCOJlft-'w 
(1) where the total Income Nil; 
does not exceed Ra. 15,000 
(2) where the total inoome 
exceeds RS.15, 000 hut does DOt 
36 exceed Re. 25,000 
(3) where the total lnoome 
exceeds R8. 25, 000 but doea 
DDt exceed Ra. 30,000 
30 per cent. of the amount 
by which the total lDoome 
exceeds Rs. 15, 000; 
Rs. 3,000 ,'us 34 per cent. 
of the a.mount by which the 
total income exoeed. R •• 25,000; 

46 
(4) where the tota11ncome R.,. 4, 700plu5 40 per ceot.,of 
exceeds Rs. 80,000 but does njt ~'! amount by which the total 
exceed Rs. 50,000 ,/ .• ,me exceeds Rs. 30,000; 
. V'" '1. 
(6) where the totallncOlf' e -- -11. :t 700phu 50 per cent. 
exceeds Rs. 50, 000 but doe r Ito. .... \ - , 1_; amount by whjch the 
not exceed RS.70, 000 ~oeb ~\ _ iDcome exceeds 
~i#" < 2W RIl~ 50,000; 
" (6) where the to.t ';In • .,;' Rs.22,700pJus 55 per cent. 
exceeds Rs. 70, 000 bU'~. of the amount by which the 
not exceed Rs. 1 t 00,000 ...... total income exceeds Rs. 70,000; 
('7) where the total Income 
exceeds Rs. 1, 00 t 000 
Rs. 39,200 plus 60 per ceut. of 
the amount by which the total 
Income exceeds Rs. 1 tOO, 000. 
5 
10 
The amount of Income-tax computed in accordance with the 15 
precedJng ProvislOll8 of this Sub-Paragraph shall be increased by 
a surchage for purposes of the Union calcwated a.t the rate of 
ten per cent. of such lncome-tax. 
In the case of every Hindu undivided famUy which at any time 20 
during the prevlouB year bas at least Doe member whose total 
Income of the previous year relevant to the assessment year 
commencing on the 1at day of AprB, 1982 exceeds Rs.15,OOO, -
(1) where the total income 
does not exceed Ra. 8,000 
(2) where the total income 
exceeds Rs. 8,000 but does not 
exceed Rs. 15,000 
Nil; 
22 per cent. of the amount 
by whjch the tota11ncome 
exceeds R •• 8,000; 
25 
(3) where the total income 
exceeds Rs. 15,000 but does not 
exceed Rs. 20,000 
Rs. 1,540 plus 27 per oent. 30 
(4) where the total income 
8ECeeds Rs. 20,000 bJ.t does DOt 
EmCeed Rs. 25,000 
of the amount by which the 
total income exceeds Rs.1S, 000; 
Rs. 2,890 plus 35 per oent. of 
the amount by which the total 
iDoome exceeds Ba.20, 000; 36 

(5) where the to~l ilf\ome 
exceeds Rs. 25, 000 bl ..~ 
not exceed Rs. 30, 0 ' " 
47 
Rs. 4,640 phl5 40 per cent. 
of the amount by which the 
total income exceeds 
.."'" I of income-tax '> Rs. 25,OOOi 
\ 
5 (6) where the k me NiI;i p~, (i.640 plus 50 per cent. 
exceeds Rs. 30, 000 ~ . ?unt by whlch the 
exceed Rs. 50, 000 .~ /me exceeds 
I 
,/ per cent. o:t./OOOi 
\lcb th, .. 
(7) where the total income ta. 10/-8. 16,640 plus 60 per cent. 
10 exceeds Rs. 60,000 of the amouDt by whlch the total 
income exceeds Rs.50,000: 
Provided that for the purposes of this Sub-Paragraph,-
(i) DO income-tax shall be payable on a total income not 
exceeding Rs. 12, 000; 
15 (ti) where the total Income exceeds Re. 12,000 but does 
not exceed Rs. 17,610, the Income-tax payable thereon shall 
not exceed forty per cent. of the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs. 12,000. 
Surcharge 4)n incolftt-iax 
20 The amount of Income-tax computed in accordalloe with the 
preoedlDg provisions of this Sub-Paragraph shall be Iaoreued 
by a surcharge for p,lrposes of the Union calculated at the rate 
of ten per cent. of such income~. 
ParClfP'aph B 
25 In the cue of every co-operative society,-
(1) where the total income 
doe. not exceed Rs. 10,000 
(2) where the total Income 
30 exceeds Re. 10,000 but doea 
DOt exceed Ra. 20,000 
(3) where the total moome 
aceeda Re. 20,000 
15 per cent. of the total 
bloome; 
Re. 1,500 pbt. 25 per oeDt. 
of the amOUDt by which the 
total income aceeda 
Ra. 10,000; 
Ra. 4, 000 pba. 40 per ceDt. 
of the UDOUDt by wbkll tile 
total JDoome aceeU 
Be. 20,000. 

48 
Surcharf~ on incorr A '1 
The amount of fncome-t. '/J' ~ ~_:r- ~cordanoe with the 
precec:Ung provisions of thlb ~ , v .. '1:, 1 be Increased by a 
surcharge for purposes of ~". , '~" i.;ed at the rate of 
ten per cent. of sUJ!b..¥.·,come ... " )_: 
«(.'000 ',ceb ,,-~, I 
, . '( "': .. I·r··· . '. ,..-:::; ~. ~{V , . . ,~ ~ 
... \'tn ., . " . 
.. ", .. .. JBrapn I 
In the case of every regtSt.?red firm, not being a case to 
which Sub-Paragraph n of this Paragraph applies,-
Rates of income-tax 
(1) where the total income Nil; 
does not exceed Rs. 10,000 
(2) where the total income 5 per cent. of the amount by 
exceeds Rs. 10,000 but does Dot which the total income exceeds 
exceed Rs. 25,000 Rs. 10,000; 
(3) where the total income Rs. 750 pillS 7 per cent. of 
exceeds Rs. 25, 000 but does not the amount by which the total 
exceed Rs. 50,000 income exceeds Rs. 25, 000; 
(4) where the total income Rs. 2,500 pillS 15 per cent. 
exceeds Rs. 50,000 but does Dot of the amount by which the 
exceed Rs. 1,00,000 total income exceeds 
Rs. 50,000; 
(5) where the total income Ra. 10,000 plus 24 per cent. 
exceeds Rs. 1,00,000 of the amount by which the 
total incom e exceeds 
Rs. 1,00,000. 
Surdlar~t on IncoPtle-tax 
The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the 
preceding provisions of this Sub-Paragraph shall be Increased 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
by a surcharre for purposes of the Union calculated at die rate 30 
of ten per cent. of such income-tax. 
Sub-Paradraph II 
In the case of every registered firm whose total income 
includes income derived from a profession carried on by it 

5 
49 /67) 
and the income 80 Included is not less than fifty-one per cent. 
of Reh tota11ncome,-
Rates of incom,-tal 
(1) where the total Income 
does not exceed Rs. 10,000 
(2) where the total income 
exceeds Rs. 10,000 but does not 
exceed Rs. 25, 000 
(3) where the total income 
Nil; 
4 per cent. of the amount by 
which the total income exceeds 
Rs. 10,000; 
10 exceeds Rs. 26,000 but does 
not exceed Rs. 50,000 
Rs. 600 plus 7 per cent. of 
the amount by w hioh the total 
income exceeds Re. 25,000; 
15 
20 
(4) where the total Income 
exceeds Rs. 50,000 but does 
not exceed Re. 1,00,000 
(5) where the totallncom~ 
exceeds Re. I, 00, 000 
Re. 2,350 plus 13 per cent. 
of the amount by which the 
total income exceeds 
Rs. 50,000; 
Rs. 8,850 plus 22 per cent. 
of the amount by which the 
tota1income exceeds 
Re. 1,00,000. 
Surcharge on jncom,~rar 
The amount of 1ncome-tax computed In accordanoe with the 
preceding provisions of this Sub-Paragraph shall be increased 
by a suroharge for purposes of the Union calculated at the rate 
of ten per cent. of INch income-tax. 
25 EqlGft4twn .-For the purposes of this Paragraph, "registered 
30 
firm" 1Dc1udes an unregistered firm &Ssessed as a registered firm 
UDder clause (b) of section 183 of the Income-tax Act. 
Parqraph 0 
In the case of every local authority,-
Rate of incollt.ca 
On the whole of the total income 
Saach.,t on illCOIIIt-ta 
50 per cent. 
The amount of income-tax computed at the rate hereinbefore 
apecUied .a11 _ IDcreued by a S1ll'obarge for purpoMl of the 
8& u.s. oaloulated at t:M rate often per cent. ~ lUoh 1Doome-tu. 

50 
Par~r4Ph E 
In !he case of a company.-
Rates of incolle-tCil 
I. In the case of a domestic company.-
(1) where the company is a 
company in which the pubUc 
are substantially mterested.-
(i) in a case where the 
total income does not exceed 
Re. 1.00.000 
45 per ~ent. of the total income; 
(ii) in a case where the total 55 per cent.of the total income; 
income exceeds Rs. 1.00.000 
(2) where the company 18 not 
a company in which the public 
5 
10 
are substantially intereated. - 15 
(i) in the Cale of an 
IDdu.Itr1a1 company,-
(a) where the total 55 per cent. of the total income; 
inoome does not exceed 
Rs. 2, 00, 000 20 
(b) where the total 60 per oent. of the total income; 
Income exceeds Ra. 2,00,000 
(ii) in any other cue 66 per oat. of the total income: 
Provided that -
(i) the income-tax p&Jable by. domestic company, being a 25 
company in which the public are 1IUbstaDtIa11y tntereNd, the 
total income of wblch exceeda Rs. 1,00, OOo.,.ha11 Dot exoeed the 
aggregate of -
(a) the inoome-tax which would have been pqabJe by the 
company If It. total iDoome had been Rs. 1,00,000 (the income ,ao 
of a.. 1, 00, 000 for tb1a pw'P08e being oomputed U If such 
bloome 1Bchlded tDcome from various sources ill tbe same 
proport1oD .. tbe total iIloome of tbe oompany); aDd 

51 
(b) eighty per cent. of the amount by which Its total income 
exceeds Rs. 1.00,000; 
(U) the income-tax parable by a domeet1c company, not beiDg a 
oompany In which the public are subataDttally interested, which 
5 18 an Ind1l8trial company and the total Income 01. which exceeds 
Re. 2, 00, 000, shall not exceed the aggregate of-
(a) the Income-tax which would have been payable by the 
company if ita total Income had been Rs. 2, 00, 000 (the income 
do Rs. 2, 00, 000 for thi8 purpose beiDg computed as 11 81ICh 
10 income included income from various sources in the aame 
proportion as the total income of the company); and 
(b) eigbty per cent. of the amount by which its totaliDoome 
exoeeda Rs. 2, 00,000. 
a. In the case of a oompany other than a domestlc compay,-
15 (i) CD 80 much of the total 
income as CCIlslsts of-
(a) royalties reoelved from 
an Indlan CCllcern in pursu-
anoe of an agreement made by 
20 it with the Indian ooacem 
after the 31st da.v of March, 
1961 but before the 1st day of 
April, 1978, or 
("> fees for rendering teclllical 
25 services received frca aD IDd1an 
conoern in pursuu.oe of an agree-
ment made by it with the Indian 
ooncern after the 29th dq 01 Feb-
nuLl'y, 1964 but batON the 1st 
30 day of AprU, 19'76, 
and where 8uch ..... ent hut 
in either case. been tpproved 
by the Central Oove~ 
(U) on the balUD8, if 8D,J, 
15 of the totaltDoome 
60 per cent. ; 
70 per cent. 

52 
I o~ I .. SllrchGrae on ' .. come-tlU 
The 8lUount of income-tax computed In accordance with the 
preceding provlsiClDS of this Paragraph shall be Increueci by a 
surcharge calculated at the rate ~ two and a half per cent. 
of such income -tax. 5 
PART IV 
[sUI section 2(7)(eD 
RULES roa COMPUTATION OF NET AGllaJL11J1AL INCOME 
Rille I. - Agrlcultural lncome of the nature referred to In 
sub-clause (a) of clause (1) of sectlon 2 of the Income-tax Act 10 
shall be computed as If lt were Income chargeable to income-tax 
under that Act under the bead ''Income from other sources" aDd 
the provisiClDs of sec~ 57 to 59 of that Act shall, 80 far as may 
be, apply acoordingly: 
Provided that sub-section (2) of sectlon 58 shall apply subject 1& 
to the modificatlon that the reference to sectlon 40A therein 8hall 
be construed as not including a reference to aub-sectlClll8 (3) II.Dd 
( 4) of section 40A. 
Rill e 2. - Agricultural income of the nature referred to In 
sub-clause (b) or sub-clause (e) of clause (1) of section 2 of the 20 
Income-tax Act [other than income derived from any buUdlng 
required as a dwelling house by the receiver of the rent or revenue 
or the cultivator or the receiver of rent-ln-kind referred to In 
the said BUbo-clause (eVsball be computed u if it were Income 
chargeable to Income-tax under that Act UDder the head "Profits 26 
and gaiDs of bustnes8 or profe8slon" and the provlslons of 
sections 30,31,32,34,36,37 ,38,40,4OA [other thaD sub-
sections (3) and (4) thereoij, 41, 43. and 43A of the Income-tax 
Act shall, so far as may be, applyaccordlDgly. 
Rule 3. - Agricultural Income of tbe nature referred to In 30 
sub-clause (e) of clause (1) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act, 
being income derived from any buUdlng required as a dwelltnc 
house by the receiver of the rent or revenue or the cultivator 
or the receiver of rent-in-kind referred to In the .. Id sub-
clause (c) shall be computed as if It were income cbarpable 
to income-tax uDder that Act uDder the head "Income from 
bouse property" and the provisiOns of sectlons 23 to 2'1 01. that 
Act sball. so far as may be, apply accordlngly: 

53 I~ 
Provided that sub- section (2) of the said section 23 shall apply 
subject to the modifications that the references to "total lDcome" 
therein shall be construed as references to net agricultural 
income and that the words, figures and letter "and before mak-
S iug any deduction under Chapter VI A" shall be omitted. 
Rule 4. - Notwtthstandlng anything contained in any other 
provisions of these rules, in a case where the assessee derives 
income from sale of tea grown and manufactured by him tn 
India, such hlCome shall be computed tn accordance with rule 
10 8 of the Income-tax Rules, 1962, and sixty per cent. of such 
income shall be regarded as the agricultural income of the 
assessee. 
Ride 5. - Where the assessee is a partner of a registered 
firm or an unregistered firm assessed as a registered firm 
15 under clause (b) of section 183 of the Income-tax Act, which 
in the previous year has any agricultural income, or Is a 
partner of an unregistered firm which has not been assessed 
as a registered firm under clause (b) of the said section 183 
and which tn the previous year has either no income charge-
20 able to tax under the Income-ta." .Act or has total income not 
exceeding the maximum amount not chargeable to tax in the 
case of an unregistered firm but has any agricultural income, 
then, the agricultural income or loss of the firm shall be 
cc.mputed in accordance with these rules and his share in the 
2S agricultural income or loss of the firm shall be computed in 
the manner laid down in sub-sectlon (I), sub- section (2) and 
sub-section (3) of section 67 of the Income-tax I\ct and the 
s hare so computed shall be regarded as the agricultural income 
or loss of the assessee. 
30 Rule 6. - Where the assessee is a member of an association 
of persons or a body of individuals (other than a Hindu undivided 
famUy. a company or a firm) which in the previous year has 
either no income chargeable to tax under the Income-tax Act or 
has total income not exceeding the maximum amount not charge-
35 able to tax in the case of an association of persons or a body 
of indiViduals (other than a Hindu undivided family. a company 
or 1\ firm) but has any agricultural income. then. the agricul-
tural income or loss of the association or body shall be com-
puted in accordance with these rules and the share of the 
40 assessee in the agricultural income or loss 80 computed shall 
be regarded as the agricultural income or loss of the 
assessee. 

54 
Rule 7. - Where the result of the computation for the previous 
year lD respect of any 80urce of agricultural lDcome 18 a 1088, 
such lOS8 shall be set off against the lDcome of the 888e81ee, 
If any, for that previous year from any other source of qrlcul-
tural iDcome: 
Provided that where the useSS88 Is a partner 01 aD un-
registered firm which has not been aS8essed u a registered 
flrm under clau8e (b) of section 183 of the Income-tax Act 
or 18 a member of aD usociation 01 persona or a body of 
lDdlvlduals and the share of the asse8888 lD the acricultural 
iDcome of the firm, usociatlon or body, as the cue may be, 
ts a loss, such loss shall not be set oIf agalDat any iDcome 
of the assessee from any other source of ap"lcultural iDcome. 
Rid e 8. - Any BUm payable by the asse8see OD acoOUDt of any 
tax levled by the State GovermneDt on the II!'lcultural lDoome 
shall be deducted lD computing the agrlcultural lDoame. 
Rule 9 • - (1) Where the asaeSBee baa, in the prevloua ,ear re-
levant to the asse88ment year oommenclng on the 1st day of April, 
1981, any agricultural income and the Del result of the oomputatioll 
of the agricultural income of the a.aeuee for anyone or more of 
the previous years relevant to the asses8ment years oommenciDg OD 
the 18t day of April, 1974 or the 18t day .of April, 1976 or the 1st 
day of Aprll, 1976 or the 1st day of Aprtl, 1177 or the'lat day of 
April, 1978 or the 1st day of April, 1979 or the 1.t day of April, 
1980, 1s a loss, then, for the purposes of sub-section (2) of 
section 2 of this Act,-
(i) the 10sa 80 computed for the prevlou8 year relev ... to the 
assessment year oommenclDg on the 1at day of Aprtl, 1174, to 
the extent, if any. such loa. has not been 8et off ap.1n8t the 
apicultural income for the previous year relevant to the 
ueesament year commenclDg on the 1st day of Aprll, 1975 or the 
1st day of Aprll, 1976 or the 1at day of April, 197'1 or tbe 1st 
day of April,1978 or the 1st day of April, 1979 or the 1st day 
of April, 1980, . 
(ii) the loss 80 computed for the prenc.al year re1evaat to ~ 
the aa.SlmeDt year commenolDlOIl the 18t day of April, It'll, 
to the exte1lt, If any, mob lou baa nat been .t oIf aaat-t 1M 
apicultural Income for the prevtOUI .year relevant to the 
u.sllllleDt year commencing 011 the lilt day of April, 1978 
or tile lat day of April, 1877 or the 1st day of April, 1978 or 
the lit day of April, 1979 or the let day of April, 1980, 
6 
10 
16 
10 
16 
so 

55 
(iii) the 1088 80 computed for the previOU8 year reievaat 
to the &88e8811leDt year oomID8Ilcing on the 1st clay of April, 
1976, to the extent, if any, lIuch 10811 ba8 not been 8et off 
aplnst the agrioulturalinoome for the previous year 
relevant to the aS8es8ment year oommencing on the 18t 
day of April, 1977 or the 1st day of April, 1978 or the 1st 
day of April, 1979 or the 1st day of April, 1980, 
(hi) the 10811 so computed for the previous year relevant 
to the a8se8sment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 
10 1977, to the extent, if any. such loss hal not been set off 
aplnat the agricultural income for the previoull year 
rei want to the .. ae88ment year commencing on the lat day 
of April. 1978 or the 1st day of April, 1979 or the 1st day 
of April, 1980, 
15 (11) the lOllS 80 computed for the previous year relevant 
to the B1lellment year commencing on the 1st day of April. 
1978, to the extent. if any. such lOIS bas not been set off 
aplnat the agricultural lnoome for the prevlou8 year 
relevant to the .. s .. lment year commenclng on the 1st day 
10 of April, 1979 or the 18t day of April, 1980, 
(11') the losl 110 computed for the previous year relevant 
to the asaesament year commencing on the 1st day of April. 
1979, to the extent, if any. such 1088 ha8 not been set off 
aplnst the agricultural income for the previous year 
26 relevant to the asaeslment year commencing on the 1st 
day of April, 1980. and 
(&Iii) the loss 80 computed for the previous year relevant 
to the .. seesment year commenclng on the 1st day of April. 
1980, 
30 shall be set off against the agricultural income of the assessee 
for the previous year relevant to the aS8e8sment year commenc-
ing on the 1st day of April. 1981 •. 
(2\ Where the assessee has, in the previous year relevant 
to the a8Hs8ment year commencing on the 18t day of April. 
36 1982 or. if by virtue of any provision of the Income-tax Act. 
income-tax ill to be charged in respect of the income of a 
period other than that previous year. in such other period. 
any agricultural income and the net result of the oomputation 
of the agricultural income of the assessee for anyone or more 
40 of the previous years relevant to the assessment years 
commencing on the 1st day of April. 1974 or the 1st day of 
April. 1975 or the 18t day of April. 1976 or the 1st day of 
April. 1977 or the 1st day of April, 19'18 or the 1st day of 
April. 1979 or the 1st day of April. 1980 or the 1st day of 
45 April. 1981, is a loss, then. for the purposes of sub-eectlon 
(6) of section 2 of this Act,-
I~ 

56 
(i) the loss so computed for the previws year relevB.Dt 
to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 
1974, to the extent, if any, such 1088 bas not been set off 
against the agricultural income for the previoul year 
relevant to the asselsment year commencing on the 1st day 
of April, 1975 or the 1st day of April, 1976 or the lit day 
of April, 1977 or the 1st day of April, 1978 or the 1st day 
of April, 1979 or the 1st day of April, 1980 or the 1st day 
of April, 1981, 
5 
(tt) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant 10 
to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of AprU , 
1975, to the extent, if any, such loss bas not been set off 
against the agricultural income for the previous year 
relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 18t day 
of April, 1976 or the 1st day of AprU, 1977 or the 1st day 15 
of April, 1978 or the 1st day of April, 1979 or the 1st day 
of April, 1980 or the 1st day of April, 1981, 
(iii) the loss so computed for the preVious year relevant 
to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 
1976, to the extent, if any, such loss has not been set off 20 
against the agricultural income for the previous year 
relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day 
of April, 1977 or the 1st day of April, 1978 or the 1st day 
of April, 1979 or the 1st day of April, 1980 or the 1st day 
of April, 1981, 25 
(ill) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant 
to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 
1977, to the extent, if any, such loss has not been set off 
against the agricultural income for the previws year 
relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day 30 
of April, 1978 or the 1st day of April, 1979 or the 1st day 
of April, 1980 or the 1st day of April, 1981, 
(v) the 108S so computed for the previws year relevant 
to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 
1978, to the extent, if any. such loss has not been set off 35 
against the agricultural income for the previws year 
relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day 
of April, 1979 or the let day of April, 1980 or the 1st day 
of April, 1981, 
(vi) the 108s so computed for the previous year relevant 40 
to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of ~pril, 
1979, to the extent, if any, such loss has not been set off 
against the agricultural Income for the previous year 

l 
5 
57 
relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day 
of April, 1980 or the 1st day of April, 1981, 
(iii') the loss 80 computed for the previous year relevant 
to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April , 
1980, to the extent, if any, such loss has not been set off 
against the agrlculturalinoome for the previous year 
relevant to ijle assessment year commencing on the 1st 
day of April, 1981, and 
(viii) the loss so computed for the previous year 
10 relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st 
day of April, 1981, 
15 
20 
25 
30 
20 of 1974. 35 
25 of 1975. 
66 of 1976. 
29 of 1977. 
19 of 19780 
21 of 1979. 
44 of 1980. 40 
shall be set off against the agricultural income of the assessee 
for the previous'year relevant to the assessment year commenc-
tng on the 1st day of April, 1982, or the period aforesaid. 
(3) Where a change has occurred in the constitution of 
a firm, nothing in sub-rule (1) or sub-rule (2) shall entitle 
the firm to set off so much of the loss proportionate to the 
share of a retired or deceased partner computed in the 
manner laid down in sub-section (1), sub-section (2) and 
sub-section (3) of section 67 of the Income-tax Act as exceeds 
his share of profits, if any, of the previous year in the firm. 
or entitle any partner to the benefit of any portion of the said 
loss (computed in the manner aforesaid) which is not 
apportionable to him. 
(4) Where any person deriving any agricultural income 
from any source has been succeeded in such capacity by 
another person, otherwise than by inheritance, nothing in 
sub-rule (I) or sub-rule (2) shall entitle any person, other 
than the person incurring the loss, to have it set off under 
sub-rule (1) or, as the case may be, sub-rule (2\. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this rule, 
no loss which has not been determined by the Income-tax 
Officer under the provlsions of these rules or the rules 
contained in Part IV of the First Schedule to the Finance 
Act, 1974, or of the First Schedule to the Finance Act, 1975, 
or of the First Sohedule to the Finanoe Aot, 1976, or of the 
First Schedule to the Finance (No.2) Act, 1977, or of the 
Schedule to the Finance Act, 1978, or of the Fil"St Schedule 
to the Finance Act, 1979, or of the First Schedule to the 
Finance (No.2) Act, 1980, shall be set off under sub-ruler 1) 
or, as the case may be, sub -rule (2). 

58 
Rule 10. - Where the net ruult of the oomputaUoD 
made 10 aocorduoe with the.e rule. 1. a loa., tbe 1088 80 
oomputed .ball be lpored and the net aartcu1tura1looome 
.ball be deemed to be iii •• 
Ride 11. - The proviatou of the Inoome-tax Aot 6 
relating to procedure for assessment (inc1udin, the 
proviaioDB of section 28M relating to rouDdiDi off of 
income) shall, with the DBceSaary modiflcattona, apply in 
relation to the computation of the net agricultUral inoome 
of the assessee as they apply in relation to the ..... ament 10 
of tile total inoome. 
RNie 12. - For tile purpose. of oomputlDJ the net 
agricul1uralincome of the ..... eee. the moome-tu Officer 
.hall bave the lalDe powers .. be baa uDder the Income-tu 
Aot for the purpo •• of ..... amellt of the total iDoaDe. 15 

5 
THB SECOND SCHEDU LE 
(See section 48) 
H_~ Sub-h_dlng No. Rat. of duty naratloD wh_ 
iDI No. and deacrlpttOll 8taDdard Preferen- rates of duty 
of article tial Areu are proteottve 
..:.,(1,.:..) ___ ..J,(2.;.&.) ___ (3l ___ .a.;(4;1..) __ --1(5::.t) __ 
In the First Schedule to the Customs TU'Uf Act,-
(f) for Headlag No.73.115, the followlDg HeadtDg 
shall be lUbatttuted, DaIIlely:-
10 "73.16 Alloy steel aDd Jdab oU'bon 
Bteel In the forms meattonec1 
In HeadlDgs Nos. 73. 08/07 to 
73.14: 
15 
20 
25 "84.63 
30 
35 
(l) Not elsewhere 
specified eOCJ, 
(2) Colls for ra-
r01l1ng, bars 
(including bright 
bars), wire rods, 
strips, sheets and 
plates,of stainless 
steel. 300% .. ". .. , 
(ii) for Heading No. 84.63, the following Heading 
shall be substituted, namely:-
Transmission shafts, crankB, 
bearing housings, plain shaft 
bearings, gears and gearing 
(including friction gears and 
gear-boxes and other variable 
speed gears), fly-wbeels, 
pulleys and pulley bloob, 
clutches and shaft coupUngs: 
(1) Not elsewhere 
specified 60% • .. 
(2) Plain shaft 
bearlDgI, with 
or wtthout bearlDg 
houllDgs 100% .. 
59 
.. 
" . . . 
110 

ltam 
No· 
(1) 
THE TBIRD SCHEDULE 
(Su sectial 48) 
DeacrlpttOll of aooda 
(2) 
In the I'1rst Scbeclule to the Central 
Exei •• Aot. -
(i) in Item No. 15A, for EqlanGtioll 
11. the .,UowiDc EzplGnitiOll sball be sub-
stituted, name1y:-
Rata of duty 
(3) 
"UplallltiOll n. - This Item does not 
inclu:le, -
(I) polyester ftlms; 
(b) electrica1inaulatora or electrical 
inaulatiDg fittings or parts of suob in-
sWators or inaulatlng flttiDga. "; 
(iI) after Item No. 1SB, the following 
Item sball be inserted, name1y:-
"lSBB. POLYESTER FILMS 
(iii) for Item No. 16, the foUow1D.g 
Item aball be substltuted, namely:-
'16. TYRES -
"Tyre" means a piewnatic tyre in the 
manufaoture of whicb rubber is used. 
and lncbdes the inner tube, the tyre 
flap and the outer cover of such a 
tyre: 
1,(1) Tyres I>r motor 'Vehicle.; and 
tyres I>r 'Vehicles or equipment •• 
designed for use off the road. 
(2) Tyres for tractors, JDclud1ng 
agricultural tractors. 
(3) Tyres I>r trailers, 
60 
I'1fty per cent • 
... 11110',. .. "; 
Sixty pe r O8Ilt. 
_II.' •. 
Sixty per cent. 
od 11110' •• 
Sixty per ceDt. 
ad II."... 
5 
10 
15 
20 
30 

Item 
No. 
(1) 
61 
Description of goods 
(2) 
U. Tyres for cycles aDd cycle-
Bate of duty 
(3) 
6 rtck8baws -
10 
16 
(1) Tyres. 
(2) Tubes. 
m. All other liVre •• 
Sixty paise pe r 
tyre or flfteeD 
per cent. 
M .,.10 r.,wb1ob-
I,ver 18 1d.gber. 
TbiIV pa.1Be pe r 
tube or flfteeo 
per cent. 
ad 118Io,--.wbicb-
ever 1s 1d.gber. 
Twenty-five per 
osnt. ad lIGlor. 
Espl .. atiOli L - "Motor vebiclea" me,lLll. 
all meobaDloally propelled vehioles, other 
20 than tractors, deatgned for use UpOD roads. 
Eql ... tif. H • - ''Motor vehicles",-
"tractors, lnuludlug agricultural tractors" 
and ''trailers'' shall include a cbasata, but 
aball not inolude a vehlcle nlDDlDg upOll 
25 fixed rails. '; 
('") for Item No. 16M, tbe following 
Item .ball be subat1tuted, Damely:-
16AA. SYNTHETIC RUBBER, INCLUDING TeD per cent. 
SYNTHETIC RUBBER LATEX AND • .,110".. 
30 filE-VULCANISED SYNTHETIC 
RUBBER LATEX 
85 
EqlllJJGtiOll • - In this Item, the ex· 
):1reesion "syntbeUc nmber" is to be 
takl'P to apply to: 
(II) UDSaturated syntheUc substanoss 
which can be irreversibly transjbrmed 
intD DOD -tbermoplasUc substances by 
vulcan1sation with sulphur and wblch, 
when so vuloaniaed as wen as may be 
(without the addiUon of any substances 
such as plasticisers, flllers or rein-
forcing agents not necessary for the 
112-

) I '} 
Item 
No. 
Deecrlptka 01 aoods Bate of chd;y 
(1) (2) 
...... Unklnc). caD prodace !labltl""" 
w1do1l,at a temperature betweeD ISO mad 
• C, will not break OIl be1Dg exteadecl 
to three itme. their oJ1ginalleagtb 
ad w11l retarn, after be1Dg extended to 
t.,lce their orlgiDallenath, 'wlt1dD a 
period of the mmu... to a leDgtb not 
greater thin ODe-ud-a-balf times 
their orig1Dallqtb. 
Sucb substIDees mclude c18-polytso-
prene (lR). polybutadjene (BB), poly-
cblorobatad1ene (CD), polybutadieu-
styrene (SBR), poly oblorobutadleDe-
acrylonltrlle .(NCR), polyllltadleoe-
acrylODitrile (NBR) and IIltyl rubber 
(DR); 
(b) tbtoplasta °(TM); aDd 
(,) natural rubber mocI1fied by 
graftJng or m1xiDg with artificial 
plutic material. de-polymerlsed 
natural rubber. IUd mixtures of 
UDsaturated synthetic substances 
with saturated synthetic bJcb 
polymers, provided that all the 
above-mentianed products oomply 
with the 'reqUirementa ooneemmg 
vuloan1satiOll, eloap.UCIl aDd 
reccnery in (0) abow. '; 
(II) ill Item No. 26A.-
(a) after sub-item (1&). tha follow-
inC sub-item sball be inserted, name]y:-
(3) 
10 
16 
20 
26 
30 
n(lb) waste·and scrap. Fi'98 tbOU8llDd 36 
stx h1md red 
(b) for sub-item (3). the loUowq 
sub1tema sbaD be .ubaUtuted, 
nameb':-
rupees per 
metric toDDe. "; 
"(3) Pipes and tubes, excl1llinl Tw8lltY~ .. bt per 
shella aDd blanks, therefor. cent. a4 .,_. 
40 

63 
Item De8CriptioD of goods Rate of duty 
No. 
{I} {2} '3} 
(4) SheU. and blanks. for plpes Twenty-etgbt 
6 and tubes. per ceDt. 
1M"''''; 
(c, the EqlfllltltiDII 8ball be 
Dum bared as ExplCllGtion 1, and 
after the Eqlanation as 80 num-
10 be red , the a,Uowlng ErpJGnatift 
8hall be 1Daerted, lWDely:-
, ElplMGliCHI IL - "Waste and 
scrap" IDe.S wa.te aDd scrap of 
copper fit 0Dly tor tba recovery of 
15 metal or tor U88 JD the manufacture 
of chemicala, but does not Include 
8111, d1"088, sca1mgs, asb IIld other 
cuprou8 relddues. '; 
(an) III Item No. zeD,-
20 (a) for sub-item (I), the following 
8ub-items shall be substituted, lUUDely:-
.~ "(I) Unwrqbt. JD.c1uding Ingots, Two tbou8&Dd 
30 
cakas, bars, blooks. bard or 80ft six buad red IIld 
Slab8, bWets. plates, catbodes, twenty-the rupees 
modes, pellets, .pelter IIld per metrlo toaD_. 
brokeD. me. 
(18) wuta ad scrap. 
(b> after sub-Item (2), the follow-
IDI sub-Item sball be tuertecl, 
ume\Y:-
TwotbouaDd 
a1x lmadred and 
tweDty .. !be 
rupees pel metric 
tDDDe. "; 
Pour tbounad 
.. 1madrecl 
rapeea per metria 
"-- n. _. , 
II~ 

Item 
No. 
(1) 
64 
Description of goods 
(2) 
Bate of duty 
ca) 
(c) the E.rpI.6. shall be num-
bered .. EqJuacion 1, and after the 
E"I .... as 80 numbered, the 
foUow[qErplGllClCion shall be inserted, 
name)y:-
'··ElpllllCltiDfll~. - "Waste aDd 
scrap" meUlS waste ad sorap 
of zinc fit oaly for the recovery 
of metal or for use in the mQU-
facture of chemicals and include. 
dross aDd asb. 't 
(uti) m Item No. rT,-
(a) after sub-item (a), the follow-
ing sub-item sball be iDBerted, 
name}y:-
"(aa) Waste aDd scrap. 
(b) after Erplanation n., the follow-
ing El'pllllCltiOft shall be inserted, 
name)y:-
I E.tplGllation III. ~ - "Waste and 
scrap" means waste 8Dd scrap of 
aluminium ftt CDly for the reoo-
very of metal or J)r use in the 
manufacture of chemicals, but 
does not 1Jlclule sludge, dross, 
soa11ngs, skimmings, ash and 
other residues. '; 
(IIiU) for item No. 2'1 A, the follow-
ing Item sball be substituted, namely:-
'ZTA. LEAD-
(1) Unwl'Ought, 1Jlc11liiDg iDgots, 
pigs, blocks, anodes, slabs, 
cakes and cast sticks. 
Fifty per cent • 
.. lIedo, .. plus 
two thousand 
rupees per metric 
tonne. "; 
Five hundred 
rupees per 
metric tonne. 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 

5 
65 
Item 
No. 
DesCript10D of goods 
(2) 
(2) Waste and scrap. 
Rate of duty 
(3) , 
Five hundred 
J:Ul)8es per 
metric fDQD8. 
EJI)ICDlCltion f. - ''LEAD'' sball include 
8D.Y alloy m whioh lead predomiDates 
by weight over each of the other metal8. 
10 ErplCDIGtion II:. - ''Waste and scrap" 
means waste and scrap of lead ftt only 
for the recovery of metal or for use 
iJ:dbe manufacture of chemicals. but 
does not mobile slag. uh and other 
16 residues. '; 
(IX) in Item No. 3'7, \Ilder ''lLExpolled-'', 
in the HOODd column, for the entrY" (i) News-
reels aDd sharte Dot exceeding 600 metres", 
the .try "'(i) News-reel. ad .borte Dot 
10 exceeding 600 IUtres" shall be eubatlt:uted: 

THE IOURTH SCHEDULE 
(Su .• ectloo 52) 
ID the 1led1clDal aDd Toilet Preparatiooa (ExciM Datiea) 
Act. 1955, for the Sohedule, the follOlrl.q Sohedale ahall be 
8ubetttuted, lWDely:-
Item 
No. 
I THE SCHEDULE 
(See aection 3) 
Description of 
dutiable e. 
",eIi"a'" prep .... 
1. AllopaWc Medicinal PreparatiOD.:-
Rate of 
duty 
(i) Medicinal preparatloo. cODtalning 
alcohol which are not capable of betnc 
CODItumed aa ordiaary alcohollc beverqe.-
(a) Patem or proprietary 
medicines. 
Twenty per cent. 
"" wUr. or 
rupees alx aDd 
sixty pal .. per litre 
of pure alcohol 
5 
10 
15 
COIlteDt, whicbe¥er 20 
(b) Others. 
la hlper. 
Rope .. six and lixty 
pal .. per lltre of 
pure alcohol 
CODtent. 25 
(ii) Medicinal preparatloos contalnlng 
alcohol whlch are capable of belne 
consumed al ordlaary alcoholle beveragel-
(G) Medicinal preparatlool 
which cootain known 
acUve IDII'edients In 
therapeutic quantltles. 
Twenty per cent. 
a4 lIaID,aa or 
rupees thirteen and 
twenty paise per 
litre of P':'1"e 
alcohol coi:lteat, 
whichever 1. 
hl .... r. 
30 
35 
J6 of 1955. 

67 II; 
Item Description of Rate of 
N~. dutlable sood8 duty 
0 
(.) Othera. Twenty per c_a 
-,. or rupees 
5 fifty-two aDd eighty 
pai88 per litre of 
pure alcohol content, 
whichever ia higher. 
(Ui) MediciD8l preparatlon8 Twenty per cent. 
10 not conta1nlDl aloobol but lUI IIGII)'., 
00Dta1niDl narcotic drug or 
narooUc. 
2. Med10lDal preparaUon8 in Ayurvedic, 
Unani or other IIUU.DOU8 ay8tem8 of 
15 medicine -
tf) MedlciD8l preparation8 Ni~ 
OOIltalDing self-generated alcohol 
which are not capable of beln, 
oonaumed as ordinary alcoholic 
20 beverages. 
(if) Medicinal preparati0ll8 Rupee one and 
containing self-generated alcohol sevent~ve pai.e 
which are capable of balng per litre of pure 
COIl8WQed a8 ordinary alcoholic aloohol OOlltent. 
25 beverage8. 
(m) All otber. containing alcohol Rupee8 fifty.two aDd 
which are prepared by distillation eighty pal8e per 
or to which alcohol ba8 been added. lltre of pure alcohol 
content. 
(tv) Medicinal prepmlUOIlI not Twenty per cent. 
30 containing alcohol but ouatalniD, ad ,,110,-. 
narcotic dru, or uarcotic. 
3. Bomoeopatblc preparatiOll8 Rupees thhteen and 
oontaJalng alcohol. twenty pal8e per 
litre of pure alcohol 
cOIltent. 
Tond preplNdolrS 
4. Toilet preparatl0ll8 cCllltaining Sixty per clat. • 
alcobol or narcotic druc or ".r.,. orru .... 
urootio. tblrteea aDd tweuty 
pal_ per litre of 
pure alcohol COllteDt, 
whlohever ia b1Per. 

68 
Explanation r., - "Patent or proprietary medicines" meaDS 
any medicinal preparation which bears either on itaelf or on 
its contailler or both, a name which ia not apeclfled in a 
monograph iIl·a pharmacopoeia, formulary or other pubU-
cations notified in thia behalf by the Central Gcwernment in 5 
the Official Gazette, or which is a brand name, that ia, a 
name a registered trade- mark under the Trade and 
Merchandise Marks Aot, 1968 or any other mark such as a 43 of 1958. 
aymbol, monogram, label, aignature or invented words or 
any wrttillg which is used in relation to that medicinal 10 
preparation for. the purpose of indicating or so as to indicate 
a connection in the course of trade between the preparation 
and some person having the right either as proprietor or 
otherwise to use the name or mark with or without any indi-
cation of the identity of that persOD. 15 
EIp'''lItiDn II • - Where any article [s chargeable with 
duty at a rate dependent on the value of the article, such 
value shall be deemed to be the value as determined in 
accordance with the prOVisions of section 4 of the Central 
Excises and Salt Act, 1944. 20 1 Gf 194-4. 
:'EIp'CllloUon Ill. - For the purposes of this Schedule, 
"pure alcohol content", In relation to ~ preparation, means 
the ethyl alcohol content in the prePlration expressed as 
ethyl alcohol of 100% by volume at 15°C. '. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The object of the BUl is to give effect to the financial proposals 
of the Central Government for the financial year 1981-82. The 
notes on clauses explain the various provisions contained in the 
Blll. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 28th February, 1981. 
R. VENKATARAMAN. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 117 
AND 274 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
(Copy of letter No. F.3(1)-B(D)/81 dated the 28th February, 1981 
from Shri R. Venkataraman, Minister of Finance, to the Se~retary, 
!.ok Sabh~ 
The President, haVing been informed of the subject matter of the 
proposed Bill, recommends under clause (1) of article 
117,read with clause (1) of article 274,of the Constitution of India, 
the introduction of the Finance Bill, 1981 to the Lok Sabha. 
2. The Bill will be introduced in the !.ok Sabha immediately 
after the presentatlon of the Budget on the 28th February. 1981. 
69 
I'U> 

Notes on clauses 
Clauee 2,read with the First Schedule to the BUl, seeks to prescribe the rates at 
which income·tax (including surcharge thereon) is to be levied on income chargeable to 
tax for the assessment year 1981-82, Further, It lays down the rates at wblch tax Is 
to be deducted at souroe during the financial year 1981-82 from incomes subject to 
such deduction under the Income-tax Act; and the rates at which "advanoe tax" is to be 
paid and tax is to be calculated and charged in special cases for the flnancW year 
1981-82. 
Rates of inoome-tax for the assessment year 1981-82. - Part I of the First Schedule 
to the Bill specifies the rates of income-tax Oncluding surcharge) on incomes Uable to 
tax for the assessment year 1981-82. These rates are the same as those speclfled in 
Part m of the First Schedule to the Finance (No.2) Act, 1980 for the purpose of deduo-
tion of tax at source from "Salaries" and for computation of "advance tax" payable 
during the financial year 1980-81. 
Rates for deduction of tax at source during the flnancW year 1981-82 from incomes 
other than "Salarles'~ - Part n of the First Schedule to the Bill specifies the rates at 
which Income-tax Oncluding surcharge where applicable) Is to be deducted at souroe 
during the financial year 1981-82 from Incomes other than "Salartes" and retirement 
annuities under section 80E (9) of the Income-tax Act. The rates speclfled In this Part 
for deduction of tax at souroe are the same as those specified in Part n of the First 
Schedule to the Finance (No.2) Act, 1980 for the purposes of deduction of tax at source 
during the financial year 1980-81, except for certain modifioations. As regards the 
deduotion of Inoome-tax at source from Interest on securities, in the case of income 
by way of interest on securities issued by the Central or a state Government (not being 
a tax-free security) or interest on debentures or other securities issued by or on 
behalf of a local authority or a statutory corporation or interest on debentures issued 
by companies where such debentures are listed In a recognised stock exchange in India, 
income-tax wm be deducted at the rate of 10 per cent,as In the financial year 1980-81. 
In the case of income by way of interest on other securities (not being Interest on a tax-
free security) or dividends payable to a resident recipient (other than a company) 
during the financial year 1981-82, tax will be deductible at the rate of 22 per cent. (made 
up of basiC Income-tax of 20 per cent. and surcharge of 2 per cent) as against 23 per oent. 
during 1980-81. 
In the case of income by way of interest other than 'loterest on securities" 
payable to a domestic company during the f1nanclal year 1981-82, tax will be deductible 
at the rate of 20.5 per cent. (made up of Income-tax of 20 per oent.and surcharge of 
0.5 per cent.) as against 21.5 per cent.in 1980-81. In the case of any other Income 
(excluding inteTe8t payable on a tax-free security) payable to a domestic company during 
the f1DaDcial year 1981-82, tax will be deductible at the rate of 22 per cant. (made up 
of Income-tax of 21. 5 per cent. and surcharge of O. 5 per cent.) as against 23 per cent. in 
1980-81. In the case of income by way of royalty payable to a foreign company by an 
Indian concern in pursuance of an agreement made before 1st AprU, 1976, tax will be 
deductible at the rate of 51.25 per cent. (made up of basic Income-tax of 50 per (lent. 
and surcharge of 1.25 per cenU as agalnat 53.75 per cant,in 1980-81. In the ca.e of 
incomes by way of fees for technical services payable to a foreign oompany by an 
Indian concern in pursuance of an agreement made before the 1st April. 1976, 
tax will be deductible at the rate of 61.25 per cent. (made up of basic income-tax of 
70 

71 
50 per cent.and surcharge of 1.25 per cent.) as against 53,75 per cent.in 19So-S1. In the 
case of income by way of interest payable on a tax-free security to a foreign company, 
tax will be deductible at the rate of 45.1 per cent.(made up ofbas1c income-tax of 44 
per oent.rmd surcharge of 1.1 per oent) as against 47.3 per cent.in 1980-S1. In the 
case of any other income payable to a foreign company (excluding income by way of 
royalty or teclmical service fees payable under agreements made after 31st March, 
1976), tax will be deductible at the rate of 71.75 per cent. (made up of basic income-
tax of 70 per cent. and surcharge of 1.75 per cent.) as against 75.25 per cent. in 
19S0-81. 
The rates specified in this Part for deduction of tax at source in all other cases are 
the same as those specified in Part II of the First Schedule to the Finance (No.2) Act, 
1980, for the purposes of deduction of tax at source during the financial year 19S0-81. 
Rate8 for deduction of tax at source from "Salaries" and retirement annuities, or 
computation of "advance tax" and charging of Income-tax in special ca8es during the 
flna.nc1al year 1981-82.- Part m of the Fir8t Schedule to the Blll specifies the rates 
at which income-tax (Including surcharge) is to be deducted at source from "SalL·ies" 
and retirement annuities referred to in section 80E (9) of the Income-tax Act, and also 
the rates at which "advance tax" Is to be paid and income-tax 18 to be calculated or 
charged In special cases for the financial year 1981-82. 
These rates are the same as those specified In Part I of the First Schedule to the 
Blll for the assessment of Incomes liable to tax for the assessment year 1981-82, except 
for the modification that in the case of individuals. unspecified Hindu undivided 
families, unregistered firm!!. etc., the nil rate slab has been raised to Re.15, 000, 
the rate of income-tax for the slab of income of Rs.15, 001 to Rs.25. 000, will be 30 
per cent. as against 18 per cent. for the slab of Rs.15, 001 to Re. 20.000 and 25 per cent. 
for the slab of Rs. 20. 001 to Rs. 25, 000 at present and the rate of Income-tax for the 
slab of Rs.25, 001 to Rs. 30, 000. will be 34 per cent.as against 30 per cent.hitherto. 
For the rest of the slabs of income,there is no change in the rates of income-tax. 
The provislon8 in the Bill for the purposes of computatlon of "advance tax" and 
charglng of income-tax in special cases during the financial year 1981-82 In the case of 
individuals, unspecified mndu undivided famllles, unregistered firms, etc., having 
net agricultural lncome. In addition to non-agricultural Income exceeding Rs. 15,000, 
are the same as in the Finance (No.2) Act. 1980, except for the following modlflcatlms:-
~) In determlnlng the Inoome-tax on net agricultural income, the net agricultural 
iucOlDe will be increased by a sum of Rs. 15. 000 instead of Re. 8, 000 at present. 
'i) Tbe restriction of the Income-tax to 60 per cent.of the total income in excess 
of the exemption limit w1ll no longer be appllcable. 
However, in the case of Hindu undivided fam1l1es having at least one member with 
independent totallncome exoeeding the exemption limit, the existing proviSions of 
aggregation of net agrlculturallncome with non-agrtculturalincome have been retained 
without any change. 
In the case of companies, the rates of Income-tax specified in Paragraph E of Part 
m of the Firat Schedule to the Blll are the same as those speci4ed in Paragraph E of 
Part I of the First Schedule to the BUl exoept for the modification that the rate of 
surcharge on inoome-tall in the oase of companies Is proposed to be reduced from 7.5 
per oent. to 2.5 per oent, of suoh income-tax. 

72 
Clause 3 seeks to insert a new section lOA in the Income-tax Act relating to 
special provision in respect of income from newly established lndustrial undertakings 
in free trade zones. 
Sub-section (1) of new section lOA seeks to provide that any profits and gains derived 
by an assessee from an industrial undertaking to which the section applies will not be 
included in the total income of the assessee. 
Sub-section (2) of new section lOA provides that this section will apply to an 
industrial undertaking which fulfils certain conditions, namely, that it begins to 
manufacture or produce articles or things during the previous year relevant to the 
assessment year 1981-82 or any subsequent assessment year in any free trade zone; 
it is not formed by the splitting up, or the reconstruction, of a business already in 
existence; and it is not formed by the transfer to a new business of mac~ery or plant 
previously used for any purpose. For the purposes of this section, reconditioned 
imported machinery or plant wlll be regarded as new. Further, where the total 
value of the machinery or plant transferred to the new bUSiness does not exceed 
20 per cent. of the total value of the machinery or plant used in that bUSiness, the 
last-mentioned condition will be deemed to have been complied with. 
Sub-section (3) of new section lOA seeks to provide that the b81efit of this section 
will be available to an industrial undertaking for five assessment years beginning with 
the initial assessment year. 
Sub-section (4) of new section lOA seeks to provide that notwtthsta'lding anything 
contained in any other provision of this Act. in computing the total income of the 
assessee of the previous year relevant to the assessment year immediately succeeding 
the last of the relevant assessment years (or of the previous year relevant to any 
sflbsequent assessment year), the unabsorbed depreciation allowance, the unabsorbed 
investment allowance, the unabsorbed development rebate, the unabsorbed capital 
expenditure on scientific research, the unabsorbed capital expenditure on family 
planning relating to the relevant assessment years will not be taken into consideration. 
Similarly, unabsorbed business losses or loss under the head "Capital gains" or 
the deficiency relating to tax holiday profits relating to relevant assessment years 
will not be taken into account. Where the assessee was entitled to a deduction for the 
relevant assessment years in respect of the proats and gains from newly establlshed 
industrial undertakings in backward areas or small-scale industrial undertakings in 
rural areas or the tax holiday, no deduction wlll be admissible in the assessment 
yeats subsequent to the relevant assessment years. Further, in computing the depreciation 
allowance on any assets in the aBsessment years following the relevant assessment 
years, the written down value will be computed as if the assessee had claimed and 
been allowed the depreciation in accordance with the provisions of the Income-tax Act 
during each one of the relevant. assessment years. 
Sub-section (5) of new section lOA seeks to provide that where any industrial 
undertaking situated in a free trade zone has begun to manufacture or produce articles 
or things during any of the previous years relevant to the assessm81t years 1977-78 
to 1980-81, such assessee may, at his option, before the expiry of the time allowed 
for the furnishing of the return of income for the assessment year 1981- 82, furnish 
to the Income-tax Off icer a declaration in writing that the proviSions of this section 
may be made applicable to him for the relevant assessment years other than the 

73 I~ 
assessment years commencing before the assessment year 1981-82; and if he does 80, 
then the provisions of complete tax hol1day specified in this section w1l1 apply for such 
assessment years and the provisions of new sub-section (4) will also apply in relation 
to any assessment year following the relevant assessment years. 
Sub-section (6) of new section lOA seeks to apply the provisions of sub-section (8) 
and sub- section (9) of section 80- I relating to tax holiday to the industrial undertaking 
referred to in this section. 
For the purpose of this s~tion, the expression "free trade zone" means the Kandla 
Free Trade Zone and the Santacruz Electronics Export Processing Zone and includes 
any other free trade zone which the Central Government may specify for the purposes 
of this section by notification in the Official Gazette. The expression "relevant 
-assessment years" means the initial assessment year and four assessment years 
immediately succeeding the initial assessment year. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1981. 
Clause 4 seeks to make two amendments in clause (I) of section 16 of the Income-
tax Act relating to standard deduction in the case of salaried asseBBees. 
Under the existing provisions, a standard deduction is granted. to salaried assessees 
in an amount, equal to twenty per cent. of the salary up to Rs. 10,000 and ten per cent. 
of the salary in excess thereof, subject to a maximum of Rs. 3,500. Under the first 
amendment, the standard deduction will be allowed at the uniform rate of twenty per 
cent. of such salary, subject to a maximum of Rs. 5,000. 
Under the existing provisions, where the assessee is in receipt of a conveyance 
allowance from his employer, the standard deduction is restricted to Rs. 1,000. Under 
the second amendment, tbis provision is proposed to be omitted. 
These amendments will take effect from 1st April, 1982 and will accordingly apply 
in relation to the assessment year 1982-83 and subsequent years. 
Clause 5 seeks to amend the Explanation below sub-section (2) of section 32A of 
the Income-,tax Act relating to investment allowance. 
Under the existing provisions, investment allowance is granted in respect of new 
machinery or plant installed in a small· scale inc:htstrial undertaldng for the manufacture 
of any articles or things, Including articles or things of low priority specifled In the 
list in the Eleventh Schedule. For this purpose, a small-scale industrial undertaldng 
means an industrial undertaldng in which the aggregate value of machinery or plant 
installed as on the last day of relevant previous year does not exceed Rs.10 lakhs. 
Under the proposed amendment, this limit is being raised to Rs.20 lakbs in a case 
where the previous year ends after 31st July, 1980. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1981 and will accordingly apply 
in relation to the assessment year 1981-82 and subsequent years. 
Clause 6 seeks to substitute the proviso to sub- section (7) of section 33A of the 
Income-tax Act relating to development allowance. 

~ 1-fj 74 
Under the existing provisions. a development allowance is granted to an asse8888 
engaged In the buslnes8 of growing and manufacturing tea in India of an amount equal to 
50 per cent. of the actual cost of planting of tea bushes on any land not planted at any 
time with tea bushes or on any land which had been previously abandoned. For this 
purpose. where the actual cost of planting 8l[ceeds Ra.l2. 500 per hectare in respect 
of land Bltuate In a hllly area or 8l[Ceeds Rs.IO. 000 per hectare In any other area. then, 
the excess Is Ignored for the purpose of computation of the development allowance. 
Under the proposed amendment. the celling Umit for the actual cost of planting has 
been raised to Ra.40. 000 per hectare for any land In a hilly area comprised within 
the district of Darjee1ing. Rs. 36. 000 per hectare In respect of land situate In a billy 
area other than the district of DarjeeUng and Rs. 30. 000 per hectare In the case of 
land situate In any other area. 
ThIs ameodment will take effect from 1st April. 1982 and will accordingly apply 
in relation to the assessment year 1982-83 and subsequent years. 
Clause 7 seeks to amend clause (rill) of section 35 (1) of the Income-tax Act relating 
to specW deduction In the case of approved flnancW corporations and public housing 
finance companies. 
Under the existing provisions. approved financial corporations engaged In providing 
long-term ftnaDce for 1ndu.strtal or agricultural development in India and approved 
pubUc housing finance companies are entitled to a deduction. In the computation of their 
taxable profits, of an amount up to 40 per cent. of the total income carried to a special 
reserve account. The aggregate of the deductions on this account over a period of years 
cannot, however, exceed the amount of the paid-up capital. The proposed amendment 
seeks to provide that the aggregate of such deduction cannot 8l[ceed twice the amount 
of the paid-up capital. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st April. 1982 and will accordingly apply In 
relation to the aS8eBsment year 1992-83 and subsequent years. 
Clause 8 seeks to make certa1D amendments In section 42 of the Income-tax Act 
relating to special provision for deducUons in the case of business of prospecting. etc •• 
for mineral oils. 
Under the existing provisional where the Central Government bas entered Into an 
agreemmt with any person for the association or part1clpation of the Central Government 
in the business of prospecting for or extraction or producUon of mineral oils, the 
81q)e1DSea and allowances in relation to such business as are specified in the agreement 
are allowed in lteu of or In addition to those admissible under the Income-tax AcL 
Under the first amendment, It is proposed to provide that the agreement may 
provide for the association or participation. In such business not only of the Central 
Government but also of any other pel'BOD authorised by It in this behalf. 
Under the second amendment, It is proposed to provide that any agreement entered 
Into after 31st March. U81 may provide also for allowaDCee In Ueu of or tn addition 
to depreclatiOil allowance admissible under sectlOD 32 of the Income-tax Act. 
These ameadm_ta will tab effect from 1st April. 1981. 

75 
Clause 9 seeks to make two amendments In secUon SOD of the Income-tax Act. 
Under the exisUng provisions, individuals and Hindu UDdtvlded famlUes resident 
In lDdla and lncurr1Dg any expeaditure on the medical treatment (Including nuraing) of 
a handicapped dependant are enUtled to a deduction, In the computation of the taxable 
income, of a sum of Ra. 2, 400 In a case where the handicapped dependant has been 
admitted for at least 182 days durlng the previous year In a hospital, DUrstng home, ar 
any noU1led Institution and Ra.600 In any other oase. Under the proposed amendments. 
the quantum of deduction is being raised from Rs. 2, 400 to Ra. 4, 800 and .from Ra. 600 to 
Rs.I,200. 
These amendments wtll take effect from 1st AprU, 1982 and will accordingly 
apply In relation to the assessment year 1982-83 am subseqaent years. 
Clause 10 seeks to amend section 80RHA of the Income-tax Act relating to deduction 
in resrsct of profits and gains from newly established small-scale industrial under-
takings in rural areas. 
Under the existing provisions, an assessee is entitled to a deduction of twenty per 
cent. of the profits and gains derived by him from a small-scale industrial undertaking 
set up in a rural area for the initial period of ten years. For this purpose, a smaU-
scale industrial undertaking means an industrial undertaking in which the aggregate 
value of machinery or plant installed as on the last day of the relevant previous year 
does not exceed Ra. 10 lakhs. Under one of the amendments, this Umit is being 
raised to Rs. 20 lakhs in cllses where the previous year ends after 31st July, 
1980. Under the other amendment, the benefit of the tax concession is being 
extended to industrial undertakings which did not qualify for the same before that 
date on the ground that the aggregate value of machlnery or plant installed therein 
exceeded Rs. 10 lakhs, but did not exceed Rs.20 lakhs. In such cues, the con-
cession will be available for the unexpired period. 
These amendments will take effect from 1st April, 1981 and will accordingly apply 
in relation to the assessment year 1981-82 and subsequent years. 
Clause 11 seeks to amend clause (a) of section 80M(1) of the Income-tax Act 
relating to inter-corporate dividends. 
• 
Under the proposed amendment, a domestic com~ny receiving income by way of 
dividends from another domestic company whicb is engaged in the manufacture of 
electronic components and raw materialsi computers and peripheralsi communication 
equipmenti process control, instrumentatlon, industrial and professional crade electro-
nic equipment will qualify for complete exemption of such income, as against 60 per 
cent. thereof hitherto. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1982 and wtll accordIngly apply 
in relation to the assessment year 1982- 83 and subsequeot years. 
Clause 12 seeks to amend section 80QQ of the Income-tax: Act relating to deduction 
in respect of profits and gains from the business of publication of hooks. 

76 
Under the existing provisions, an assessee carrying on a business in India of 
printing and publication of books, or only pubUcation of books without the activity of 
printlng,is entitled to a deduction, in the computation of his taxable income, of an 
amount equal to 20 per cent. of the profits from such books. This tax concession was 
available up to and including the assessment year 1980- 81. Under the proposed 
amendment, the tax concesssion will be available for five more years, i. e., up to and 
Including the assessment year 1985-86. 
The proposed amendment will take effect from 1st Aprll. 1981. 
Clause 13 seeks to insert an Explanation in clause (v) of section 86 of the lncome-
tax Act. -
Under the existing provisions, no income-tax is payable by a member of an 
association of persons on any portion of the amount which he is entitled to receive 
from the association on which income-tax has already been paid by the association of 
persons. 
Under the proposed amendment, in the case of an association of persons which Is 
assessable under section 167A, the members of the association whose shares in the 
income or part of the income of the association are indeterminate or unknown. w1ll be 
deemed to be entitled to receive equal shares in the total income or the part of the 
total income of the association and the individual share of such member in the total 
income or part of the total income will be determined accordingly. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1981. 
Clause 14 seeks to insert a new clause (v) and two Explanations in sub-section (1) 
of section 160 of the Income--tax Act. 
New clause (v) seeks to provide that in respect of any income which a trustee 
appointed under an oral trust receives or is entitled to receive on behalf or for the-
benefit of any person, such trustee or trustees will be regarded as representative 
assessee. 
The new Explanation 1 seeks to provide that where any trust has not been declared 
by a duly execut.ed instrument in writing, for the purposes of clause (iv), it w1l1 be 
deemed to be a trust declared by a duly executed instrument in writing If a statement 
in writing signed by the trustee. setting out the purposes of the trust, particulars 
as to the trustees,the beneficiaries and the trust propert~ is forwarded to the Income-
tax Officer within the specified time limit. Where the trust has been declared before 
1st June. 1981, the specified time limit will be a period of three months from that day 
and in any other case, three months from the date of the declaration of the trust. 
New Explanation 2 seeks to define the e~pression "oral trust" to mean a trust 
which Is not declared by a duly executed instrument in writing and which is not deemed 
to be a trust declared by a duly executed instrument in writing in terms of Explanation 1. 
This amendment wUl take effect from 1st April, 1981. 

77 I~ 
Clause 15 seeks to insert new section 164A in the Income-tax Act relating to charge 
of tax in case of oral trust. 
Under the proposed amendment, where a trustee receives or is entitled to receive 
any income on behalf or for the benefit of any person under an oral trust, income-tax • 
wIll be charged on such income at the maximum marginal rate. For this purpose, 
the expression "maximum marginal rate" will have the same meaning as in Explanation 2 
below section 164(3). The expression "oral trust" will have the same meaning as in 
Explanation 2 below section 160(1). 
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1981. 
Clause 16 seeks to insert a new section 167A in the Income-tax Act relating to 
charge of tax where the shares of members of an association of persons are not 
known. 
Sub-section (1) of new section 167A seeks to provide that where the individual 
shares of the members of an association of persons in the income of such association 
are indeterminate or unknown, income-lax will be charged on the total income of the 
association at the maximum marginal rate. 
Sub-section (2) of new section 167A seeks to provide that where the individual 
shares of the members of an association of persons in any part of the income of such 
association are indeterminate or unknown, the income-tax payable by the association 
will be the aggregate of the amount of income-tax on such part of the total income at 
the maximum marginal rate and the amount of income-tax which would have been 
chargeable if the remaining part of, the total income were its total income. 
For the purposes of this section, the expression "maximum marginal rate" has 
the same meaning as in Explanation 2 to section 164(3). Further, the indivIdual shares 
of the members of an association of persons in the income of such association will be 
deemed to be indeterminate or unknown if such shares are indeterminate or unknown 
on the date of formation of such association or at any time thereafter. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1981. 
Clause 17 seeks to substitute clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 208 of the 
Income-tax Act by two clauses. 
Under the proposed amendment, in the case of a person, other than a company, 
local authority, registered firm or 8 Hindu undivided family which a.t any time during 
the previous year had at least one member whose total income of the previous year 
exceeds Re. 15,000, advance tax will be payable only where his income exceeds 
Rs. 15,000. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st June, 1981. 
ClauBe 18 seeks to Bubstitute sub-section (2) of section 2q2 of the Income-tax Act by 
two new Bub-sectlODS. 

78 
Under the existing provisions, a person qualifies for appointment as a judicial 
member in the Appellate Tribunal if he has for at least ten years held a civil judicial 
post or has ~en a member of t!le Central Legal Service not below Grade m for at 
least three years or has been in practice 3S an advocate for at least ten years. 
Under the first amendment, it is proposed to provide that a person shall qualify for 
appointment as a judicial member of the Appellate Tribunal if he has for at least ten 
years held a judicial office in the territory of India or has been a member of the 
Central Legal Service and has held a post in Grade I of that Service or any equivalent 
or higher post for at least three years. A person who has been an advocate for at least 
ten years will continue to be eligible for such appointment as hitherto. For this 
purpose, in computing the period during which such a persOD has beld a Judicial 
office, any period during which he has been an advocate or has held the office of a 
member of a tribunal or any post under the Union or State requiring special knowledge 
of law after he has held any Judicial office w1l1 be included. Similarly, in computing 
the period during which a person has been an advocate of a High Court, any period 
during which he has held a Judicial office or the office of a member of a tribunal or 
any post under the Union or State requiring special knowledge of law after he became 
an advocate w ill also be included 
Under the existing provisions, a person who has served as an ASSistant Commis-
sioner of Income-tax for at least three years qualifies for appointment as an accountant 
member in the Appellate Tribunal. Under the second amendment, it is proposed to 
provide that a person who has been a member of the Indian Income-tax Service, 
Group A and bas held the post of Commissioner of Income-tax or any equivalent or 
higher post for at least three years will qualify for appointment as an accountant 
member in the Appellate TribunaL 
These amendments will take effect from 1st April, 1981. 
Clause 19 seeks to amend sub-section (6) of section 263 of the Income-tax Act 
relating to appeals to the Appellate Tribunal. 
Under the existing provisions, a fee of Rs. 125 is payable by an assessee in respect 
of an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal. Under the proposed amendment, the fee is 
being raised to as. 200. 
This amendment wlll take effect from 1st June.1981. 
Clause 20 seeks to amend sub-section (1) of section 256 of the Income-tax Act 
relating to reference to High Court. 
Under the existing prOVisions, a fee of Rs. 125 is payable by an assessee in respect 
of a reference application to the High Court. Under the proposed amendment, the fee 
Is being raised to Rs. 200. . 
This amendment will take effect from 1st June, 1981. 

79 
/30 
Clause 21 seeks to amend sub-section (2) of section 269G of the Income-tax 
.4ct relating to appeals to the Appellate Tribunal against orders for the acquisition 
of lmmovable property under Chapter XXA. 
Under the existing provisions, a fee of Rs. 125 is required to be IBid by an 
asselsee for filing an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal against an order made by the 
competent authority for the acquisition of an immovable property. Under the proposed 
amendment, the fee is being raised to Rs. 200. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st June, 1981. 
Clause 22 seeks to insert a new section 293A in the Income-tax Act relating to 
power to make exemptions, etc., in relation to participation in the business of pros-
pecting for or extraction, etc., of mineral olls. 
Under the new flection, if the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary 
or expedier:t so to do in the public interest, it may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make exemption, reduction in rate or other modification in respect of income 
tax in favour of persons with whom the Central Government bas entered into 
agreements Cat' the association or J»,rticilBtion of that Government or any person 
authorised by that Government in the business conSisting of the prospecting for or 
extraction or production of mineral oils, or persons rendering technical services in 
connection with such business carried on by that Government or by any person speci-
fled by that Government in this behalf by notification and employees of such persons. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1981. 
Clause 23 seeks to amend the Ninth Schedule to the Income-tax Act containing a 
list of priority industries. 
Under the proposed amendment, the priority industry, Mmely, electronic 
components and raw materials; computers and periphtlrals; communication 
equipment; process control, instrumentation, industrial and professional grade 
electronic equipment is being included in the Ninth Schedule. 
This amendment wlll take effect from 1st April, 1982 and will accordingly apply 
in relation to the assessment year 1982- 83 and subsequent years. 
Clause 24 seeks to amend the Eleventh Schedule to the Income-tax Act. 
Sub-olause (a) seeks to make an amendment of a consequential nature. &1b-clause (b) 
seeks to omit certain articles or things from the said Schedule. 
The second amendment mentioned above will take effect from the 1st April, 1982 
and will aocordingly apply in relation to the assessment year 1982-83 and subsequent year,. 
Clause 25 seeks to make amendments of a oonsequenti al nature in section 80P and 
section 273 of the Inoome-tax Act, 
These amendments will take effect from 1st Aprll. 1981. 

80 
Clause 26 seeks to amend section 21 of the Wealth-tax Act. 
Sub-clause (a) seeks to insert a new Explanation in sub-section (1). The new 
Explanation seeks to provide that a trust which is not declared by a duly executed 
instrument in writing will be deemed to be a trust declared by a duly executed 
instrument in writing if a statement in writing, signed by the trustee, setting out the 
purpose of the trust. particulars as to the trustee, the beneficIary and the trust 
property is forwarded to the Wealth-tax Officer within the specified time limit. 
Where the trust has been declared before 1st June, 1981, the specified time limit 
will be a period of three months from that day and in any other case,wlthin three 
months from the date of declaration of the trust. 
Sub-clause (b) seeks to amend sub-section (4). Under the first amendment, the 
provisions of that sub-section will apply notwithstanding anything contained in the 
provisions of sub-sections (I), (lA), (2) and (3) of that section. Under the second 
amendment, the provisions of Explanation 2 will apply to'that sub-section as also to 
sub-section (4A). 
Sub-clause (c) seeks to insert new sub-section (4A). Under the 
proposed amendment, where the assets chargeable to wealth-tax are held by a trustee 
under an oral trust, wealth-t3.?t will be levied upon and recovered (rom such trustee 
in the same manner and to the same extent as an individual citizen of India and 
resident in India in accordance with the rates specified in Part I of Schedule I or at 
the rate of 3 per cent. , whichever course is more beneficial to the revenue. 
For the purpose of new sub-section (4A), the expression "oral trust" means a 
trust which is not declared by a duly executed instrument in writing and which is not 
deemed under the new Explanation to sub-section (1) to have been so declared. 
These amendments will take effect from 1st April, 1981. 
Clause 'Z7 seeks to insert new section 21AA in the Wealth-tax Act relating to assess-
ment when assets are held by certain associations of persons. 
Sub-section (1) of new section 21AA seeks to provide that where assets chargeable 
to wealth-tax are held by an association of persons (other than a company or co-operRtive 
society) and the individual shares of the members of the association in the income or 
assets or both, of the association on the date of its formation or at any time thereafter 
are indeterminate or unknown, wealth-tax will be levied and recovered from such 
association in the same manner and to the, same extent as an individual citizen of 
India and resident in India at the rates speCified in Part I of Schedule I or at the rate 
of three per cent., whichever course is more beneficial to the revenue. 
Sub-section (2) of new section 21AA seeks to provide that where any buSiness or 
profession carried on by an association of persODS referred to in sub-section (1) has 
been discontinued or tbe association bas been dissolved, the Wealth-tax Officer wUl 
make an assessment on the net wealth of the association as if no such discontinuance 
or dissolution had taken place and all other proviSions of the Act, including the 
provisions relating to the levy of penalty or any other sum. will apply to such assess-
ment. 

81 
Sub-section (3) of new section 21AA empowers the Wealth-tllx Offlcer, the Appellate 
Assistant Commissioner and the Commissioner (Appeals) to impose or direct the 
imposition of a penalty referred to in section 18 or section l8A if such association 
has been found to be guilty of any of the acts specified in those sections. 
Sub-section (4) of new section 21AA seeks to provide that every person who was 
at the time of such discontiD1.1ance or dissolution a member of the association and the 
legal representative of any deceased person will be10iptly and severally liable 
for the tax, penalty or other sum payable and all the provisions of the Act will apply 
to any such assessment or imposition of penlllty or other sum. 
Sub-section (5) of new section 21AA seeks to provide that where any sucb dis-
continuance or dissolution takes place after any proceedings in respect of an assess-
ment year have commenced, the proceedings may be continued against the persons 
referred to in sub-section (4) from the stage at which they stood at the time of such 
discontinuance or dissolution and all other provisions of the Act will apply acconiingly. 
The Explanation to new section 21AA seeks to provide that in computing the net 
wealth of the association any assets referred to in the specified clauses of section 
5(1) will not be excluded. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1981. 
Clause 28 seeks to amend sub-section (4) of section 24 of the Wealth-tax Act 
relating to appeals to the Appellate Tribunal. 
Under the existing provision~, a fee of Rs.125 is payable by an assessee in respect 
of appeals to the Appellate Tribunal. Under the proposed amendment, the fee is being 
raised to Rs. 200. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st June, 1981. 
Clause 29 seeks to amend sub-section (2) of section 26 of the Wealth-tax Act relating 
to appeals to the Appellate Tribunal from orders of enhancement by the Commissioner. 
Under the eXisting prOvisions, a fee of Rs.125 is payable by an assessee in respect 
of an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal. llnder the proposed amendment, the fee is being 
raised to Rs.200. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st June, 1981. 
Clause 30 seeks to amend sub-section (1) of section 27 of the Wealth-tax Act relat-
ing to reference to Higb Court. 
Under tbe existing provisions, a fee of Rs.125 1s payable by an assessee in respect 
of a reference application to the High Court. 'Vnder the proposed amendment, the fee 
is being raised to Rs. 200. 
This amendmEnt will take effect from 1st olme, 1981. 

82 
Clause 31 seeks to insert a new sub-section (4) in section 41 of the Wealth-tax Act 
relating to service of notice. 
Under the proposed amendment, where an association of persons referred to in 
new section 21M is dissolved, notices under the Wealth-tax Act in respect of any matter 
relating to the association may be served on any person who was a member of 
sucb association immediately bej)re its dissolution. 
This amendment wiD take effect from 1st Aprtl, 1981. 
Clause 32 seeks to amend sub-section (4) of section 23 of the Gift-tax Act relating 
to appeals to the Appellate Tribunal. 
Under the existing provisions, a fee of Rs.l25 is payable by an assessee in respect 
of an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal. Pnder the proposed amendment. the fee is being 
raised to Rs. 200. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st June, 1981. 
Clause 33 seeks to amend sub-section (2) of section 25 of the Gift-tax Act relating 
to appeals to the Appellate Tribunal. 
Under the existing provisions. a fee of Rs.125 is payable by an assesRee in respect 
of appeals to the Appellate Tribunal. Under the proposed amendment. the fee 1& being 
raised to Rs.200. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st June, 1981. 
Clause 34 seeks to amend sub-section (1) of section 26 of the Gift-tax Act relating 
to reference to High Court. 
Under the existing provisions. a fee of Rs.l25 is payable by an assessee in respect 
of a reference application to the High Court. Under the proposed ameMment. the fee 
is being raised to Rs. 200. 
This amendment will take effect from let June, 1981. 
Clause 35 seeks to insert two new clauses in sectJon 2 of the Companies (Proft.ts) 
SlJrtax Act. 1964. 
New c1aURe (1) seeks to define tbe expression "advance tlurtax" as the surtax pay-
able under section 7 A. 
New clause (7 A) seeks to define the expressiOn "regular assessment" 88 an assess-
ment made under section 8. 
These amendments will take effect from 1st April, 1981. 
Clause 38 seeks to iDsert new sectlons 7 A to 7D in the Companies (Protl1B) Surtax 
Act regarding payment of adV8Doe surtax. 

83 
Sub-seotion (1) of new section 7 A defines \'arious expressions. The expression 
"chargeable amo1Dlt". in relation to any previous year. means so much of the charge-
able profits of the previous year as exceed the statutory deduction. The expression 
"current chargeable amo1Dlt". in relation to the ad\'ance surtax payable by a company 
during any financial year. means the chargeable amount of the company of the previous 
year relewnt to the assessmeat year immediately following the ftnancial year. 
Sub-section (2) of new section 7 A seeks to provide that surtax shall be payable in 
advance during the financial year in respect of the chargeable amount of the period 
which would be the previous year for the Immediately following assessment year. 
Sub-section (3) of new section 7 A seeks to provide that the amount of advance 
surtax plI.Yable by a company in the financial year will be computed on the basis of 
the chargeable amount of the latest previous year in respect of which the company has 
been assessed by way of regular assessment or the chargeable amotmt of the latest 
pre\'1ous year. being a later year than the previous year referred to earlier. on the 
basis of which a pro\'1sional assessment has been made. whichever Is bigher. SurVut 
will be calculated on SJlc.h char ........ hl~t at the rates specified in the Third dl7U yeau ·1f>'YIft(l5AIU"~ 
Schedule to the Act 1 81 ~ and In Jl.. ~ . 
1IJle, 9. ' 
'O.t of oompul f thP Sub -section (4, ,. ,lion 7 A seeks to provide that the advance surtax will be 
paya.,lv in three equal instalments on the specified dates during the financial year. 
The specified dates i>r this purpose will be 15th June. 15th September and 15th 
December in the case of a company whose chargeable am01Dlt to the extent of 75 per 
cent. or more Is derived from a source or sources for which the previous year ends 
on or be"re 31st December. The specified dates will be 15th September, 15th 
December and 15th March in any other case. However. where the Board bas. in 
exercise of the powers conferred by the proviso to section 211(1) of the lncome-tax 
Act. authorised the payment of tbe last instalment of advance tax on 15th March 
during the financial year. instead of on tbe 15th December, the last instalment of 
advance surtax in the ode of such company will also be payable on the 15th March 
during the financial year. 
Sub-section (5) of new section 7 A seeks to provide that a company which bas been 
previously assessed by way of regular assessment wlll be required to furnish a 
statement of advance surtax payable by it computed in the manner laid down in sub-
section (3) on or before the date on which the first instalment of advance surtax is 
payable by it. Further, a company which has not been previously assessed by 
way of regular assessment will be required to furnish an estimate of the current 
chargeable am01Dlt and the advanne surtax payable by It on such amount in the manDer 
laid down in sub-section (3) at any time on or before the date OIl which the last instal-
ment of advance surtax 1s payable in 1ts case. This sub-section applies to all sucb 
companies in whose case the chargeabIt, profits assessable under ·the Act are likely to 
exceed the amount of statutory deduction. In the case of a company which has been 
previously assessed by way of regular assessment, the arlount of advance surtax Is 
required to be paid in three equa1instalments on the dates applicable to it under sub-
section (.). In the case of a new company. the amount of advance surtax wlll be 
required to be paid in equal instalments on such of the. dates applicable in its case as haW! 
not expired or in one sum if only the last of such dates has not expired. 

Sub-section (6) of new section 7 A seeks to provide that in cases/where the company 
estimates that its current chargeable amount of the previous year in respeot of which 
it is required to furnish the statement of advance surtax would be less than the chargeable 
amount as aforesaid, it will have the option to furnish an estimate of such current 
cbargeable amount instead of furnishing the statement. 
Sub-section (7) of new section 7 A seeks to provide that ·where a company has fur-
nished a statement as aforesaid, it will have the option to file an estimate if it estimates 
that its current chargeable amount is Ukely to be less than the chargeable amount on the 
basis of which it is so required to pay advance surtax. An estimate can be furnished at 
any time before the last instalment of ad,'ance surtax is due in its case. 
Sub-section (8) of new section 7A seeks to provide that in a case where the advance 
surtax payable by a company on the basis of its current chargeable amount exceeds 
the surtax payable by it on the basis of the statement or estimate furnished by it by 
more than 20 per cent., it will be required to furnish an estimate of advance surtax 
payable by it on the basis of its current chargeable amount before the date on which 
::o~:t_:~~~~~~ ~~:~~~S~/:i:u;OZ:;~ u~~- 1981. ~~r::~:i~~~~~:) or 
the first proviso to section 212(3A) of the Income-l.c.- \ ""'of the Gift- .. date for furnishing 
the estimate of advance tax payable under the Income-tax.. . ~Ile company has paid 
the advance surtax payable on the basis of the statement or estimate furnished by it 
before the date on which the last instalment is ordInarily due, the balance amount wUl 
be payable on or before the extended date. 
Sub-section (9) of new section 7 A seeks to provide that the company may send a 
revised estimate of the advance surtax payable by it before any of the dates specified 
in sub-section (4) and adjust any excess or deficiency in respect of an instalment 
already paid in a subsequent instalment or any subsequent instalments. 
Sub-section (10) of new section 7 A seeks to provide that every statement or estimate 
under that section will be sent in the prescribed form and verified in the prescribed 
manner. 
These provisions will take effect from 1st April, 1981. 
New section 7B provides for interest payable by Government. 
Pnder new section 7B, the Central Government will be required to pay simple 
interest at 12 per cent. per annum on the amount bY'which the aggregate sum of 
any instalments of advance surtax paid during any financial year in which they are 
payable under section 7A, exceeds the amount of surtax determined on regular 
assessment, from 1st April of the assessment year to the date of regular 
assessment for the said assessment year. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1981. 
New section 7C relates to charging of interest for non-payment of advance 8Urtax. 
Sub-sectlon (1) of new section 7C seeks to provide that where the advance surtax paId 
by a company on the basis of its own estimate is 1e8s than eighty-three and one-third 

85 
per cent. of the assessed surtax. it shall pay simple interest at the rate of twelve per 
cent. per annum from 1st April of the assessment year till the date of the regular 
assessment on the amount by which the advance surtax paid by it falls short of the 
assessed surtax. 
Sub-section (2) of new section 7C seeks to provide that where a company has not 
furnished the statement of advance surtax or the estimate in lieu of such -statement or 
a new company has not furnished the estimate of advance surtax. simple interest 
shall be payable by such company at the rate of twelve per cent. per annum from 1st 
April of the assessment year up to the date of regular assessment on the amount equal 
to the assessed surtax. 
Sub-section (3) of new section 7C seeks to provide that 'where a company has not 
furnished the bigher estimate of advance surtax. it shall pay simple interest at the 
rate of twelve per cent. per annum from 1st April of the assessment year till the 
date of regtl!ar assessment on the amOllnt by which the advance surtax paid by it 
falls short of the assessed Sllrtax. 
cJt 9'-0 yeaits and gains as 01· 
Sub-section (4) 00De 1981. ~,and In a.s-'provide that in a case where a provisional 
assessment of the o:mt ~f oompul',f that .. A(i section 7. interest as provided in sub-section 
(1) or sub-section (2) 01 ~ ..;tion (3) will be calculated up to the date on which the 
surtax provisionally assessed is paid and thereafter interest will be calculated at the 
rate of twelve per cent. per annum on the amount by which the surtax provisionally 
assessed falls short of the assessed surtax. 
Sub-section (5) of new section 7C seeks to provide that the Income-tax Officer may. 
in the cases and circumstances to be prescribed hy rules. reduce or waive the interest 
payable by the company under this section. 
Sub-section (6) of new section 7 C seeks to provide that where as a result of an orde r 
of appeal. revision or rectification,the amount on which interest is payable by the company 
stands reduced. the interest will be reduced accordingly and the excess interest paid -will 
be refunded. 
Sub-section (7) of new section 7C seeks to provide that the expression "assessed sur-
tax" for the purposes of this section and section 9A will mean the surtax determined on 
the basis of a regular assessment without making any deduction therefrom. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1981. 
New section 7D relates to interest payalie by a company in case of underestimate. 
etc. 
New sectlon 7D seeks to provide that where on making the regular assessment, 
the Inoome-tax Officer flnds that any oompany bas underestimated the advance 
surtax payal:ie by It and thereby' reduced the amount payalie in either of the Arst 
two instalments, he may dlreCt that such oompany shall pay slmple Interest at the 
rate of twelve per cent. per annum for the period during which the payment was 
defiCient. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1981. 

86 
Clause 37 seeks to Insert a new section SA of the Compulles (Profits) Surtax Act, 
relating to penaltles for false eatimate of or failure to pay surtax In advance. 
These provisions are broadly on the lines of the corresponding provisions of the 
Income-tax Act relating to imposition of penalty for false estimate of or flf.lure to 
pay income-tax In advance In the case of oompanles. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1981. 
Clause 38 seeks to amend section 10 of the CompanIes (Profits) Surtax Act. 
Under the proposed amendment, no order imposing a penalty under new section 
SA will be made unless the assessee has been given a reasonable opportunity of 
being beard •• 
This amendment wnl take effect from 1st Aprll, 1981 • 
...... ~-­
Clause 39 seeks to amend !ub-sectl.~ ,._-" 
Surtax Act relating to appeals to the c~~e. 1981. 
~.ompa.nles (Profits) 
Under the proposed amendment, any oomp~ ~bJ~3_~ the G~~~~ of JDterest by 
the Income-tax Officer under the provisions of new section 7D may appeal to the 
Comm1s~oner (Appeals). 
ThIs amendment will take effect from 1st Aprll, 1981. 
Clause 40 seeks to amend sub-section (6) of section 12 of the Companies (Profits) 
Surtax Act. 
Under the existing provisions, a fee of Ra. 125 is payal:ie by an assessee in respect 
of an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal. Under the proposed amendment, the fee is 
being raised to Rs. 200. 
This amendment wUl take effect from 1st June, 1981. 
Clause 41 seeks to amend section 18 of the Companies (Profits) Surtax Act 
relating to application of the proviSions of the Income-tax Act. 
Under the proposed amendment, sectlons 218 and 219 of the Income-tax Act 
are proposed to be made appllcable to surtax as they apply to income-tax. 
This amendment wUl take effect from 1st Aprll, 1981. 
Clause 42 seeks to Insert a new section 24AA In the Companles·(Proflts) Surtax 
Act relaUng to power to make exemptions, etc.", In relation to participation in the 
business of prospectlng for or extraction, etc., of mineral on •• 
Under the new section,if the Central Government Is satisfied that it is 
neceseary or expedient SO to do In the publlc interest, it may, by notification in the 

87 
Official Gazettee, make exemption, reduction in rate or other modiflcatlon in respect 
of surtax In favour of foreign companies Wi th whom the Central Government has entered 
Into agreements for the assocIation or particIpation of that Gove~nt or any person 
authorised by that Government in the business consisting of the prospecting for or 
extraction or productIon of mineral ons or foreign companies rendering technical 
servIces in connection with such business carried on by that Government or any person 
specified by that Government in this behalf by notiflcation In the Official Gazette. 
The expreSSion "foreign company" shall have the same meaning as In section 80B(4) 
of the Income-tax Act. 
ThIs amendment will take effect from 1st Aprn, 1981. 
Clause 43 seeks to amend rule 1 of the First Schedule to the Companies (Proflts) 
SurtAx Act. 
Under t!le proposed amendment, where any income or profits and gal.ns are 
required to be excluded from tlle ,t9tal [nco me under any clause of rule 1, the 
amount of such incomSllfb y;8}.ts and gains as ~lted In accordance with the 
provisions of the !reine, 1981. ~,and In a case where any deduction Is requIred to 
be allowed under Cmt of compul',f that .4~l!:t in respect of such Income or profits and 
gains, the amount 01 B or profits and gains computed as aforesaid as 
reduced by the amount of such deduction, shall alone be deemed to be the amount 
of Income or profits and gains required to be excluded from such total Income. 
This admendment wlll take effect from 1st April. 1981 and wlll accordingly 
apply in relation to the assessment year 1981-82 and subsequent years. 
Clause 44 seeks to amend sub-sectIon (6) of section 16 of the Interest-tax 
Act, 1974. 
Under the exIstIng provisions. a fee of Rs. 125 Is payalie by an assessee In 
respect of an appeal to the Appellate TrIbunal. Under the proposed amendment, 
the fee is being raised to Rs.200. 
This amendment wID take effect from 1st June, 1981. 
Clause 45 seeks to amend sub-section (6) of section 19 of the Hotel-Receipts 
Tax Act, 1980. 
Under the existing provisions, a fee of Rs.125 Is payable by an assessee 
In respect of an appeal to the Appellate Trll:Amal. Under the proposed amendment, 
the fee is being raised to Rs. 200. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st June, 1981. 
Clause 46 read with the Second Schedule seeks to -
(1) ralse the rate of baSic customs duty on bars (including bright bars) and wire 
rods of stalnl ess steel; 

88 
(11) raise the rate of basic customs duty on plain abaft bearings. 
Clause 47 seeks to levy up to the 31st March. 1982, auxillary duties of customs on 
all imported goods at the rate of 25 per cent. of tl1eir value. 
Clause 48 read with the Third Schedule seeks to change the tariff descriptlon of -
(1) Item No.IM relating to plastIcs to exclude polyester fUms from its scope 
(now included in 9 new item - ISBB); 
(2) Item No.1S relating to tyres as a measure of rationalisation; 
(~) Item No.I6AA relating to synthetic rubber as a measure of rationalisatIon; 
(4) Item No. 2M relating to copper to provide for specific inclusion of waste 
and scrap, ~ shells and blanks for pipes and tube" of copper within Its scope; 
~ -
(5) Item No. 2GB relating to zinc to provide for splC . • "1'Ilon of waste 
and scrap. and calot~ of zinc wltbJ.n I ts &cope: . ~ 
c the Gi -+ 
(6) Item No.27 relating to aluminium to provide I ... " ~"'l~lmclusion of waste 
and scrap of alumlnlum within Its scope: 
(7) Item No. 27A relating to lead to provide for speclflc inclUSion of waste 
and scrap of lead within its scope. . J 
(8) Sub-Item 11(1) of Item No. 37 relating to cinematograph fUms to cover 
news-reels and shorts up to 600 metres in length within its scope. 
Clause 49 seeks to levy up to the 31st day of March, 1982, special duties of 
excise on all excisable goods fJ-t the rate of ten per cent. of the duty levlatie under 
the Central Excises Act, read with any notification for the time being In force Issued 
under the said Act or the rules made thereunder. 
Clause 50 seeks to amend the First Schedule to the Adtlitional Duties of Excise 
(Goods of Special ImportaDCe) Act. 1957, to raise the additional excise duty (In Beu 
of sales-tax) 011. cigarettes. 
Clause 51 seeks to amend the Additional Duties of Excise (Textiles and Textile 
Articles) Act, 1978, to raise the additional duty leviable tmder this Act on textiles 
and textile articles. 
Clause 52 seeks to substitute the Schedule to the Medicinal and ToUet Pre-
parau'ons (ExcIse Duties) Act, 1955, by another Schedule prescribing ad3usted 
rates ol exCise duties on the medicinal and tonet preparations containing alcohol, • narcatlc drug and narcotic on the basIs of pure alcohol content, replacing the 
LOPdon-Proof strength system ado~ed earlier. BesIdes. an alternate ad valorem 
rate Is being provided for certain medlolDal preparations ~ch are capalie of 
being consumed as ordinary alcobollc beverages. 

89 I flo 
Clause 53 seeks to make certain amendments in the Compulsory DepoSit Bcheme 
(Inaome-tax Payers) Act, 1974. 
Sub-clause <a> seeks to amend sub-section (1) of sect10n 3. Sub-clauae (b) seeks 
to amend clause (ill) of sub-section (1) of section 4. These amendments seek to secure 
that, In relation to the alt8esament years 1982-83 and 1983-84 also, compulBOry 
depoSits are made at the rates specified in Paragraph C of the Schedule to the Act. 
These amendments wlll take effect from 1st Aprn, 1981. 
Sub-clause (c) (1) seeks to Insert a DeW sub-sedtiOil (lA) In sectIon 8. 
Under the proposed amenc:hnent, the amount of compulsory depoSIt made by or 
recovered from an lndlvldualor any perlOn who Is assessable In respect of the Income 
of such Individual In a representative capacity shall be repayable, together with the 
Interest due thereon, on the 1st day of the Immediately succeeding financial year 
in which such individual. attains 70 years of age. In a case where such Indlvldual 
has attained the age of 70 years before 1st Aprll, 19'81, the amount will become 
repayable OIl 1st June, 1981. The depoSitor, however, will have the option not to 
Withdraw the amount of compulsory deposit or Interest when it becomes due. 
This amenc:hnent wfil take effect from 1st June, 1981. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 3 of the BIll seeks to Insert a new secUon loA In the Income-tax Act, 1961 
relatlDg to special provision In respect of lDOOme from newly establlsbed industrial 
undertaklnp In free trade zones. The Explanatlon'be1ow this new section defines the 
expression "free trade zone" occurring In the section to mean the Kandla Free Trade 
Zone and the Santacruz ElectroniCS Export Processing Zone, and to Include any 
other free trade zone which the Central Government may, by notlf1catlon In the 
Official Gazette, specify for the purposes of this section. This power is necessary to 
cover free trade zones which may be established In future. 
Clause 22 of the Bill proposes to insert a new section 293A In the Income-tax Act 
which empowers the Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, to 
make exemption. reduction in rate or other modification in respect of income-tax 
In favour of any person with whom the Central Government has entered Into agree-
ment for the association or participation of that Government or any person authorised 
by it in the business consisting of the prospecting for or extraction or production of 
mineral oUSt and in favour of persons rendering technical services in connection with 
such business carried on by that Government or by any person specified by that 
Government in this behalf by notification. The new section also empowers the Central 
Government to make a similar exemption In favour of the employees of such persons. 
Sub-section (3) of the proposed new section requires all the notifications issued under 
this section to be laid before each House of Parliament. Clause 42 of the Bill proposes 
to insert a new section 24AA in the Companies (Profits) Surtax Act, 1964 to give a 
similar power to the Central Government to make an exemption, etc., in respect of 
surtax in favour of foreign companies with whom the Central Government has entered 
into agreements for the association or participation of that Government or any person 
authorised by that Government in the business consisting of the prospecting for or 
extraction or production of mineral oils and In favour of foreign companies rendering 
technical services in connection with such bUsiness carried on by that Government or 
any person specified by that Government in this behalf by notification in the Official 
Gazette. Notifications issued under this section are also required to be laid on the 
Table of eacb House of Parliament. This power is required to facUttate participation 
of foreign companies and technicians in the off-shore drilling operations which are 
being undertaken by the Central Government and the on and Natural Gas Commission. 
Clause 36 of the Bi1l seeks to Insert new sections 7 A to 7D in the Companies 
(Profits) Illrtax Act, 1974 so as to provide for payment of advance surtax. New 
section 7C relates to charging of Interest for non-payment of advance surtax. Sub-
section (5) of this new section empowers the 1Dc0me-tax Officer to reduce or waive 
the interest payable by the company under this section in the cases and circumstances 
to be prescribed by rules made under the Act. 
90 

91 
The delegatLon of leglslatlve power under the aforesaid provisions relates to 
matters of proced\u'e or admlnlstraUve detan or to matters In respect of which 
It Is not practlca.l:ie to make detaIled provisions. Hence, the delegat1C1l d. 
legislative power Is of a normal character. 

LOK SABBA 
A 
BILL 
to give effect to the financial proposals of the Central Government 
for the financial year 1981-82. 
(Shri R. VeJdeatar._, 
Minister of Fin-.:e.) 