AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 25 of 2022
THE WIDOWS (PROTECTION AND WELFARE) BILL, 2022
By
SHRI  BENNY BEHANAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the protective measures with need based rehabilitation and
welfare to be undertaken by the Government for the distressed, infirm,
neglected, and disowned widows by providing financial assistance,
pension, medical care, housing and other facilities
through a Welfare Board to such widows and for
matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic
of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Widows (Protection and Welfare)
Act, 2022.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.

(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
      2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “disowned widow” means a widow who has been deserted or
thrown out of household by her relatives to fend for herself and who has
no means to support her and her dependent children, if any;
(b) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State the
Government of that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(c) “Board” means the Widows Welfare Board established under
section 3;
(d) “distressed” in relation to a widow means any widow who lives
uncared for and has become inform due to old age or chronic or incurable
disease, physical deformity or mental imbalance and who has no
independent and adequate means of livelihood for her and her dependent
children, if any;
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(f) “widow” means a legally married women whose husband has
died.
3. (1) The Central Government, shall, as soon as may be, but not
later than six months from the commencement of this Act, by notification
in the Official Gazette, establish a Board to be known as the Widows
Welfare Board for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid
having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power to acquire,
hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable and to
contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
(3) The headquarter of the Board shall be at Chalakudi in the
State of Kerala and the Board shall establish its branches in all other
States and Union territories at conspicuous places as the Board may
deem fit and necessary.
(4) The Board shall consist of:—
(a) the Union Minister of Women and Child Development
who shall be the chairperson ex-officio;
(b) a Deputy Chairperson, preferably a woman with such
qualifications and experience, as may be prescribed, to be appointed
by the Central Government;
(c) one member representing with such qualification, as may
be prescribed, to be appointed by the Central Government;
(d) ten women Members from both the Houses of the People
and the Council of States, to be nominated by the respective Presiding
Officers of each House;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
2
Definitions.
Establishmentof the Widows
Welfare Board.

(e) six members representing Union Ministries of Women
and Child Development, Home Affairs, Education, Health and
Family Welfare, Finance and Social Justice and Empowerment;
(f) not more than eight members to be appointed by the
Central Government in consultation with the Governments of the
States, by rotation in alphabetical order, to represent the
Governments of the States;
(g) two members to be appointed by the Central Government
from amongst the registered non-Governmental Organisations
(NGOs) working for the welfare of distressed widows, or single
women , as the case may be.
(5) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and
conditions of the Deputy Chairperson and members of the Board shall
be such as may be prescribed.
(6) The Board shall follow such procedure for holding its meetings
and the quorum for such meetings shall be such, as may be prescribed.
(7) The Board shall have a Secretariat consisting of a Member
Secretary and such number of officers, and employees as may be
prescribed.
(8) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and
conditions of service of Member Secretary, officers and employees shall
be such as may be prescribed.
4. (1) Notwithstanding anything contrary contained in any other law for
the time being in force, the Board shall promote and implement such protective
and welfare measures as it thinks appropriate, including rehabilitation for the
distressed widows who are in dire need of such measures.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of
sub-section(1), the Board shall,—
(a) maintain district-wise register of the abandoned, disowned and
distressed widows covered under this Act who are to be rehabilitated and are
in need of assistance from the Board with such particulars and details and in
such manner as may be prescribed;
(b) collect and get verified the antecedents of every widow covered
under this Act to assess her need for assistance in such manner as may be
prescribed;
(c) work out plans and formulate schemes for the overall welfare and
rehabilitation of abandoned, disowned or distressed widows covered under
this Act;
(d) give wide publicity through electronic and print media about the
welfare and rehabilitation measures being undertaken by the Board to enable
the women covered under this Act to avail them; and
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
3
Functions of
the Board.

4
25
30
35
40
 (e) perform such other functions not inconsistent with the provisions of
this Act, as may be assigned to it by the appropriate Government from time to
time.
5. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official
Gazette, constitute a Fund to be known as the National Distressed
Widows Rehabilitation and Welfare Fund with an initial corpus of rupees
fifty thousand crore for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Fund shall be administered by the Board in such manner
as may be prescribed.
(3) The Fund established under sub-section (1) shall consist of
all receipts from—
(a) the Central Government and Governments of the States
and Union territories and their institutions and organisations;
(b) body corporates, both public and private sector and Banks
and financial institutions both domestic and foreign; and
(c) individuals, associations and others in the form of
contributions or donations
 6. (1) On the recommendation of the Board or otherwise, the
appropriate Government shall provide the widows covered under this
Act, the following facilities, namely:—
(a) monthly subsistence allowance of not less than fifteen thousand
rupees if the widow is having any dependent children and not less than
ten thousand rupees in case she has no dependent children to support;
(b) residential accommodation free of cost wherever necessary;
(c) free medical care with medicines and with indoor and outdoor
facilities as may be required;
(d) free education to the dependent children as per their talent
including higher, medical, engineering and education in such manner as
may be prescribed;
(e) gainful employment as per the physical condition after
imparting vocational training wherever possible;
(f) financial assistance for rehabilitation like self - employment
wherever required;
(g) free legal aid in case the widow has been thrown out or
abandoned by her kith and kin; and
(h) such other facilities, as may be necessary for the rehabilitation,
welfare, proper development, regaining her lost status in the family and
for maintaining a respectable life in the society:
Provided that if a widow covered under this Act either gets married,
remarried, gainfully employed or taken back by her kith and kin in the
family, the facilities being provided to her shall be withdrawn by the
appropriate Government.
Constitutionof NationalDistressedWidowsRehabilitationand WelfareFund.
Facilities to beprovided bytheappropriateGovernment.
10
15
20
5

15
20
5
(2) The costs incurred by the appropriate Government on
providing the facilities under this Act to the widows covered under
this Act shall be defrayed from the Rehabilitation and Welfare Fund
established under section 5.
7. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, for the time
being in force or in any custom prevalent any widow covered under this Act
shall:—
 (a) not be evicted or thrown out of the house of the in-laws or parents,
as the case may be or where such widow was last residing;
(b) be entitled to inherit the property or her share of jointly owned property
from her in-laws or parents, as the case may be; or
(c) be entitled for maintenance from her in-laws or kith or kin who neglect
or abandon the widow.
8. (1) The appropriate Government shall establish such number
of hostels at conspicuous places in various parts of its territorial
jurisdiction as it may deem necessary for boarding and lodging of
abandoned and disowned and distressed widows covered under this
Act with necessary facilities of daily life as may be prescribed.
(2) The appropriate Government shall also provide necessary free
medical aid and medicines and means of entertainment for the residents
of the hostels established under sub-section (1):
Provided that widows living in such hostels shall not be entitled to
maintenance allowance.
9. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made
by Parliament by law in this behalf, provide the requisite funds to the
State Governments, Union territories and the Board, from time to time
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
10. The Board shall prepare an Annual Report in such form and in such
manner, as may be prescribed, of its activities in implementing the provisions
of this Act and submit it to the President of India who shall cause the report to
be laid before both the the Houses of Parliament along with action taken
thereon by the Central Government as soon as it is received.
11. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act,
the Central Government may, by order published in the Official gazette, make
such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to
it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after expiry of three years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
       12. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have
effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other
law for the time being in force.
Protective
provisions.
5
Establishment
of hostels.
CentralGovernmentto providerequisite
funds.
Annual reportto the Board.
Power toremove
difficulty.
Act to haveoverridingeffect.
25
30
35
40
10

13. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation
of any other law for the time being applicable to the widows covered under
this Act.
14. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after
it is made before each House of the State Legislature while it is in session for
a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two
or more successive sessions and if, before the expiry of the session immediately
following the session or successive sessions aforesaid both Houses agree in
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that they should not
be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under such rule.
6
5
Power tomake rules.
Act tosupplementother laws.
10
15

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In our country, world’s second most populous nation, there are millions
of unfortunate and helpless women who lose their husbands during their lifetime
and become widows. More than fifty per cent of these widows are old, infirm
suffering from various diseases, physical deformity or mental imbalance
particularly belonging to poor and middle class families who live uncared for
and neglected by their near and dear ones and most of them are without
independent and adequate means of livelihood and roof over their heads. It is
very common that when a widow does not have any permanent source of
income or livelihood she is driven out of her in-laws home or even from her
parental home. Their problems increase manifold due to poverty and other
compelling reasons where they have no other option but to go for begging for
survival and many such widows can be seen begging in the streets and public
places. Several women who become widows in their youth. Many of such
widows work as housemaids and take up other jobs for survival. Many widows
take shelter in old age homes but their number is lawfully very short. Their
miseries increase when they have dependent children to support and bring up.
They too need protective umbrella.
It is therefore imperative to establish an authority to exclusively take
care of such widows throughout the country.
Hence this Bill.
  NEW DELHI;                    BENNY BEHANAN
  November 26, 2021.
7

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Widows
Welfare Board. Clause 5 provides for the establishment of National Distressed
Widows Rehabilitation and Welfare Fund with initial corpus of rupee fifty
thousand crore to be provided by the Central Government. Clause 6 provides
for financial assistance and other facilities for widows. Clause 8 provides for
establishment of hostels. Clause 9 makes it mandatory for the Central
Government to provide requisite and adequate funds for carrying out the
purposes of this Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. Apart from the initial corpus of rupees
One Hundred crore , it is estimated that a sum of rupees Thirty Six crore may
involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees  Fifty crore is also likely to be
involved.
8

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make
rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to
matters of details only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal
character.
9

LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to provide for the protective measures with need based rehabilitation and
welfare to be undertaken by the Government for the distressed,
infirm, neglected, and disowned widows by providing
financial assistance, pension, medical care, housing
and other facilities through a Welfare Board to
such widows and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
(Shri Benny Behanan, M.P.)