THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED CASTES) ORDER
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007
BY
PROF. MAHADEORAO SHIWANKAR, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order (Amendment)
Act, 2007.
2. In the Schedule to the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950, in Part X.—
Maharashtra,—
(i) for entry 8, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:—
“8. Basor, Burud, Bansor, Bansodi, Basod, Vihchar, Injwar, Dhoba, Dhobi,
Mang”; and
(ii) for entry 11, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:—
“11. Bhambi, Bhambhi, Asadaru, Asodi, Chamadia, Chamar, Chamari,
Chambhar, Chamgar, Haralayya, Harali, Khalpa, Machigar, Mochigar, Madar,
Madig, Mochi, Telegu Mochi, Kamati Mochi, Ranigar, Rohidas, Nona, Ramnami,
Rohit, Samgar, Samagara, Satnami, Surjyabanshi, Surjyaramnami,
Charmakar, Pardeshi Chamar, Holi.”.
Short title.
Bill No.  25 of  2007
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Amendment
of the
Schedule.
C.O. 19
5
10
15

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
In pursuance of article 341 of the Constitution, the list of Scheduled Castes was first
notified in 1950 and this list was modified from time to time. However, there are certain castes
in various States which have found no place in the Scheduled Castes Order, 1950.  A  number
of requests have been made by several State Governments to amend the (Scheduled Castes)
Order, 1950 in order to include new and synonymous communities in the list of Scheduled
Castes in order to extend the benefits of reservation to the persons belonging to these
castes. In some cases, people belonging to the same caste are known by different or
synonymous names of their caste in different areas of the same State. But all these names are
not mentioned in the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950. The persons belonging to
the same caste are denied benefits of reservations and other facilities because of different
nomenclature of their caste. Moreover, there are certain new castes which are required to be
included in the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950 in view of their social, educational
and economic backwardness. This anomaly requires to be rectified by amending the
Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950 in relation to the State of Maharashtra.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW DELHI; MAHADEORAO SHIWANKAR
November 13, 2006.
2
SERVER 3 \ BILL 2004 \ LS \ 264LS.PM65

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
The Bill seeks to include new castes based on social, educational and economic
backwardness, synonymous communities in respect of a caste and modifications in the
existing entries relating to certain communities in the list of Scheduled Castes for the State of
Maharashtra. The Bill, if enacted, would involve additional recurring and non-recurring
expenditure on account of benefits to be provided to the persons belonging to the communities
to be included under continuing schemes meant for development of the Scheduled Castes
from the Consolidated Fund of India.  At this stage, it is not possible to give the exact
amount to be incurred on this account. However, it is estimated that a sum of approximately
rupees one hundred crore is likely to be involved as a recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also  likely to be involved.
3

ANNEXURE
Extract from the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950.
C.O. 19
* * * * * *
(PART III.—Rules and Orders under the Constitution)
* * * * * *
PART  X.—Maharashtra
* * * * * *
8. Basor, Burud, Bansor, Bansodi
* * * * * *
11. Bhambi, Bhambhi, Asadaru, Asodi, Chamadia, Chamar, Chamari, Chambhar,
Chamgar, Haralayya, Harali, Khalpa, Machigar, Mochigar, Madar, Madig, Mochi, Telegu
Mochi, Kamati Mochi, Ranigar, Rohidas, Nona, Ramnami, Rohit, Samgar, Samagara, Satnami,
Surjyabanshi, Surjyaramnami.
* * * * * *
4

LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950.
—————
(Prof. Mahadeorao Shiwankar, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—264LS(S-3)—23.02.2007.