THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013
By
DR. BHOLA SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2013.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. In section 304A of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), for the words "any rash or negligent act", the words "any rash or
negligent act, except by any act of rash and negligent driving of motor vehicle," shall be
substituted.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 25 of 2013.
Amendment of
section 304A.
45 of 1860.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
3. After section 304A of the principal Act, the following new section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"304AA. Whoever drives any motor vehicle, or rides, in any public place in a rash or
negligent manner or drives or rides the motor vehicle under the influence of liquor so as to
endanger human life, and causes death by his rash and negligent act, shall be deemed to
have committed the offence of murder and shall be punished with death or imprisonment for
life and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees.
Explanation: For the purpose of this section, the terms 'motor vehicle' and 'public
place' shall have the meanings as assigned to them under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988.".
Insertion of
new section
304C.
Death due to
rash and
negligent
driving. 5
59 of 1988.

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The mushrooming growth of our urban regions has resulted in rapid rise in the number
of vehicles on the roads of our cities. With the growth in population, the public transport
system which consists mainly of buses has also grown. The high growth in the public
vehicles as well as private vehicles has tended to make roads very unsafe for pedestrians
and other road users. The problem is compounded by the people indulging in rash and
negligent driving under the influence of liquor. In cities, thousands of people die every year
because of drunken driving or road rage. This menace has assumed worrying proportions
particularly in the metropolitan cities. The incidents of violating traffic signals and instructions,
road rage, drunken driving etc. are on the rise.
Though there is considerable anger in the public about the rising number of road
accidents, there has been no response to address this problem from the Government. In the
absence of any stringent legal framework, the persons responsible for rash and negligent
driving are let off easily. Persons indulging in rash and negligent driving or drunken driving
knowingly endanger the lives of fellow road users and therefore need to be treated harshly.
Section 304A of the Indian Penal Code was inserted in the Code in 1870 when there
were no motor vehicles in the country. Transport was only through carriages-drawn either
by bullocks or horses. Motor vehicles arrived in the country only during the first decade of
twentieth century. At the time, private conveyance was the preserve of the Englishmen and
the upper echelons of the society. This section was inserted with a view to protect the
interests of the British and the ruling class who only had the means to own a vehicle that
could cause an accident and hence, while protecting their own interest, ensured that causing
injury or death due to accident by a motor vehicle remains not too serious an offence. That
is why the offence was made bailable and that too with minimal punishment. But the situation
has changed now. After the passage of one hundred fifty years, the need for changing the
provisions with a view to make the provisions more stringent has grown stronger. The
deaths caused by rash and negligent driving should be considered as murder within the
meaning of section 300 and the offender should be punished, accordingly.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BHOLA  SINGH
February 7, 2013

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE
(ACT NO. 45 OF 1860)
* * * * * * *
304. Whoever commits culpable homicide not amounting to murder, shall be punished
with [imprisonment for life] or imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine, if the act by which the death is caused is done
with the intention of causing death, or of causing such bodily injury as is likely to cause
death.
or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years,
or with fine, or with both, if the act is done with the knowledge that it is likely to cause death,
but without any intention to cause death, or to cause such bodily injury as is likely to cause
death.
[304A. Whoever causes the death of any person by doing any rash or negligent act
not amounting to culpable homicide, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both].
[304B. (1) Where the death of a woman is casued by any burns or bodily injury or
occurs otherwise than under normal circumstances within seven years of her marriage and
it is shown that soon before her death she was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her
husband or any relative of her husband for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry,
such death shall be called "dowry death", and such husband or relative shall be deemed
to have caused her death.
Explanation—For the purpose of this sub-section, "dowry" shall have the same
meaning as in section 2 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 (28 of 1961).
(2) Whoever commits dowry death shall be punished with imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than seven years but which may extend to imprisonment for life].
* * * * * * *
4
Punishment
for culpable
homicide not
amounting to
murder.
Causing death
by negligence.
Dowry death.

LOK  SABHA
——————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
————
(Dr. Bhola Singh, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4871LS(S-4)—25-02-2013.