1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020
By
SHRI ANTO ANTONY, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first Year of the Republic of  India
 as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2020.
2. After article 14 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
"14 A. (1) Every citizen, who is above the age of eighteen years and not otherwise
disqualified under this Constitution or any other law for the time being in force, shall
Bill No. 25 of  2020
5
Insertion of
new article
14A.
Right to Vote.
Short title.
AS  INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
have the right to vote in any election to the House of the People or to the Legislative
Assembly or to the institution of local-self Government.
(2) Every citizen who is registered as voter but not physically present within the
geographical limits of the polling booth or constituency or the State concerned shall have
the right to vote through the use of digital technology or such other method as may be
facilitated by the State.
(3) For the purposes of clause (2), the State shall,—
(a) set up such number of ad hoc electronic polling booths, as may be necessary,
to enable every voter, who is not present, at the time of election, within the geographical
limit of the polling station or constituency or the State where he is registered as a
voter for any  valid reason like employment, medical treatment of self or any family
member or studies in any recognised university or educational institutions, to exercise
his right to vote at such  electronic polling booths;
(b) set up ad hoc electronic polling booths attached with Embassy of India
located abroad in friendly countries to enable every citizen, who is registered as voter
in India and temporarily residing in any friendly country for any valid reason like
employment, medical treatment of self or any family member or studies in any
recognised university or educational institutions in that friendly country, to cast his
vote from there during elections.
5
10
15

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In India the right to active suffrage continues to be only a legal right and not a
Fundamental Right included in part III of the constitution.
There are fundamental differences between a fundamental right and legal right. A legal
right is only an off shoot of a mundane legislation violatable with little or scant consequences.
But a fundamental right is one which is inalienable and irreducible and any citizen who is a
voter can resort to constitutional remedies such as invoking the writ jurisdiction of High
Courts and the Apex Court when his right to vote is illegally denied by the State or any organ
of the State or by the rich with active connivance of the agencies of the State or otherwise.
 In all elections sizeable chunk of citizenry goes not included in the voters list and still,
large number of voters remain incapacitated from exercising the right to vote due plethora of
reasons beyond their control. This reduces the meaning of democracy and plutocracy
masquerades as democracy. Out migration from this country for the sake of employment,
pursuit of education and temporary domicile abroad due to various reasons and the stay of
citizens of a particular State in other States for various reasons results in wasting of the
valuable right to vote by millions of voters. This negates democracy. Once electronic ad hoc
polling booths are established as per the need of the citizens who are voters the present
non-exercise of the right to active suffrage can be done away with.
As Abraham Lincoln said democracy is possible when Government of the people, by
the people and for the people becomes a living reality. But statistics eloquently reveals that
large number of citizens are not included in the voters list and often majority of citizens
included in the  voters list are not in a position to cast their votes. The present State where
moneyed class can mortify the legal right of the poor to vote can be changed only by
elevating the right to vote into an irreducible and inalienable fundamental right.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Constitution with a view to:—
(a) guarantee every citizen who is above the age of eighteen years and  has not been
otherwise disqualified under this Constitution or any other law for the time being in force the
right to vote to in any general election or bye election to the House of the People or to the
Legislative Assembly or to the institution of local-self Government of a State;
(b) set up ad hoc electronic polling booth in such place either within the territory of
India or attached to every embassy of India of a friendly nation of India to facilitate voting by
citizens registered as voter in any general election or bye election to the House of the People
or to the Legislative Assembly or to the institution of local-self Government if such citizen is
physically present in any place other than the place where his polling booth is situated either
in his home State or in any other than State or in a friendly nation of India, as the case may be,
to ensure exercise of right to vote by the registered voter irrespective of the fact whether he
is physically present in the geographical limits of the constituency or polling booth concerned
or not through the use of digital technology or such other methods as may be facilitated by
the State.
The Bill seeks to achieve the objective.
N
EW DELHI; ANTO  ANTONY
November 11, 2019

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to provide for setting up of ad hoc electronic polling booth
in such place either within the territory of India or attached to every embassy of India of a
friendly nation of India to facilitate voting by citizens registered as voter in any election to
the House of the People or to the Legislative Assembly or to the institution of local-self
Government  through the use of digital technology or such other methods as may be facilitated
by the State if such  citizens are physically present in any place other than the place where
his polling booth is situated. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about
rupees Eighty Five Crore will be involved per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India
————
(Shri Anto Antony, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—4521LS(S3)—22-01-2020.