THE ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNALS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI DUSHY ANT CHAUTALA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Administrative Tribunals (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2)  It shall come into force on such date as Central Government may, by notification in
the official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985, in section 6, in sub-section (1), for the
words "unless he is, or has been, a judge of a High Court" the words, "unless he is a judge
of a High Court or an advocate for at least ten years in a High Court or two or more such
Courts in succession" shall be substituted.
Bill No.  25 of  2016
Short title and
commencement.
13 of 1985. Amendment
of section 6.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The concept of separation of powers was proposed by Montesquieu in the sixteenth
century and the concept of equal opportunity has been highlighted by the makers of the
Constitution through various provisions. These two ideas are required to be incorporated in
the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 which provides for adjudication or trial by
Administrative Tribunals.
The executive, the legislature and the judiciary are known as the three pillars of
democracy. It is believed that the three should function independently without major
intervention of each other and that would ensure that the respective duties are discharged in
the best possible manner. However, at the same time, there should be sufficient check and
balance on these three wings for an effective Government, so as to avoid one of them from
becoming totalitarian in nature. In India, the check and balance system has been working
effectively. However, it has come to notice that some of the Tribunals and Commissions have
exclusive provisions where only retired judges of Supreme Court or High Courts are being
appointed by the executive. This lies absolutely against the spirit of the Constitution.
Therefore, the proposed amendment is put forth to remove the provision for
appointment of retired judges as Chairman and members. Thus only a sitting judge of Supreme
Court or High Courts, as the case may be, can be appointed to such post if that judge wishes
to leave his office of Judge voluntarily and assents to join Tribunal or Commission.
The Bill also proposes to insert provisions wherein an advocate with not less than ten
years of practice becomes eligible to be appointed as the Chairman of the Tribunal. The
rationale of such could be found in our Constitution which provides for appointment of
advocates with certain years of practice as Judge of Supreme Court or High Court. The same
should be applied for Tribunals. This will facilitate the speedy disposal of the cases pending
in Tribunals because the positions in the Tribunal shall not remain vacant for long. This also
captures the idea of providing equal opportunity to people with equal experience and eligibility.
The proposed amendment seeks to ensure that the doctrine of Checks and Balances
and the Right to Equality is maintained.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; DUSHYANT CHAUTALA
February 10, 2016.
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNALS ACT, 1985
(ACT  NO. 13 OF 1985)
*   *  *  *  *
6. (1) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Chairman unless he is or
has been a Judge of a High Court.
*   *  *  *  *
3

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985.
————
(Shri Dushyant Chautala, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4229LS(S3)—26.02.2016.