THE UNIFORM SYLLABUS (HIGH SCHOOL AND HIGHER
SECONDARY SCHOOL LEVEL) BILL, 2008
By
DR. R. SENTHIL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the setting up of a National Board for High School and Higher Secondary
School Education for implementing the scheme of uniform syllabuses in high schools
and higher secondary schools in the country and for matters connected therewith.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Uniform Syllabus (High School and Higher Secondary
School Level) Act, 2008.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force immediately.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) “Board” means National Board for High School and Higher Secondary School
Education set up under this Act;
(b) “Government” means the Central Government or the Government of a State,
as the case may be;
(c) “High School education” means education imparted in schools from sixth
standard to tenth standard; and
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Definitions.
Bill No. 25 of  2008
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
10

2
(d) "Higher Secondary School education" means education imparted in schools
at eleventh and twelfth standard levels.
3. (1) There shall be uniform syllabuses for all subjects except the social science
subjects for High School and Higher Secondary School education in the country.
(2) The syllabuses of social science subjects for High School and Higher Secondary
School education shall be in accordance with regional perspective and in regional context.
Explanation:— Social science includes subjects of geography, history, political science,
economics, languages, psychology, philosophy, home sciences.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, set up a
Board to be known as the National Board for High School and Higher Secondary School
Education for achieving the purposes of the Act set out in section 3 of the Act.
(2) The Board shall consist of the following:—
(a) a Chairman, who shall be an eminent educationalist, to be appointed by the
Central Government;
(b) the Secretary, in charge of the Ministry of Human Resource Development of
the Central Government;
(c) Secretaries, in charge of the Departments of Education of the State
Governments and Union territories; and
(d) such number of other Members, who shall also be eminent educationalists,
as may be prescribed, to be appointed by the Central Government.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
the Chairman and other Members shall be such, as may be prescribed.
5. The Central Government shall provide to the Board such officers and other staff, as
may be required for the efficient functioning of the Board.
6. The Central Government and the State Governments shall provide sufficient funds
to meet the administrative expenditure of the Board, in such ratio as may be prescribed.
7. The Board shall, with respect to the high school and higher secondary school
education, perform the following functions:—
(a) determine, review and update the syllabuses of subjects taught; and
(b) monitor recent developments in the field of high school and higher secondary
school education.
8. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
9. The Board shall prepare every year, in such form as may be prescribed by the Central
Government, an annual report giving account of its activities during the previous year and
copies of the report shall be forwarded to the Central Government who shall cause the same
to be laid before each House of Parliament.
10. (1) The Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Uniform
syllabuses of
subjects taught
in Secondary
and Higher
Secondary
Schools.
Setting up of
the National
Board for
High School
and
Higher
Secondary
School
Education.
Salary,
allowances
and terms
and
conditions of
service.
Provision of
Officers and
Staff for the
Board.
Provision of
funds for the
Board.
Functions of
the Board.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Annual
report.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Power to
make rules.

3
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days, which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
There are different syllabuses of school education in various boards of school
education in India, like the Central Board of School Education (CBSE), various State boards
of school education, Anglo-Indian board of school education and matriculation board. Each
board has its own syllabus. Since there are different systems of school education, twelfth
standard students studying different systems have different levels of information put to
them.
The number of students studying  CBSE syllabus in Tamil Nadu is about 7200. The
number of students studying the Tamil Nadu State syllabus is around 5,15,000. The CBSE
system has more syllabus than the different State board syllabuses. Hence, in entrance
examination to Indian Institutes of Technology and Central Engineering and Medical Colleges,
the student studying the CBSE syllabus, though their number is less, fare better and they
enter these institutions in large numbers. Whereas the students studying the State board
syllabus, though they are in such large numbers, are virtually not able to enter these
institutions.
To correct this anomaly, there must be only one syllabus in science and mathematical
subjects in 10th standard and 12th standard classes so that a level playing field is provided
for the rural students.
India is a vast country. The beauty of the nation is unity in diversity. Students belong
to different social, educational, economic and cultural backgrounds. They will have different
abilities to start with. Hence, a uniform syllabus at entry level will do more harm than good.
We need to have different syllabuses, tailored to meet the needs of the students of different
backgrounds at elementary level. Hence, uniform syllabuses for high school and higher
secondary school level are proposed through this Bill.
The uniform syllabuses can be only in mathematics, accountancy and science subjects
like physics, chemistry, botany, zoology, etc. All children should read their mother tongue
as their first language which will be variable. Children from different regions should read
more about their regional history and geography. Hence, there cannot be a uniform syllabuses
in social sciences and language subjects. Hence, the art subjects are excluded from the
purview of uniform syllabuses.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI;                                                                                                  R. SENTHIL
February 18, 2008.
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for setting up of a National Board for High School and
Higher Secondary School Education. Clause 5 provides for provision of officers and staff
to the Board by the Central Government. Clause 6 provides that the Central Government
and the State Governments shall provide sufficient funds to the Board. The Bill, therefore, if
enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve
a recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore is also likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. Since the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the setting up of a National Board for High School and Higher Secondary
School Education for implementing the scheme of uniform syllabuses in high schools
and higher secondary schools in the country and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Dr. R. Senthil, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—631LS(S-5)—04.03.2008.