Short title and
Commencement.
Amendment
of article 324.
Bill No.  25 of  2018
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
By
SHRI RAJEEV SATAV, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In article 324 of the Constitution, for clause ( 2), the following clauses shall be
substituted, namely:—
"(2) The Election Commission shall consist of the Chief Election Commissioner
and such number of other Election Commissioners, if any, as the President may, from
time to time, fix.
(2A) The appointment of the Chief Election Commissioner and other Election
Commissioners shall be made by the President on the recommendation of the Selection
Committee.
5
10
A
S  INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(2B) There shall be a Selection Committee consisting of—
(i) the Prime Minister—Chairperson;
(ii) the Union Law Minister—Member;
(iii) the Leader of the Opposition in the House of the People—Member;
(iv) the Leader of Opposition in the Council of States—Member; and
(v) the Chief Justice of India or a Judge of the Supreme Court nominated
by him—Member.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this clause, "the Leader of the
Opposition in the House of the People" or "the Leader of the Opposition in the
Council of States" shall, when no such leader has been so recognized, mean the
Leader of the single largest group in Opposition in the House of the People or
the Council of States, as the case may be.
(2C) The Selection Committee shall for the purposes of selecting the Chief
Election Commissioner or Election Commissioners and for preparing a panel of
persons to be considered for appointment as such, constitute a Search Committee
consisting of at least five persons of standing and having special knowledge and
expertise in the matters relating to public administration, vigilance, policy making,
law and election management or in any other matter which, in the opinion of the
Selection Committee, may be useful in making the selection of the Chief Election
Commissioner and the Election Commissioners:
Provided that not less than two members of the Search Committee shall be from
amongst the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes or
the other Backward Classes or Minorities or Women:
Provided further that the Selection Committee may also consider any person
other than the persons recommended by the Search Committee.
(2D) The Selection Committee shall regulate its own procedure in a transparent
manner for selecting the Chief Election Commissioner and the Election Commissioners.
(2E) The term of the Search Committee referred to in sub-section (2C), the
fees and allowances payable to its members and the manner of selection of panel of
names shall be such as may be prescribed by the Selection Committee.".
5
10
15
20
25
30

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The framework of the Constitution has established the office of the Chief Election
Commissioner and the Election Commissioners who are entrusted with the responsibility to
deal with matters that form the foundations of a democratic polity which is based on principles
of transparency and accountability. In July 2017, the Supreme Court had made an observation
on the absence of any law on the appointment of the Chief Election Commissioner (CEC) and
further observed that leaving it entirely to the political executive would not ensure
independence of the poll panel. The absence of any properly crafted procedure and
independent mechanism for appointment to such crucial post under the Constitution hampers
its status and authority. There is an immediate necessity to change the selection procedure
for the appointment of such constitutional authorities. It would add prestige to the post, if
the people heading it are chosen through a procedure in which the President has the benefit
of getting a recommendation from a committee that will reflect a bipartisan consensus. The
appointment of the above mentioned constitutional functionaries are governed by the
provisions of the Constitution. As there is no separate law nor any prescribed procedure in
the scheme of things currently in force, these appointments are made by the President on the
advice of the Council of Ministers Headed by the Prime Minister. On a careful perusal of the
debates in the Constituent Assembly, we come across the speech of Pandit Hriday Nath
Kunzru and Prof. Shibban Lal Saxena, who spoke eloquently on the need to appoint a person
as the Chief Election Commissioner or the Election Commissioner who commands confidence
of a majority of both the Houses of Parliament. In principle, one could say that the person
appointed should be such as to be acceptable and should have the confidence of the
Parliament or across the political spectrum.
In the last sixty years of the glorious history of this country, our polity has undergone
a metamorphosis and from the days of single party dominance earlier, we are passing through
an era of coalition Governments. It would be in the fitness of things to incorporate a transparent
procedure in respect of the appointment of such constitutional authorities, where the
credibility and independence of the authority is of paramount importance. In order to nurture
and strengthen this confidence of the public, a change in the selection procedure for the
appointment is necessary keeping in view the changed political scenario in the country with
its multiparty focus. A broad-based Committee will greatly add to the perceived sense of
impartiality, neutrality and credibility, thereby further strengthening the faith of the public in
the institutional framework of such authorities.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAJEEV SATA V
November 30, 2017.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause (2) of the Bill provides for constitution of a Search Committee to shortlist
prospective candidates for appointment as Chief Election Commissioner or Election
Commissioners. It also provides for the fees and allowances payable to members of the
Search Committee. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty-five lakh
per annum will be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees ten lakh is also likely to be involved.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * * *
PART XV
ELECTIONS
324. ( 1)* * * * * *
(2) The Election Commission shall consist of the Chief Election Commissioner and
such number of other Election Commissioners, if any, as the President may from time to time
fix and the appointment of the Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners
shall, subject to the Provisions of any law made in that behalf by Parliament, be made by the
President.
* * * * * * *
Superintendence,
direction and
control of
elections to be
vested in an
Election
Commission.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Rajeev Satav, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—3492LS(S3)—29-01-2018.