As introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 25  of  2024
THE DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT AND MONITORING COMMITTEE 
FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF CENTRAL SECTOR AND  
CENTRALLY SPONSORED SCHEMES  BILL, 2024 
By
Dr. Rajiv Pratap Rudy , M.P.
a
BILL
to constitute District Development and Monitoring Committees in each district to promote 
efficient coordination among all elected representatives in Parliament, State Legislatures 
and Local Governments, including the Panchayati Raj Institutions and Municipal  
Bodies, for time bound development of districts through a streamlined  
model of monitoring and accountability for implementation  
of Central Sector and Centrally sponsored schemes in  
each district and for matters connected therewith  
or incidental thereto.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
Chapter I
Preliminary
1. (1) This Act may be called the District Development and Monitoring Committee for 
Implementation of Central Sector and Centrally Sponsored Schemes Act, 2024.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
Short title, extent 
and commencement.
5

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a)  “Central Sector Schemes” means poverty alleviation, social inclusion and livelihood 
generation programmes funded and implemented by the Central Government in States as 
per the national development agenda;
(b) “Centrally Sponsored Schemes” means poverty alleviation, social inclusion 
and livelihood generation programmes funded partially by the Central Government and 
implemented by the States;
(c) “Committees” means the District Development and Monitoring Committees;
(d) “District” means the districts in a State;
(e) “District Planning Committees” means the District Planning Committees formulated 
under article 243ZD of the Constitution;
(f) “Lok Sabha” refers to the Lower House of the Parliament of India;
(g) “Member of Parliament” means the elected representative of the people in the 
Parliament of India;
(h) “MIS Portal” means the Management Information System developed by the Central 
Government wherein the records of the meeting are uploaded for display before all the 
relevant stakeholders; and
(i) ‘’prescribed’’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Chapter II
District Development and Monitoring Committee
3. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification, 
appoint, there shall be constituted, for the purposes of this Act, Committees to be 
known as the District Development and Monitoring Committees of Central Sector and 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme, at the level of each district, consisting of the following  
members, namely:—
(a) the Member of Parliament, Lok Sabha, elected from the district concerned to be 
nominated by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed—Chairperson, 
ex-officio:  
Provided that in case there are more than one Member of Parliament, Lok Sabha, 
representing the district, the senior-most Member of Parliament, Lok Sabha, shall be 
nominated as the Chairperson:
Provided further that in case the district has more than one Parliamentary 
Constituency in Lok Sabha as its segment and the senior-most Member of Parliament, 
Lok Sabha, has been made the Chairperson in another district, the next senior-most 
Member of Parliament, Lok Sabha, shall be nominated as the Chairperson;
Provided also that in case there is same seniority, the Member of Parliament,  
Lok Sabha, in whose Parliamentary Constituency the largest geographical area of the 
district falls shall be nominated as the Chairperson. 
(b) the other Members of Parliament, Lok Sabha, representing the district—Co-
Chairpersons, ex-officio;
(c) the District Magistrate—Member Secretary, ex-officio ;
(d) all Members of State Legislative Assembly elected from the district—Members, 
ex-officio;
(e) not exceeding one representative of the State Governments to be nominated by the 
Central Government—Members, ex-officio;
(f) all Mayors and Chairpersons of Municipalities in the respective districts—Members, 
ex-officio;
(g) not exceeding five elected heads of the Gram Panchayats in the respective districts— 
Members, ex-officio; and
(h) such other member as nominated by the Nominating Committee comprising the 
following members, namely:—
(i) the Chairperson of the Committees; and
Definitions.
Constitution of 
Committees.
5
10
15
2
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

(ii) the Co-Chairpersons of the Committees: 
Provided that at least one member of the Committees under clause (f) shall be 
woman:
Provided further that at least two members of the Committees under clause (g) 
shall be women.
(2) The Committees shall be constituted within a period of thirty days from the date of 
commencement of this Act:
Provided that the position of Chairperson shall not remain vacant for more than 
thirty days.
4. (1) The Committees shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules 
of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings in the manner as may 
be prescribed:
Provided that the Committees shall meet at least once in each quarter of a 
year;
(2) The Member Secretary shall be responsible for convening the meeting of the 
Committee:
Provided that the Committees shall meet even in the absence of the Chairperson 
with the next senior-most Co-Chairperson presiding over the meeting. 
(3) The Committees may invite the representatives responsible for implementation of 
the Centrally Sponsored Schemes or other stakeholders as it may consider appropriate for 
the discharge of its functions.
(4) The expenditure incurred on the Committees shall be in such manner as may be 
prescribed.
5.  The Committees shall:–
(a) ensure that all Central Sector Schemes and Centrally Sponsored Schemes as 
specified in the Schedule are implemented in accordance with their programme guidelines;
(b) facilitate coordinated solutions to remove constraints of any kind in the 
implementation of the Central Sector Schemes and Centrally Sponsored Schemes;
(c) resolve matters related to provision of land and space for faster roll out of priorities;
(d) guide District Planning Committees about all the national programmes and their 
leveraged for transformation of the district; 
(e) identify issues for follow up for timely achievement of scheme objectives;
(f) intensively monitor all time bound national initiatives for universal coverage; 
(g) recommend improvements in design of approved programmes and suggest mid-
course corrections to address implementation constraints;
(h)  have the authority to summon and inspect any record to look into complaints and 
alleged irregularities received in respect of the implementation of the Central Sector and 
Centrally Sponsored Schemes including complaints of wrong selection of beneficiaries, 
mis-appropriation and diversion of funds and recommend follow-up action thereto; 
(i) refer any matter for enquiry to the District Collector or CEO of the Zila Panchayat 
or Project Director of District Rural Development Agency (or Poverty Alleviation Unit) or 
suggest suitable action to be taken in accordance with the rules which shall be acted upon by 
the concerned authority within thirty days; and
(j) closely review the flow of funds including the funds allocated and released by both 
Central Government and the State Government, utilization and unspent balances under each 
Scheme. 
Chapter III
Accountability of the Committee and Social Audits
6. It shall be the responsibility of the Member Secretary of the each Committees to,–
(a) disseminate knowledge and information collected or generated by the Committees 
to all the stakeholders in written format in such manner as may be prescribed; and 
(b)  made publicly available the recording of the meetings of the Committees through 
an MIS Portal developed by the Central Government in not exceeding five days after the 
conclusion of such meeting.
3
Meetings of the 
Committees.
Functions of the 
Committees.
Dissemination of  
information by  
the Committees.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

7. (1) The Central Government shall monitor the conduct of the meetings of the 
Committees in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that if the meetings of the Committees may not be conducted, the Central 
Government shall urge the District Collectors to convene the meetings.
(2) The Central Government shall nominate five officers who shall randomly select ten 
districts per representative each year and attend the meetings of the respective Committees.
(3) The officers nominated under sub-section (2) shall report the progress and conduct 
of the meetings to the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(4) The expenditure incurred by the officers shall be in such manner as may be 
prescribed.  
Chapter iv
Miscellaneous
8. (1) If the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do, it 
may, by notification, amend the Schedule and thereupon the Schedule, shall be deemed to 
have been amended accordingly. 
(2) The Central Government shall make the necessary amendment to the Schedule 
within fifteen days of introduction or discontinuation of any Central Sector Scheme or 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme.
(3) A copy of every notification made under sub-section (1) shall be laid before each 
House of Parliament as soon as may be after it is made. 
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry out the 
provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the foregoing power, such rules may provide 
for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the time and place of the meetings of the Committees and the procedure to 
be followed at such meetings under sub-section (1) of section 4 and the expenditure 
incurred on the meetings of the Committees under sub-section (3) of section 4; and
(b) any other matter which is to be or may be, prescribed or in respect of which 
provision is to be made by the Central Government by rules.
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before 
each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and if, before the expiry of 
the session immediately following the session or successive sessions aforesaid both Houses 
agree in making any modification in the rule or both  Houses agree that the rule should not 
be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, 
as the case may be; so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
4
Ensuring timely  
and regular 
conduct of 
meetings.
Power to amend 
Schedule.
Power of 
Central 
Government to 
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

The Schedule 
[See section 5(a)]
Central Sector and Centrally Sponsored Schemes
1. Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Program  
2. Deen Dayal Antyodaya Yojana - NRLM
3. Deen Dayal Upadhyaya-Grameen Kaushalya Yojana (DDU-GKY) 
4. National Social Assistance Progamme
5. Umbrella Programme for Development of Minorities 
6. Umbrella Programme for Development of Other Vulnerable Groups 
7. Umbrella Programme for Development of Scheduled Tribes 
8. Umbrella Scheme for Development of Scheduled Castes
9. Prime Minister Jan Aarogya Yojana (by subsuming RSBY) 
10. Blue Revolution 
11. Border Area Development Programme
12. Environment, Forestry and Wildlife 
13. Infrastructure Facilities for Judiciary 
14. Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM)/National Rural Drinking Water Mission 
15. Mission for Protection and Empowerment for Women 
16. National Education Mission 
17. National Health Mission 
18. National Livelihood Mission - Ajeevika
19. Pradhan Mantri AwasYojna (PMAY) 
20. Pradhan Mantri Gram SadakYojna
21. Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojna
22. Soil Health Card     
23. e-National Agriculture Markets (E-NAM) 
24. Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA) 
25. Shyama Prasad Mukherjee Rurban Mission 
26. Swachh Bharat Mission
27. Swachh Bharat Mission (Gramin)       
28. Digital India Land Records Modernization Programme (DILRMP)
29. Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Yojana (DDUGJY) 
30. Urban Rejuvenation Mission: AMRUT and Smart Cities Mission
31. Heritage City Development and Augmentation Yojana (HRIDAY) 
32. National River Conservation Plan—Other Basins
33. Fortification of Rice and its Distribution under Public Distribution System
34. Prime Minister Formalisation of Micro Food Processing Enterprises Scheme 
35. Safe Tourist Destination for Women
36. Strengthening Teaching-Learning and Results for States (STARS)
37. Development Programmes (Animal Husbandry) 
38. Saksham Anganwadi and POSHAN 2.0 (Umbrella ICDS - Anganwadi Services, 
Poshan Abhiyan, Scheme for Adolescent Girls) 
39. Mission Shakti (Mission for Protection and Empowerment for Women)
40. Mission V ATSALYA (Child Protection Services and Child Welfare Services) 
41. Pradhan Mantri Ayushman Bharat Health Infrastructure Mission (PMABHIM)
42. Digitalization of Primary Agriculture Cooperative Societies 
43. Krishionnati Yojana
44. ASPIRE (Accelerating State Education Program to Improve Results)
5

45. Pradhan Mantri Poshan Shakti Nirman (PM POSHAN)
46. Prosperity through Cooperatives 
47. Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojna
48. Revision of norms for Central Assistance released to States/ UTs for meeting 
expenditure on intra-state movement, handling of foodgrains and FPS dealers 
margin under NFSA 
49. Green Revolution 
50. National Programme of Mid Day Meal in Schools 
51. India COVID-19 Emergency Response and Health System Preparedness Package 
(PhaseII) (DBS) (CSS) 
52. Umbrella ICDS 
53. White Revolution       
54. Beti Bachao Beti Padhao
6

7
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Government implements several Central Sector Schemes and Centrally Sponsored 
Schemes to supplement the efforts of the State Government financially. These are also 
implemented to align the objectives of the National Development Agenda with that of the 
State’s as well as to ensure inclusive development of all States by targeting key structural 
objectives like poverty elimination, social inclusion and livelihood guarantee. 
However, it has been witnessed that the systems of compliance and accountability 
for efficient and time bound implementation of these schemes have been lacking. Many 
problems like appropriate dispensation of funds or governance problems with respect to 
availability of land, impede the potential progress of these schemes. 
Therefore, to strengthen these mechanisms and for the effective dispensation of public 
goods, the District Development and Monitoring Committees are being instituted. These 
committees comprise the Members of Parliament who would monitor the progress of the 
Central Sector and Centrally Sponsored Schemes in the districts of their constituencies. 
The Committees include representations from the District Collectors, Members of State 
Legislative Assemblies, State Governments, Municipalities and Gram Panchayats, hence, 
covering all wings of the Government to ensure coordination and alignment of objectives. 
The functions of these Committees include coordination between all wings of the 
Government to solve problems of governance, resolving matters of land and space, 
recommending improvements in system design of the schemes, looking into appropriate 
dispensation of funds and following up with the Parliament, State Assembly and Local 
Government. 
The present Bill institutes mechanisms to ensure accountability of the Committees 
themselves. The minutes of the meeting are required to be recorded and uploaded on an 
MIS portal by the Central Government as well as information distributed to all the relevant 
stakeholders. Additionally, a randomized audit is also required to be conducted of a few 
districts each year to oversee whether the meetings are being conducted as per the prescribed 
mandate. 
It is important to note that the present Bill respects and keeps intact the division of 
power under the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India by having an advisory nature 
and a monitoring role of schemes with the Central Government’s involvement. 
The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide for a smooth flowing system of accountability to 
effectively achieve universal coverage of all development schemes that have the involvement 
of the Central Government. 
Hence this Bill.
New Delhi;                                                                                   RAJIV PRATAP RUDY 
June 18, 2024

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the District Development and 
Monitoring Committees at the district level by the Central Government.  Clause 4 provide for 
the meetings of the Committees. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure 
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that about rupees four crores and  
eight lakh per annum would involve from the Consolidated Fund of India. Clause 7 provides 
for deputing five officers from the Central Government to oversee the timely conduct of 
meetings of the Committee. In respect of this clause, an indicative recurring expenditure of 
about rupees eight lakh per annum is estimated.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees sixty lakh is also likely to be involved.
8

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character.
9

LOK SABHA
a
BILL
to constitute District Development and Monitoring Committees in each district to promote 
efficient coordination among all elected representatives in Parliament, State Legislatures 
and Local Governments, including the Panchayati Raj Institutions and Municipal  
Bodies, for time bound development of districts through a streamlined  
model of monitoring and accountability for implementation  
of Central Sector and Centrally sponsored schemes in  
each district and for matters connected therewith  
or incidental thereto.
(Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy, M.P.)