THE CITIZENS AFFECTED BY CYCLONE, SUPER CYCLONE OR
TSUNAMI IN COASTAL AREAS (COMPENSATION,
REHABILITA TION AND WELFARE) BILL, 2009
By
SHRI BAIJAY ANT PANDA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the protection of citizens living in coastal areas affected by cyclone or
super cyclone or tsunami or any other natural calamity in the coastal areas of the
country by providing adequate compensation, rehabilitation and welfare
measures and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Citizens Affected by Cyclone, Super Cyclone or
Tsunami in Coastal Areas (Compensation, Rehabilitation and Welfare) Act, 2009.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Bill No.  25 of  2009
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "affected citizen" means any citizen who loses his life or receives physical
injuries or whose property, movable or immovable, including standing crops in fields,
orchard, livestock, poultry and animal rearing farm, machinery, fishing instruments,
boat, tools, consumer goods, business establishments is either lost or washed away
or is damaged in any manner or is adversely affected by cyclone, super cyclone or
tsunami or any such other natural calamity in the coastal area;
(b) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State the Government of
that State and in other cases the Central Government;
(c) "Commissioner" means the Commissioner appointed under section 4;
(d) "Fund" means the Coastal Areas Natural Calamity Assistance Fund
established under section 3; and
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the Official
Gazette, constitute a fund to be called the Coastal Areas Natural Calamity Assistance Fund
for the purpose of this Act.
(2) The initial corpus of the fund established under sub-section (1) shall be five
thousand crore rupees of which,
(i) four thousand five hundred crore rupees shall be provided by the Central
Government after due appropriation made by Parliament in this behalf; and
(ii) five hundred crore rupees shall be provided by the State Governments
concerned in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The Central Government shall, from time to time, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide such amount as may be necessary for carrying out
the purposes of this Act.
(4)  Such other sums as may be received by way of donation, contribution or assistance
from individuals, organisations or otherwise shall also be credited to the Fund.
4.  (1) The appropriate Government shall, as soon as may be, after the commencement
of this Act, appoint a Commissioner in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Commissioner appointed under sub-section (1) shall be provided with such
other staff as may be necessary for assisting him in the efficient discharge of his duties
under this Act.
(3) The Commissioner shall be responsible for settling the claims of compensation of
the affected citizens in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that the claim of compensation under this Act shall be settled by the
Commissioner, as soon as may be, but not later than three months of the occurrence of the
cyclone or super cyclone or tsunami or any other natural calamity.
5. (1) Every affected citizen shall apply for compensation in the prescribed form to the
Commissioner who shall after such inquiry as he deems necessary, subject to the provisions
of section (4), settle the claim of compensation.
Definitions.
Constitution
of the Coastal
Areas Natural
Calamity
Assistance
Fund.
Commissioner
to settle
claims.
Compensation
to affected
citizens of
coastal areas.
5
10
15
20
25
30
40
35

3
(2) The affected citizen shall be paid compensation in the following manner:—
(i) in case of loss of life, a compensation of not less than four lakh rupees to the
next of kin of the victim within thirty days from the date of submission of application;
(ii) in case of severe injury leading to incapacitation of the victim, medical
treatment free of cost till such period as is necessary for fullest possible recovery
and payment of such amount in compensation as, in the opinion of the Commissioner,
is necessary for his rehabilitation;
(iii) in case of damage to the dwelling unit, repair of the dwelling unit, if viable
or construction of a new dwelling unit preferably at the same place;
(iv) in case of damage to the cultivable land or otherwise, providing similar
areas of cultivable land or otherwise at a reasonable distance from the place of
residence;
(v) in case of damage to the standing crops, adequate compensation in proportion
to the losses suffered by such citizen; and
(vi) in case of loss of livestock adequate compensation for such losses in such
manner as may be prescribed.
6. (1) Any affected citizen covered under this Act who is also a traditional fisherman
shall, in addition to the compensation provided under section 5, also be given adequate
financial assistance for the purchase or repair of fishing net, boat and other necessary
fishing equipments by the appropriate Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) Adequate compensation shall also be paid to the family of those traditional fishermen
who go missing or are swept away by the water currents or disappear in a cyclone, super
cyclone, tsunami or natural disturbances in the sea, as the case may be, by the appropriate
Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
7. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, in consultation with the
Governments of those States having coastal areas within their territorial jurisdiction, by
notification in the Official Gazette, prepare a long term Special Development Plan for the
coastal areas of the country which are prone to and are frequently devastated by cyclones,
super cyclones, tsunami and other natural disturbances in the sea.
(2) without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in sub-section (1),
the Special Development Plan may also include,—
(a) installation of early warning system at conspicuous places throughout the
coastal belt of the country and in particular in coastal areas of the State of Orissa;
(b) construction of security wall in coastal belts which are more vulnerable to
cyclone, super cyclone, tsunami and other natural disturbances in the sea;
(c) introduction of low-cost and high waves resisting housing techniques which
can withstand the fury of cyclone, super cyclone, tsunami and other natural
disturbances of the sea in the coastal areas; and
(d) such other provisions as the Central Government may deem necessary for
the development of coasted areas and prevention of soil erosion.
8. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may make such order and give such directions, not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the removal of such
difficulty.
9. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force, regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act.
10.  (1) The Central Government may, by  notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Special
provision for
traditional
fishermen.
Miscellaneous
provisions.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
40
35
45

4
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Our country has a very long coastal belt spread in the eastern, western and southern
parts which are prone to various types of natural calamities mostly generating from the sea.
In the recent past, Orissa was devastated by super cyclone killing thousands of people and
causing extensive damage to the buildings, houses, business establishments and dwelling
units, standing crops, livestock, cultivable lands, roads, bridges and other movable properties.
The State is yet to fully recover from such a large scale devastation. The coastal areas of
Orissa also witness the fury of cyclones very frequently which is one of the causes of its
backwardness. The coastal areas of Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Tamil Nadu, Puducherry
and Andhra Pradesh recently witnessed massive damages caused by tsunami. Sea storms
during moonlit nights are of very common occurrence in coastal areas. Cyclones, super
cyclones, tsunami and other disturbances in the sea not only cause extensive damage in the
coastal areas, but also take away precious human lives and cause massive soil erosion. This
has contributed to the backwardness of the coastal areas.
Though it is not possible to stop cyclones, super cyclones, tsunami and other natural
disturbances in the sea and their adverse effects on the coastal areas but with concerted
efforts it is possible to minimize the miseries of the affected citizens by providing them with
timely compensation and undertaking rehabilitation measures. The Central Government has
to play a key role in this regard and many a time delay is caused in securing relief due to
procedural wrangles. It is felt that if a permanent Coastal Areas Natural Calamity Assistance
Fund is created and administered, the delays and miseries can be minimized. The Bill seeks to
ensure immediate relief to the affected citizens of coastal areas in case of natural calamities.
The Bill also provides for a long term development plan for the coastal areas.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BAIJAYANT PANDA
June 5, 2009.
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Coastal Areas Natural Calamity
Assistance Fund for which Central Government has to provide four thousand five hundred
crore rupees initially and thereafter as per the need of the Fund. Clause 4 provides for the
appointment of a Commissioner for settlement of compensation claims of affected citizens.
Clause 5 provides for the amount of compensation to be paid to the affected citizens. Clause 6
provides for additional financial assistance to the fishermen. The Bill, therefore, if enacted,
will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. Apart from the initial four
thousand five hundred crore rupees which is to be included in the corpus of the Fund, it is
not possible at this stage to give an exact estimate of the actual expenditure that may have to
be incurred. It is, however, estimated that a recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees ten
thousand crore would be involved per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifteen thousand crore is also likely to be
involved.
6

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 10 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only.
The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
7

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the protection of citizens living in coastal areas affected by cyclone,
super cyclone or tsunami or any other natural calamity in the coastal areas of the
country by providing adequate compensation, rehabilitation and welfare
measures and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Baijayant Panda, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2280LS(S5)—23-06-2009.