THE RICKSHAW PULLERS AND ROADSIDE MECHANICS
(FREEDOM TO EARN LIVELIHOOD) BILL, 2019
By
SHRI GOPAL CHINAYYA SHETTY, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for complete freedom to earn livelihood to the cycle rickshaw and cart
pullers and roadside mechanics by prohibiting the local police and personnel of
local bodies from impounding or taking away the tools, wares, stuff, cycle
rickshaw, cart, etc., so as to enable the poverty stricken and unemployed
youth and other citizens to earn their livelihood without fear and feed
their dependent families and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Rickshaw Pullers and Roadside Mechanics (Freedom
to Earn Livelihood) Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
Short title and
extent.
Bill No. 25 of 2019
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State the Government of
that State and in all other cases the Central Government;
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(c) "rickshaw puller" means a person who physically pulls a cycle rickshaw of
any kind which includes a hand cart in order to earn his livehhood; and
(d) "roadside mechanic" includes persons repairing bicycle, cycle rickshaw,
scooter, motor cycle and other motorized vehicles or those repairing footwear, utensils
and other wares by the roadside or under a tree without erecting any permanent
structure at the site.
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force
every rickshaw puller and roadside mechanic shall have complete freedom to earn his
livelihood without any hindrance or interference from any authority of the Government
including those of Police and local self-Government.
4. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, no
officer or employee of any authority of local self-Government such as Municipalities,
Municipal Corporations, Municipal Councils or by whatever name known shall impound the
articles, tools, bicycle, rickshaw, carts of a rickshaw puller or roadside mechanic.
5. For earning hassle free livelihood under the provisions of this Act, a rickshaw
puller or roadside mechanic shall not,—
(a) obstruct the public place such as roads, footpath, parks and such other
places declared as public places by the appropriate Government; and
(b) obstruct the flow of traffic or vehicles and pedestrians.
6. It shall be duty of the appropriate Government to ensure strict compliance of the
provisions of this Act to ensure freedom to earn livelihood to every rickshaw puller and
roadside mechanic within its territorial jurisdiction in such manner as may be prescribed.
7. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force but save aforesaid the
provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other law for the
time being in force dealing with the subject matter of this Act.
8. The Central Government may give directions to the Government of any State for
implementing the provisions of this Act in the State.
9. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of three years from the date
of commencement of this Act.
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
Definitions.
Freedom to
earn
livelihood.
Local Self
Government
authorities and
Police
Personnel not
to confiscate
or impound
the articles,
wares, etc.
Conditions to
be followed
for earning
livelihood.
Appropriate
Government
to ensure
compliance.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to give
directions.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
After the population explosion, the worst problem our country is facing today is ever
growing unemployment scenario. The number of unemployed is growing menacingly.
Government services have become scarce due to trimming of Government Departments.
Public Sector Undertakings are resorting to V oluntary Retirement Schemes and moreover
they are being disinvested for ultimate privatisation hence there are no jobs in the Public
Sector Undertakings. Agriculture which used to be biggest employment provider is also
undergoing slump because of unremunerative price structure and fall in prices of commodities.
The Private Sector is relying more and more on computers. Thus the employment generation
is not commensurate with the growing population.
Self-employment seems to be the only way to tackle unemployment but it requires
finance and every one can not afford to have that. Some citizens try to earn their livelihood
through rickshaw pulling or by hawking or vending articles or repairing motor vehicles,
cycles, footwear etc. by the roadside but most of them are hounded by local police and
Municipal employees. They have to grease the palms of the police and Municipal employees
or their articles and other things are taken away and impounded. Thus they remain under
threat and can not earn their livelihood with freedom. When State can not provide employment
to these poor people they should not be denied their right to earn livelihood. So it is felt that
there should be complete freedom for these poor people to earn their livelihood and there
should be no interference from police or local authorities in their vocation.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court had issued orders in 1985 to prepare instructions for
hawkers, pavement dwellers, etc. and even under the tenure of Hon'ble Prime Minister Late
Shri Atal Bihari Vajpayee, many positive steps were taken regarding this in Parliament.
In response to the directions issued by the Supreme Court, the Street Vendors
(Protection of Livelihood and Regulation of Street Vending) Act, 2014 was enacted to protect
the rights of urban street vendors. However, the concerns of rickshaw pullers and roadside
mechanics has not yet been addressed. The need is, therefore, to provide for complete
freedom to the rickshaw pullers and roadside mechanies to earn their livelihood.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; GOPAL  CHINAYYA  SHETTY
December 17, 2018.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. Since the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for complete freedom to earn livelihood to the cycle rickshaw and cart pullers
and roadside mechanics by prohibiting the local police and personnel of local bodies
from impounding or taking away the tools, wares, stuff, cycle rickshaw, cart, etc.,
so as to enable the poverty stricken and unemployed youth and other
citizens to earn their livelihood without fear and feed their dependent
families and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—3255LS—01.02.2019.