5
Short title and 
commencement.
As introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 260 of 2022
THE ANGANWADI WORKER’S WELFARE BILL, 2022
By
Shri M.K. Ragha v an, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for welfare of Anganwadi workers employed across the country and  
to ensure that they are provided with all social security benefits.
 B e it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 
 1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Anganwadi Worker’s Welfare Act, 2022. 
  ( 2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, specify.
 2. In this Act, until unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) “anganwadi worker” means any person employed to provide additional and 
supplementary healthcare and nutritional services to children and pregnant women 
under the Integrated Child Development Services Scheme (ICDS Scheme); and
Definitions.

2
5
10
15
20
25
30
(b) “prescribed’’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
 3. ( 1) The Central Government shall, for the purpose of welfare of ASHA 
workers,—
(a) ensure a minimum of honorarium of rupees twenty thousand per 
month which shall be reviewed every five years taking into account the 
prevailing inflation;
(b) provide a personal accident insurance cover of rupees ten lakhs to each 
Anganwadi workers;
(c) provide a health insurance cover of rupees five lakh on floater basis 
which shall be reviewed every five years; and
(d) provide a life insurance cover of rupees twenty lakh to each Anganwadi 
worker.
  ( 2) The premium in respect of the personal accident insurance, health 
insurance and life insurance cover to Anganwadi workers under sub-section ( 1) shall 
be borne by the Central Government.
 4. ( 1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make provisions, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient, for 
removing the difficulty:
  Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years 
from the date of commencement of this Act.
  ( 2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be 
laid before each House of Parliament.
 5. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make provisions, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient, for 
removing the difficulty:
  Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years 
from the date of commencement of this Act.
  ( 2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be 
laid before each House of Parliament. 
Welfare of 
ASHA worker.
Power to remove 
difficulty.
Power to make 
rules.

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 Anganwadi workers form the backbone of India’s healthcare system. They are the 
grassroot workers who have significantly contributed for betterment of our country’s 
progress. As a result of this, it’s important that we acknowledge their contributions. The 
present remuneration paid for the service of these exemplary healthcare warriors is highly 
inadequate. Moreover, there is no proper social security for these workers. Considering the 
present circumstances, it’s important that we provide them with adequate social security. 
This Bill incorporates the minimum amount of wages for Anganwadi worker’s and also 
incorporates social security measures such as personal accident insurance, health and life 
insurance for these workers.
 Hence this Bill.
     New Delhi;                                    M.K. RAGHA V AN 
November 21, 2022

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
 Clause 3 of the Bill provides for payment of Honorarium to the Anganwadi workers 
by the Central Government. It further provides for payment of insurance premium by the 
Central Government. It also provides for contribution to pension fund of Anganwadi workers 
by the Central Government. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from 
the Consolidated Fund of India. A recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty thousand 
crore is likely to be involved per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
 A non-recurring expenditure of rupees hundred crores is also likely to be involved.                 

5
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
 Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to provide for welfare of Anganwadi workers employed across the country and  
to ensure that they are provided with all social security benefits.
(Shri M.K. Raghavan, M.P .) 