THE RESPONSIBLE PARENTHOOD BILL, 2018
By
DR. SANJEEV BALYAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for implementation of two child norm to improve the standard of living of
citizens especially that of women and empower them, stabilize country's population
in order to achieve the goal of development in accordance with country's resources
while achieving the Sustainable Development Goals, 2030 of United Nations
Organization, provide a graceful, safe and paucity free life for the forthcoming
generation and to provide pure water, clean air and hygienic food for
ensuring  Right to Life as guaranteed under article 21 of the
Constitution and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Responsible Parenthood Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
the State and in all others cases, the Central Government;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 260 of 2018
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
(b) "Committee" means District Population Planning Committee constituted under
section 6;
(c) "living child" means a naturally born child;
(d) "National Authority" means the National Population Planning Authority
constituted under section 4;
(e) "parent" means father or mother whether biological, adoptive or step father
or step mother, as the case may be;
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(g) "Provincial Authority" means the Provincial Population Planning Authority
constituted under section 5; and
(h) "small family" means a family with two living children or one living child.
3. (1) No person shall, after a period of ten months from the date of commencement of
this Act, procreate more than two living children.
(2) If any person procreates third child after having two living children, such person
shall be responsible for upbringing of that child without any facility from the Government.
4. ( 1) The Central Government shall, within six months from the date of
commencement of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a National
Authority to be known as the National Population Planning Authority for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
(2)  The National Authority shall consist of:—
(a) Secretary, Union Ministry of Health and Family Welfare—Chairperson,
ex-officio;
(b) Secretary, Union Ministry of Women and Child Development Member,
ex-officio;
(c) Secretary, Union Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment—Member,
ex-officio;
(d) Secretary, Union Ministry of Human Resource Development—Member,
ex-officio; and
(e) four other members working in the field of population stabilization having a
minimum of ten years of experience, to be apppointed by the Central Government in
such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that at least two members appointed under clause (f) shall be women.
5. (1) The appropriate Government shall, within eight months from the date of
commencement of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a Provincial
Authority to be known as the Provincial Population Planning Authority in every State and
Union Territory, for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Provincial Authority shall consist of:—
(a) Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, in the State Government—
Chairperson, ex-officio;
(b) Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development, in the State
Government—Member, Ex-officio;
(c) Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, in the State
Government—Member, ex officio;
(
d) Secretary, Ministry of Human Resource Development in the State
Government—Member, ex officio; and
Responsibility
of Parent for
upbringing of
more than
two living
children.
Constitution
of National
Planning
Authority.
Constitution
of Provincial
Population
Planning
Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(e) four other members working in the field of population stabilization having a
minimum of ten years of experience, to be appointed by the appropriate Government in
such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that at least two members appointed under clause (f) shall be women.
6. (1) The appropriate Government shall, within ten months from the date of
commencement of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a district
Population Stabilization committee at the district level under its jurisdiction for carrying
out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The District Population Stabilization Committee shall consist of:—
(a) District Magistrate-Chairperson, ex-officio;
(b) Chief Medical Officer-Member, ex-officio;
(c) Chief Development Officer-Member, ex-offico;
(d) Additional District Officer, Finance- Member ex-officio; and
(e) four other members working in the field of population stabilization having
a minimum of five years of experience, to be appointed by the appropriate Government
in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that at least two members appointed under clause (e) shall be women.
7. The National Authority, Provincial Authority, District Population Stabilization
Committee, as the case may be, under their respective jurisdiction shall—
(a) ensure that a candidate contesting elections at any level including the
elections to either House of Parliament or State legislature, District Panchayats, Block
Panchayat, Village Panchayat, Municipal Corporation, Municipal Committees,
Cooperative Committee or Sugar Committee or elections to any other such bodies shall
not have more than two living children;
(b) implement two child norms for—
newly appointed persons in Government jobs whether permanent,
temporary or on contract basis; and
(c) ensure that persons already serving in Government offices, whether
permanent, temporary or on contract basis, and having two living children on the date
of commencement of this Act do not procreate more than two living children.
(d) implement two child norms for those persons who are serving in any capacity
in any firm, company, organisation, Institute or Trust including co-partner, partners,
shareholders, Directors and members of such firm, company, organisation or Institution
and entering into any contract as contractor or dealing with Government offices;
(e) implement two child norms for all persons who applies for any type of
certificate, licences, no objection certificate or enter into any contract with Government
for any new business including trade or setting up of industry;
(f) ensure inclusion of two child norm in all Government welfare schemes except
for welfare schemes meant for new born child including mid-day meal, education and
health;
(g) ensure that any couple who violates the provisions of this Act, is not eligible
to exercise his right to vote in any election;
(h) if any couple after having two living children procreates third living child
and more, such couple shall not be provided any incentive and liable for such
disincentives as may be decided by the appropriate Government; and
Constitution
of District
Population
Stablization
Committee.
Functions of
the Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(i) if any couple after having two living children maintain the two child norms,
such couple shall be provided incentives by the appropriate Government in such
manner as may be prescribed.
8. (1) If there is untimely death of one or both children, the couple shall have the right
to procreate two living children.
(2) If any or both children are physically disabled, the couple shall have the right to
procreate another two living children.
(3) If either of parent re-marries after divorce, in such case,—
(i) if any woman has two children from previous marriage or marriages and has
the legal right of custody of those children with her, such woman shall not have any
right to procreate any child on re-marriage; and
(ii) If a man marries with spinster or childless woman, such couple shall have the
right to procreate two living children.
(4) if a divorcee or widower marries a spinster or a childless woman and has the legal
right of custody of two children from previous marriage or marriages such couple shall have
right to procreate one living child.
(5) if a divorcee or widow re-marries with a person who has the legal right of custody
of children from such previous marriage or marriages, such couple shall have right to procreate
one living child:
Provided that if a couple have twins or more than two living children during first time,
such couple shall not have the right to give birth to a new child:
Provided further that if a couple has two living children and intends to adopt one or
more than one child, such couple shall have right to adopt as many number of children as
they desire.
9. The provisions of this Act shall apply to all non-resident Indians who intend to
come back and settle in India.
10. (1) If a couple intends to have more than two living children, such couple shall
subject to such exceptions as may be prescribed, apply to the District Population Planning
Committee for necessary permission in such form and manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The District Population Planning Committee shall,—
(a) upon receipt of an application under sub-section ( 1), examine the reasons
furnished by the applicant and inform about its decision within a period of one month
to the couple in such manner as may be prescribed; and
(b) afford an opportunity of being heard to the couple before disposing of
application, if it is not satisfied with reasons furnished by the couple for procreating
more than two living children.
(3) If the couple is not satisfied with the decision of the District Population Planning
Committee, such couple may file an appeal before the Provincial Authority.
(4) If the couple is not satisfied with the decisions of the Provincial Authority, such
couple may file an appeal before the National Authority.
11. Whoever violates the provisions of this Act shall not be eligible to get any facility
under any scheme of the Government and shall also be laible to pay fine of  ten per cent of his
annual income or rupees fifty thousand whichever is higher.
12. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, provide adequate funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Exceptions.
Application
of Act to
non-Resident
Indians.
Application
to District
Population
Planning
Committee to
give birth to
more than
two living
children.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Examining of
application
by District
Population
Planning
Committee.
Appeal
against the
decision of
District
Population
Planning
Committee/
Provincial
Authority.
Penalty.
Central
Government to
provide
adequate funds.

5
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
13. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act, as may appear to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
14. The provisions of this Act shall have overriding effect notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any
instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act,
15. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15

6
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The root cause of majority of the problems being faced by the country is uncontrolled
growth of population. At the time of independence our country has population of thirty-six
crores. Today, it has increased exponentially and is now approximately one hundred and forty
two crores. India has only 2.4 per cent. landmass of the world, upon which eighteen per cent.
of the world's total population resides. Due to population density being in excess of established
norms, not only the exploitation of natural resources available in limited quantities taking
place at a reckless pace, but also the charm between demand and supply is widening day by
day.
In spite of achieving outstanding success in areas of industrialisation, science and
technology, the task of fulfilling the basic needs of all the citizens of the country has become
extremely tough and challenging. Due to excessive population, all State Governments and
the Government of India are facing grave difficulties in providing quality education, health,
clean environment, employment to all the people of this country.
Due to continuous exploitation of natural resources, water of almost all the rivers of
the country like the Ganga, Yamuna, Narmada and Brahmaputra  has become severely
polluted. The population explosion has destroyed even other human beings, forerts and fills
etc. Nature is constantly losing its balance. During the last year, through an article Stephen
Hawking says ''....humans have 100 years to move to another planet'' published on 4th May,
2017 in world famous Time Magazine. Efforts were made to realise the world about the
warning of late Prof. Stephen Hawkins. Prof. Hawkins was of the belief that the pace at which
world population is increasing their side effects would be equally horrible and would increase
at a similar pace.
During the next hundred years, a new planet will be needed for humans to live in.
Explaining the reasons in detail, the chief reasons cited by Prof. Stephen Hawking are climate
change, collision of satellites, epidemics and population explosion. We cannot refute this
fact of a contemporary, respected and all sections accepted scientist and Prof. Hawkins.
Excessive population was cited as the biggest danger by fifty Nobel Prize winner
scientists in a programme organised by Times Higher Education in August, 2017 in Singapore.
Following the sequence, in November, 2017, twenty thousand scientists around the world
had signed a letter calling excessive population on the biggest problem of contemporary
world. In the year 1992, for the first time, when world population was more than three hundred
crores, even then, one thousand and seven hundred scientists around the world had cited
burgeoning population as the biggest concern and had suggested to control and balance it.
In the year 1968, Foreign Policy Association, on the occasion of its 15th anniversary,
had invited thousands of scientists from across the world to participate in a three day
programme organised on the issue of world picture during next fifty years, where all the three
day studies and suggestions of participant scientists were compiled in a book entitled
''Towards the year 2018''. Today, if we read that book, then we will find that by ignoring the
suggestions of those scientists, we are currently aspiring and desiring for a fifty year old life
and environment.
Rising above party politics, several enlightened and awakened parliamentarians, had
presented Private Member Bills regarding population control. From the time of freedom
attainment till now, around thirty four Private Member Bills have been introduced regarding
population control, and of which maximum Bills were presented by fifteen Congress Member
of Parliaments. Also various Member of Parliaments including seven from BJP, five from TDP,
two from AIADMK and one each from Trinamool Congress, RSP , Samajwadi Party, MNS and
RJD had presented Private Member Bills in connection with population control. But not even
once discussion could take place in Parliament on such a serious issue.

7
In context of above, the then Minister of Health and Family Welfare, Late Shri M.L.
Fotedar had introduced 79th Constitutional Amendment Bill, 1992 in Tenth Lok Sabha in year
1992 and it was brought in Rajya Sabha, also in the same year, that is still pending. Recently,
a memorandum was given to Hon'ble President by one hundred and twenty five
parliamentarians. In spite of that, whenever a question regarding population control is asked
in the Parliament, then it has been repeatedly asserted by Government of India citing I.C.P.D.
(International Conference for Population and Development) that India is binded to its rules
due to which population control law cannot be enacted.
In the year 2015, in the reply of the question regarding population control asked by
hon'ble members of this same Parliament, Shri J.C. Reddy and Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh,
Government had again repeated the old reference of I.C.P.D. (International Conference for
Population and Development). Also, in the year 2017, in response to the questions of hon'ble
parliamentarians, Shri Suresh Paddapalli and Shri Uday Pratap Singh, same reasons was
repeated. But after examination of I.C.P.D., it was found that if Government wishes, then even
after following the limits of I.C.P.D., India may enact an effective law in this regard and the
declaration letter of I.C.P.D. does not limit in any way the freedom of any country to take
actions for adopting population control and family planning measures for its people in
accordance with its legal provisions and culture and is in accordance with the closing
statement of I.C.P.D.
Taxpayers are caretakers of this country and if they, themselves, start agitating for
raising their voice regarding their rights, then it would have an adverse impact upon national
economy. It has happened for the first time in independent India that the caretakers of this
country have expressed their inability for nurturing this ever increasing population of the
country. Therefore, there is a need to seriously consider such voices.
According to 2011 Census, more than sixty five per cent (currently ninty crore
population of India) is below thirty five years of age. If India today itself succeeds in bringing
its population down to replacement rate, even then, during the coming thirty  five years, total
ninety crore children will take birth. It we look towards this fact in a simple way, then according
to 2011 Census, nearly two crore and forty lakh children are born in India annually and on
other hand, approximately eighty eight lakh people die. That means, every year there is an
increase of about 1.5 crore in population figures that is bound to increase continuously.
Whereas the Cental Government had declared that 100th crore child was born on
11th May 2000 in Safdarjung Hospital in Delhi, whose name is Aastha Arora. In the year 2000,
population of one hundred crore has now increased to one hundred and thirty six crore,
according to government figures. That is, a growth of two crore per annum. This fact does
not match with the 2011 census data in any case.
If we study the figures, pertaining to total number of aadhaar cards generated till date
i.e. 1,22,12,49,465 total population not having aadhaar cards in cell age groups i.e. 14,69,17,160,
the total population falling below eighteen years of age threshold and devoid of aadhaar
cards i.e. 14,34,55,416 total population above the eighteen year threshold and devoid of
aadhaar cards i.e. 2,56,31,986. Remaining population in many States, where aadhaar card
generation has not reached to one hundred per cent i.e. 70,99,69,104. Out of that 3.63 per cent
and total population having aadhar cards i.e.2,57,71,878, then we come to know that still one
hundred and forty two crore population are left to get aadhaar cards. Therefore, it becomes
clear from this fact that India has left China way behind in terms of population, about which,
recently, claims have been made in a report published by China.
According to 2011 census, the total number of married women in India was 33,06,21,277
out of which 18,19,74,153 women were having two or less than two children. Whereas, even
after the family planning programmes that have been going on for the last seventy years and
spending 2.25 lakh crore (more than 20 lakh crore rupees as per current estimates) worth of
taxpayers money since 1974 on family planning programmes. 15,76,47,124 women were having
more than two children. Even after the constant publicity given to family planning programmes

8
for the last seventy years, there is such a big population of women giving birth to more than
two children, then after 2011, during the next seven years, the population of India can be
estimated and calculated easily even by a common person.
Whereas it is clear that today, population of India is one hundred and forty two crores
and approximately sixty five per cent (ninety two crore) population is below thirty five years
of age. If India today itself succeeds in bringing its population down to replacement level,
even then during the coming thirty five years, minimum ninety crore children will be born as
the death rate is rapidly decreasing due to improvement in health care facilities and also
average age is increasing. But, even after that, if we, in place of eighty eight lakh people
dying each year, suppose that with increase in population, in future, evey year, average one
core people will die then during the next thirty five years, thirty five crore people will die. By
decreasing the death rate of the population, during the next thirty five years, it is expected
that there will be a sure shot increase of minimum fifty five crore in population of India. This
makes clear that in the next thirty five years, population of India will be minimum two hundred
crores. That is why, we would have to undertake special efforts in order to control the
population of India.
Due to ever increasing population, the problems of poverty, unemployment, pollution,
adulteration and crimes are also increasing by leaps and bounds. To avoid the tough situations
of future. Government of India shall have to take special steps in the direction of population
control on an urgent basis.
In the name of right to reproduction, we cannot throw the precious future and life of
our crores of yet to born children into the den of darkness and such a horrible situation
cannot be tackled only on the basis of awareness. Population stabilisation is extremely
important keeping in mind the national interests. That is why along with awareness the need
is also to have a appropriate  legislation to check the rapid population growth in the country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SANJEEV BALYAN
November 26, 2018.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for constitution of National Population Planning Authority.
It also provides for appointment of experts in population stabilization to the National Authority.
Clause 5 provides for Constitution of Provincial Population Planning Authority. It also provides
for appointment of experts in population stabilization to the Provincial Authority. Clause 6
provides for Constitution of  District Population Stabilization Committee. Clause 14 provides
for the Central Government to provide adequate funds. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring
expenditure of about rupees two thousand crore per annum would involve from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
9

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 17 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
10

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for implementation of two child norm to improve the standard of living of
citizens especially that of women and empower them, stabilize country's population
in order to achieve the goal of development in accordance with country's resources
while achieving the Sustainable Development Goals, 2030 of United Nations
Organization, provide a graceful, safe and paucity free life for the forthcoming
generation and to provide pure water, clean air and hygienic food for
ensuring  Right to Life as guaranteed under article 21 of the
Constitution and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Dr. Sanjeev Balyan, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—2692LS(S3)—24-12-2018.