1
THE MICRO, SMALL  AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES
DEVELOPMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI GAJANAN CHANDRAKANT KIRTIKAR
A
BILL
to amend the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development
(Amendment)  Act, 2016.
(2)  It shall come into force on such date,  as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No.  260   of  2016
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006, after section
10, the following sections shall be inserted, namely:—
"10A. (1) Every scheduled commercial bank shall lend to the micro, small and
medium enterprises at the rate of one per cent plus the rate of fixed deposit of such
banks.
(2) Every micro, small or medium enterprise shall be entitled to collateral free
loan of upto rupees two crore from scheduled commercial banks.
10B. The Central Government shall, from time to time, notify suitable incentives
to increase the inflow of equity capital in micro, small and medium enterprises.".
Insertion of
new sections
10A and 10B.
Lending rate
and limit for
lending of
collateral
free loans.
Incentives to
increase the
inflow of
equity
capital.
5

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006 aims to provide for
facilitating the promotion and development and enhancing the competitiveness of micro,
small and medium enterprises in the country. The said Act, as well as the guidelines issued
by the Reserve Bank of India in its circular dated 1st July, 2011 and the recommendations of
various committees and task groups have brought about considerable positive changes in
various areas of development of competitiveness of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
(MSMEs).
However, the MSMEs, that contribute to eight per cent of the country's Gross Domestic
Product (GDP), forty-five per cent of the manufactured output, forty per cent of our exports
and that employs an estimated sixty million people, continue to face serious bottlenecks in
its development. Lack of access to adequate and timely credit at a reasonable cost is the
most critical problems faced by this sector. Hence, there is an urgent need to make it
mandatory by law for scheduled commercial banks to provide affordable lending rates to
MSMEs.
The Bill hence, aims to ensure lowest lending rates to MSMEs, fixed at one per cent
plus the rate of interest for fixed deposits of the scheduled commercial banks in the coutnry.
This would ensure more credit flow to the MSME sector, without hurting commercial banks,
as they will continue to have freedom to fix lending rates to other sectors or units. The Bill
also aims to make it mandatory for scheduled commercial banks to offer MSMEs, collateral
free loans, up to rupees 2 crore. These two key changes in the principal Act would revive
MSMEs through increased credit flow.
Hence, this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; GAJANAN CHANDRAKANT KIRTIKAR
October 28, 2016.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006.
————
(Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2929LS(S3)—17-11-2016.