1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE  SPECIAL  INFRASTRUCTURE  DEVELOPMENT  IN
ECONOMICALLY  BACKWARD  REGIONS  BILL, 2019
By
SHRI KUNWAR PUSHPENDRA SINGH CHANDEL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of an Infrastructure Development Board for the
infrastructure development in the economically backward regions of the
country particularly Bundelkhand region by way of widening of
National Highways, construction of ring road, bypass, doubling
of single rail track line, construction of over bridge, under
bridge in straight structure on railway tracks, construction
 of regional air strips, construction of jetties, desilting
and beautification thereof and for matters
connected  therewith or
incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of  India
 as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Special Infrastructure Development in Economically
Backward Regions Act, 2019.
Bill No. 260 of  2019
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "backward region" means the Bundelkhand region and such other
economically backward regions of the country as the Central Government may, from
time to time, declare;
(b) "Board" means Infrastructure Development Board constituted under
section 3;
(c) "infrastructure" includes National Highways, ring roads, bypass, railway
tracks, railway stations, regional air strips, under bridges and over bridges; and
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Board to be known as the Infrastructure Development Board for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
(2) The headquarter of the Board shall be at Mahoba district in the State of Uttar
Pradesh.
(3) The Board shall consist of twenty-five members to be appointed by the Central
Government in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that at least five members of the Board shall be the Members of Parliament
representing backward regions to be nominated by the Central Government in such manner
as may be prescribed:
Provided further that at least one member of the Board shall be each from the States
of Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh who possesses minimum twenty years of experience
in infrastructure development sector.
(4) The Chairperson of the Board shall be appointed from amongst the members of
Board by consensus.
(5) The Board shall consist of such number of officers and employees to be appointed
by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(6) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson, members, officers and employees of the Board shall be such as
may be prescribed.
(7) The Board shall hold at least one meeting every month to review its functions and
to establish co-ordination between various Ministries.
4. The Board shall, for the purposes of the development of the backward regions—
(a) carry out annual survey of the infrastructure development work;
(b) fix the priority of the development work to be undertaken;
(c) carry out the widening of accident prone National Highways into four lane or
six lane roads;
(d) widening of bridges over rivers and roads, construct new rail and road bridges;
(e) carry out doubling of single rail track wherever required;
(f) carry out construction of rail under bridges and over bridges in straight
shape;
(g) carry out construction of bypass and ring roads on National Highways;
Definitions.
Constitution
of
Infrastructure
Development
Board.
Functions of
the Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(h) operate new trains;
(i) construct and upgrade railway stations with world class facilities;
(j) desilt large ponds, provide for beautification of jetties and operate motor
boats and sea planes;
(k) ensure timely repair and renovation of old structures; and
(l) carry out other such functions as may be assigned to it, from time to time, by
the Central Government.
5. The Central Government shall establish a Separate Centralize Management
Information System for monitoring development work in the backward regions including
the records and the details of all works and the review of the progress of works being
undertaken by the Board with the use of modern techniques like space technique in such
manner as may be prescribed.
6. The Central Government shall, in consultation with the Board, provide such
economic incentives to the agency which completes the targeted works in specified time in
such manner as may be prescribed.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite funds to the Board for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
8. The Central Government may give such directions to the State Government, to
implement the provisions of this Act in their jurisdiction, as may be necessary for the purpose
of this Act.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect,  as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Economic
Incentives to
the Agency.
Monitoring
and
assessment of
development
work.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Power to
issue
directions.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND REASONS
Bundelkhand is an economically backward region and the Central Government has
been providing economic packages for its development from time to time in the absence of
any proper action plan at the States level. This fund goes waste on account of corruption
and unplanned spending without any development in this region.  It is the responsibility of
Government to take steps for the holistic development of backward regions of the country
including Bundelkhand. There is lack of regional  connectivity through road, rail and air
route in Bundelkhand and the present system is not very convenient also.
Accidents are very common on those narrow National Highways in the regions  which
result in loss of life and property. This can be solved by widening the double lane highways.
Traffic jams can be avoided in their cities and towns by constructing ring road, bypass and
also over bridges and under bridges wherever necessary. There are various such points on
rivers where one needs to cover a long distance to cross the rivers to reach the side in this
region. It can be solved by constructing bridges on such points of the river which would cut
down the travel time. Distance by train can become less cumbersome if new trains are
operated and doubling of single railway tracks is completed. More amenities can be provided
to rail passengers by providing world class level facilities at existing railway stations.
There are several areas in economically backward regions, in particular Bundelkhand
which are naturally very scenic. Regional air facility may be augmented by establishing air
connectivity which would increase the accessibility in these areas. There are many big
ponds and water bodies which need repair and beautification so that tourism may be promoted
in these areas. Construction of jetties around ponds and motor boats and sea planes service
in these ponds may also generate more and more employment avenues.
There are several areas in Bundelkhand which are economically backward and need
improvement in infrastructure. Development of the backward regions is very crucial for the
development of the country and Bundelkhand region has to play a special role in it.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide for the constitution of an Infrastructure
Development Board for the infrastructure development of the economically backward regions
of the country including Bundelkhand including the widening of National Highways,
construction of ring road, bypass, doubling of single rail track line, construction of over
bridge, under bridge in straight structure on railway tracks, construction of regional air
strips, construction of jetties, desilting and beautification thereof to ensure accelerated
development of the Bundelkhand region.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW D ELHI; KUNWAR PUSHPENDRA SINGH CHANDEL
   October 25, 2019
4

5
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill  provides for the constitution of a Infrastructure Development
Board. It also provides for appointment of Chairperson, members, officers and employees to
the Board. Clause 5 provides for establishment of a Centralized Management Information
System for monitoring and assessment of development works of the Board. Clause 6 provides
for the economic incentives to the agencies which completes the targeted works in specified
time. Clause 7 provides that the Central Government shall provide requisite funds to the
Board for carrying out the purposes of this Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees five
thousand crore would involve as recurring expenditure per annum from the Consolidated
Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees   five hundred crore is also likely to be incurred.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of an Infrastructure Development Board for the
infrastructure development in the economically backward regions of the
country particularly Bundelkhand region by way of widening of
National Highways, construction of ring road, bypass, doubling
of single rail track line, construction of over bridge, under
bridge in straight structure on railway tracks, construction
 of regional air strips, construction of jetties, desilting
and beautification thereof and for matters
connected  therewith or
incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—3025LS(S3)—14-11-2019.