Bill No. 260 of  2015
THE REGULATION OF COMPUTER TRAINING CENTRES BILL, 2015
By
SHRI RAJESH RANJAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for regulation of computer training centres and banning of all the computer
training centres functioning without registration from the Government.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Regulation of Computer Training Centres Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. On and from the date of commencement of this Act, no person shall run any computer
centre without prior registration with the designated authority of the Central Government.
3. The In-charge or the head of the affairs of a computer centre, whether set up prior to
or after the commencement of this Act, shall, within one month from the date of commencement
of this Act, apply to the designated authority of the Central Government, in such form and
manner, as may be prescribe by rules made under this Act, for registration of his computer
centre.
4. Whoever contravenes the provision of section 2 shall be punished with imprisonment
for a term not exceeding two months or with fine of rupees one lakh, or with both.
5. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Computer
centres not to
function
without
registration.
Computer
centres to
apply for
registration.
Penalty.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
There are a number of computer training centres at present operating in the country
without any Government's permission or registration. These computer training centres after
advertising in the newspapers enrol the students by charging thousands of rupees. Many of
these institutions have closed down their activities after collecting money from the students.
These institutions are charging different rates from students on different type of computer
education. Many of these institutions have cheated the students and spoiled their carrer as
after receiving the hefty amount they locked their activities within three-four months. This
has    created great unrest among the students community. Their career has been marred and
these students have been agitating. Thus, there is a need of closing down all these computer
training centres and award severe punishment to those who operate such centres in the
country without the permission of the Government.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAJESH RANJAN
November 13, 2015.

4
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

GMGIPMRND—2859LS(S3)—01.12.2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for regulation of computer training centres and banning of all the computer
training centres functioning without registration from the Government.
————
(Shri Rajesh Ranjan, M.P.)