1
THE PRIV ATE HEALTHCARE SECTOR (REGULATION OF FEES)
BILL, 2017
By
SHRIMATI DARSHANA VIKRAM JARDOSH , M.P.
A
BILL
to regulate the fee charged for private healthcare services with a view to making them
affordable for the common man and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (i) This Act may be called the Private Healthcare Sector (Regulation of Fees) Act,
2017.
(ii) It extends to the whole of India.
(iii) It shall come into force such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 260 of  2017
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Committee" means the Special High Power Committee constituted under
section 3;
(b) "diagnostic laboratory" means a place owned or run by an industrial or a
group of persons or by private or corporate hospital where pathological tests or
investigations are conducted;
(c) "medical consultancy and other allied services" includes,—
(i) consultancy by qualified medical practitioners concerning all aspects
of medical treatment/surgery whether in private clinics/hospitals or in the
corporate hospitals;
(ii) all such pathological tests as are prescribed by the qualified doctors
whether in a private clinic or in a private and/or corporate hospital; and
(iii) all such scanning or imaging services, namely, x-ray, ultra sound,
MRI, CT scan or any other new health treatment method employed in future
whether in a private clinic or in a private/corporate hospital;
(d) "medical practitioner" means a person duly qualified and registered by the
Medical Council of India and engaged in the business of consultancy and providing
medical treatment to patients whether as a private practitioner or in a private or
corporate hospital; and
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Committee to be known as the Special High Power Committee to determine the fee
charged by a private medical practitioner and private/corporate hospitals for providing
medical treatment including charges levied for pathological tests, scanning and imaging.
(2) The Committee shall consist of—
(i) The Minister of Health and Family — Chairperson,
Welfare Government of India, ex-officio;
(ii) Chairperson of the Department— — member;
Related Parliament Standing
Committee on Health and Family Welfare,
(iii) five representatives of private — members;
Hospitals, Laboratory including
Government run hospitals/Laboratory,
(iv) two representatives of — members;
Non-Governmental Organisation in the health
sector,
(v) five representatives of Medical — members;
Practitioners,
(vi) one representative from each — members;
National Political Party,
(vii) the Secretary to the Government of — Secretary,
India, Ministry of Health and Family ex-officio;
Welfare.
(3) The members referred to in clauses ( iii), (iv) and ( v) shall be appointed by the
Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(4) The members referred to in clause (vi) shall be appointed by the Central Government
on the recommendation of the respective political party.
Definitions.
Constitution
of the High
Power
Committee
for
regularization
of charges by
private
Healthcare
services.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
4. The Central Government shall provide the Committee such financial and other
assistance as may be necessary for the efficient functioning of the Committee.
5.  The Committee shall,—
(i) fix the fee to be charged by the medical practitioners from patients or any
other person/corporate paying on behalf of patient or health insurance providers
either in their private clinics or in a private hospital/corporate hospital after taking
into consideration such factors as may be necessary; and
(ii) fix the charges for the pathological tests and scanning/x-ray, after taking
into consideration the infrastructural and service inputs used in carrying out the
tests.
6. (1) No medical practitioner, private or corporate hospital shall charge from any
patient the fee exceeding the fee fixed by the Committee.
(2) It shall be mandatory for every medical practitioner/private or corporate hospital
or diagnostic laboratory to display the fee as determined by the Committee in such manner
as may be prescribed.
7. (1) Whoever contravenes the provisions of this Act shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years and with fine which may
extend up to rupees fifty lakh.
(2) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a medical practioner/
hospital/laboratory, the licence of such medical practioner/hospital/laboratory shall be
cancelled forthwith.
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
to carry out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made
before each House of parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Central
Government
to provide
assistance to
the
Committee.
Functions of
the
Committee.
Mandatory
display of
consultancy
and other fees.
Penalty.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
While it is not practically feasible for the Government to provide medical treatment
facilities to each and every citizen of the country, every day there are cases coming to light
when private hospitals and private medical practitioners charge undue fees from patients for
treatment costs and other allied services like pathological tests, etc. Even, the Insurance
Regulatory Development Authority (IRDA) has also voiced its concerns about higher charges
levied by private/corporate hospitals, which is one of the major obstacles in expansion of
health insurance sector in India and for development of medical tourism in our country. The
regulation of fee in private medical sector would be a right step in the direction of providing
affordable and equitable healthcare services to all citizens.
It is, therefore, proposed to constitute a Special High Power Committee to fix the
medical and pathological and other test charges levied by medical practitioner, private hospital,
corporate hospitals and clinics.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; DARSHANA VIKRAM JARDOSH
March 30, 2017.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of a special High Power Committee to
regulate the fees charged by medical practitioner, private or corporate hospitals and clinics.
Clause 4 provides that the Central Government shall provide financial assistance to the
Committee for its efficient functioning. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about
rupees one hundred crores per annum would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of
India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to regulate the fee charged for private healthcare services with a view to making them
affordable for the common man and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
————
(Shrimati Darshana Vikram Jardosh, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—438LS(S3)—20-12-2017.