 AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
Bill No. 260 of 2024 
THE WILD LIFE (PROTECTION) AMENDMENT BILL, 2024 
BY 
SHRI VISHALDADA PRAKASHBAPU PATIL, M.P 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Wild Life (Protection) Amendment
Act, 2024. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Short title and 
commencement. 

-2- 
2. In section 2 of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972, (hereinafter 
referred to as the principal Act), for sub-section (16A), the following                     
sub-section, shall be substituted by— 
“(16A) invasive species” means a species of animal or plant that is 
non-native (or alien) to the ecosystem under consideration and whose 
introduction causes or is likely to cause economic or environmental harm 
or harm to human health.”. 
Amendment of 
section 16A. 
3. In section 17A of the principal Act, after the existing proviso, the 
following proviso shall be inserted, namely:- 
 
“Provided further that nothing in this section shall prevent the 
removal or destruction of invasive species, as identified by the Invasive 
Species Control Bureau, from any forest land or specified area.”. 
 
Amendment of 
section 17A. 
4. In section 29 of the principal Act, after the existing proviso, the 
following proviso shall be inserted, namely:- 
“Provided further that the destruction of invasive species, as identified 
by the Invasive Species Control Bureau, may be permitted under a permit 
granted by the Chief Wild Life Warden, subject to such terms and 
conditions as may be specified.”. 
 
Amendment of 
section 29 
5. In section 40A of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), the following 
sub-section, shall be inserted, namely: —  
“(3A) The Central Government may, by notification, grant immunity 
from prosecution to any person who, prior to the declaration of a species 
as invasive, unintentionally caused harm to such species, provided that 
such harm was not caused with gross negligence or willful intent.” 
Amendment of 
section 40A 
      6. Section 62A of the principal Act shall be omitted. Omission of section 
62A. 
7.  After Section 62A of the principal Act  the following section shall be 
inserted, namely: — 
 
“62AA. (1) The Central Government may, for the purposes of this 
Act, by order published in the Official Gazette, constitute a Invasive 
Species Control Bureau, to identify and regulate or prohibit the 
import, trade, possession or proliferation of invasive species which 
pose a threat to the wild life or habitat in India, consisting of—  
 
 
Insertion of new 
section 62AA, 
62AB, 62AC, 
62AD and 62AE. 
Constitution of 
Invasive Species 
Control Bureau. 

-3- 
 
(a) the Director of Wildlife Preservation—Director ex officio;  
(b) the Inspector-General of Police—Additional Director; 
(c) the Chairperson of Invasive Species Committee—Additional 
Director ex officio; 
(d) the Deputy Inspector-General of Police—Joint Director;  
(e) the Deputy Inspector-General of Forests—Joint Director;  
(f) the Additional Commissioner (Customs) and Central Goods and 
Services Tax—Joint Director; and 
(g) such other officers as may be appointed from amongst the officers 
covered under sections 3 and 4 of this Act. 
(2) The members (except members ex officio) shall be entitled to 
receive such allowances in respect of expenses incurred in the 
performance of their duties as may be prescribed.  
“62AB. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Invasive Species 
Control Bureau shall take measures with respect to— 
(i) collection and collation of information related to the 
introduction, spread, and impacts of invasive species, and to 
disseminate the same to State and other enforcement agencies for 
immediate action, so as to regulate the population of invasive species 
and identify invasive species to establish a centralised invasive species 
data bank, in consultation with the Invasive Species Advisory 
Committee, as per sub-section (2) of section 62AD of this Act; 
(ii) co-ordination of actions by various officers, State Governments 
and other authorities in connection with the enforcement of the 
provisions of this Act, either directly or through regional and border 
units set up by the Bureau; 
(iii) implementation of obligations under the various international 
Conventions and protocols that are in force at present or which may be 
ratified or acceded to by India in future;  
(iv) assistance to concerned authorities in foreign countries and 
concerned international organisations to facilitate co-ordination and 
universal action for control of invasive species;  
(v)  development of infrastructure and capacity building for 
scientific and professional investigation into wildlife crimes and assist 
State Governments to ensure success in prosecutions related to wildlife 
crimes, in coordination with the Invasive Species Advisory Committee; 
(vi) monitoring and the effectiveness of invasive species 
management programs; and 
       (vii) advising the Government of India on issues relating to 
invasive species having national and international ramifications, and 
suggest changes required in relevant policy and laws from time to time.  
 
Power and 
functions of the 
Invasive Species 
Control Bureau. 

 
-4- 
      (2) The  Invasive Species Control Bureau shall exercise: 
        (i) such powers as may be delegated to it under sub-section (1) of 
section 5, sub-sections (1) and (8) of section 50 and section 55 of this 
Act; and 
       (ii) such other powers as may be prescribed.” 
“62AC. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, there shall be 
established by the Central Government for the purposes of this Act, a 
body to be called the Invasive Species Committee, to advise the Invasive 
Species Control Bureau on the identification, assessment, and 
management of invasive species. 
       (2)  The Invasive Species Committee shall consist of the following 
members, namely:— 
(a) Chairperson, who shall be an eminent person having 
adequate knowledge, expertise and experience in the conservation 
and wildlife protection and in matters relating to invasive species, to 
be appointed by the Central Government; 
(b) sixteen ex officio members to be appointed by the Central 
Government, representing the Ministries dealing with—  
(i) Agricultural Research and Education;  
(ii) Agriculture and Farmers Welfare;  
(iii) Ayurveda, Unani, Siddha, Sowa Rigpa, Yoga and 
Naturopathy and Homoeopathy;  
(iv) Commerce and Industry;  
(v) Environment and Climate Change;  
(vi) Forests and Wildlife;  
(vii) Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education;  
(viii) National Bureau of Fish Genetic Resources; 
(ix) Zoological Survey of India; 
(x)  Botanical Survey of India; 
(xi)  Wildlife Institute of India;  
(xii) Science and Technology; 
(xiii) Tribal Affairs; 
 
(c) one representative each from ten States and Union territories by 
rotation, to be nominated by the Central Government; 
 
(d) five non-official members to be appointed from amongst 
experts including legal experts and scientists having special 
knowledge of, or experience in, matters relating to conservation of 
biological diversity, wildlife protection and invasive species, 
representatives of industry, conservers, creators and knowledge-
holders of biological resources; and 
 
Constitution of 
Invasive Species 
Committee. 

-5- 
(e) a Member-Secretary, who shall have experience in matters 
relating to wildlife protection from the impact of invasive species, to be 
appointed by the Central Government. 
       (3) The members (except members ex officio) shall be entitled to 
receive such allowances in respect of expenses incurred in the 
performance of their duties as may be prescribed. “ 
“62AD. (1) It shall be the duty of the Invasive Species Committee to 
advise the Invasive Species Control Bureau and the Central Government on the 
identification, assessment, and management of invasive species, by measures 
as it thinks fit. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the 
measures referred to therein shall provide for— 
(a) developing and adopting scientific criteria for identifying and 
assessing invasive alien species, considering factors such as, potential 
ecological impacts, economic costs, social consequences, geographic 
distribution, pathways of introduction,  dispersal potential and any other 
factor, as it may seem fit; and 
(b) establishing a transparent process for proposing, evaluating, 
and listing (or delisting) invasive alien species, including public 
consultation and stakeholder engagement, peer review of scientific 
assessments, and annual review and updating of the list of invasive alien 
species with the Invasive Species Control Bureau.  
Functions of the 
Invasive Species 
Committee. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Declaration of 
certain wild 
animals as invasive 
species. 
“62AE. (1) State Governments may, in consultation with the Invasive 
Species Committee, notify species not specified under Schedules I, II, III, 
and IV of this Act, as invasive within their respective jurisdictions for a 
period not exceeding two hundred days; 
(2) if subsequent to the initial notification mentioned under sub-
section (1), circumstances necessitate an extension, the State Government, 
in consultation with the Central Government, issue a further notification 
extending the period of the initial notification for a period not exceeding 
one hundred  days; 
(3) subsequent extensions may be granted by the Central Government, 
in consultation with the Invasive Species Committee, for periods not 
exceeding ninety days each, provided that the total duration of the initial 
notification and all extensions shall not exceed two years.”. 
8. In section 63 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after clause (k), 
the following clauses shall be inserted, namely: — 
(ka) the matters to be prescribed under sub-section (2) of                 
section 62AA; 
(kb) the matters to be prescribed under Cl (i) of sub-section(1)             
and Cl. (ii) of sub-section (2) of section 62AB; 
 
Amendment of 
section 63. 

-6- 
(kc) the matters to be prescribed under sub-section (3) of                 
section 62AC; 
(kd) the matters to be prescribed under sub-sections (1) and (2) of 
section 62AD; 
(ke) the matters to be prescribed under sub-sections (2) and (3) of 
section 62AE.”. 
  

 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 
 The impact of invasive species is a gravely pressing matter in terms of research, 
economic, environmental impact and legislations. Many parts of India are affected by invasive 
species, especially the Andaman Islands. Many scientists fear that endemic species of the islands 
might have to face the fate of the lonesome Galapagos tortoise which went extinct due to 
invasive species. While India has several general laws to tackle the issue of invasive species, it is 
not specific and is left open to interpretation by concerned authorities. This sort of open 
interpretation would be detrimental to the action taken as not all officers may have the required 
scientific background for the same, and even if the officer may wish to take action there is no 
clear way ahead on what to do once the invasive species is caught.  Moreover, since a proper 
definition of invasive species is lacking in the current Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972, it is not 
addressing the fact that invasive species must be defined in terms of the concerned ecosystem 
and the considerable harm it has on the environment it is released or public health or economy. 
As per international standards, majority of the invasive animal species are of least concern in 
IUCN’s Red List and Unlisted except the Indian Bullfrog to belong to Appendix II of CITES. 
This may allow the state to execute laws on invasive species with certain independence. 
However due to lack of specific research data is insufficient in many regions so the extent of 
problem is not clear pushing back chances of specific legislations. For example, we have Plant 
Quarantine (Regulation of Import into India) Order 2003, due to adequate research. 
Unfortunately, this is not the case with other species. For example, fish research in India has 
been done only with captured groups and not those found in the wild. Action taken by 
Government both at Union and States is not healthy, for example the Judiciary has expressed its 
displeasure at slow pace of work in this field, as was observed in the Madras High Court. This is 
due to the responsibility of managing invasive species in hands of multiple agencies and their 
lack of coordination and a public centralized database access.  
 
This is a matter of concern as India had adopted the Convention on Biological Diversity’s 
(CBD) Aichi Target 9 as its National Biodiversity Target 4 – i.e., to identify invasive alien 
species and their pathways of introduction, and to develop strategies to manage prioritised 
invasive alien species by 2020. In addition to this, India has also submitted 23 targets under the 
Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework, CBD pledging to reduce rates of 
introduction and establishment of invasive alien species by 50 per cent. by 2030.  Therefore, 
keeping these mutli-faceted lacunae in mind, the basis of actions has been bolstered as a whole 
so that India can successfully report in the next upcoming COP its achievement of the above 
targets, via- 
(i) including definition of invasive species 
(ii) Omitting section 62 of the Act and introducing a comprehensive structure to regulate or 
prohibit the import, trade, possession or proliferation of invasive species, with: – 
a. the Invasive Species Committee, a research wing with diverse yet relevant 
representations dedicated to invasive species, cross-ministerial, institutes, experts, 
etc, outlining a well-considered scientific and transparent process for proposing, 
evaluating, listing (and delisting as well) invasive species, along with enabling 
provisions directing the formulation of specific management measures, which is 
proposed to embolden; and 
 
 
 

-2- 
 
b. the Invasive Species Control Bureau, a converging body with officials from 
relevant services tasked with the mission to regulate invasive species and identify 
and thereby create a database on invasive species in India as well as to advise the 
Centre from time to time on important policy matters to keep in cognizance to 
achieve international commitments; and 
 
(iii)Allowing State governments to declare invasive species with deadlines, extendable with 
reasonable conditions 
 
Hence this Bill. 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                              VISHALDADA PRAKASHBAPU PATIL 
 
    November 13, 2024. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
 
Clause 7 of the Bill vide proposed section 62AA provides for Constitution of Invasive 
Species Control Bureau. It also vide proposed section 62AC provides for constitution of Invasive 
Species Committee. The Bill, therefore, if enacted and brought into operation, will involve 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees three 
hundred of recurring expenditure per annum would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of 
India.  
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred is also likely to be involved. 
  
 
  

 
ANNEXURE 
(WILF LIFE PROTECTION ACT, 1972) 
(ACT NO. 53 OF 1972) 
*  *  *  *  *  *  * 
2. (16) “hunting”, with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, 
includes,—  
(A) killing or poisoning of any wild animal or captive animal and every 
attempt to do so; 
*  *  *  *  *  * 
Definitions. 
17A. Save as otherwise provided in this Chapter, no person shall—  
 
(a) wilfully pick, uproot, damage, destroy, acquire or collect any 
specified plant from any forest land and any area specified, by notification, 
by the Central Government;  
(b) posses, sell, offer for sale, or transfer by way of gift or otherwise, 
or transport any specified plant, whether alive or dead, or part or derivative 
thereof:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall prevent a member of a 
scheduled tribe, subject to the provisions of Chapter IV, from picking, 
collecting or possessing in the district he resides any specified plant or part 
or derivative thereof for his bona fide personal use. 
*  *  *  *  *  * 
Prohibition of 
picking, 
uprooting, etc. 
of specified 
plant 
29. No person shall destroy, exploit or remove any wild life including 
forest produce from a sanctuary or destroy or damage or divert the habitat of 
any wild animal by any act whatsoever or divert, stop or enhance the flow of 
water into or outside the sanctuary, except under and in accordance with a 
permit granted by the Chief Wild Life Warden, and no such permit shall be 
granted unless the State Government being satisfied in consultation with the 
National Board that such removal of wild life from the sanctuary or the change 
in the flow of water into or outside the sanctuary is necessary for the 
improvement and better management of wild life therein, authorises the issue of 
such permit:  
Provided that where the forest produce is removed from a sanctuary the 
same may be used for meeting the personal bona fide needs of the people living 
in and around the sanctuary and shall not be used for any commercial          
purpose.  
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, grazing or movement of 
livestock permitted under clause (d) of section 33, or hunting of wild animals 
under a permit granted under section 11 or hunting without violating the 
conditions of a permit granted under section 12, or the exercise of any rights 
permitted to continue under clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 24, 
including the bona fide use of drinking and household water by local 
communities until they are settled, shall not be deemed to be an act prohibited 
under this section. 
*  *  *  *  *  * 
 
Destruction, 
etc., in a 
sanctuary 
prohibited 
without a 
permit. 

-2- 
40A.(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (2) and (4) of 
section 40 of this Act, the Central Government may, by notification, require 
any person to declare to the Chief Wild Life Warden or the authorised officer, 
any captive animal, animal article, trophy or uncured trophy derived from 
animals specified in Schedule I  in his control, custody or possession, in respect 
of which no declaration had been made under sub-section (1) or sub-section (4) 
of section 40, in such form, in such manner and within such time as may be 
prescribed.  
(2) Any action taken or purported to be taken for violation of section 40 of 
this Act at any time before the commencement of the Wild Life (Protection) 
Amendment Act, 2002 (16 of 2003) shall not be proceeded with and all 
pending proceedings shall stand abated.  
(3) Any captive animal, animal article, trophy or uncured trophy declared 
under sub-section (1), shall be dealt with in such manner and subject to such 
conditions as may be prescribed. 
*  *  *  *  *  * 
Immunity in 
certain cases. 
62A.(1) The Central Government may, by notification, regulate or prohibit 
the import, trade, possession or proliferation of invasive alien species which 
pose a threat to the wild life or habitat in India.  
(2) The Central Government may authorise the Director or any other 
officer to seize and dispose of, including through destruction, the species 
referred to in the notification issued under sub-section (1). 
*  *  *  *  *  * 
Regulation or 
prohibition of 
import, etc., of 
invasive alien 
species. 
63.(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for all or 
any of the following matters, namely:— 
         (a) *  *  *  *  *  
(b) *  *  *  *  *  
(c) *  *  *  *  *  
(d) *  *  *  *  *  
(e) *  *  *  *  *  
(f) *  *  *  *  *  
(g) *  *  *  *  *  
(h) *  *  *  *  *  
(i) *  *  *  *  *  
(j) *  *  *  *  * 
(k) *  *  *  *  * 
(l) *  *  *  *  * 
    
 (2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a 
total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or 
more successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should 
not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule. 
*  *  *  *  *  * 
Power of 
Central 
Government to 
make rules. 

 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
--------- 
 
 
 
 
 
A 
 
BILL 
  
further to amend the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 
 
----------  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Shri Vishaldada Prakashbapu Patil, M.P.)  