1
THE COMPULSORY CAREER GUIDANCE BILL, 2017
By
SHRI R. DHRUV ANARAYANA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory career counselling and guidance to the students at school
level in order to help them chart a proper career path and choose their professions
accordingly and for matters connected therewith.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Career Guidance Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 261 of  2017
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State, and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "National Career Service" means the National Career Service (NCS) Project,
Government of India, Ministry of Labour and Employment;
(c) "National Review Committee" means the National Review Committee
constituted under section 7;
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(e) "stream" means a course of study or discipline chosen by a student on
completion of his secondary or higher secondary grade Board Exams;
(f) "technical education" shall have the same meaning assigned to it in the All
India Council for Technical Education Act, 1987; and
(g) "vocational training" means education and training which helps to train
people with skills and knowledge that is required in a specific field, particularly in the
labour market.
3. It shall be the responsibility of the appropriate Government to provide compulsory
career counselling to the students in such manner as may be prescribed.
4. For the purposes of section 3, the appropriate Government, with the assistance of
the National Career Service shall—
(a) conduct career counselling and guidance sessions for every student, six
months prior to the secondary and higher secondary grade Board exams;
(b) ensure that career counselling guidance sessions are conducted by trained
and qualified professionals;
(c) ensure that students are well informed about the subjects and the combination
thereof in the stream;
(d) provide students a complete and comprehensive idea of the scope and jobs
that may be available to them after choosing their respective stream;
(e) ensure that students are well informed about the prospects and merits of
vocational training and technical education;
(f) take essential steps for improvement in studies of weak students;
(g) grant scholarship to the students belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the
Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes along with the students, whose
parents are living below poverty line to pursue higher education;
(h) take available steps computer based training; and
(i) undertake such other functions as it deem necessary for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
5. ( 1) The National Career Service shall submit an annual report to the Central
Government mentioning the number of sessions conducted under section 4 along with the
name of the schools and other detail in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Central Government shall cause the report to be laid before both the Houses
of Parliament.
6. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a National Review Committee to evaluate the work of the National Career Service in such
manner as may be prescribed.
Compulsory
Career
Counselling to
students.
Appropriate
Government
to conduct
Compulsory
Career
Counselling
for all students
before
secondary or
higher
secondary
grade Board
exams.
Annual report.
Constitution
of National
Review
Committee.
Definition.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(2) The National Review Committee shall consist of a Chairperson and such number
of experts in the field of employment and training, retired teachers and principals as
members to be appointed by the appropriate Government in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service
of the Chairperson and other experts of the National Review Committee shall be such as
may be prescribed.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite funds to the State Government for carrying out the purpose
of this Act.
8. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carryout the purpose
of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or successive sessions aforesaid
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Act not in
derogation of
other law.
Power to
make rules.
Central
Government to
provide funds.
5
10
15
20

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
History is said to be the greatest teacher of all time and if we were to learn from our
past, then we can clearly see the fact that nations have been built and destroyed by the
power of the youth. Our country is pushing its boundaries to move ahead and stand
equally with the developed countries of the globe, but it has been struggling in reaching its
goal as it fails to mobilize and use its strength in the right direction, the strength being the
youth of this great nation.
Our country is plagued by the epidemic of unemployment and poverty as most of the
students are unsure about their career goals and blindly end up following courses that bear
no results for them. The General Enrollment Ratio (GER) in India drops in the level of higher
education because most of the students drop out and wish to start working. These students
must be informed about the merits of vocational and technical education, so that they can
plan their future and move their career graph forward, instead of being confused and uncertain,
as employment is the ultimate goal for most of them.
Education fails to be priority as most of the population is concerned with feeding
themselves and their families. This Bill would help such students to identify their talents
and would help them to focus their attention on skill development, thereby ensuring that
they have a career even if they do not focus on formal higher education.
Every child needs to identify their true potential and every youth of this nation
deserves to be employed in their relevant sector, and the positive change in that direction
has to be made from the school level itself.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; R. DHRUVANARAYANA
November 29, 2017.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that appropriate Government shall provide career
counselling to all students. Clause 4 empowers the appropriate Government with the assistance
of National Career Service to conduct the career counselling sessions in the schools. Clause 5
provides for the constitution of the National Review Committee for carrying out the purposes
of the Bill. It also provides for grants and scholarships to students belonging to poor
economic backgrounds. Clause 7 provides for Central Government to provide adequate
funds to the State Government. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure to
the tune of rupees seven crore would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees eleven crore is also likely to be involved.

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory career counselling and guidance to the students at school level
in order to help them chart a proper career path and choose their professions accordingly
and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri R. Dhruvanarayana, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2752LS(S3)—20-12-2017.