Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
                   
                                                       
          
Bill No.  261 of  2022
THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
Sඁඋං Rൺඁඎඅ Sඁൾඐൺඅൾ,  M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860. 
Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third  Year of the Republic  of India as 
follows:— 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2022.
 (2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and commencement.

  2 . After section 440 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:—
 “440A. Whoever commits mischief  of stone pelting on any person or property 
(public or private) shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be 
less than one year but which may extend to ten years and with fine which shall not be 
less than rupees fifty thousand but which may extend upto rupees one lakh:
  Provided that in case of public property owned by or in the possession of ,—
(a) the Central Government; or
(b) any State Government; or
(c) any local authority; or
(d) any corporation established by, or under, a Central, Provincial or State Act; or
(e) a company as defined in section 2(20) of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013),
  the person committing mischief by stone pelting shall be punished with rigorous 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than two years but which may extend upto 
ten years and with fine:
  Provided further that a person committing mischief of stone pelting on security 
personnel, police force, healthcare workers, rallies and religious functions shall be punished 
with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than two years but which may 
extend to ten years and with fine: 
  Provided also that if the person fails to pay the fine imposed for the damage done the 
same shall be recovered as an arrear of land revenue.
  Explanation.—  For the purpose of this section,—
  ( a) "public property" means any property, whether immovable or movable (including 
any machinery) which is owned by, or in the possession of, or under the control of the State 
or Central Government;
  ( b) "private property" refers to the ownership of property by private parties essentially 
anyone or anything other than the Government. Private property may consist of real estate, 
buildings, movable property, objects; and
  ( c)  “stone pelting” — refers to criminal assault in the form of stone throwing by 
individuals or mob who pelt, bombard or throw stones at security personnel, police forces, 
healthcare workers, rallies and religious functions/procession or any property.".
   
Insertion of 
section 440A.
Mischief by 
stone pelting.

STATEMENT  OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 Although India does not have any law directly dealing with stone-pelting, there are 
other provisions of the Indian Penal Code that tackle this crime.  These are Section 120B, 
121, 141, 142, 143, 321 to 336, 350 and 427.  Section 120B talks about punishment for 
criminal conspiracy, which may extend to six months and a fine. Section 121 talks about 
waging war against the Government of India, which can be punishable by life. Section 141 
and 142 talk about unlawful assembly and Section 143 about its punishment, which may 
extend up to six months or a fine or both. Section 321 to Section 326 deal with voluntarily 
causing hurt and grievous hurt, which may attract a punishment of up to seven years along 
with a fine depending on the gravity of the injury. Section 350 talks about criminal force, 
which is punishable with imprisonment which may extend to three months or a fine or both. 
Section 427 talks about mischief causing damage to the amount of Rs. 50 or upwards shall 
be punishable for a term which may extend to two years. However, Section 326 was inserted 
with an amendment and two provisions relating to acid attacks were inserted, but stone-
pelting is still to be taken care of. While the Indian Penal Code mentions action against 
rioting and violent activities, it does not include stone pelting or compensation for damages 
for stone pelting.
 Hence this Bill.
       Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                                      RAHUL SHEWALE
      21 November, 2022.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
————
(Shri Rahul Shewale, M.P .)