THE CONTROL OF RISING PRICES  BILL,  2015
A
BILL
By
SHRI RAJESH RANJAN, M.P.
to provide for the deterrent measures for the control of consistently rising prices of
essential  commodities  particularly of  foodgrains, pulses, edible  oils, fruits and
vegetable and items of daily use which have adversely affected the common man
and for prevention of hoarding, profiteering and determination of prices of
 all consumer goods by the appropriate Government to give the desired
 relief to the common man and for matters connected therewith
 and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Control of Rising Prices Act,  2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. 261 of  2015
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “consumer goods” includes all essential commodities of daily use of
consumers such as wheat and wheat products mainly flour, rice and other cereals,
pulses and beans, edible oils, ghee including desi and vanaspati, sugar and jaggery,
salt, soaps and detergents but does not include seasonal vegetables and fruits;
(c) “dealer” means any person, by whatever name known or called, who carries
on the business of selling any consumer good or goods in any manner;
(d) “hoarding” means accumulating consumer goods and their stocks meant for
sale to the general public with a view to concerning such goods and stocks so as to
create artificial scarcity with malicious intention to raise their prices which are very
high and are not competitive;
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(f) “profiteering” with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions means
the sale of any consumer goods at a price or rate higher than the fixed maximum retail
price or prevailing market price; and
(g) “retail price” means such fixed price at which a dealer can sell consumer
goods in retail and such price shall include all taxes levied on such products.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the hoarding of, profiteering in and over pricing of consumer goods and articles in any
manner whatsoever is hereby prohibited.
(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be guilty of an offence
under this Act.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, set up a
Commission for Price Fixation of Consumer Goods for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Commission shall consist of,—
(a) a Chairperson to be appointed by the Central Government with such
qualifications and experience as may be prescribed;
(b) five members to be appointed by the Central Government from amongst the
experts in the field of commodities and consumer goods including representatives of
the public and dealers respectively in such manner as may be prescribed;
(c) four members to be nominated by the State Governments by rotation in the
alphabetical order.
(3) The terms of office of the Chairperson and members and the procedure to be
followed in the discharge of their functions, and the salary and allowances shall be such as
may be prescribed.
(4) The Central Government shall provide Secretarial assistance to the Commission in
such manner as may be prescribed.
5. (1) The Commission shall, by order notified in the Official Gazette, fix the maximum
selling retail price of all consumer goods and commodities which may be charged by a dealer
or the minimum price which is to be paid by a consumer to the dealer.
(2) The Commission may while fixing the prices of the consumer goods, take into
account,—
(i) the quality and durability of the goods.
(ii) the supply and demand position of consumer goods;
(iii) the overall cost of production;
Definitions.
Prohibition of
hoarding of,
profiteering
in and over
pricing of
consumer
goods and
articles.
Constitution
of a Commis-
sion for Price
Fixation of
Consumer
Goods.
Function of
the
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(iv) the losses, if any, during production;
(v) the price of accessories, which in any manner affect the price factor of the
consumer goods;
(vi) the prevailing price and availability position of similar products in the
international market;
(vii) the export potential of the consumer goods;
(viii) any other relevant factor which may be deemed necessary in determining
the price factor of the consumer goods;
(ix) fixation of defferent prices for different consumer goods in different States
or regions as per the local production, consumption and availability and other factors.
(3) After taking into consideration all the relevant factors, the prices fixed under this
Act shall be revised from time to time by the Commission.
(4) The prices fixed under this Act shall be given wide publicity throughout the country
through print, electronic and media in such manner as may be prescribed.
6. (1) It shall be duty of the appropriate Government to implement the provisons of this
Act and the price structure fixed under this Act within its territorial jurisdiction in the manner
it may deem necessary or exepedient to do so for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, ban the
export of consumer goods which are in short supply in the country and allow free import of
such goods in the country.
7. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
every dealer of consumer goods shall,—
(a) display a board showing the maximum retail price of every consumer goods
which he sells at a conspicuous place of his shop or establishment;
(b) display the stock position on daily basis of all the consumer goods available
with him;
(c) maintain a register for the consumer goods and make entries about the goods
giving such details and in such manner as may be prescribed.
8. (1) Any dealer who contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 3 and
profiteers in any consumer goods shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment which
shall not be less than four years but may extend to seven years and also with fine which shall
not be less than five lakh rupees but may extend to ten lakh rupees and the consumer goods
in respect of which the offence has been committed or such part thereof as the trial Court may
deem fit shall be confiscated by the appropriate Government.
(2) Any dealer, consumer or person who in contravention of the provisions of this Act
found deliberately hoarding consumer goods or articles of daily use shall be punished with
rigorous imprisonment which shall not be less than five years but may extend to ten years
and also with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees and the hoarded stock shall be
confiscated by the appropriate Government unders the orders of  the trial Court.
(3) Any dealer who, without valid and reasonable ground refuses to sell any consumer
goods shown in the stock by him to any consumer desirous to purchase the goods or
refuses to sell it at the price fixed under this Act shall be punished with regorous imprisonment
which may extend to five years and also with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees.
(4) Any dealer who contravenes the provisions of section 6 shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and also with fine which may extend
to two lakh rupees.
Appropriate
Government
to implement
the privisions.
Miscellaneous.
Penalty.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
9. When any Police Officer not below the rank of Inspector of Police has reasonable
grounds for believing or has definite information that there has been a contravention of any
provisions of this Act, such officer may, after recording in writing the grounds on his belief,
at all reasonable hours enter and search and place where a dealer keeps, or is for the time
being keeping, any consumer goods covered under this Act and seize the goods under this
Act.
10. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of  Crminal Procedure, 1973 all
offences punishable under this Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable.
(2) Any Police Officer, not below the rank of Inspector of Police, may arrest without
warrant any person against whom a reasonable complaint has been made or creditable
information has been received of his having been involved in any of the offences punishable
under this Act.
11. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
12. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force dealing with any of the matters dealt with in this Act.
13. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive session aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
Power of
search and
seizure.
Cognizance of
offence and
arrest without
Warrant.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to make
Rules.
5
10
15
20
25
2 of 1974.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
These days the general  public particularly the poor, middle class and housewives
have adversely been affected by sharp increase in the prices of consumer goods of daily use.
It is becoming difficult for the households to have two square meals as the atta, rice, pulses,
edible oils, ghee, spices, sugar, vegetables and fruits have become very costly and gone out
of the reach of the common man. This is causing resentment, concern and frustration amongst
the people be it salaried class, middle class, daily wage earners, poor or those living below
the poverty line and mostly the housewives whose budget for kitchen is shrinking very fast.
In order to maintain the balance and keep check on increasing expenditure, the housewives
resort to cut the items or reduce their quantity but in vain. Even Daal-Roti has become a
luxury for almost all the households. Nutrition has become the victim and survival has
become the main issue. On the other hand, the dealers are resorting to profiteering and
selling the goods on premium at their whims and fancy. The wholesellers and others are in
most cases creating artificial scarcity by hoarding the goods with intention of profiteering
later. There is no check on the pricing of any commodity. Prices are fixed by the dealers as per
their choice and it is said that syndicates in different parts determine the prices on daily basis
resulting in price rise of every thing.
Hence, a system of checks and balances has become necessary in order to stabilize the
prices of different consumer goods, which are used by the common man. If a Commission is
set up for this purpose it may fix the retail prices of all consumer goods to protect the poor
consumers in the country. Penal provisions have to be provided for those who do not
comply with the prices determined by the Commission and those who resort to hoarding and
profiteering so as to deter them. This will control the price rise to a great extent and give the
desired results to the common man, those living below poverty line, daily wage earners and
housewives whose household budget has become nightmare for them.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAJESH RANJAN
November 13, 2015.
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for setting up of a Commission to fix the retail prices of
consumer goods for the purposes of the Bill. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that  a sum of rupees one hundred crore
may involve as recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India per annum.
A sum of rupees one hundred crore may also involve as non-recurring expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India.
6

7
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 13 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only the delegation of
legislative power is normal character.

loLOK  SABHAL
————
A
BILL
to provide for the deterrent measures for the control of consistently rising prices of
essential  commodities  particularly of  foodgrains, pulses, edible  oils, fruits and
vegetables and items of daily use which have adversely affected the common man
and for prevention of hoarding, profiteering and determination of prices of
 all consumer goods by the appropriate Government to give the desired
 relief to the common man and for matters connected therewith
 and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Rajesh Ranjan, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2835LS(S3)—01-12-2015.