1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI SHRIRANG APPA BARNE, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted  by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In article 16 of the Constitution, for clause (4), the following clause shall be substituted,
namely:—
"(4) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision for
the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class or
Bill No. 262 of  2016
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title
and com-
mencement.
5
Amendment
of article 16.

2
economically backward class of citizens which, in the opinion of the State, is not
adequately represented in the services under the State.
Explanation.— For the purpose of this clause, the expression ‘economically
backward class' means economically backward class as Parliament may, by law,
determine."
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The reservation system, which came into force soon after coming into force of the
Constitution, has paid rich dividends. The standard of life of the least privileged class of the
society has been improved. In the recent years, there has been a great demand to protect the
economically weaker section of the society as they do not get any sort of assistance or
protection from the Government. This vulnerable chunk of society, which is in huge majority,
is not enjoying fruits of the democracy or any scheme of the Government. They live in utter
poverty and are in need of help from the Government.
Therefore, in order to bring a large chunk of the society in the national mainstream, it
is proposed to reserve some posts or appointments in Government service in favour of
persons belonging to the economically weaker section.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI: SHRIRANG APPA BARNE
October 28, 2016
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *
16( 1) * * * * *
(2) * * * * *
(3) * * * * *
(4) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision for the
reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of citizens which, in
the opinion of the State, is not adequately represented in the services under the State.
* * * * *
Equality of
opportunity
matters of
public
employment.
4

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Shrirang Appa Barne, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2923LS(S3)—17.11.2016.