1
THE REORGANIZATION OF TIME ZONES BILL, 2017
By
SHRI GAURA V GOGOI , M.P.
A
BILL
to establish and demarcate two different Time Zones to provide for more systematic,
inclusive and progressive governance and administration of the country and for
matters connected therewith.
BE  it enacted by the Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Reorganization of Time Zones Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Eastern Indian Standard Time” refers to the time zone to be adhered to by
the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland, Manipur, Mizoram, T ripura, Assam,
Meghalaya, Sikkim, West Bengal, Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, Odisha and Bihar and the
Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands;
(b) “Time Zone” refers to a range of longitudes where a uniform standard time
is used for commercial, social and legal purposes;
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No.  262 of  2017
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
  5
10

2
(c) “Universal Time Coordinated” means Coordinated Universal Time used as
the primary time standard by the world to regulate clocks and time;
(d) “Western Indian Standard Time” refers to the time zone to be adhered to by
the States of Gujarat, Rajasthan, Goa and Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh,
Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Karnataka, New Delhi, Haryana,
Punjab, Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh and Jammu and Kashmir and the Union
territories of Puducherry, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Daman and Diu and Lakshadweep.
3. The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish a
separate Time Zone for the States of,—
(a) Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland, Manipur , Mizoram, T ripura, Assam,
Meghalaya, Sikkim, West Bengal, Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, Odisha and Bihar
and the Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands at Universal Time
Coordinated + 6.30 which shall, for all purposes, be referred to as the Eastern Indian
Standard Time; and
(b) Gujarat, Rajasthan, Goa and Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh,
Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Karnataka, New Delhi, Haryana,
Punjab, Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh and Jammu and Kashmir and the Union
Territories of Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Daman and Diu and Lakshadweep and
Puducherry at Universal Time Coordinated + 5.30 which shall, for all purposes, be
referred to as the Western Indian Standard Time.
4. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, the National Physical Laboratory shall, in consultation with State Government
concerned, implement and administer the Time Zones as referred to section 3 in all areas
connected therewith.
(2) The National Physical Laboratory shall be responsible for the following, but not
restricted to,—
(a) the realization, establishment, maintenance and dissemination of the Eastern
Indian Standard Time and the Western Indian Standard Time as notified;
(b) creation and maintenance of a Time Zone database to disseminate information
related to the functioning of the Time Zone;
(c) publishing information of the database on its website to enable public access;
(d) creation of a Time Zone map that is accurate, to be used for further reference;
and
(e) maintenance of time and frequency measurements with respect to each Time
Zone which shall include upgradation of the same when necessary.
5. The Central Government shall, in anticipation of initial logistical hurdles with
respect to the inter-State functioning of the Railways, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute an Authority to specifically overcome the difficulties arising during the
bifurcation of two Time Zones and deal with all matters connected therewith.
6. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as it appears to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after expiry of one year from the date of
commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be
laid before each House of Parliament.
Demarcation
of Time Zones
by the Central
Government.
National
Physical
Laboratory to
Administer and
Implement
Time Zones.
Central
Government to
constitute an
Authority for
inter-State
functioning of
Railways.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
  5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
India stretches from 97.4 East in Arunachal to 68 East in Gujarat a difference of almost
30 degrees of longitude— that translates essentially into a time difference of two hours.
Globally, across all the larger nations, all but China use multiple Time Zones for increased
efficiency and productivity and easier coordination. Following two separate and specific
Time Zones instead of one standard Time Zone will allow for greater productivity and
efficiency for citizens as well as contribute to savings in energy consumption. Several
precious daylight hours can be more effectively utilized instead of being overlooked.
In 2006 India's Planning Commission released a report that stated that having two
Time Zones would lead to substantial energy savings. In a global scenario that is headed
towards an energy crisis, India can lead the way in modifying its own practices to make a
difference. The initial hurdles in the process of transition are a minor glitch when considering
the long term convenience post implementation of the Time Zones and the overall positive
impact it can have on the general well-being of citizens as well as providing a fillip to
economic activity.
This Bill seeks to initiate a conducive framework for establishing and implementation
of Time Zones more specific to the geographical co-ordinates of the area, eventually leading
to more inclusive and systematic governance.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; GAURAV GOGOI
November 29, 2017.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to constitute an Authority to
deal with logistic hurdles related to inter-State functioning of Railways after implementation
of Time Zones. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about sum of about
rupees twenty crore will be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty crore is also likely to be involved.

5
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to establish and demarcate two different Time Zones to provide for more systematic,
inclusive and progressive governance and administration of the country and for
matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Gaurav Gogoi, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2728LS(S3)—20-12-2017.