1
Bill No.  263  of  2019
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of article 16.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
By
SHRI P.P. CHAUDHARY, M.P .
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In article 16 of the Constitution, in clause (4), for the words ‘‘backward class of
citizens’’, the words ‘‘socially and educationally backward class of citizens’’ shall be
substituted.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Constitution prohibits discrimination on the grounds of religion, race, caste, sex
or place of birth and provides for equality of opportunity in matters of public employment. It
also allows the State to make certain provisions for the advancement of persons belonging
to the backward classes or for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.
Article 15(4) of the Constitution allows the State to make special provisions for the
advancement of any ‘socially and educationally’ backward classes of citizens or for the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. Article 15(5) allows the State to make special
provisions, by law, for advancement of persons belonging to the backward classes or for the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in relation to their admission to educational
institutions, including private and aided or unaided institutions other than minority institutions
as referred to in article 30(1).
Article 16(4) allows the State to make any provisions for the reservation of appointments
or posts in favour of any backward class of the citizens, which in the opinion of the State, is
not adequately represented in the services under the State.
It may be seen that under articles 15(4) and (5) of the Constitution, the State can make
any special provision for advancement of any socially and educationally backward classes
of the citizens or for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, whereas under
article 16(4), the State can make any provision for reservation of appointments or posts in
favour of any backward class of citizens which, in the opinion of the State, is not adequately
represented in the services under the State. Article 16(4) is a broader constitutional provision
for the representation of backward classes whereas article 15(4) and (5) restrict to socially
and educationally backward classes of citizens. This divergence goes against the
Constitutional principles of equality as the opportunities that are made available to all classes
and sub-groups of people by the State should be equal, without elevating one sub-group
over the other. Hence, it is imperative that opportunities in services under the State under
article 16(4) of the Constitution should also be provided on the basis of the same parameters
to Backward Classes as are provided in the matters of admission and other means of
advancement under article 15(4) and (5) of the Constitution. A different set of parameters
should not be used for the advancement of the same classes.
The proposed amendment is also important in light of the fact that article 16(4) in its
current form is too broad and allows scope for misuse. It also brings a number of people
under its purview that may not in fact be deserving for availing benefits of reservation under
above mentioned articles of the Constitution. It is important that benefits that are provided
to the persons belonging to the backward classes should reach to those who deserve the
most and such a criterion can only be established when those who are socially and
educationally backward are given priority. The limited resources of the State must be
apportioned for the benefits of those who deserve and require them the most and  for  this
purpose this Bill has proposed an amendment in article 16(4) of the Constitution.
Hence, this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; P. P. CHAUDHARY
October 28, 2019.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * *
16.( 1)* * * *
(4) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision for the
reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of citizens which, in
the opinion of the State, is not adequately represented in the services under the State.
* * * *
3
Equality of
opportunity
in matters of
public
employment.

MGIPMRND—3057LS(S3)—18-11-2019.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri P.P . Chaudhary, M.P .)