Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
                   
                                                       
          
Bill No. 263 of  2022
THE MENTAL HEALTHCARE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
Dඋ. Sඁඋං඄ൺඇඍ E඄ඇൺඍඁ Sඁංඇൽൾ,  M.P.
A
BILL
 to amend the Mental Healthcare Act, 2017.
Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third  Year of the Republic  of India as 
follows:— 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Mental Healthcare (Amendment) Act, 2022.
 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
   2. In section 17 of the Mental Healthcare Act, 2017 (hereinafter referred to as the 
principal Act), in clause (a), for the words “best interests”, the words “will and preference” 
shall be substituted.
Short title and commencement.
Amendment of section 17.
10 of 2017.

3. In section 21 of the principal Act, in sub-section (4), the following explanation 
shall be inserted, namely:—
  “Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub-section (4), "medical insurance" 
includes the indemnification of the insurer or the hospital in the cases requiring but not 
limited to:—
(i) hospitalization; 
(ii) psychotherapy; 
(iii) medication; 
(iv) cognitive behavioral therapy; 
(v) counseling; or 
(vi) any other form of treatment deemed fit for the patient by a medical 
practitioner or a clinical psychologist.”.
4. In section 65 of the principal Act, for the first proviso of sub-section (3), the 
following proviso shall be substituted, namely:—
 "Provided that till the period the Authority specifies the minimum standards 
for different categories of mental health establishments, after due inspection of such 
mental health establishments by authorities, it shall issue a provisional certificate of 
registration to the mental health establishment.".
   
Amendment of 
section 21.
Amendment of 
section 65.

STATEMENT  OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 The Mental Healthcare Act, 2017 has been lauded as the legislation of the people 
but there are several lacunas in the Act which neglect the agency of the mentally ill person 
under the Act and overlooks the responsibility of the State to provide for a safe space for 
the treatment of the patient. From addiction to dementia to schizophrenia, almost 1 billion 
people worldwide suffer from a mental disorder. Lost productivity as a result of two of 
the most common mental disorders, anxiety and depression, costs the global economy  
US$1 trillion each year. Poor mental health amongst employees costs Indian companies a 
combined  $14 billion a year due to absenteeism, attrition and other reasons. India unfortunately 
lags behind in mental health when compared to other countries. To give an example, the rest of 
the world spends about 5 to 18 per cent. of their GDP on mental health whereas India spends 
only 0.05 per cent. Whereas the problem is huge, according to the latest WHO statistics, 
there are an estimated forty-five million Indians who suffer from depression and another 
45 million who suffer from anxiety. 
 Section 17(a) of the principal Act casts a duty on the nominated representative to 
consider the “best interests” of the mentally ill person, while discharging their duty under 
the act. However, the use of the term ‘best interests”, makes the Act a reluctant acceptance 
to India’s obligation to Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities which asserts 
that the will of the person with disability shall not be undermined, therefore the amendment. 
 The COVID-19 pandemic laid bare the huge gaps in the healthcare system, 
especially in access to affordable mental healthcare. According to a scientific brief released 
by the World Health Organization in March, 2022, the global prevalence of mental illness like 
depression and anxiety increased by 25 per cent. since the pandemic. Access to affordable 
mental healthcare, especially after the pandemic has become a basic need for all individuals. 
The Act instructs insurers to make provisions for medical insurance for treatment of mental 
illness. In the year 2018, the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (hereinafter 
IRDAI) of India had also directed the India Insurance companies to cover mental disorders 
as per the Act. 
 However, a Public Interest Litigation filed in the Supreme Court revealed that the 
insurance companies are in violation of Sec. 21(4) of the Act. Following which the IRDAI 
had instructed the insurance companies to introduce policies for mental illness by October 
2020. Following the IRDAI directive, insurance companies began to offer insurance for 
mental illness but only in case of hospitalization. 
 Treatment of mental illness is not limited to medication or hospitalization. It 
also includes rehabilitation, counseling and psychotherapy. Some mental illnesses like 
depression, anxiety, Bipolar Disorder and other behavioral disorders which are chronic 
in nature may not necessitate hospitalization but require other aids for treatment like 
psychotherapy and medication. Such treatment can be very hard on the pockets thereby 
causing economic burden on the family of the patient. An amendment to the Act, extending 
insurance benefits for mental illness which do not necessarily require hospitalization with 
a goal to reduce financial burden on the families of people suffering from mental illness is 
necessary, therefore the amendment is proposed. 

 Section 65 of the Act provides for registration of the Mental Healthcare 
Establishments, but the first proviso to Section 65(3) of the Act allows for issuance a 
provisional certificate of registration to the mental health establishment without any 
inspection of the same. Since mental healthcare establishments are a place of primary care 
for the mentally ill patients, it can be detrimental to the safety of the patients to allow for 
even temporary registration of the establishment without due diligence from the end of the 
State. Therefore it is imperative that even the provisional certificate be issued only after due 
inspection of the establishment, therefore the amendment.  
 Hence the bill.
            Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                 SHRIKANT EKNATH SHINDE
22 November,  2022.

ANNEXURE 
Eඑඍඋൺർඍඌ Oൿ Rൾඅൾඏ ൺඇඍ Sൾർඍංඈඇඌ Fඋඈආ Tඁൾ
 Mൾඇඍൺඅ Hൾൺඅඍඁർൺඋൾ Aർඍ, 2017
(Aർඍ Nඈ. 10 ඈൿ 2017)
*                         *                            *          *
 17. While fulfilling his duties under this Act, the nominated representative shall—
  ( a) consider the current and past wishes, the life history, values, cultural 
background and the best interests of the person with mental illness;
*                         *                            *          *
21. (1) Every person with mental illness shall be treated as equal to persons with 
physical illness in the provision of all healthcare which shall include the following, 
namely:—
*                         *                            *                        *   
(4) Every insurer shall make provision for medical insurance for treatment of mental 
illness on the same basis as is available for treatment of physical illness.
*                         *                            *          *   
65. (1) No person or organisation shall establish or run a mental health establishment 
unless it has been registered with the Authority under the provisions of this Act.  
*                         *                            *          *   
(3) The Authority shall, on receipt of application under sub-section (2), on being 
satisfied that such mental health establishment fulfils the standards specified by the 
Authority, issue a certificate of registration in such form as may be prescribed:
   Provided that till the period the Authority specifies the minimum standards for 
different categories of mental health establishments, it shall issue a provisional 
certificate of registration to the mental health establishment. 
*                         *                            *          *   
                               
Duties of 
nominated 
representative.
Right to equality 
and non-
discrimination.
Registration of 
mental health 
establishment.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Mental Healthcare Act, 2017.
————
(Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde, M.P .)