1
Short title
and extent.
THE  AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE (REMUNERATIVE
SUPPORT PRICES AND MISCELLANEOUS
PROVISIONS) BILL, 2017
By
SHRI SUKHBIR SINGH JAUNAPURIA, M.P.
A
BILL
to  provide for the establishment of an Agricultural Produce Price Fixation Board
to fix the remunerative support price of agricultural produce including fruits
and vegetables on annual and seasonal basis and timely intervention by the
Government at the time of steep fall in prices of such produce in the open
market and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Y ear of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Agricultural Produce (Remunerative Support Prices
and Miscellaneous Provisions)  Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Agricultural produce” includes wheat, paddy, pulses, sugarcane, cotton,
oil seeds, coarse grains like maize, millet, jowar, bajra, gram, soyabean, fruits and
Bill  No. 263 of  2017
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
ON 29.12.2017
Definitions.5

2
vegetables such as potato, onion, tomato, cauliflower, cabbage including such other
agricultural or horticultural produce which are used for human consumption or for
any medicinal purposes;
(b) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the State Government
and in the other cases, the Central Government;
(c) "Board" means the Agricultural Produce Price Fixation Board established
under section 3;
(d) "Government agency" means and includes any agency of the Government
by whatever name called or which receives grants from the Government and which is
engaged in procurement, distribution and canalising agricultural produces; and
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3.  (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but not later than six
months from the date of commencement of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette,
establish a Board to be known as Agricultural Produce Price Fixation Board.
 (2) The Headquarters of the Board shall be at Hyderabad in the State of
Andhra Pradesh.
(3) The Board shall consist of:—
(a) A Chairperson and a Deputy Chairperson with agricultural background
and holding agricultural qualifications, to be appointed by the Central Government;
(b) one member from each zonal office of the Board;
(c) one member each to represent the Union Ministries dealing with Agriculture,
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution, Food Processing Industries and
Chemicals and Fertilisers;
(d) one member to represent the Indian Council of Agricultural Research;
(e) four members to be appointed by the Central Government from amongst the
farmers and agricultural labourers, in rotation from various States; and
(f) four members of Parliament, of whom two shall be from Lok Sabha and two
from Rajya Sabha, to be nominated by the Presiding Officers of the respective Houses.
(4) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual
succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose off property, both
movable and immovable, and to contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
(5) The Board shall set up one zonal office each in the eastern, western, northern,
north eastern, central and southern parts of the country comprising of such States and
Union territories, as may be determined by the Board and each zonal office shall consist of
such members as may be prescribed.
(6) The term of office of the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and the manner of
filling vacancies and the procedure to be followed in the discharge of their functions shall
be such as may be prescribed.
4. (1) The Board shall,—
(i) fix and declare minimum remunerative support prices of agricultural produce
before every sowing season after examining the recommendations of all the zonal
offices:
Provided that different prices may be fixed for different produce and for different
zones;
(ii) fix the issue prices of foodgrains for retail sale to consumers every year.
Establishment
of an
Agricultural
Produce Price
Fixation
Board.
Functions of
the Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
Government
agencies to
purchase
agricultural
produce.
(2) The Board shall perform its functions in close liaison with Government agencies,
institutions including co-operative societies and such other authorities concerned with the
procurement, supply, distribution, trade of agricultural produce and avoid duplication of
efforts.
(3) The Board shall give wide publicity to the remunerative prices fixed for agricultural
produce through electronic and print media throughout the country.
5. (1) It shall be the duty of each zonal office of the Board to recommend to the Board
the remunerative support prices of agricultural produce in respect of its jurisdiction.
(2) Every zonal office of the Board, before recommending the minimum support
remunerative prices of agricultural produce, shall take into account all relevant factors, but
in particular, the following, namely:—
(a) average capital investment made by farmers in growing the produce;
(b) average labour charges;
(c) interest on loans borrowed for growing the produce;
(d) premium for crop insurance, if any;
(e) maintenance cost of the land;
(f) expenditure on fertilizers, seeds and electricity, etc.;
(g) any concession, rebate or subsidy provided by Government in relation to
agricultural produce;
(h) prevailing open market price of each product;
(i) climatic conditions and incidence of natural calamities like floods, droughts,
hailstorms, cyclones and untimely rains; and
(j) average monthly household expenditure of an average farmer.
6.  (1) In case any farmer fails to sell his produce in the open market at the desired
prices, the Central Government shall purchase his produce at the price fixed by the Board
through Government agencies.
(2) If there is a steep fall in the prices of agricultural produce in the open market, it
shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to intervene through its agencies in the
market to ensure that farmers shall get minimum support price of the produce and take such
other measures as it may deem necessary to handle the situation and protect the interests
of the farmers.
7. (1) If any farmer is not satisfied with the declaration of price fixed for any agricultural
produce, he may file an appeal to the Central Government within thirty days for reviewing of
such price.
(2) The Central Government shall give its decision within fifteen days from the date of
filing of such appeal.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the Board for carrying out the purpose of this Act.
9. The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Function of
the zonal
office.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Appeal to
Central
Government
regarding
price
fixation.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
In our country, the farmer and his family entirely depends on the crop he grows and
reaps. The crop is the result of his hard work and his expectations are always for the
remunerative prices so that he could repay the loans which he borrowed for growing
agricultural produce and to meet social obligations and household expenditure. But
unfortunately, it is an usual phenomenon that in the immediate post harvest period the
prices of most of the agricultural produce decline very sharply and farmers are left high and
dry and at the mercy of unscrupulous traders who exploit them to the maximum possible.
Similarly, it is now very common that whenever there is bumper crop of anything, be
it foodgrains or vegetables, the prices of such items fall very steeply. For instance when
there is bumper crop of any commodities, their prices fall to the extent that the growers have
no choice but to throw them on the roadsides and it has been noticed that the farmers
sometimes burn their sugarcanes on the fields. But even the Government does not come to
their rescue. Hence, there is an urgent need to provide that Government should intervene at
such times to protect the interests of the farmers.
The Agricultural Ministry of the Union Government fixes the minimum support prices
of agricultural produce but generally such prices are not realistic ones and there has always
been discontentment amongst the farmers regarding such prices because they remain far
below the expectations of the farmers. It is, therefore, necessary to set up a statutory
autonomous Agricultural Produce Price Fixation Board and including therein the
representatives of the farmers and agricultural labourers to fix the remunerative prices for
agricultural produce taking into consideration all the aspects. It will also be mandatory for
the Government to purchase agricultural produce from the farmers through their agencies.
It is felt that the guarantee of a minimum assured price will further give the requisite boost
to our agriculture sector and our farmer will prosper which he really deserves.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SUKHBIR SINGH JAUNAPURIA
November 29, 2017.
5

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of  Agricultural Produce Price
Fixation Board. It further provides for setting up of zonal offices. Clause 4 provides that the
Board shall give wide publicity through electronic and print media about the prices fixed.
Clause 6 provides that the Central Government shall purchase agricultural produce at the
prices fixed by the Board. Clause 8 provides for payment of adequate funds to the Board for
carrying out the purposes of the Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted and brought into
operation, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that
a sum of rupees fifty crore may be involved as recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one thousand crore may also be involved.
6

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to the matters of detail only the delegation
of legislative power is, of a normal character.
7

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to  provide for the establishment of an Agricultural Produce Price Fixation Board
to fix the remunerative support price of agricultural produce including fruits
and vegetables on annual and seasonal basis and timely intervention by the
Government at the time of steep fall in prices of such produce in the open
market and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Sukhbir Singh Jaunapuria, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3394LS(S3)—02-01-2018.