 
As ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Bill No. 264 of 2022
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2022
By
Sඁඋං Aൻൽඎඅ Kඁൺඅൾඊඎൾ, M.P.
ൺ
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, 2022.     
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In PART-II of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, after CHAPTER-IV , the 
following Chapter and section thereunder shall be inserted, namely:—   
CHAPTER IVA
Mൺඑංආඎආ Tൾඋආ ඈൿ Mൾආൻൾඋඌඁංඉ ඈൿ Pൺඋඅංൺආൾඇඍ ൺඇൽ Sඍൺඍൾ Lൾ඀ංඌඅൺඍඎඋൾ
“11C. No person shall be elected as a member to either House of Parliament or of the 
Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council of a State for more than three terms for the 
each membership.”.
5
Short title and 
commencement.
Insertion of new 
Chapter IV A.
Maximum Term 
of Membership 
of Parliament 
and State 
Legislature.
43 of 1951.
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Since independence, we as a country embraced a democratic system of governance. The 
democratic framework has given the citizens to form any political party, join any political 
party and exercise his or her democratic right. However, it has been seen that with the 
passage of time the democratic framework has rusted in many places with no development 
in political ideology, lack of fresh and innovative ideas and at places the archaic systems are 
still being followed. The political leaders continue for long and thus not introduce any kind 
of variation in the systems. 
To bring change in the system and to infuse new methods and ideas we need to think 
differently. To bring freshness in the political biosphere there is a need to stipulate the tenure 
of political leaders in their capacity as elected representative and develop scope of rotation. 
The term of each person be at State Legislature (both houses where applicable) and at 
Parliament (both houses) should be restricted to a maximum of three terms separately. 
Hence this Bill.
    Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                                                                ABDUL KHALEQUE                                                             
November 23, 2022

LOK SABHA
_______
ൺ
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
_______
(Shri Abdul Khaleque, M.P .)