1
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No.  264 of  2016
THE STATE OF ARUNACHAL PRADESH (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI NINONG ERING, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the State of Arunachal Pradesh Act, 1986.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.   (1) This Act may be called the State of Arunachal Pradesh (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the State of Arunachal Pradesh Act, 1986, for section 35, the following section
shall be substituted, namely:—
"35. (1) On and from the date of commencement of the State of Arunachal Pradesh
(Amendment) Act, 2016, there shall be constituted for the State of Arunachal Pradesh
a separate cadre each of the Indian Administrative Service, the Indian Police Service
and the Indian Forest Service.
5
10
Substitution of
new section
for section 35.
Separate cadre
of All India
Services.
69 of 1986.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(2) The initial strength and composition of the State cadre shall be such as the
Central Government may, by order, determine.
(3) The members of each of the all India services borne on the joint cadre AGMUT
(Arunachal Pradesh, Goa, Mizoram and Union Territories) shall, on and from the
commencement of the State of Arunachal Pradesh (Amendment) Act, 2016, be allocated
to the State cadre of the same service constituted in such manner and with effect from
such date as the Central Government may, by order, specify.
(4) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect the operation, on or after the
commencement of the State of Arunachal Pradesh (Amendment) Act, 2016, of the
All India Services Act, 1951, or the rules and regulations made thereunder.".
Strength and
composition
of the State
cadre.
61 of 1951.
5
10

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The law relating to recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to the
All India Services is contained in the All India Services Act, 1951 and the rules and regulations
made thereunder. At present, there is a joint cadre of the All India Services for
Arunachal Pradesh, Goa, Mizoram and Union Territories (AGMUT). The demand for a separate
cadre in respect of Arunachal Pradesh is necessary in present dynamic structures of
administration. Officers who spend a good amount of time in the State and understand it
better in terms of administration are transferred to other location of AGMUT cadre probably
never to return which creates gap in administrative understanding. When joint cadre was
allotted to Arunachal Pradesh, it was a new State. But time has arrived now to consider a
separate cadre for Arunachal Pradesh under All India Services which will only simplify
administration and make governance more efficient and effective in the State of Arunachal
Pradesh.
Even smaller States like Manipur, Tripura and Sikkim have their own separate cadre
now but a larger State like Arunachal Pradesh does not have one. Thus, the Government
should provide a separate cadre to the State of Arunachal Pradesh now. Section 35 of the
State of Arunachal Pradesh Act, 1986 contains provisions relating to the All India Services.
This section has to be amended in order to create a separate cadre for the State of Arunachal
Pradesh from present AGMUT cadre in all three All India Services.
Accordingly, it is proposed to amend the State of Arunachal Pradesh Act, 1986 relating
to All India Services to give effect to the aforesaid proposal.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; NINONG ERING
October 8, 2016.

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE STATE OF ARUNACHAL PRADESH ACT, 1986
69 OF 1986
* * * * * *
35. Every member of the Indian Administrative Service; the Indian Police Service and
the Indian Forest Service who, immediately before the appointed day, is holding any post in
the existing Union Territory of Arunachal Pradesh shall, until otherwise directed by the
Central Government, be deemed to be on deputation, on and from the appointed day, to the
Government of the State of Arunachal Pradesh on the same terms and conditions of service
as are applicable to him under the relevant cadre rules:
Provided that the period of such deputation shall in no case extend beyond a period of
three years from the appointed day.
Explanation.— In this section, "cadre rules" means the Indian Administrative Service
(Cadre) Rules, 1954, the Indian Police Service (Cadre) Rules, 1954 or the Indian Forest Service
(Cadre) Rules, 1966, as the case may be.
* * * * * *
Provisions
relating to All
India Services.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the State of Arunachal Pradesh Act, 1986.
————
(Shri Ninong Ering, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2926L(S3)—17.11.2016.