1
Short title.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI NISHIKANT DUBEY, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows: —
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2016.
Bill No. 265 of  2016
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. After article 370 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
“370A. Notwithstanding anything contained in articles 80 and 81, until the area of the
State of Jammu and Kashmir and Gilgit-Baltistan under the occupation of Pakistan ceases to
be so occupied and the people residing in that area elect their representatives,
(i) five seats in the House of the People and one seat in the Council of States
shall remain vacant, but such seats shall not be taken into account for reckoning the
total membership of the House of the People or the Council of States, as the case may
be; and
(ii) the said area shall be excluded in delimiting the territorial constituencies
under article 82.".
Seats in the
House of the
People and in
the Council of
States to be
kept for the
territory of the
State of Jammu
and Kashmir
and Gilgit-
Baltistan under
the occupation
of Pakistan.
Insertion of
new article
370A.
5
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
A large part of the State of Jammu and Kashmir and Gilgit Baltistan was occupied by
Pakistan after the 1948 war between two countries. Even after the passage of sixty-six years
of the said war, that area, which legitimately belongs to India, still remains under the occupation
of Pakistan. The solution to the Kashmir imbroglio is possible only when the area under
illegal occupation of Pakistan is returned to India and the people there are able to live in a free
and democratic environment.
It is a matter of extreme surprise that the composition of the Lower House, i.e. the
House of the People, does not take into account this territory which is under illegal
occupation of another country. The State Legislature of Jammu and Kashmir keeps twenty-
four seats in the assembly vacant for the territory under illegal occupation of Pakistan
until that area is reunited with the State. However, no such provision exists in the case of
the House of the People and the Council of States. It would be proper that for the area of
the State of Jammu and Kashmir including Gilgit Baltistan under illegal occupation of Pakistan,
five seats in the House of the People and one seat in the Council of States be kept vacant till
that area is reunited with the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; NISHIKANT DUBEY
October 20, 2016.
3

GMGIPMRND—2876LS(S3)—17.11.2016.
LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Nishikant Dubey, M.P.)