AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
Bill No. 265 of  2024 
THE ADVOCATES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024 
By 
SHRI OMPRAKASH BHUPALSINH ALIAS PAVAN 
RAJENIMBALKAR, M.P. 
A 
BILL 
Further to amend the Advocates Act, 1961. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows: 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Advocates (Amendment) Act,
2024. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, and 
different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act. 
Short title and 
Commencement. 

 
-2- 
 
2. In section 2 of the Advocates Act, 1961, (hereinafter referred 
to as the principal Act), in sub-section (1),- 
(i) for clause (a) the following clauses, shall be 
substituted, namely:— 
"(a) "advocate" means and advocate entered in any roll 
under the provisions of this Act and includes an advocate 
carrying on practice in law with a law firm”;  
(aa) "Advocates Nurture Fund" means the fund 
constituted by the Central Government under section 44C to 
be specifically used for the purposes mentioned under 
section 44A;"; 
(ii) after clause (g), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:- 
(ga) "junior advocate" means a law graduate who has 
enrolled with the bar council of any State or Union Territory 
of India and who has passed All India Bar Exam (AIBE) 
conducted by Bar Council of India, a statutory body 
constituted under the advocates act, 1961 and whose annual 
income does not exceed rupees two lakh per annum;”; 
 
Amendment of 
section 2. 
3. After section 44 of the principle Act, the following sections 
shall be inserted, namely:— 
 
"CHAPTER - VA 
SOCIAL SECURITY BENEFITS 
 
44A. (1) The Central Government shall, in consultation 
with the Bar Council of India, formulate and notify, from 
time to time, suitable welfare schemes for practicing lawyers 
on matters relating to,- 
(a) life insurance cover up to the age of fifty 
years; 
(b) health benefits; 
(c) stipend for junior advocates; 
(d) group health insurance cover; 
(e) compensation in case of death; and 
(f) any other benefits as may be determined by 
the Central Government. 
Insertion of new 
sections 44A and 
44B. 
 
 
 
 
 
Nurture Schemes 
for Practising  
Lawyers. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
-3- 
 
(2) The State Government may, in consultation with the 
State Bar Council formulate and notify, from time to time, 
suitable welfare schemes for practicing advocates, including 
schemes relating to— 
(a) chamber building;  
(b) organization of seminars, lectures symposiums 
for knowledge re-orientation; and 
(c)  the organization of other scheme for the nurture 
of needy Advocates. 
 
44B. The Central Government shall, in consultation with 
the Bar Council of India, formulate and notify, from time to 
time, suitable stipend scheme for junior advocates for a 
period of three years or till starting independent practice or 
till he reaches the age of twenty-seven years, whichever is 
earlier, from the date of passing the All India Bar Exam 
(AIBE). 
44C. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification 
in the Official Gazette constitute a fund to be called the 
“Advocates’ Nurture Fund” which shall be managed by the 
Central Government in consultation with the Bar Council of 
India in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(2) The Fund shall be made up of,- 
      (a)  any grants made to the Fund by the Central 
Government; 
       (b)   all contributions made to it by the Bar Council 
of India and State Bar Councils;   
(c) any voluntary donation or contribution made to 
the Fund by  any Advocate, including any sum received 
from the insurance company on the death of an Advocate 
insured under the group life insurance policy where such 
Advocate had nominated the Trustees Committee as the 
person to whom the money secured by the policy shall be 
paid in the event of his death;  
(d) any profits or dividends received from the 
insurance company in respect of the policy of group life 
insurance of Advocates; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Stipend for 
Junior 
Advocates. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Constitution of 
the Advocates 
Social Nurture 
Fund. 

 
-4- 
 
(e)  any interest or dividend or other return or any 
investment made in respect of any part of the Fund; and 
(f)  all admission fees and annual subscription for 
membership of the Scheme received and interest, if any, 
thereon.”. 
 
  

 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 
In spite of the various court(s) noting the plight of talented junior advocates leaving 
advocacy on account of financial instability, there have been very less progress on that front..  
In a recent research by Vidhi Centre for Legal Policy, which sowed that more than  
“79 per cent of the advocates across seven high courts with less than two years of legal 
practice at the Bar are earning less than Rs. 10,000/- per month”. The numbers of young 
advocates who are entering Litigation ae on decline because of the sole reason of lack of 
institutional financial support. 
Majority of advocates at the High Courts of Allahabad, Bombay, Kerala, Madras and 
Patna were of the opinion that young lawyers earned between rupees two thousand and rupees 
five thousand per month, during their first two years of practice. 
Advocates, as architects of justice, play a crucial role in ensuring society remains 
intact and justice is served. In their tireless pursuit for upholding justice, advocates remind us 
that justice s not just a concept but a way of life; 
This seeks to amend the Advocates Act, 1961 with a view to constitute Advocates’ 
Nurture Fund and the rules for the disbursement funds to be made by the Central or the State 
Government to creates a financial security net for the advocates who have retired from 
practicing because of their age or illness and to the young lawyers who have just started out in 
the profession for their sustenance.  
Hence this Bill. 
 
 
    OMPRAKASH BHUPALSINH ALIAS                                                                                       
PAVAN RAJENIMBALKAR 
 New Delhi 
November 11, 2024. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
 
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of the Advocates' Nurture Fund to be 
managed by the Central Government. It also provides for the Central Government to provide 
grants for the fund. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund 
of India. However, at this stage it is not possible to calculate the exact amount which is likely 
to be incurred towards recurring and non-recurring expenditure for the purpose. 
  

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE ADVOCATE ACT, 1961 
ACT NO. 25 OF 1961 
*  *  *  * 
2.(1) *  *  *  * 
(a) “advocate” means an advocate entered in any roll 
under the provisions of this Act; 
*  *  *  * 
 
(i) “Legal practitioner” means an advocate or vakil 
or any High Court, a pleader, mukhtar or revenue agent; 
*  *  *  * 
(n) “State roll” means a roll of advocates prepared and 
maintained by a State Bar Council under section 17. 
*  *  *  * 
 
 
Definitions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
———— 
 
 
A 
BILL 
 
 
 
further to amend the Advocates Act,1961. 
 
 
 
——— 
 
 
 
 
(Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh Alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar, M.P.) 