1
THE  INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
By
SHRI BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB, M.P .
A
BILL
further to amend the  Indian Penal Code, 1860.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 265 of  2019
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Sedition.
Substitution of
new section
for section
124A.
2. For section 124A of the Indian Penal Code 1860, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:—
“124A. Whoever, by words, either spoken or written or by signs, or by visible
representation, or otherwise, brings or attempts to bring into hatred or contempt, or
excites or attempts to excite disaffection towards, the Government established by law
in India, and thereby generates an inclination to cause harm to public order by violent
acts, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, to which fine may be added, or with
imprisonment which may extend to three years, to which fine may be added, or with
fine.
Explanation 1.—The expression “disaffection” includes disloyalty and all
feelings of enmity.
Explanation 2.—Mere casual raising of slogans against the Government
established by law in India shall not amount to sedition unless there is direct and
imminent incitement to violence.”.
45 of 1860.
5
10

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The provision of sedition did not find place in the Indian Penal Code when it was
enacted in 1860. Subsequently, for purely political reasons, section 124A was inserted in the
Code by the British colonial Government. The section was liberally used to stifle free speech
and many nationalist leaders, including Bal Gangadhar Tilak and Mahatma Gandhi, were
tried under this section, so much so that Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru once described this section
as “highly objectionable and obnoxious”.
In such historical backdrop, it was expected that the provisions relating to sedition
would not remain in our statute books. However, not only was the provision retained in the
statute book, its constitutionality was upheld by the Supreme Court in Kedarnath versus
State of Bihar (1962). Since then, the provisions have stood firmly in the statute book and
have been used a number of times by successive Governments.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to restrict the scope of the definition of sedition to only such
cases which bring or attempt to bring into hatred or contempt, or excite or attempt to excite
disaffection towards, the Government established by law in India, and thereby generates an
inclination to cause harm to public order by violent acts.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above object.
N
EW DELHI; BHARTRUHARI  MAHTAB
October 25, 2019.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
(45 OF 1860)
* * * * *
124A. Sedition
Whoever, by words, either spoken or written, or by signs, or by visible representation,
or otherwise, brings or attempts to bring into hatred or contempt, or excites or attempts to
excite disaffection towards the Government established by law in India,  shall be punished
with imprisonment for life, to which fine may be added, or with imprisonment which may
extend to three years, to which fine may be added, or with fine.
Explanation 1—The expression “disaffection” includes disloyalty and all feelings of
enmity.
Explanation 2 —Comments expressing disapprobation of the measures of the
attempting to excite hatred, contempt or disaffection, do not constitute an offence under this
section.
Explanation 3—Comments expressing disapprobation of the administrative or other
action of the Government without exciting or attempting to excite hatred, contempt or
disaffection, do not constitute an offence under this section.
* * * * *
4

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
————
(Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—2992LS(S3)—15-11-2019.