1
THE COMPULSORY VOTING BILL, 2014
By
SHRI SUKHBIR SINGH JAUNAPURIA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory voting by the electorate in the country and for matters
connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh  Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory V oting Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  It shall be compulsory for every voter who is eligible to vote at an election to
exercise his right to vote when called for by the Election Commission:
Provided that a voter may be exempted from exercising his right to vote—
(a) if he is physically incapacitated from an illness of a serious nature and
produces a medical certificate from a registered medical practitioner certifying such
incapacity; or
(b) if the Election Commission or such other authority as may be empowered by
the Election Commission, on receipt of a request either before or after the poll, from the
voter, is satisfied that there are genuine and bona fide grounds for such exemption.
Bill No. 266 of  2016
Short title;
extent and
commencement.
Compulsory
voting.
5
10
15
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
3. The Election Commission shall ensure protection and safety of all citizens who come
to polling booths to cast their votes.
4. The Election Commission shall send a list of names of all eligible voters, who have
not cast their votes, to Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be.
5. (1) There shall be set up adequate number of polling booths at convenient locations,
in every constituency of the House of the People or Legislative Assembly, as the case may
be.
(2) The polling booths shall be set up in such a way—
(i) that number of voters in each booth shall be equal to the extent possible;
(ii) that the distance between one polling booth and another shall not exceed
five hundred meters:
Provided that in hilly regions and desert areas polling booths may be set up according
to geographical convenience and density of population.
6. There shall be made suitable arrangements enabling the persons deployed in
connection with the polling duty to cast their votes.
7. There shall be made separate arrangement in every polling booth for senior citizens,
physically challenged persons and pregnant women to enable them to cast their votes.
8. Any person, who fails to cast his vote shall be liable to—
(i) A fine of rupees  five hundred, or
(ii) two day's imprisonment, or
(iii) forfeiture of his ration card;
(iv) be rendered ineligible for contesting any election for a period of ten years
from the date of his conviction;
(v) be ineligible for allotment of a plot or a house in a Government owned
organisation;
(vi) be ineligible to get loan of any kind from any financial institution owned by
the Government;
(vii) be ineligible for entitlement to any welfare scheme announced by the
Government from time to time:
Provided that if such person is an employee of the Union Government or the State
Government or the Union territory administration or any public sector undertaking owned or
controlled by Union Government or the State Government or the Union territory administration,
such person shall also be punished with—
(a) forfeiture of ten days 'salary; and
(b) delay in promotion for a period of two years.
Protection
and safety for
voters at
polling
booths.
Sending of list
of names of
voters not
casting their
votes to the
Government.
Adequate
number and
spacing of
polling
booths.
Special
arrangements
for poll staff.
Special
arrangements
for senior
citizens, etc.
Punishment.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

3
9. Any person who, despite his illness or physical incapacity has exercised his rights
to vote at an election or any person who has exercised his right to vote at all elections held
during a period of fifteen years preceding the commencement of this Act without any break
shall be—
(i) given preference in jobs in the services under the Central Government; and
(ii) given preference in admission to the institutions of higher education.
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to
make rules.
Incentive for
voting.
5
10
15

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Our country is the largest democracy in the world having population of more than a
billion. But it has been seen that only about thirty-five to forty per cent. of  the eligible voters
exercise their right to vote. During almost all the elections in the country,  it has been
observed that the number of actual voters is far below the number of eligible voters. Therefore,
the average voting is very low. This type of electoral trend makes it clear to us that suitable
steps are necessary to encourage the citizens to exercise their right to vote in order to elect
their representative so that the results of the election show the will of all the electors and not
just a segment of them.
In the last few elections, the problem of low voting percentage has become worse and
the voting percentage has gone down even below thirty-five per cent. In many cases, citizens
either deliberately avoid casting their votes or even boycot elections. Therefore, the Bill
seeks to make voting compulsory for all the electors subject to certain restrictions so that the
voting percentage in the country is increased. However, the citizens who are either physically
incapacitated or have bona fide reasons have been given exemption under the Act.
Since voting is being made compulsory, punishment is also sought to be given to
those who do not cast their votes. At the same time, incentives are also proposed for those
who do exercise their right to vote without break or in spite of illness.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SUKHBIR SINGH JAUNAPURIA
November 2, 2016
4

5
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 provides for setting up of adequate polling booths in every constituency.
Clauses 6 and 7 provide for special arrangements for persons deployed for poll duty and for
special arrangements for senior citizens, physically challenged persons and pregnant women
to enable them to cast their votes. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about
rupees eight crore is likely to be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fourteen crore is also likely to be involved.

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill which will relate to matters of detail only. The delegation of legislative
power is, therefore, of a normal character.

GMGIPMRND—2992LS(S3)—17-11-2016.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory voting by the electorate in the country and for matters
connected therewith.
————
(Shri Sukhbir Singh Jaunapuria, M.P. )