Short title and 
commencement.
5
AS ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Bill No. 266 of  2022
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
Sඁඋං Sඁඒൺආ Sංඇ඀ඁ Yൺൽൺ ඏ, M.P.
ൺ
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In article 85 of the Constitution,—
(a) in clause 1, the following proviso shall be added at the end, namely:–
“Provided that the Parliament shall meet for not less than one hundred and forty
working days in a calendar year.”.

(b) after clause 2, the following explanation shall be inserted, namely:–
“Explanation.— For the purpose of this article, “working days” shall include any day on which there is a joint sitting of the Houses and not include any period, exceeding two days for which the Parliament is adjourned.”.
2

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In the last five years, the average number of working days for the Indian Parliament 
has fallen consistently. As a result, the time spent on discussing bills has also reduced. 
In the United Kingdom, Parliament sits for an average of one hundred and fifty days 
each year. In the United States, Congress sits for upwards of one hundred days each 
year. The German Bundestag sits for an average of one hundred and five days each year, 
and has a pre-set calendar.
In the year 2018, as many as twenty-five per cent Bills in the Lok Sabha were 
passed in less than thirty minutes and the entire Union Budget of 2018 was passed in 
less than thirty minutes.
As the Government keeps restricting the Parliament’s calendar, the opposition’s 
space to be effective is constrained leading to ever increasing disruptions in Parliament. 
India needs to set high standards for Parliamentary democracy amongst international 
peers as well as its own leaders.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;       SHYAM SINGH YADA V
November 23, 2022
3

ANNEXURE
[Eඑඍඋൺർඍ ൿඋඈආ ඍඁൾ Cඈඇඌඍංඍඎඍංඈඇ ඈൿ Iඇൽංൺ]
 * * * * * *
85. (1) The President shall from time to time summon each House of Parliament to meet 
at such time and place as he thinks fit, but six months shall not intervene between its last 
sitting in one session and the date appointed for its first sitting in the next session.
(2) The President may from time to time— 
(a) prorogue the Houses or either House; 
(b) dissolve the House of the People.
 * * * * * *
Sessions of 
Parliament, 
prorogation and 
dissolution.
4

(Shri Shyam Singh Yadav, M.P .) 