1
Short title.
Bill No.  267 of  2015
THE  CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRIMATI POONAM MAHAJAN, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2015.
2. For article 331 of the Constitution, the following article shall be substituted
namely:—
"331. Notwithstanding anything in article 81, the President may, if he is of
opinion that—
(a) the Anglo-Indian community is not adequately represented in the
House of the People, nominate not more than two members of that community to
the House of the People; and
Substitution
of new article
for article
331.
Representation
of the Anglo-
Indian and the
Overseas
Indian
communities
in the House
of the People.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
(b) the Overseas Indian community is not adequately represented in the House
of the People, nominate not more than eight members of that community, having
special knowledge or practical experience in respect of such matters as business,
literature, science, art, sports and social service from South Asia, South East Asia
and Asia Pacific region, Middle East, Central Asia, Africa, Europe, North America
and South America to the House of the People.".
5

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Indian Diaspora is about twenty-two million strong and spread across nearly two
hundred countries. The Indian Diaspora facilitated and promoted invaluable cultural, economic
and political exchanges between India and their country of residence. In this age of
globalization, the tangible and intangible benefits accrued to the country's progress due to
such exchanges cannot be overlooked. The extraordinary success of overseas Indians are
celebrated widely in India and their contributions have been acknowledged by the Government
through Pravasi Bhartiya Samman. In addition to this, Non-Resident Indian's voting rights
were enhanced when the Government accepted the Election Commission's recommendations
for allowing Non-Resident Indians to cast their votes through proxy voting and e-ballots in
polls in India.
India remains the largest recipient of officially recorded remittances from overseas
workers in the world. India received about $70 billion in remittances in 2013 thereby contributing
3.7 per cent. to the country's GDP. This amount is equivalent to 25 per cent. of international
reserves, 15 per cent. of India's exports, 12 per cent. of imports covered and surpassed
earnings from Information Technology services that amounted to $65 billion. These
remittances promote prosperity and are an effective antidote to combat poverty that is
rampant in our country. Moreover, Non-resident Indians bank deposits were $103.84 billion
for the financial year 2013-14, according to data given by the Reserve Bank of India.
According to the United Nations Fund for Population (UNFPA), despite many positive
contributions made by migrated population to the development of countries of their origin,
it is essential that these non-resident persons are not seen solely as agents of development.
They are human beings and nations of their origin have an obligation to give them their due
rights and protection.
Inspite of the separate ministry dedicated for the welfare of overseas Indians, millions
of emigrants staying abroad are facing problems like poor working conditions, low wages
and human rights abuses in the country of their residence and harassment by authorities for
doing business in India, admission of their children in education institutions and lack of legal
assistance in India.
In order to evolve an inclusive approach as well as commemorating one hundredth
anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi's return to India, representation to overseas Indian
community in the House of the People should be allowed so that myriad problems faced by
them in different parts of the world can be adequately addressed.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Constitution with a view to provide that the
President shall nominate not more than eight members in the House of the People, from
amongst the persons having special knowledge or practical experience in respect of such
matter as business, science, art, sports and social service, from amongst overseas Indian
community representing South Asia, South East Asia and Asia Pacific, the Middle East,
Central Asia, Africa, Europe, North America and South America.
N
EW DELHI; POONAM  MAHAJAN
July 9, 2015.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to amend article 331 of the Constitution, with a view to
provide representation of Overseas Indian community in the House of the People.
Article 106 of the Constitution provides that the members of either House of Parliament
shall be entitled to receive such salaries and allowances as may from time to time be determined
by Parliament by law.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees forty-five crore would be involved
per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five crore is also likely to be involved.

5
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * *
331. Notwithstanding anything in article 81, the President may, if he is of opinion that
the Anglo-Indian Community is not adequately represented in the House of the People,
nominate not more than two members of that community to the House of the People.
* * * * * *
Representation
of the Anglo-
Indian
Community in
the House of
the People.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shrimati Poonam Mahajan, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3170LS(S3)—02-12-2015.