Bill No. 267 of 2019
THE ARTISTS (SOCIAL SECURITY) BILL, 2019
By
SHRI RAVI KISHAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for social security and welfare measures for artists and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Artists (Social Security) Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the Context otherwise requires,—
(a) "artist' means a person who through his creative skill performs any activity
concerned with the production, exhibition of imaginative designs, videos, sounds,
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
actions or ideas including a person engaged in cinema industry either as an actor,
dancer, singer, producer, photographer, editor or distributor of films or a group of
persons who exhibit their skills in unison to produce or exhibit such designs, videos,
sounds, action or idea but does not include a person who works under any State
Government or the Central Government or in any Public Sector Undertaking under the
control of the Central Government or a State Government;
(b) "Board" means the National Artists Security Advisory Board constituted
under section 4;
(c) "cinema" means a feature film or a documentary or a short film;
(d) "Fund" means the National Artists Welfare Fund constituted under
section 6; and
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. The Central Government may formulate, from time to time, suitable welfare schemes
for artists on the matters relating to—
(a) insurance covering life and disability;
(b) health and maternity benefits;
(c) provident fund; and
(d) old age protection.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Board to be known as the National Artists Social Security Advisory Board to exercise the
powers conferred upon, and to perform the functions assigned to it, under this Act.
(2) The Board shall consist of the following, namely:—
(a) a Chairperson to be appointed by the Central Government;
(b) two eminent artists to be nominated as members by the Central Government;
and
(c) the Secretary to the Government of India in-charge of the Ministry of Culture
shall be the ex-officio member-Secretary to the Board.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
the Chairperson and members of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
(4) The Central Government shall make available to the Board such number of officers
and staff as may be required for  efficient functioning of the Board.
5. The Board shall,—
(a) make recommendations to the Central Government to formulate and implement
suitable schemes for the welfare of artists;
(b) advise the Central Government on such matters arising out of the
administration of this Act as may be referred to it;
(c) advise the Central Government regarding administration of the Fund; and
(d) undertake such other functions as may be assigned to it by the Central
Government from time to time.
6. The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a
Fund to be known as the Artists Welfare Fund for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
7. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, credit such sums of money to the Fund as it may think fit for being utilized for
the purposes of this Act.
Framing of
welfare
schemes for
artists by the
Central
Government.
Constitution
of the
National
Artists Social
Security
Advisory
Board.
Functions of
the Board.
Constitution
of National
Artists
Welfare Fund.
Central
Government to
grant funds.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

8. The Fund shall be utilized to provide financial assistance to the artists for the
following purposes:—
(a) compensation in case of death or accident;
(b) old age pension;
(c) disability assistance;
(d) free health care facility to the artists and their family members; and
(e) subsidized housing facilities.
9. The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
3
Utilization of
Fund.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is a welfare State and it is the duty of the State to ensure that all sections of the
society are covered by a State sponsored social security network. On account of their
unorganized nature of profession artists do not get adequate social security. There is
practically no welfare scheme for their benefit. There is an urgent need to enact a legislation
to provide for social security and welfare of the artists so that they can live a life of comfort
and dignity.
The present Bill provides for:—
(a) empowering the Central Government to formulate welfare schemes for the artists;
(b) constitution of a Board to be known as the National Artists Social Security Advisory
Board to recommend the Government to formulate and implement suitable schemes for welfare
of artists; and
(c) constitution of a Welfare fund to be known as National Artists Welfare Fund; in
order to provide social security to the artists in the country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAVI  KISHAN
October 23, 2019.

5
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 provides for constitution of the National Artists' Social Security Advisory
Board. Clause 6 provides for constitution of a Fund to be known as a National Artists
Welfare Fund by the Central Government. Clause 7 provides for supply of fund by the
Central Government. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. At this stage, it is difficult to give an exact estimate of expenditure
likely to be involved as the exact amount of expenditure likely to be involved will depend
upon the number of schemes formulated by the Government. However, it is estimated that an
annual recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is likely to be involved from
the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees two hundred crore is also likely to be involved.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Act. Since the rules will relate to the matters of detail only. The delegation
of legislative power is, of a normal character.

MGIPMRND—2997LS(S3)—15-11-2019.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for social security and welfare measures for artists and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Ravi Kishan, M.P .)