1
Short title and
commencement.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI NISHIKANT DUBEY, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 267 of  2016
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Amendment of
article 72.
2. After clause ( 1) of article 72 of the Constitution, the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
"(1A) Save as otherwise provided in clause ( 1), the power referred to in
clause (1) shall be exercised by the President within a period of six months from the
date of receipt of the petition of mercy:
Provided that if the President does not exercise the power within the aforesaid
period, it shall be deemed that the petition of mercy has been declined and the orders
of the Court in respect of the petitioner shall be enforced immediately.".
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is one of the largest democracies in the world. It gained freedom in 1947 from the
British rule after a prolonged struggle and sacrifice of sons of the soil. The Constitution was
drafted keeping in view the welfare of the citizens. Though the utmost care was taken while
drafting the Constitution to meet expectations of the citizens but there have been occasions
when need arose for amending the Constitution to keep pace with the changing scenario in
the country.
Article 72 of the Constitution empowers the President to grant pardons, reprieves,
respites or remissions of punishment or to suspend, remit or commute the sentence of
any person convicted of any offence. Though the President has been bestowed with absolute
powers in this regard, no time limit has been fixed within which such power has to be
exercised. As a result, the mercy petitions made before the President are kept pending for
a long period without any decision. As a fall out of this, the convicts are to be kept guarded
in jails and heavy expenditure is incurred upon them. In the present situation, attempts are
being made both externally and internally to hurt the harmony and vibrancy of our civil
society and we are continuously facing terrorist attacks. It is high time to curb anti-national
activities and for that, if death penalty is awarded to a convict by any court after considering
the circumstances which led them to reach such a decision based upon the gravity of the
crime and such person files mercy petition before the President of India, the decision on
such mercy petition should be taken within six months in order to send a strong signal
among anti-national elements and to check their nefarious activities.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; NISHIKANT DUBEY
October 20, 2016
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *
72. (1) The President shall have the power to grant pardons, reprieves, respites or
remissions of punishment or to suspend, remit or commute the sentence of any person
convicted of any offence—
(a) in all cases where the punishment or sentence is by a Court Martial;
(b) in all cases where the punishment or sentence is for an offence against any
law relating to a matter to which the executive power of the Union extends;
(c) in all cases where the sentence is a sentence of death.
* * * * *
Power of
President to
grant pardons,
etc., and to
suspend, remit
or commute
sentences in
certain cases.
4

GMGIPMRND—2877LS(S3)—17.11.2016.
LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Nishikant Dubey, M.P. )