Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 267 of  2017
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN FROM SEXUAL OFFENCES
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
SHRI GAURAV GOGOI, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences
(Amendment) Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette appoint.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In section 2 of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act,  2012 (hereinafter
referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section (1),—
(a) after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, namely :—
‘(da) “database” means the details of the sexual offenders contained in
the Sexual Offender Register under section 12B;'; and
(b) after clause (j), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely :—
‘(ja) “sexual offence” includes the offences of “penetrative sexual assault”,
“aggravated penetrative sexual assault”, “sexual assault” and “aggravated sexual
assault” as defined under sections 3, 5, 7, 9 and 11, respectively;
(jb) “sexual offender” refers to any individual charged with committing
any sexual offence under this Act;
(jc) “Sexual Offenders Register” means the Register maintained under
section I 2A;’.
3. After section 12 the principal Act, the following heading and sections thereunder
shall be inserted, namely :—
“F.—ESTABLISHMENT OF A SEXUAL OFFENDERS REGISTRY
12A. The State Government shall cause to be maintained a computerized Sexual
Offenders Register containing details of sexual offenders in such manner as may be
prescribed.
12B. The Sexual Offender Register shall contain the following details of the sexual
offender, namely:—
(a) name and surname, and every alias;
(b) date of birth and gender;
(c) the address of main residence and every secondary residence or, if there is no
such address, the location of that place;
(d) the address of every place at which he is employed or retained or is engaged
on a volunteer basis, or, if there is no address, the location of that place, the name of
employer or the person who engages him on a volunteer basis or retains him and the
type of work he does there:
Provided that in case of a police officer charged under section 9, the details
regarding his status as an officer or a member of the Indian Police Service and the
address and telephone number of his unit, if applicable, shall be recorded;
(e) the address of every educational institution at which he is enrolled or, if there
is no such address, the location of that place;
(f) designated Aadhaar identification detail;
(g) height and weight and a description of every physical distinguishing mark
that he has;
(h) the licence plate number, make, model, body type, year of manufacture and
colour of the motor vehicles that are registered in his name or that he uses regularly, if
any;
(i) the licence number and the name of the issuing jurisdiction of driving licence
that he holds;
(j) the passport number;
(k) one mandatory proof of identification;
Amendment
of section 2.
32 of 2012.
Maintenance
of Sexual
Offenders
Register.
Content of the
Sexual
Offenders
Register.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(l) the telephone number at which he may be reached;
(m) every offence to which the order relates;
(n) the time and place where the offence or offences were committed; and
(o) the time and place where he was convicted of; and
(p) such other details as may be prescribed:
Provided that in addition to information mentioned under clauses (a) to (p), if the
person collecting the information is of the opinion that any observable characteristic
that may assist in identification of the offender, including his eye colour, hair colour
and photograph be taken, he may register such additional details.
12C. It shall be the duty of the local police authorities of each State to maintain the
Sexual Offenders Register established under section 12A in such manner as may be prescribed.
12D. (1) A person who is subject to a judicial order and charged as a sexual offender
under sections 3,5,7,9 or 11 shall register in person with the Sexual Offenders Register within
seven days after such order is made along with details of offence in connection of which the
order is made.
(2) When a sexual offender reports for registration, he shall provide the information as
mentioned under section 12B accurately to the person who collects the information.
12E. A registered sexual offender shall, within seven days after the date of  the change
of any information submitted at the time of registration, notify the authorised person, who
collects registration information, of any change in the information which he provided under
section 12B.
12F. Whoever knowingly contravenes provisions of sections 12B,12D or 12E shall be
liable for imprisonment for a term which may extend upto three years or with fine which shall
not be less than rupees five thousand but which may extend upto rupees ten thousand or
with both.
12G. It shall be the duty of the police officer responsible for registration of information
of the sexual offender to register without delay the information in such manner as may be
prescribed.
12H. ( 1) It shall be the duty of the police officer to ensure that the registration of the
information of the sexual offender is done in a manner and in circumstances that ensure its
confidentiality and maintain privacy of sexual offender in a manner that is reasonable in the
circumstances.
(2) Every information of the sexual offender registered shall be used only for the
purposes of investigation of the offences punishable under this Act.
12I. No person shall have access to any information collected under this Act, unless
the sexual offender is a member or employee of or a person retained by police who utilises the
information for the purpose of preventing or investigating a crime of a sexual nature or an
offence
12J. No person shall disclose any information or fact collected under this Act or
registered in the database or allow it to be disclosed, unless.
(a) it is required to enable him to prevent or investigate a crime of a sexual nature
or to frame charge for such an offence;
(b) the disclosure is necessary to enable the prosecutor to determine whether a
charge for an offence resulting from an investigation shall be framed;
Maintenance
of Sexual
Offenders
Register.
Obligation of
sexual
offenders to
Register.
Notification
of change of
information.
Punishment
for failure to
register.
Responsibilities
of police
officer for
registration.
Confidentiality
of
information.
Unauthorised
access to
information.
Unauthorised
disclosure.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
(c) the disclosure is to a prosecutor, judge or justice in a proceeding relating to an
application for a search warrant in connection with an investigation and the information is
relevant to the application; and
(d) the disclosure is to a member or an employee of a police service outside India or to
a person detained by such police, and is necessary to assist the police in the prevention or
investigation of a crime of a sexual nature.
12K. Whoever knowingly contravenes provisions of section 12H or 12I shall be liable
for imprisonment for a term which may extend upto six months or with fine which shall not be
less than rupees two thousand but which may extend extend upto rupees three thousand or
with both.".
4. After section 44 the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely :—
"44A. (1) The National Commission for Protection of Child Rights constituted under
section 3, in consultation with the State Commission for Protection of Child Rights
constituted under section 17, of the Commissions for Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005,
shall, in addition to the functions assigned to it under this Act shall carry out a continuing
inter-disciplinary program of research, including longitudinal research, that is designed
to provide information required to protect children from sexual abuse and/or neglect of
sexual abuse incidents and to improve the well-being of victims of child sexual abuse.
(2) Every research program under sub-section ( 1) shall include following but not
restricted to—
(a) nature and scope of areas linked to the impact of child sexual abuse;
(b) causes, prevention, assessment, identification, treatment, cultural and socio-
economic distinctions, and the consequences of child sexual abuse, including the
effects of child sexual abuse and neglect on his development and identification of
successful early intervention services or other services that are required;
(c) appropriate, effective and culturally sensitive investigative, administrative,
and judicial systems, including multi-disciplinary, coordinated decision-making
procedures with respect to cases of child sexual abuse;
(d) the evaluation and dissemination of best practices, including best practices
to meet the needs of children with disabilities;
(e) effective practices and programs to improve activities such as identification,
screening, medical diagnosis, forensic diagnosis, health evaluations, and services,
including activities that promote collaboration between the medical community,
including providers of mental health and developmental disability services; and
(f) evaluation of the redundancies and gaps in the Governmental services in the
field of child sexual abuse.
(3) The National Commission for Protection of Child Rights shall, not later than three
years after the commencement of this Act, in consultation with the State Commission for
Protection of Child Rights, submit a report to the Union Ministry of Women and Child
Development of its activities under this section.”.
5. In section 45 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after clause (d), the  following
clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(e) the manner of carrying out the inter-disciplinary program of research under section
44A;".
Punishment
for
unauthorised
disclosure and
consultation
of
information.
Insertion of
new section
44A.
Inter-
disciplinary
research
program to
protect
children from
sexual abuse.
4 of 2006.
Amendment
of section 45.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is a signatory to the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child since 1992 that
mandates all parties to take measures to prevent children from being coerced into unlawful
sexual activity and create an environment that disallows this to happen. We are country
where an estimated forty per cent. of our population is constituted by children and onus of
ensuring their safety and security rests with us as representatives and in the interest of
securing the future of our country.
In the year 2016, an alarming number of fifteen thousand cases have been registered
under the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 which means that every
hour, two children are sexually abused in India. The fight against child sexual abuse deserves
our undivided attention because it holds at stake the future of the children of this country.
Child Sexual abuse can have a debilitating impact on children and while justice is important
in cases of abuse, it is more important to create an environment that propagates prevention
of any such offences.
The Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 has initiated a new wave of
measures in the form of providing for child friendly procedures for reporting, recording of
evidence, investigation and trial of offences to combat the appallingly widespread prevalence
of sexual abuse against children and grant them access to justice. However, the disgruntling
increase in the number as well as the brutality of sexual offences against children requires
more stringent measures to be taken.
It is in securing this interest that this Bill seeks to establish a Sexual Offenders Register
to better assist law enforcement officers in their job of preventing this sort of abuse that so
often goes unnoticed and unreported. The registration requirements under this Act are intended
to better assist law enforcement officers by providing them with an appropriate, comprehensive,
and effective means to monitor those persons who pose such a potential danger.
The proposed register intends to be punitive in nature and is implemented to protect
the community by reducing the likelihood that an offender will reoffend and to facilitate the
investigation and prosecution of any future offences that they may commit. The purpose of
the Bill is to help police services to prevent and investigate crimes of a sexual nature by
requiring the registration of certain information relating to sex offenders and not to interfere
with the process of rehabilitation of any offenders and hence seeks to maintain the registers
as private, allowing disclosure only under certain conditions.
Child Sexual Abuse is an extensive problem and requires a series of administrative and
preventive measures to comprehensively tackle it. The research on this issue has not received
adequate importance in India because of lack of reporting or disclosure. Child Sexual Abuse
is a multi dimensional problem having legal, social, medical and psychological implications
and there is a need of a provision for greater research to understand this issue so as to be
able to come up with better informed policies that are targeted at specifically and thoroughly
researched areas.
There is need to provide an opportunity to conduct such research so as to identify the
gaps in legislation for this issue along with identifying other areas that need to be addressed
to ensure protection of children from sexual abuse.
Child sexual abuse is rampant, indiscriminate and cuts across class, region, culture and
religion and needs to be addressed at the earliest.
N
EW DELHI; GAURAV GOGOI
November 29, 2017.

6
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the State Government shall cause to be maintained a
computerized Sexual Offenders Register containing details of sexual offenders under its
jurisdiction. Clause 4 provides that the National Commission for Protection of Child Rights
shall, in consultation with the State Commissions for Protection of Child Rights constituted
under section 17 of the Commissions for Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005, to carry out a
continuing inter-disciplinary programme of research, including longitudinal research, designed
to provide information required to protect children from sexual abuse and/or neglect of
sexual abuse incidents and to improve the well-being of victims of child sexual abuse. The
expenditure relating to States shall be borne out of the Consolidated Funds of the State
Government concerned. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees
twenty crore per annum would involve from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees thirty crore  is also likely to be involved.

7
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules relating to manner
of carrying out the inter-disciplinary programme of research. As the rules will relate to matters
of detail only, the delegation of legislative power is therefore of normal character.

8
ANNEXURE
[EXTRACT FROM THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN FROM SEXUAL OFFENCES ACT, 2012]
No. 32 of 2012.
* * * * *
2. * * * * *
(d) "child" means any person below the age of eighteen years;
* * * * *
(j) “sexual harassment” has the same meaning as assigned to it in section 11;
44. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the qualifications and experience of, and the fees payable to, a translator or an
interpreter, a special educator or any person familiar with the manner of communication of the
child or an expert in that field, under sub-section (4) of section 19: sub-sections (2) and (3) of
section 26 and section 38;
(b) care and protection and emergency medical treatment of the child under
sub-section (5) of section 19;
(c) the payment of compensation under sub-section (8) of section 33;
(d) the manner of periodic monitoring of the provisions of the Act under sub-section
(1) of section 44.
* * * * *
Definitions.
Power to
make rules.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012
————
(Shri Gaurav Gogoi, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2820LS(S3)—20.12.2017.