1
S3 \F\BILL 2016\LS\2893LS(E)
Short title,
extent  and
commence-
ment.
THE NATIONAL BOARD FOR WELFARE OF FLOOD VICTIMS BILL,
2016
By
SHRI AJAY MISRA ‘TENI’ M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a National Board for welfare of flood victims by making
provisions of providing permanent shelters to flood victims, suggest measures to
control floods and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  ( 1) This Act may be called the National Board for Welfare of Flood  Victims
Act, 2016.
(2)  It extends to the whole of India.
(3)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No.  268 of  2016
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
S3 \F\BILL 2016\LS\2893LS(E)
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Board" means the National Board for Welfare of Flood Victims constituted
under section 3; and
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a National Board for Welfare of Flood Victims.
(2) The headquarters of the Board shall be at New Delhi and its regional offices shall
be located in the capital of each State.
(3) The Board shall consist of a Chairperson and such other members as may be
prescribed.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service
of the Chairperson and other members of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
(5) The Central Government shall make available such officers and staff to the
Board as it may require for its efficient functioning.
4. The Board shall—
(1) identify areas in every State which are prone to flood;
(2) take steps to provide permanent shelters capable of withstanding the
intensity of the flood to people in identified areas;
(3) formulate accelerated water drainage system in the residential areas located
near rivers;
(4) take steps for plantation in nearby areas of river banks to mitigate the
gravity of flood;
(5) install flood forecast system to alert the persons residing in flood prone
areas; and
(6) make recommendations to the Central Government regarding minimizing the
loss of lives and property in flood affected areas.
5. The expenditure incurred on provision of permanent shelter to flood victims
under section 4 shall be borne by the Central Government and the State Governments in
such ratio, as may be prescribed.
6. It shall be the duty of the Central Government to implement the recommendations
of the Board:
Provided that where it is felt that any recommendation cannot be implemented due to
any reason, the Central Government may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, inform the
Board accordingly.
7. (1)  The Board shall prepare, in such form and at such time, as may be prescribed,
its annual report, giving a true and full account of its activities during the previous financial
year and submit a copy thereof to the Central Government.
(2) The Central Government shall cause the annual report to be laid before each
House of Parliament.
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Definitions.
Constitution
of the
National Board
for providing
of permanent
shelters to
flood victims.
Functions of
the Board.
Expenditure
incurred on
implementation
of the Act to
be borne by
the Central
and the State
Governments.
Recommendations
of the Board
to be
implemented
by the Central
Government.
Annual
Report.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
S3 \F\BILL 2016\LS\2893LS(E)
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is an agricultural country where more than seventy per cent. of the people earn
their sustenance from agriculture itself as it happens to be the principal source of their
income. Besides natural resources, favourable atmosphere is also necessary for good
produce. Polluted environment, unplanned and uncontrolled development leads to disruption
in the weather-cycle in the country frequently culminating in the incidence of floods. In the
recent past, floods have wreaked havoc in Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Bihar, West
Bengal, Uttarakhand, Odisha, etc. The floods have devastated hundreds of villages and
caused severe damage to life and property as well as to crops. Alongside, agricultural land
has been subjected to great soil erosion. Several parts of the country have to bear the burnt
of devastating floods every year from June to September due to which millions of people get
displaced and rendered homeless. Huge loss occurs due to the loss of crops, livestock as
well as erosion of soil. In view of the problems faced by the flood victims, temporary
arrangements of shelter and food are made for them.
Such temporary arrangements need to be put in place in the flood affected areas every
year. There is a need to exercise an effective control and find a permanent solution by
making arrangements for permanent shelters to the flood affected people with essential
infrastructure like pucca houses, proper drainage system, community hall for livelihood in
emergent situation and sheds for animals with proper provision of fodder, etc.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; AJAY MISHRA ‘TENI’
October 19, 2016.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of a National Board for Welfare of Flood
Victims. Clause 4 provides inter alia  that Board shall take steps to provide permanent
shelters capable of withstanding the intensity of the flood to people in identified areas,
formulate accelerated water drainage system in the residential areas located near rivers and
install flood forecast system to alert the persons residing in flood prone areas. Clause 5
provides that the expenditure incurred on provision of permanent shelters to flood victims
shall be borne by the Central Government and State Governments in prescribed ratio. The
Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It
is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty thousand crore is also likely to be
incurred.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only, and as such, the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a National Board for welfare of flood victims by making
provisions of providing permanent shelters to flood victims, suggest measures to
 control floods and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Ajay Mishra 'Teni', M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2893LS(S3)—18-11-2016.