 AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 269 of 2022
THE PATHARUGHAT NATIONAL FARMERS
MEMORIAL BILL, 2022
By
SHRI DILIP S AIKIA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the construction and management of a National Memorial to
perpetuate the memory of the farmers who died or were wounded on
28 January 1894 at Patharughat in the State of Assam.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Patharughat National Farmers Memorial
Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title
and
commencement.
5

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Memorial” means the National Memorial to perpetuate the memory of the
farmers who died or were injured on 28 January 1894 at Patharughat in Darrang
District of the State of Assam;
(b) “Trust” means the Trust for the construction and management of the Memorial;
and
(c) “Trustee” means the Trustee of the Martyr Farmers National Memorial,
Patharughat.
3. The objects of the Trust shall be—
(a)  to construct and maintain suitable buildings, structures and parks at the
site or in the surrounding area  in order to perpetuate the memory of the farmers
who died or were injured on the 28th day of January, 1894, at Patharughat in the
State of Assam;
(b) to acquire land, buildings and other properties for the trust; and
(c) to raise and receive funds for the purposes of the Memorial.
4. (1) The trustees of the memorial shall be following, namely:—
(a) the Prime Minister—Chairperson,
(b) the Union Minister-in-charge of Culture;
(c) the Leader recognized as leader of opposition in the House of the People
or where there is no leader of opposition, then leader of the largest party in opposition
in the House;
(d) the Governor of the State of Assam;
(e) the Chief Minister  of the  State of Assam; and
(f) three eminent persons nominated by the Central Government.
(2) The trustees shall be body corporate by the name of  “Trustee of the Martyr
Farmers National Memorial Patharughat” for the purposes of this Act shall have
perpetual succession and a common seal and shall by the said name sue and be sued
and shall be entitled to contract for the acquisition and holding of property.
5. The trustees nominated under clause (f) of sub-section (1) of section 4 shall
continue to be trustees for a period of five years and shall be eligible for re-nomination.
6. All funds and property, whether movable or immovable, which may go to it,
bequeathed or otherwise be transferred for the purpose of the Memorial or shall be
acquired for the said purpose, shall vest with the Trust.
7. The Central Government may, after appropriation made by Parliament
by law in this behalf, grant to the Trust such sums of money as the Central
Government may think fit for the purposes of this Act.
8. (1) For the purposes of managing the affairs of the Trust, the Trustees may, by
a resolution passed in the meeting, appoint a Management Committee and assign to it
such powers, duties and functions subject to such directions and limitations as may
be defined in such resolution.
(2) The trustees may appoint any persons, whether such persons are trustees
or not, as members of the management committee and may, from time to time, vary or
rescind any resolution passed by it under this section.
9. The Trust shall meet at least once in a year for approving the audited accounts
of the Trust and shall transact such other business as may be deemed necessary.
5
2
Definitions.
15
10
Objects of the
Trust.
Trustees of the
Memorial.
20
25
30
35
40
45
Term of office
of nominated
trustees.
Property vested
with the trustees.
Central
Government to
provide funds.
Power of trustees
to appoint
management
committee.
Power to approve
audited accounts.

10. No act of the trustees shall be deemed to be invalid by reason of any vacancy
in the body of the trustees or any defect in its constitution.
11. (1) The accounts of the trust shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India at such intervals as may be specified by him and the expenses in
connection with such audit shall be payable by the trust to the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India.
(2) The Comptroller and Auditor-General and any person appointed by him
under this act in connection with the audit of the accounts of the Trust shall have
generally the usual rights, privileges and authority in connection with such audit as
the Comptroller and Auditor-General has in case of audit of the Government accounts
and shall have rights in particular for demanding the presentation of books, accounts,
related vouchers and other documents and to inspect any of the offices of the trust.
(3) The audit report and account report of the trust as certified by the
Comptroller and Auditor-General or by any other person appointed by him in this
matter shall be forwarded to Central Government every year and the Central
Government shall lay the reports as soon as possible on the table of both houses of
the Parliament.
12. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
such rules shall have power to make rules for—
(a) the manner in which the funds of the Memorial shall be kept, deposited
or invested;
(b) the manner of authentication of orders for the payment of money by the
Trustees;
(c) the form in which accounts shall be maintained by the trustees and the
audit of such accounts and their publication;
(d) the layout, construction, improvement, preservation and management
of the monument;
(e) the conditions on which the public shall have access to the monument or
particular parts thereof and the regulation of the conduct of persons entering
the monument; and
(f) the preservation of any property vested in the Trustee, and the prevention
of damage to, or interference with, that  property and  restriction of  persons
trespassing on any particular part of the monument.
(3) A rule made under this section may provide that a breach of any rule made
under clauses (e) and (f) of sub-section (2) shall be punishable with fine which may
extend to one hundred rupees.
13. The Trustees may make such regulations as may be relevant to this Act for all
or any of the following purposes:
(a) the manner in which meetings of the Trustees shall be called, the quorum for
the transaction of business at such meetings and the procedure to be followed at such
meetings;
Validity of the
acts of trustees
not to be
questioned due
to vacancy etc.
Accounts and
Audit.
Power to make
rules.
Power to
trustees to make
regulations.
5
10
15
20
25
30
40
35
3

(b) the manner in which the decision of the majority of the Trustees, the matter in
respect of which the decision shall be obtained by circulation to the required Trustees,
the power of the Trustees to make regulations;
(c) the term of office of the members of the management committee, their powers
and duties and the circumstances in which, and the conditions subject to which, such
powers and duties may be exercised; and
(d) the appointment of such officers and servants as may be deemed necessary
for the purposes of the trust, and the terms and conditions of their service.
14. Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in
session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in
two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both the Houses agree in
making any modification in the rule or regulation or both Houses agree that the rule
or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of
anything previously done under that rule or regulation.
Laying of rules
and regulations
before
Parliament.
5
15
10
4

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The pages of the history of independent India are full of incidents that unfold
stories of bravery, sacrifice and patriotism. In India’s freedom struggle against the
British hegemony, countless people from different parts of India fought for the
freedom of their motherland against the British rule and sacrificed their lives. The
people of Assam had bravely participated in the freedom movement against the
exploitation, discrimination and tyranny of the British.  One such incident is the
historical revolt of the Patharughat farmers of Darrang district of Assam against the
increasing rate of land tax by the British. Patharughat is a small village in Darrang
district of Assam, situated approximately 60 kilometers north-east of Guwahati.
 25 years before the Jallianwala Bagh massacre, on January 28, 1894, more
than 100 farmers were shot dead by the British.  This incident took place in Patharughat,
Assam. After the occupation of Assam by the British in 1826, the survey of the vast
land of this state started. On the basis of such surveys, the British started levying land
tax, due to which the discontent spread among the farmers.  In 1893, the British
Government decided to increase the agricultural land tax to 80 percent. On this day
the farmers were protesting against the British.  British soldiers were ordered to shoot
these farmers, due to which more than 100 farmers had to lose their lives.
This incident gave a new direction to India’s freedom movement.  The deaths
of many innocent farmers further strengthened the freedom struggle against the British.
The martyrs of Patharughat are always remembered in the golden pages of history for
their bravery and sacrifice for their motherland.
Therefore, there is a need that a museum should be declared as a national
memorial to perpetuate the memory of farmers who died or were injured on January
28, 1894, at Patharughat in the State of Assam.
Hence this Bill.
    NEW DELHI;      DILIP SAIKIA
21 November, 2022.
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the construction and maintenance of suitable
buildings, structures and gardens around the National Memorial Patharughat by the
trust and acquisition of land, buildings and other properties for the purpose of the
trust and raising and receiving funds for the purpose of the memorial. Clause 7 provides
for grants to be given to the Trust by the Central Government after due appropriation
done by parliament by law in this behalf for the purposes of the Act.
Therefore, on enactment of this Bill, both recurring and non-recurring
expenditure are likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India.  However,
it is difficult to estimate the amount required for this purpose as it will depend on the
decisions of the Trust.
6

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for
carrying out the purposes of the Bill.  Clause 13 provides for power of trustees to
make such regulations as may be relevant to this Act. As the rules will relate to matters
of detail only, the delegation of legislative powers is of normal character.
7

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to provide for the construction and management of a National Memorial to
perpetuate the memory of the farmers who died or were wounded on
28 January 1894 at Patharughat in the State of Assam.
————
(Shri Dilip Saikia, M.P .)