AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
 Bill No.  269  of  2024 
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR DETECTION AND REPORTING OF 
CASES OF ATROCITIES AND CASTE DISCRIMINATION AGAINST 
SCHEDULED CASTES AND SCHEDULED TRIBES BILL, 2024  
By 
ADV. CHANDRA SHEKHAR AZAD,  M.P. 
A 
BILL 
to constitute a National Commission for Detection and Reporting of Cases 
of Atrocities and Caste Discrimination Against the Persons Belonging to the 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto.  
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth year of the Republic  of India 
as follows:- 
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Commission for Detection and
Reporting of Cases of Atrocities and Caste Discrimination against the Persons 
Belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Act, 2024. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Short title, extent 
and 
commencement. 

-2- 
2.(1) In this Act unless the context otherwise requires- 
(a) "atrocity" means atrocity as defined in the Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989. (Act no. 33 of 1989); 
(b) "caste discrimination" means any act which results in 
discrimination against a member of the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled 
Tribes in violation of any existing law, rule, sub-rule or bye laws or 
regulation or absence of fair play in the process or put such member in 
disadvantageous position due to his caste factor in any forn1 by any person 
other than the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes; 
(c) “Commission" means the National Commission for Detection and 
Reporting of Cases of Atrocities and Caste Discrimination Against the 
Persons Belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes constituted 
under section 3; 
(d) prescribed means as may be prescribed under this Act; and 
(e) "Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes" shall have the meanings 
as assigned to them, respectively, under clause (24) and clause (25) of article 
366 of the Constitution. 
2. The words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in 
the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 (45 of 2023) or the Bharatiya Nagarik 
Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 (46 of 2023) shall have the same meanings assigned to 
them, respectively, in those enactments.  
3. The Central Government shall, by notification in the official Gazette, 
constitute a body to be known as the National Commission for Detection and 
Reporting of Cases of Atrocities and Caste Discrimination against the 
Persons Belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes and to 
exercise the powers conferred on, and to perform the functions assigned to, 
it under this Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Definitions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Constitution of the 
National 
Commission for 
detection and 
reporting of cases 
of atrocities and 
caste 
discrimination 
against the 
Scheduled Castes 
and Scheduled 
Tribes. 

-3- 
3. The National Commission shall consist of- 
(i) a Chairperson, who shall be a retired Judge of the Supreme Court 
or a retired Chief Justice or a retired Justice of the High Court, 
preferably belonging to the Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes, or a 
person who is or has been committed to the cause of welfare of the 
persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, to be 
nominated by the Central Government. 
(ii) twenty Members to be nominated by the Central Government 
from amongst persons of ability, integrity and standing who have had 
experience in law or legislation, trade unionism, management of an 
industry or organization committed to cause of welfare of the persons 
belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes or 
administration, economic development, health, education or social 
welfare: 
    Provided that at least fifteen Members shall be from amongst the 
persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, 
respectively, 
(iii) a Member-Secretary to be nominated by the Central Government, 
who shall be- 
(i) an expert in the field of management, organizational structure 
or sociological movement, or 
(ii) an officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary in the Central 
Government belonging to the Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes , 
who holds an equivalent civil post under the Union with appropriate 
experience. 
 
4.(1) The Chairperson and every Member shall hold office for such period, 
not exceeding three years, as may be specified by the Central Government in this 
behalf.  
(2) The Chairperson or a Member (other than the Member-Secretary who is a 
member of a civil service of the Union or of an all-India service or holds a civil 
post under the Union) may, by writing and addressed to the Central Government, 
resign from the office of Chairperson or of the Member, as the case may be, at 
any time. 
 
Term of office and 
conditions of 
service of 
Chairperson and 
Members National 
Commission 

-4- 
(3) The Central Government shall remove a person from the office of 
Chairperson or a Member referred to in sub-section (2) if that person- 
(a) becomes an undischarged insolvent; 
(b) gets convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which in 
the opinion of the Central Government involves moral turpitude; 
(c) becomes of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; 
(d) refuses to act or becomes incapable of acting; 
(e) is, without obtaining leave of absence from the Commission, absent 
from three consecutive meetings of the Commission; or 
(f) in the opinion of the Central Government has so abused the position of 
Chairperson or Member as to render that person's continuance in office 
detrimental to the public interest:  
       Provided that no person shall be removed under this clause until that 
person has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.  
(4) A vacancy caused under sub-section (2) or otherwise shall be filled by 
fresh nomination. 
(5) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and 
conditions of service of, the Chairperson and Members shall be such as may be 
prescribed. 
5. (1) The Central Government shall provide the Commission with such 
officers and employees as may be necessary for the efficient performance of 
the functions of the Commission under this Act. 
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and 
conditions of service of, the officers and other employees appointed for the 
purpose of the Commission shall be such as may be prescribed. 
Officers and other 
employees of the 
Commission. 
6. The salaries and allowances payable to the Chairperson and Members 
and the administrative expenses, including salaries, allowances and pensions 
payable to the officers and other employees referred to in section 5, shall be 
paid out of the grants referred to in sub-section (1) of section 11. 
 
 
 
 
 
Salaries and 
allowances to be 
paid out of grants 
made under 
section 11. 

-5- 
7. No act or proceeding of the Commission shall be questioned or shall be 
invalid on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy or defect in the 
constitution of the Commission. 
Vacancies, etc., 
not to invalidate 
proceedings of the 
Commission. 
8.(1) The Commission may set up such number of its offices at such places, 
throughout the country, as may it may consider necessary for detection and 
reporting of crime of atrocities and caste discrimination against persons 
belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, from time to time; 
(2) The Commission shall have the power to depute such number of officers 
as it may think fit for the purpose of detection and reporting of cases throughout 
the country. 
(3) The Officers of the Commission shall be given special assistance in 
discharge of their functions by the officials of the State Governments particularly 
by police officials in the States whenever such request is made in writing. 
Offices of the 
Commission. 
9. (1) The Commission shall meet as and when necessary and shall meet at 
such time and place as the Chairperson may think fit. 
(2) The Commission shall regulate its own procedure and the procedure of 
the committees thereof. 
(3) All orders and decisions of the Commission shall be authenticated by the 
Member-Secretary or any other officer of the Commission duly authorized by the 
Member-Secretary in this behalf. 
Procedure to be 
regulated by the 
Commission. 
10. The Commission shall- 
(i) detect and report the crime of atrocities and caste discrimination 
against persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes to 
the Home Secretary to the Central Government or State Government 
concerned, as the case may be, and ensure that there is no under reporting; 
(ii) send the details of cases of atrocities and caste discrimination against 
persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes detected to 
the Home Secretary of the Central Government or State Government 
concerned, as the case may be, irrespective of the fact that such cases have 
actually been registered by the police or not; 
(iii) instill the feeling of security among the persons belonging to the 
Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes that they are safe to enjoy their human 
rights and live their lives with dignity and respect; 
 
Functions of the 
Commission. 

-6- 
(iv) sensitize the law enforcement agencies/machinery towards crimes 
against persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes by 
way of suggesting well structured training programme meetings, 
conferences, workshops and seminars for police personnel and other law 
enforcement against at all level; 
(v) suggest material to be incorporated in the syllabi of various Police 
Training Centers/ Academics at all levels for creating awareness about their 
duties towards prevention of crime against weaker sections of the society 
particularly persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes; 
(vi) suggest material to be incorporated in the syllabi of schools, 
colleges, educational institutions and universities to inculcate the values of 
egalitarian society in the minds of teachers and students in schools, colleges 
and universities and to abolish the practice of untouchability and create 
awareness amongst teachers and students about the importance of their roles 
in prevention of crime against the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes 
and Scheduled Tribes; 
(vii) take concrete steps to increase awareness in administration in 
general at district level to increase awareness about methods of preventing 
crime against persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes; 
(viii) take steps to improve general awareness about legislation seeking 
to prevent crimes against persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes by- 
(a) creating awareness through print and electronic media; 
(b) developing a community monitoring system to check cases of 
violence, abuse and exploitation; 
(c) involving community in creating and spreading awareness. 
(d) organizing legal literacy and legal awareness; 
 (ix) ensure that proper mechanism is in place for safety and protection 
of persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes; 
 
 
 

-7- 
(x) encourage NGOs working in the area of combating crimes against the 
persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and 
working with the district administration and police to prevent such crime; 
(xi) encourage citizens groups/civil society to create awareness about the 
issues of atrocities and caste discrimination and help in bringing to light the 
cases of atrocities and caste discrimination against persons belonging to the 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and also to assist the police in 
investigation of such crimes; 
(xii) conduct study and suggest methods to overcome delay in 
registration of First Information Report in cases of crimes against the 
persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes; 
(xiii) ensure proper supervision with the help of District Administration 
and Senior Police Officer at District level for timely completion of 
investigation and proper follow up of reports of cases of atrocities and caste 
discrimination against the persons belonging to the persons belonging to the 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes; 
(xiv) identify atrocity prone area for taking preventive measures to save 
life and property of the members of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes communities and taking up matters with District Administration and 
police officers at District level to provide adequate infrastructure in such 
vulnerable areas for prevention of crimes against persons belonging to the 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes;  
(xv) help in economic and social rehabilitation of victims of atrocities 
and caste discrimination; 
(xvi) conduct survey and studies to evaluate the working of legislations 
seeking to prevent atrocities and caste discrimination with reference to the 
problems being faced by police and judiciary in disposal of cases and take 
appropriate measures to resolve such problems; 
 (xvii) forward report of extreme violation of human rights and take all 
measures to prevent recurrence of such cases at initial stage; 
(xviii) discuss issues resulting in delay in investigation and trial of cases 
of atrocities at least once in a month compulsorily at appropriate level in the 
State; 
 

-8- 
(xix) measures for swift and salutary punishment to public servants 
found guilty of neglect of duty and violence against persons belonging to the 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes; and 
(xx) undertake a comprehensive review of the effectiveness of the 
machinery in tackling the issues of atrocities and caste discrimination 
against the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes; 
11.(1) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Commission by way of grants 
such sums of money as the Central Government may think fit for being 
utilized for the purposes of this Act. 
(2) The Commission may spend such sums as it thinks fit for performing 
the functions under this Act, and such sums shall be treated as expenditure 
payable out of the grants referred to in sub-section (1). 
Grants by the 
Central 
Government 
12. (1) The Commission shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant 
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the Commission shall be audited by the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General at such intervals as may be specified by him and any 
expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the 
Commission to the Comptroller and Auditor-General. 
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General and any person appointed by him 
in connection with the audit of the accounts of the Commission under this Act 
shall have the same rights and privileges and the authority in connection with 
such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General generally has in connection 
with the audit of Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to 
demand the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other 
documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of the Commission. 
( 4) The accounts of the Commission, as certified by the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General or any other person appointed by him in this behalf, together 
with the observations of the Central Government shall be laid before each Houses 
of Parliament. 
 
 
Accounts and audit 

-9- 
13. The Commission shall prepare, in such form and at such time, for each 
financial year, as may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of its 
activities during the previous financial year and forward a copy thereof to the 
Central Government. 
Annual report 
14. The Central Government shall cause the annual report together with a 
memorandum of action taken on the recommendations contained therein, in so 
far as they relate to the Central Government, and the reasons for the non-
acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations and the audit report to be laid 
as soon as may be after the reports are received, before each House of Parliament. 
Annual report and 
audit report to be 
laid before 
Parliament. 
15. The Central Government shall consult the Commission on all major 
policy matters affecting the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes or 
Scheduled Tribes. 
Central 
Government to 
consult 
Commission. 
16. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not derogation of 
any other law for the time in force. 
Act not in 
derogation of any 
other law. 
17. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such 
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be 
necessary for removing the difficulty:  
    Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of 
two years from the commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament. 
Power to remove 
difficulties. 
18. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of 
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the 
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no 
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that 
rule. 
Power to make 
rules. 

STATEMENT  OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 
 Entries 1 and 2 of List II - State List to the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution mention 
'Public Order' and 'Police' are the subject matter of the State Governments and Union Territory 
Administrations. However article 15(4) enables the State to make special provisions for 
advancement of any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens including for the 
Scheduled Castes and Schedule Tribes. Article 15(3) of the Constitution enables the State to 
make special provisions for women and children which includes the women and children of the 
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes communities. Article 17 abolishes the practice of 
Untouchability. However, the practice of Untouchability still persists in our society. There is no 
effective institutional mechanism of the Central Government at village level to prevent, detect, 
register, investigate, and prosecute all the crimes against the Scheduled Castes and the 
Scheduled Tribes communities. Absence of effective mechanisms to deal with cases at local 
level makes the situation worse for victims. There is an abysmal rate of prosecution in cases of 
atrocities. In view of the articles 15 and 17 of the Constitution central legislations such as "the 
Protection of Civil Rights Act 1955 and the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribe (Prevention 
of Atrocities) Act l989 have been enacted to check atrocities against SCs and STs People. To 
look after welfare of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes , the National Commission for 
Scheduled Castes, the National Commission for Scheduled Tribes and Parliamentary 
Committee on Welfare of SCs and STs are functioning but not proving that much effective to 
check the increasing the number of cases of atrocities against these communities. In the last few 
years particularly from 2019 to 2021 as per National Crime Records Bureau data there is an 
increasing number of atrocities against SCs and STs People. It appears that there is no 
mechanism of the Central Government to prevent, detect and report all these crimes of atrocities 
at village level or police station level in the States. There are also other reasons for these social 
evils such as lack of awareness of legislations to prevent atrocities among civil society, local 
administration, teachers, students and others. Lack of courage in public to be witness or 
approver of such crimes. The Police personnel in the States are not very much sensitive to deal 
with such cases properly due lack of focused training, set up caste ridden society at local level 
and lack of public support in detection and reporting of cases of atrocities against the persons 
belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. Therefore, there is an urgent need 
for plugging the loopholes in our system to deal with the cases of atrocities and provide the 
appropriate guidelines to be followed and implemented in the right manner. The bill seeks to 
establish a National Commission with its offices at local level to prevent, detect and report the 
cases of atrocities and other crimes against the SCs and STs Communities. It further provides to 

strengthen and streamline time bound investigation procedures to be followed by police while 
dealing such cases. The Bill also suggests ways to encourage civil society and youth in schools, 
colleges and Universities to come forward to create an egalitarian society. The Bill seeks to 
achieve the above objectives 
 
 Hence this Bill. 
  
NEW DELHI;                           CHANDRA SHEKHAR AZAD 
 June 12,  2024. 
 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
 
 
  Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the National Commission for 
prevention, detection, and reporting of crimes of atrocities and caste discrimination against the 
persons belonging to the SCs and STs Communities. Clause 5 provides for salaries and 
allowances to be paid to the officer and employees of the National Commission. Clause 6 
provides for salary and allowances of the Chairperson and Members of the National 
Commission. Clause 10 provides for improving general awareness about legislation seeking to 
prevent crimes against SCs/STs by the Commission. Clause 11 provides that the Central 
Government shall, by way of an appropriation by the Parliament, provide the funds to the 
National Commission. The Bill, if enacted, will involve fund from the consolidated fund of 
India. It will involve rupees one hundred crore recurring amount from the consolidated fund of 
India. It also requires non recurring amount of rupees one hundred crore. 

  
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
 
 
 Clause 18 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of the Bill. The delegation power is of a normal character. 

LOK  SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
------------  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 
 
BILL 
 
 
to constitute a National Commission for detection and reporting of cases of atrocities and caste 
discrimination against the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and 
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
 
 
 
 
------------  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Adv. Chandra Shekhar Azad,  M.P.) 