1
THE RAINWATER (MANDATORY HARVESTING AND
COLLECTION) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI JAGDAMBIKA PAL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory harvesting of rainwater in every residential, commercial
establishment and government building in order to make contribution to the
conservation of water and recharge of groundwater and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Rainwater (Mandatory Harvesting and Collection)
Act, 2015.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 269 of 2015
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(2) It extends to the Union territories only.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, not later than one year from the coming into
force of this Act, as Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. It is hereby declared that it is expedient in public interest that the Union Government
shall undertake adequate measures to harvest rainwater in the country for the purpose of
water conservation and preservation of the existing water bodies from exploitation.
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) "commercial establishment" means any building which is being used as an
office or factory or for any other commercial purposes in connection with any trade or
business;
(b) "Government" means the Central Government or the Union territory
Administration, as the case may be;
(c) "government building" means any building occupied or being used by any
or all Government departments, Ministries and includes the offices of public sector
enterprises, statutory bodies or bodies owned and administered by the Government
and autonomous bodies, bodies of local self-government and residential areas of
government employees provided by the Government;
(d) "groundwater recharge" means recharging of open wells or underground
water, as the case may be, by various means by use of rainwater;
(e) "household" means a dwelling unit of any description;
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(g) "rainwater harvesting" means collection and storage of rainwater from rooftop
of a building or other parts of a building from which water can be collected or from a
vacant land for use or for the purpose of groundwater recharge.
4. It shall be the duty of the Government to ensure and implement such measures, as
it may deem necessary and appropriate, to harvest rainwater in government buildings within
such time as may be prescribed.
5. (1) Every owner or occupier of an independent household building having sital area
of not less than 2400 square feet or every owner who proposes to construct an independent
household building on a sital area of not less than 1200 square feet shall adopt such measures
to provide rainwater harvesting structures for storage for use of harvested water or for
groundwater recharge.
(2) Every developer and builder of residential apartment complexes, irrespective of
sital area or number of apartments proposed to be built, shall adopt such measures to
provide rainwater harvesting structures for storage for the use of harvested water within the
apartment complex premises for purposes such as garden, flushing of toilets or for groundwater
recharge.
(3) The responsibility to ensure compliance of the provisions of sub-section (2) shall
lie with the developer or builder of the proposed apartment complex.
(4) Every existing residential apartment complex which, on the date of commencement
of this Act, does not have rainwater harvesting structures in place shall adopt such measures
to provide rainwater harvesting structures for storage for the use of harvested water within
the apartment complex premises for purposes such as garden, flushing of toilets or for
groundwater recharge.
(5) The responsibility to ensure compliance of the provisions of sub-section (4) shall
lie with the association(s) of residents formed from within the residents and owners of the
apartments in the said apartment complex.
Declaration.
Definitions.
Compulsory
rainwater
harvesting in
government
buildings.
Compulsory
rainwater
harvesting by
households
and residential
establishments.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section:—
(a) "association of residents" means a group of people representing the interest
of the complex in its entirety, either elected by residents and owners or chosen by a
process mutually agreed upon by the owners and residents of the said complex;
(b) "builder" and "developer" means the company or individual or group of
individuals responsible for the planning and construction of the apartment project
including getting necessary approvals from government authorities and agencies for
the project until its completion;
(c) "independent household building" means a single unit of dwelling on a site
of land including villas and houses; and
(d) "residential apartment complex" includes multiple units of dwelling on a
single site of land, irrespective of size and number of flats or number of people residing
in these flats or buildings.
6. (1) Every commercial establishment shall adopt such measures to provide rainwater
harvesting structures for storage for use of harvested water within the  apartment complex
premises for purposes such as garden use, flushing of toilets,  or for groundwater recharge.
(2) The responsibility to ensure compliance of the provisions of sub-section (1) shall
lie on the person, by whatever name called, who is primarily responsible for the affairs of that
establishment in the concerned premises of the establishment.
7. (1) The Government shall take such measures, as it may deem appropriate, to educate
and spread awareness among its own departments and  Ministries, and the people about the
benefits and importance of rainwater harvesting.
(2) The Government shall take such measures, as it may deem necessary, to provide
any or all kinds of assistance through advertisements and online portals to people or
groups of people installing rainwater harvesting structures in their buildings.
(3) For the purpose of sub-sections (1) and (2), the Government shall also associate
non-Governmental Organisations and other such agencies or institutions working in this
area and with relevant experience in such manner as may be prescribed.
8.  Any person or group of persons violating the provisions of this Act shall be
punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or with a fine
which may extend to rupees two lakh or with both.
9. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder, shall have effect,
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
10. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
Compulsory
rainwater
harvesting by
commercial
establishment.
Action plan
to educate
the masses
about
rainwater
harvesting.
Punishment.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Act not in
derogation of
other laws.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Water shortage is being seen as one of the major challenge in the coming years,
rainwater harvesting is more relevant today than it has been in the past. A majority of the
rainwater goes uncollected and runs-off into drains or rivers throughout the country. By
collecting even a small part of the total rainfall received by us, the scale of the problem of
water scarcity and shortage can be brought down, if not eliminated.
Rainwater harvesting is already practiced in dry and desert areas where rainfall is
collected and stored for later use. This practice, which is being practiced for decades in areas
of Rajasthan, needs to be replicated throughout the country.
Harvesting rainwater for storage forms one part of the larger problem involving water.
In our country, groundwater resources have been used for all kinds of purposes from
agriculture through tube wells in farm areas to cities where groundwater is increasingly
being used as the primary water source. However, unregulated usage of groundwater has led
to massive exploitation of this resource. There are some areas where groundwater recharge
through rainwater is one of the many solutions to this problem and perhaps one of the
easiest solutions.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; JAGDAMBIKA PAL
November 17, 2015.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 7 of the Bill provides for the Government to spread awareness among people
and its employees about the importance of rainwater harvesting. The Bill, therefore, if enacted,
would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of
rupees one hundred crore is likely to be involved as recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one thousand crore is also likely to be involved.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory harvesting of rainwater in every residential, commercial
establishment and government building in order to make contribution to the
conservation of water and recharge of groundwater and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Jagdambika Pal, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2951LS(S3)—02-12-2015.