Bill No. :&6 orr"", @ 
THE TAXATION LAWS (AMEND-
MENT) BILL, 1960 
(As INTRODUCED IN Lox SABHA 
ON 29TH APRIL, 1960) 

II of 1922. 
BlII No. z4i of 1"0 
THE TAXATION LAWS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1960 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Indian Income-tax Act. 1922, the Wealth-tax 
Act, 1957, the Expenditure-tax Act, 1957 and the Gift-tax Act. 
1958. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eleventh Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
S 1. (1) This Act may be called the Taxation Laws (Amendment) Short title 
and com-
10 
Act, 1960. 
(2) Subject to any provision made in this behalf in this Act, it 
shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of April, 
1960. 
CHAPTER II 
AMENDMENTS TO THE INDIAN INCOME-TAX ACT, 1922 
menoement. 
2. In section 4 of the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922 (hereinafter Amendment 
-
20 
referred to as the Income-tax Act), in sub-section (3),- of lection 4· 
(i) after clause (xiva) , the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(xivb) Any income chargeable under the head "Salaries" 
received by or due to a person, not resident in the taxable 
territories and not being a citizen of India, as remuneration 
for services rendered in connection with his employment on 
a foreign ship where his total stay in the taxable territories 
does not exceed in the aggregate a period of ninety days in 
the previous year;"; 
(ii) for clauses (xvii) and (xviia) , the following clauses shall 
be substituted, namely:-
"(xvii) Monthly payments on the 15 Year Annuity Certi-
2S ficates issued by or under the authority of the Central Gov-
ernment or such other annuity certificates issued by or under 
the authority of that Government as that Government may, 
28e(B) LS--l. 

Amendment 
of lection 5. 
2 
by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, 
to the extent to which the amounts of the certificates do not 
exceed in each case the maximum amount which is permitted 
to be invested therein; 
(X'l'iia) Interest on Treasury Savings Deposit Certificates, 5 
Post Office Cash Certificates, Post Office National Savings 
Certificates, National Plan Certificates, 12 Year National Plan 
Savings Certificates and such other certificates issued by the 
Central Government as that Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, ahd interest on 
deposits in Post Office Savings Banks, to the extent to which 10 
the amounts of such certificates or deposits do not p.xceed in 
each case the maximum amount which is permitted to be 
invested or deposited therein;". 
3. In section 5 of the Income-tax Act,- IS 
(i) the Explanation to sub-section (7A) shall be omitted; and 
(ii) after sub-section (8), the following Explanation sballbe 
inserted, and shall be deemed always to have been inserted, 
namely:-
"Explana.tion.-In SUb-sections (2), (5) and (7 A), the 20 
word "case" in relation to any person whose name is specified 
in any order or direction issued in pursuance of any of the 
aforesaid sub-sections means all proceedings under this Act 
in re3pect of any year which may be pending on the date of 25 
such order or direction, and includes also all proceediniP 
under this Act which may be commenced after the date of 
such order or direction in re3pect of any year.": 
Amendment 4. In section 10 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (2), after the 
of.cction 10. proviso to clause (vib) , the following further proviso shall be insert-
ed, namely:- 30 
"Provided further that no allowance under this clause shall 
Amendment 
of lection 
ISB. 
be made in respect of any machinery or plant which consist of 
office appliances or road transport vehicles.". 
5. In section 15B of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (1), after 
the words "to which this section applies". the words "or in respect 
of any sums paid by him on or t3fter the 1st day of April, 1960, as 35 
donations to the Government or to any local authority to be utilised 
for·any charitable purpose as defined in sub-section (3) of section 4" 
shall be inserted. 

J 
s. (1) In section 16 of the Int:ome-tax Act, in clause (4) of sub- A.mcndmtnt 
section (1), for the words, figures and letters "section 15B and section oflection J 6 
15c-, the words, figures and letters "section 15B, section 15C and 
section 58F" shall be substituted. 
S (2) The amendment made by sub-section (1) shall be deemed to 
10 
IS 
I of 1890. 
!! of 1908. 20 
have had effect on and from the 1st day of April, 1957, for the pur-
poses elf sub-sections (2) and (2B) of section 18 of the Income-tax 
Act, and on and from the 1st day of April, 1958, for other purposes. 
'1. In section 46 of the Incom~tax Act,-
(i) for the proviso to sub-section (2), the following proviso 
shall be, and shall be deemed always to have been, substituted, 
namely:-
"Provided that without prejudice to the powers confer-
red by this sub-section, the Collector shall, for the purpose 
of recovering the amount specified in the certificate, have 
also all the powers which-
(4) a Collector has under the Revenue Recovery Act, 
1890; 
(b) a civil t:ourt has under the Code of Civil Proce-
dure, 1908, for the purpose of the recovery of an amount 
due under a decree."; 
(ii) for sub-section (8), the following sub-sections shall be, 
and shall be deemed always to have been, substituted, namely:-
" (1 A) For the purposes of this section, the expression 
"Collector" shall include-
(a) an additional collector or any other officer 
authorised to exerdse the powers of a Collector under 
any law for the time being in force in a State relating to 
land revenue; and 
(b) a Collector in. Pakista:n. 
(8) The Income-tax Ofticer may forward a certificate 
under sub-section (2) to a Collector in Pakistan through the 
Central Board of Revenue of Pakistan if the assessee has 
property in the district of that Ccllector.". 
Amendment 
of section 46-

Amendment 
of ,ection 
S6A. 
4 
8. In section 56A of the Income-tax Act, in clause (i) of sub-
section (1),-
(a) for item No. (2), the following item shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"(2) Iron and steel (metal), ferro-alloys, and special S 
steels;"; 
(b) for item No. (4), the following items shall be substitut-
ed, namely:-
" (4) Chemicals (other than fertilisers) of the following 
types:-
(i) Inorganic heavy chemicals; 
(ii) Organic heavy chemicals; 
(iii) Fine chemicals including photographic chemi-
cals; 
(iv) Synthetic rubber; 
(v) Man-made fibres other than viscose rayon; 
(vi) Coke oven by-products; 
(vii) Coal tar distillation products like napthalene, 
anthracene and the like; 
10 
IS 
(viii) Explosives including gun powder and safety 30 
fuses; 
(4A) Inorganic, organic and mixed fertilisers;"; 
(c) for item No. (5), the following item shan be substituted, 
namely:-
U(5) Industrial machinery of the following types (in- 25 
eluding gear wheels and parts thereof, boilers and steam 
generating plants):--
A. Major items of speciaZi.!ed equ.ipment used in 
specific industriel: 
(i) Textile machinery (such as frames, carding 30 
machines, powerlooms and the like) including textile 
accessories; 
(ii) Jute machinery; 
(iii) Rayon machinery; 
(iv) Sugar machinery; 
(v) Tea machinery; 
35 

s 
Ie 
20 
30 
35 
5 
(vi) Mining machinery; 
(vii) Metallurgical machinery; 
(viii) Cement machinery; 
(ix) Chemical maohinery; 
(x) Pharmaceuticals machinery; 
(xi) Paper machinery; 
B. General items of machinery wed in several 
industries, such as the equipment required for various 
'unit processes': 
(i) Size reduction equipment-crushers, ball mills 
and the like; 
(ti) Conveying equipment-bucket elevators, skip 
hoists, cranes, derricks and the like; 
(iii) Size separation units-screens, classifiers and 
the like; 
(iv) Mixers and reactors-kneading mills, turbo 
mixers and the like; 
(v) Filtration equipment-filter presses, rotary 
filters and the like; 
(vi) Centrifugal machines; 
(vii) Evaporators; 
(viii) Distillation equipment; 
(ix) Crystallisers; 
(x) Driers; 
(xi) Power driven pumps-reciprocating, centrifu-
gal and the like; 
(xii) Air and gas compressors and vacuum pipes 
(excluding electrical furnaces); 
(xiii) Refrigeration plants for industrial use; 
(xtiv) Fire fighting equipment and 'appliances m. 
cluding fire engines; 
C. Other items of Indu.strial Machinery: 
(i) Ball, roller and tapered bearings; 
(il) Speed reduction units; 
(iii) Grinding wheels and abrasives;". 

IJIICl1ion of 9. After section 59 of the Income-tax Act, the following sections 
;;A lecti:'d shall be inserted, namely:-
,9B. 
Publication 
of informa-
tion res-
pecting 
penalties in 
certain cues. 
"59A. (1) The Central Government shall cause to be pub-
lished, by notification in the Official Gazette, the names and such 
other particulars as may be relevant of- 5 
(a) persons on each of whom a penalty amounting to 
not less than five thousand rupees or such lower amount as 
inay be fixed by the Central Government, by notification in 
. the Ofticial Gazette, has been imposed at any time on or 
after the 1st day of April, 1960, under clause (c) of sub- 10 
8eCtion(l) of section 28; and 
(b) persons who have been convicted as a result of any 
pr.oceedings initiated on or after the 1st day of April, 1960, 
under section 52 or under any provision of the Indian Penal 
Code for any offence connected with any proceedings under IS 45 of 1860. 
this Act. 
-(2) If in the interests of revenue the Central Government 
considers it necessary so to do, it may also cause to be published, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, the names and such other 
particulars as may be relevant of- 20 
(a) persons on each of whom a penalty has been 
imposed at any time on or after the 1st day of April, 1960, 
under clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (1) of sec-
tion 28; or 
(b) persons on each of whom a penalty of an amount 25 
not exceeding the amount referred to in clause (a) of sub-
section (1) has been imposed at any time on or after the 1st 
day of April, 1960, under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of 
section 28; or 
(c) persons who have been convicted al a result of any 30 
-proceed.ings initiated on or after . the 1st day of April, 1960, 
under any provision of this Act other than section 52. 
(3) No publication under this section shall be made-
(i) in the case of an assessee mentioned in ~clause (a) of 
sub-section (1) or in claqse (a) or clause (b) of sub-section 35 
(2) who has presented an appeal under section 30 against 
the order of penalty, until the appea11s disposed of by the 
Appellate Assistant Comml.aloner; 

, 
10 
I~ 
20 
2S 
., 
(ii) in the case of an assessee mentioned in clause (bJ 
of sub-iectioD (1) or clause (c) of sub-section (2), until the 
time for appealing has expired without an appeal having 
been presented, or an appeal if presented has been disposed 
of. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the 
Central Government may refrain from publishing the name of 
any person if it is satisfied that in the interests of revenue it is 
necessary so to do, and where the Central Government refrains 
from publishing the name of any person, the reason for not 
publishing the name shall be recorded in writing. 
(5) Every notification issued under this section shall be laid 
before Parliament as soon as may be after it is made. 
(6) The provisions of this section shall have effect notwith-
standing anything to the contrary contained in section 54. 
Explanation.-ln the case of a firm, company or other asso-
ciation of persons, the names of the partners of the firm, directors, 
managing agents, secretaries and treasurers, or managers of the 
company, or the members of the association, as the case may be, 
may also be published if, in the opinion of the Central Govern-
ment, the circumstances of the case justify it. 
59B. Where a person makes an application to the Commis- piaclosure oi 
sioner in the prescribed form and after payment of the prescribed ==n 
fee for information as to the amount of tax detennined as pay- tax payable. 
able by any assessee in respect of any assessment made on or 
after the 1st day of April, 1960, the Commissioner may, notwith-
standing anything contained in section 54, if he is satisfied that 
there are no circumstances justifying its refusal, furnish or cause 
to be furnished the infonnation asked for.". 
30 '10. After section 60A of the Income-tax Act, the follOWing section Insertion of 
shall be inserted, and shall be deemed always to have been inserted, ~;. section 
namely:-
35 
"SOB. (1) Where by virtue of any prOVision of this Act Tax may be 
income-tax or super-tax is to be charged in respect of the iucome ~~e:d for 
of a period other than the previous year, income-tax or super-tax, other than 
as toe case may be, shall be charged accordingly. ~!:;I~:. 
deducted 
at source 
or paid 
in advance, 
wherever 10 
provided. 

8 
(2) In respect of income chargeable under this Act, income-
tax or super-tax shall be deducted at the source or paid in advance, 
where it is so deductible or payable under any provision of this 
Act.". 
CHAPTER III 
.AMENDMENTS TO THE WEALTH-TAX Aer, 1957 
IDlC:rtion of new aeetioDl 11. In the Wealth-tax Act, 1957, after section 42, the following 
~B . IDAd sections shall be inserted, namely:-42 m ct 
27 of 1957. 
Publication 
of informa-
tion respect-
ing penalties 
in certain 
cues. 
"42A. (1) The Central Government shall cause to be pub-
lished, by notification in the Official Gazette, the names and such 10 
other particulars as may be relevant of-
(a) persons on each of whom a penalty amounting to not 
less than five thousand rupees or such lower amount as may 
be fixed by the Central Government, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, has been imposed at any time on or after 15 
the 1st day of April, 1960, under clause (c) of sub-section (1) 
of section 18; and 
(b) persons who have been convicted as a result of any 
proceedings initiated on or after the 1st day of April, 1960, 
under sub-section (2) of section 36 or under any provision of 20 
the Indian Penal Code for any offence connected with any 4S oC 186C1, 
proceedings under this Act. 
(2) If in the interests of revenue tbe Central Governmen~ 
considers it necessary so to do, it may also cause to be published, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, the names and such other 25 
particulars as may be relevant of-
(a) persons on each of whom a penalty has been imposed 
at any time on or after the 1st day of April, 1960, under \ 
clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 18; or ~ 
(b) persons on each of whom'a penalty of an amount not 30 
exceeding the amount referred to in clause (a) of sub-section ... 
(1) has been imposed at any time on or after the 1st day of • 
April, 1968, under clause (c) of sub-section (l) of section 18; 
or 
(c) persons who have been convicted as a result c.f any 35 
proceedings initiated on or after the 1st day of April, 1960, 
under any provision of this Act other than sub-section (2) 
of section 36. 

(3) No publication under this section shall be made-
(i) in the case of an assessee mentioned in clause (a) of 
sub-section (1) or in clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section 
(2) who has presented an appeal under section 23 against the 
order of penalty,' until the appeal is disposed of by the 
Appellate Assistant Commissioner; 
(ii) in the case of an assessee mentioned in clause (b) of 
sub-section (1) or clause (c) of sub-section (2), until the time 
for eppealing has expired without an appeal having been 
10 presented, or an appeal if presented has been disposed of. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the 
Central Government may refrain from publishing the name of 
any person if it is satisfied that in the interests of revenue it is 
necessary so to do, and where the Central Government refrains 
15 from publishing the name of any person, the reason for not 
publishing the name shall be recorded in writing. 
(5) Every notification issued under this section shall be laid 
before Parliament as soon as may be after it is made. 
(6) The provisions of this section shall have effect· not-
20 withstanding anything to the contrary contained in section 42. 
42B. Where a person makes an application to the Commis- Di~c108ure 
. . h 'bed f d f f h of informa-8loner In t e prest:rl orm an a ter payment 0 t e pres- tion respect-
cribed fee for information as to the amount of wealth-tax deter- :~able. tax 
mined as payable by any assessee in respect of any assessment 
25 made on or after the 1st day of April, 1960, the Commissioner 
may, notwithstanding anything contained in section 42, if he is 
satisfied that there are no circumstances justifying its refusal, 
furnish or cause to be furnished the information asked for.". 
CHAPTER IV 
AMENDMENTS TO THE EXPENDITURE-TAX ACT, 1957 
12. In the Expenditure-tax Act, 1957, after section 38, the follow- Insertion of 
tng sections shall be inserted namely' _ new sections , • 38A and 
286(B) LS-2. 
38B in Act 
29 of 1957. 
"3SA. (1) The Central Government shall cause to be pub- Publication 
lished, by notification in the Official Gazette, the names and such o.f informa-tion respect-
other particulars as may be relevant of- ~g penaJti~8 
m cen&m 
(a) persons on each of whom ~ penalty amounting to alsel. 
not less than five thousand rupees or such lower amount as 

10 
may be fixed by the Central Government, by notitlcation iIi 
the Official Gazette, has been imposed at any time on or 
after the 1st day of April, 1960, under clause (c) of sub-
section (1) of section 17; and 
(b) per~ons who have been convicted as a result of any 5 
proceedings initiated on or after the 1st day of April, 1960, 
under sub-section (2) of section 32 or under any provision 
of the Indian Penal Code for any offence connected with any 4S of 1860. 
proceedings under this Act, 
(2) If in the interests of revenue the Central Government 10 
considers it necessary so to do, it may also cause to be published, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, the names and such other 
particulars as may be relevant of-
(a) persons on each of whom a penalty has been 
imposed at any time on or after the 1st day of April, 1960, IS 
under clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 
17; or 
(b) persons on each of whom a penalty of an amount 
not exceeding the amount referred to in clause (a) of sub-
section (1) has been imposed at any time on or after the 20 
1st day of April, 1960, under clause (c) of sub-section (1) 
of section 17; or 
(c) persons who have been convicted as a result of any 
proceedings initiated on or after the 1st day of April, 1960, 
under any provision of this Act other than sub-section (2) 25 
of section 32. 
(3) No publication under this section shall be made-
(i) in the case of an assessee mentioned in clause (a) of 
sub-section (1) or in clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section 
(2) who has presented an appeal under section 21 against 30 
the order of penalty, until the appeal is disposed of by the 
AppeUate Assistant Commissioner; 
(ii) in the case of an assessee mentioned in clause (b) 
of sub-section (1) or clause (c) of sUb-section (2), until the 
time for appealing has expired without an appeal having 35 
been presented, or an appeal if presented has been disposed 
of. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the 
Central Government may refrain from publishing the name of 

45 of 1860. 
II 
any person if it is satisfied that in the interests of revenue it is 
necessary so to do, and where the Central Government refrains 
from publishing the name of any person, the reason for not 
publishing the name shall be recorded in writing. 
, (5) Every notification issued under this section shall be laid 
before Parliament as soon as may be after it is made. 
(6) The provisions of this section shall have effect notwith-
standing anything to the contrary contained in section 38. 
38B. Where a person makes an application to the Commis- Disclosure 
10 sioner in the prescribed form and after payment of the prescribed ~~~r;:;-
fee for information as to the amount of expenditure-tax deter- ing bl tax . paya e. 
mmed as payable by any assessee in respect of any assessment 
made on or after the 1st day of April, 1960, the Commissioner may, 
notwithstanding anything contained in section 38, if he is 
IS satisfied that there are no circumstances justifying its refusal, 
furnish or cause to be furnished the information asked for.". 
CHAPTER V 
AMENDMENTS TO THE GIFT-TAX ACT, 1958 
13. In the Gift-tax Act, 1958, after section 41, the following sections InsertiOD ef 
20 shall be inserted, namely: - :~ =~ 
in Act IS 
of 1958. 
30 
3S 
u41A. (1) The Central Government shall cause to be pub-- Pub~tlOD 
lished, by notification in the Official Gazette, the names and such :aD ~;: 
other particulars as may be relevant of- ~ __ 
(a) persons on each of whom a penalty amounting to not 
less than five thousand rupees or such lower amount as may 
be fixed by the Central Government, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, has been imposed at any time on or after 
the 1st day of April, 1960, under clause {c) of sub-section (1) 
of section 17; and 
(b) persons who have been convicted as a result of any 
proceedings initiated on or after the 1st day of April, 1960, 
under sub-section (2) of section 35 or under any provision of 
the Indian Penal Code for any offence connected with BUY 
proceedings under this Act. 
(2) If in the interests of revenue the Central Government 
considers it necessary so to do, it may also cause to be published, 
c:asca. 

12 
by notification in the Official Gazette, the names and such other 
particulars as may be relevant of-
(a) persons on each of whom a penalty has been imposed 
at any time on or after the 1st day of April, 1960, under 
clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 17; or S 
(b) persons on each of whom a penalty of an amount not 
exceeding the amount referred to in clause (a) of sub-c;ection 
(1) has been imposed at any time on or after the 1st day of 
April, 1960, under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 17; 
~ ro 
(c) persons who have been convicted as a result of any 
proceedings initiated on or after the 1st dey of April, 1960, 
under any provision of this Act other than sub-section (2) 
of section 35. 
(3) No publication under this section shall be made- IS 
"(i) in the case of an assessee mentioned in clause (a) of 
sub-section (1) or in clause (a.) or clause (b) of sub-section 
(2) who has presented an appeal under section 22 against the 
order of penalty, until the appeal is disposed of by the 
Appellate Assistant Commissioner; 20 
(ii) in the case of an assessee mentioned in clause (b) 
of sub-section (1) or clause (c) of sub-section (2), until the 
time for appealing has expired without an appeal hE.ving 
been presented, or an appeal if presented has been disposed 
~ ~ 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the 
Central Government may refrain from publishing the name of 
any person if it is satisfied that in the interests of revenue it is 
necessary so to do, and where the Central Governmentrdrains 
from publishing the name of any person, the reason for not 30 
publishing the name shall be recorded in writing. 
(5) Every notification issued under this section shall be laid 
before Parliament as soon as may be after it is made. 
(6) The provisions of this section shall have effect notwith-
standing anything to the contrary contained in section 41. 3S 
Explo.nation.-In the case of a firm, company or an Dssocia-
tion or a body of individuals or persons, the names of the partners 
of the firm, directors, managing agents, secretaries and treasurers 
or managers of the company, or the members of the association or 

15 
body, as the case may be, may also be pUblished if in the opinion 
of the Central Government the circumstances of the case ji.lstify 
it. 
41B. Where a person makes an application to the C(lmmis- D~closure 
. . h 'b d f d f' f h 'b d of mfonna-S Slo~er m t e prescll e orm an a ter payment 0 t e prescr, e tion respect-
fee for information as to the amount of gift-tax determined as ~~~k. 
payable by any assessee in respect of any assessment made on 
or after the 1st day of April, 1960, the Commissioner may, not-
withstanding anything contained in section 41, if he is satisfied 
10 that there are no circumstances justifying its refusal, furnish or 
cause to be furnished the information asked for.". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The object of this Bill is-
(i) to give effect to the Government's decision to relax the 
secrecy provisions of the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922, the 
Wealth-tax Act, 1957, the Expenditure-tax Act, 1957 and the 
Gift-tax Act, 1958 for publishing the names and other particulars 
of certain types of tax-offenders and for disclosure of information 
regarding the amount of tax payable by an assessee; and 
(ii) to make certain amendments to the Income-tax Act 
which have become necessary owing to some judicial decisions 
and in the light of the experience gained in the working of the 
Act. Some of these amendments are of a clarificatory nature 
while some others are intended to give relief to assessees or to 
facilitate collection of tax. 
2. The notes on clauses explain the object under~ying each of the 
amendments contained in the Bill. 
MORARJI R. DESAI. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 23rd April, 1960. 
If 

Notes on clause, 
Clause 2 makes the following amendments to section 4 of the 
Income-tax Act:-
Sub-clause (i) inserts a new clause (xivb) in sub-section (3) to 
secure exemption in respect of income from "Salaries" of a non-
resident non-Indian employee of a foreign shipping concern where 
his total stay in the taxable territories during the year does not 
exceed ninety days. 
Sub-clause (ii).-Under clauses (xvii) and (xviia) of sub-section 
(3) of section 4 of the Income-tax Act, exemption is granted to income 
receivable in respect of small savings securities issued by the Central 
Government. These clauses are being suitably re-drafted in order 
to make available the exemption in respect of all such securities that 
have already been issued or may be issued hereafter. 
Clause 3 amends section 5 with retrospective effect to clarify that 
the word "case" in sub-sections (2) and (5) includes completed 
assessments in respect of an assessee. 
Clause 4 amends section 10 to provide that development rebate 
will not be admissible in respect of road transport vehicles and office 
appliances. 
Clause 5 amends section 15B of the Income-tax Act to extend the 
tax exemption to donations made to Government or a local authority, 
provided that the donations are to be utilised for a charitable purpose 
as defined in the Act. 
Clause 6 amt;!nds clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 16 of the 
Income-tax Act to clarify that the contributions made by an employee 
to his individual account in a recognised providend fund have to be 
included in his total income though they are exempt from income-tax 
under section 58F. 
Clause 7 amends sectiQn 46 of the Income-tax Act so as to include 
in the definition of Collector other officers exercising the powers of a 
Collector. 
Clause 8 amends items (2), (4) and (5) of the list of the basic 
industries mentioned in section 56A of the Income-tax Act to extend 
15 

16 
the benefit of that section to a larger number of such industries. 
Clause 9 inserts two new sections (59A and 59B) in the Income-
tax Act to relax its secrecy provisions- (i) to enable the Central 
Government to publish the names 'and other particulars of tax-payers 
who have been penalised or convicted for certain tax offences, and 
(ii) to enable the Commissioner to disclose the amount of tax pay-
able by an assessee to any person on application. 
Clause 10 inserts a new section (60B) to remove any doubt as to 
the effectiveness of the provisions contained in the Act respecting 
assessment of tax for any period other than the previous year, 
deduction of tax at the source or payment of tax in advance. 
Clauses 11 to 13 make in the Wealth-tax Act, 1957, the Expenditure-
tax Act, 1957 and the Gift-tax Act, 1958, amendments similar to those 
made In the Income-tax Act by clause 9. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clauses 9, 11, 12 and 13 of the Bill which relax the secrecy provi-
sions of the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922, the Wealth-tax Act, ]957, 
the Expenditure-tax Act, 1957 and the Gift-tax Act, 1958, authorise 
the making of rules with respect to matters (by using the expression 
"prescribe") like the form in which an applicant may apply to the 
Commissioner for information regarding the tax payable by an 
assessee and the amount of fees payable by the applicant. The 
proposed delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 
17 
286(~) LS-3 

~ation 
Income-tax 
authorities. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE INDIAN INCOME-TAX ACT, 1922 (11 or 1922) 
• • • • • • 
CHAPTER I 
CHARGE or INCOME-TAX 
• ... • • • • 
4. • • • • • • 
... • • • • • 
(3) Any income, profits or gains falling within the following 
classes shall not be included in total income of the person receiving 
them:-
• • • • • • 
(xvii) Interest on the 10 year Treasury Savings Deposit Certi-
ficates or the monthly payments on the 15 Year Annuity 
Certificates issued by or under the authority of the Central 
Government for an amount not exceeding the maximum 
amount which is permitted to be invested therein. 
(xviia) Interest on deposits in Post Office Savings Bank, Post 
Office Cash Certificates, Post Office National Savings Certi-
ficates and Post Office National Plan Certificates for amounts 
not exceeding in each case the maximum amount which is 
permitted to be deposited or invested therein. 
• • 
5. • • 
• • 
CHAPTER II 
INCOME-TAX AUTHORITIES 
• • 
• • 
• • 
(2) The Central Government may appoint as many Commissioners 
of Income-tax as it thinks fit and they shall perform their functions 
in respect of such areas or of such persons or classes of persons or of 
such incomes or classes of incomes or of such cases or classes of 
cases as the Central Board of Revenue may direct, and where such 
directions have assigned to two or more Commissioners of Income-tax 
the same area or the same persons or classes of persons or the same 
18 

19 
income or classes of incomes or the same cases or classes of cases, 
they shall have concurrent jurisdiction subject to any orders which 
the Central Board of Revenue may make for the distribution 8.nd 
allocation of work to be performed . 
• • • • • • 
(5) Inspecting Assistant Commissioners of Income-tax and 
Income-tax Officers shall perform their functions in respect of such 
persons or classes of persons or of such incomes or classes cf income 
or in respect of such areas as the Commissioner of Income-tax may 
direct, and where, such directions have assigned to two or more 
Inspecting Assistant Commissioners of Income-tax or Income-tax 
Officers, the same persons or classes of persons or the same incomes 
or classses of income or the same area in accordance with any ordl!rs 
which the Commissioner of Income-tax may make for the distribution 
and allocation of the work to be performed. The Commissioner may, 
by general or special order in writing, direct that the powers cnnferred 
. on the Income-tax Officer and the Appellate Assistant Commissioner 
by or under this Act shall, in respect of any specified case or class 
of cases, be exercised by the Inspectin~ Assistant Commissioner and 
the Commissioner, respectively, and, for the purposes of any case 
in respect of which such order applies, references in this Act or in 
any rules made hereunder to the Income-tax Officer and the Appellate 
Assistant Commissioner shall be deemed to be references to the 
Inspecting Assistant Commissioner and the Commissioner, 
respectively. 
• • • • • • 
(7 A) The Commissioner of Income-tax may transfer any case 
from one Income-tax Officer subordinate to him to another, and the 
Central Board of Revenue may transfer any case from anyone 
Income-tax Officer to another. Such transfer may be made at any 
stage of the proceedings, and shall not render necessary the I·e issue 
of any notice already issued by the Income-tax Officer from whom 
the case is transferred. 
ExpZanation.-In this sub-section, 'case' in relation to any person 
whose name is specified in the order of transfer means all proceedings 
under this Act in respect of any year which may be pending on the 
date of the transfer, and includes all proceedings under this Act 
which may be commenced after the date of the transfer in respect of 
any year. 
• • • • • • 

2U 
CHAPTER III 
TAXABLE INCOME 
• • • ... • • 
ExemptiO:l 15H. (1) The tax shall not be payable by an assessee in respect 
~ d~c~~~ of any sums paid by him on or after the 1st day of April, 1953, as 
fobrl ch ri- donations to any institution or fund to which this section applies: t e purpo-
au. . Provided that in the case of a company this exemption shall apply 
Exemption 
lind ezclu-
aions delCr-
minin, the 
toLl in~ome. 
Tx when 
P··foible. 
only in respect of income-tax and not in respect of super-tax payable 
by it: 
Provided further that this exemption shall not apply-
(a) if the aggregate of the sums so paid by the assessee is less 
than two hundred and fifty rupees, 
(b) to any sums paid in excess of one twentieth of the assessee's 
total income as reduced by any portion thereof exempt from 
tax under any other provisions of this Act, or one hundred 
thousand rupees, whichever is less. 
• • • • • • 
16. (1) In computing the total income of an assessee-
(a) any sums exempted under the first proviso to sub-section 
(1) of section 7, the second and third provisos to aection 8, 
sub-sections (2), (3), (4) and (5) of section 14, section 15, 
section 15B and section 15C shall be included, and any sum 
exempted under section 15A shall also be included except 
for the purpose of determining the rates at which income-tax 
(but not super-tax) is payable by the assessee to whom the 
exemption is given; 
• • • • • • 
CHAPTER VI 
RIlCOVUY or TAX AND PJ:NALTIBB 
'" • '" • '" • 
46. • • • • • • • • • • .. • 
(2) The Income-tax Oftlcer may forward to the Collector a 
certificate under his signature specifying the amount of arrears due 
from an assessee, and the Collector, on receipt of such certiflcate, 
shall proceed to recover from such assessee the amount specified 
therein as if it were an arrear of land revenue: 

21 
Provided that without, prejudice to any other powers of the 
Collector in this behalf, he shall for the purpose of recovering the 
said amount have the powers which under the Code of Civil Proce-
S of 1908. dure, 1908, a Civil Court has for the purpose of the recovery of an 
amount due under a decree. 
(SA) 
• • • • • • 
If the person to whom a notice under this Bub-section is ient fails 
to make payment in pursuance thereof to the Income-tax OfIlcer, 
further proceedings may be taken by and before the Collector on the 
footing that the Income-tax Officer's notice has the same effect as an 
attachment by the Collector in exercise of his powers under the 
proviso to sub-section (2) of section 46. 
• • • • • • 
CHAPTER IX 
SUPER-TAX 
... ... ... ... ... • 
56A. (1) No super-tax shall be payable by a company on such &emption 
part of its total income as consists of dividends received from an ~=r; 
Indian company formed and registered after the 31st day of March, di'ridendl. 
1952, where-
(i) the Central Government is satisfied that the Indian com-
pany is wholly or mainly engaged in an industry for the 
manufacture or production of anyone or more of the 
following, namely:-
• ... • ... • 
(2) Iron and steel; 
• ... ... ... ... 
(4) Heavy chemicals including fertilizers; 
(5) Heavy machinery used in industry including ball and 
roller bearing end gear wheels and parts thereof, boilers 
and steam generating equipment; 
OMGIPD-LS 1-205 M of L-26-4~I6so 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
further to lDlend the IndiBn Income-tax Act, 1922, the Wealth-
tax ACt, 1957, the Expenditure-tax Act, 1957 and the Gift-
tax Act, 1958. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (I) of article 117 end 
clause (I) of article 274 of the Constitution of India, recom-
mended to Lok Sabha, the introduction of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
SeC1etary. 
(Shn Morarji Desai, Minister of Finance) 