CLJRhI GCNL.:A 
'to 
mE AFRL':AN ~EVELUPM E.~n· BANL BILL, 1983 
Ll0 be/·AS intrOduced in Lok Sabha7 
1. Page 2, 1 in e 4,-
(i) fOr "Banksn read "B ank" 
(11) for "th inks, fit" ~ "thinks fit," 
....... 
2. Page 2, line 21,-
for "duty" ~ "dul y" 
-
3. Page 3, line 3,-
i£L "CJR" read nCJF" 
4. Page 7, l~ne 14,-
( i) for "US $ 1.33" ~ "UG $ 1.33" 
(ii) for "sharges" ~ II shares" -
5. Page 7, line 18,-
for "US $ 3.6575" ~ -
o. Page 7, line 1'1,-
m "US $ 731iOO" rgad 
7. Page 7, line 9 frum bottQn, -
i£!. "rote= sIt 
NEW DELHI; 
M~rcb 14, 1983 
~ " rates" 
~'US $ ).6575" 
"US $ 731500" 

5 
JO 
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA ON 
~1 7 M,A,R 1983 
Bill ~o. 16 of 1983 
THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK BIIL, 1983 
A 
BILL 
to implement the international agreemmt for the el~li8hmeRt and 
operation of th.e African Development Bank and for matters connected 
therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-fourth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the African Development Bank Act, Short 
1983. title, 
extent 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. and 
com-
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government mence-
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. mInt. 
'2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise reqliires,- Defh\l· 
tioftB. 
(a) "Agreement" means the agreement for the establishment of 
the Afric~n Development Bank; 
(b) "Bank" means the African Development Bank established 
under the Agreement. 
3. (1) There sIlaU be paid out of the ConlOlidated Fand of ladle, Pa~nts 
after .ue KpprOprlatlMl made by ParUa.ent Ity law III ads bellalf. aU to Bank. 
suck sums .. may, from time to time, be rettairei for the purpose .f 
15 payin.,~ . 
(a) the subscriptions payable by the Central Government to the 
Bank UDder Artides t, 7, 18 aDd 21 of the Arreemenf; 

Reserve 
Bank to 
be depo-
sitory 
fof Bank. 
Confer-
mentof 
status 
anei cer-
tain im-
munities, 
exemp.-
tions and 
privile-
ges on 
Bank and 
confer-
ment of 
certain 
immuni-
ties, 
exemp-
tiona 
and 
privi-
}Ieps on 
i~ 
oftlcers 
and 
em.-
ployeell. 
Power to 
make 
rules. 
Nd"Jft-
ea\ions 
Issued 
under 
section 
land 
ruleI 
made 
wuIer 
section 
8 to be 
laid 
before 
Parlia-
ment. 
2 
(Jb) any SUDls payable by the Central Govei'nment to the Bank 
under Article 28 of the Al1'eenlent. 
(2) The Central Government may, if it thinks fit so to do, create 
and Issue to the Banks, in such form as it thinks, 8t any non-Interest 
bearing and Don-negotiable notes or other obligations. 5 
4. The Reserve Bank of India shall be the depository of the Indian 
currency holdings of the Bank. 
5. (1) l'olotWltnstanding anything to the contrary contained in any 
other law, the provisions of the Agreement set out in the Schedule shall 
have the force of law in India: 
Provided'that nothing in Article 57 of the Agreement shall be con-
strued as-
(a) entitling the Bank to import into India goods flree of any 
duty of C'Ustoms without any restriction on their subsequent sale 
10 
thel'ein; or 15 
(b) conferring on the Bank any exemption from duties or 
taxes which form part of the price of goods sold; or 
lc) conferring on the Bank any exemption from duties or tax. 
Which are in fact no more thah cnarges for services rendereu. 
(2) The Central Government may. hy notification in the Official 20 
Gazette, amend the Schedule in conformity with any amendments, duty 
. made and adopted, of the provisions of the Agreement set out therein. 
6. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
7. Every notification issued under sub-section (2) of section 5 and 25 
every rule made under section 6 shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it il ilsued or made, before each Hause of Parliament, while it is in 
lenion, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
. session or in two or more S'Uccessive sessions, and if, before the expiry 
of the se~ion immediately following the session or the Buccessive 30 
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the 
notification or, as the case maybe, in the ll'Ule or both Houses agree 
that the notification or rule should not be issued or made, the notifica-
tion or rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the ca~e may be; so, however, that any such modiflca- 35 
tfon or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously dODe 'Under that notification or Il'ule. 

3 
THE SCHEDULE 
(See section 5) 
PROVISIONS OR THE AGREEMENT WHICH SHALL HAVE FORCE 
OF LAW 
AGREEMENT ESTABLISHING THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
5 CHAPTER VII 
10 
STATUS, IMMUNITIES, EXEMPTIONS AND PRIVILEGES 
ARTICLE 50 
STATUS 
To enable it to fulfil its purpose and the functions with which it is 
entrusted, the Bank shall possess full international personality. To 
those ends, it may enter into agreements with members, non-member 
States and other international organizations. To the same ends, the 
status, 'immunities,exemptions and privileges set forth in this Chapter 
15 shan ,be accorded to the Bank in the territory of each tnember. 
ARTICLE 51 
STATUs IN MEMBER COUNTRIES 
In the territory of each member the Bank shall possess full juridical 
personality and, in. particular, full capacity: 
20 (a) to contra~t; 
'(b) to acquire and dispose of immovable and movable property; 
and 
(c) to'institute legal proceedings. 
ARTICLE 52 
• JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS 
1. The Bank shalI enjoy immunity from every form of legal process 
except in cases ariSing out of the exercise of its' borrowing powers when 
it may be sued only in a court of competent jurisdiction in the territory 
of a member in which the Bank has its prinCipal office, or in the territory 
30 of a member or non-member'State where it has appointed an agent 
'for the purpose of accepting service or notice of process or has issued 
or guaranteed securities. No actions shall, however, be brought by 
J1)embers or persons acting for or deriving cllUms from members. 
2. The property and assets of the Bank shall, wherever located and 
by whomsoever held, be immune from all forms of seizure,' attachment 
35 Qr e~ecution before the delivery of final judgment against the Bank. 
ARTICLE 53 . ,-
IMMUNITY OF ASSETS AND .ARcHIVES 
1. Property and aSiets of the Bank, wherever located and by whom-
soever held, shall be imml Ine from search, requisition, confiscation, 
40 expropriation or any other form of taking or foreclosure' by executive 
or legislative action. 
45 
2. The archives of the Bank and, in general, all documents belonging 
to it, or held by it, shall be inviolable, wherever located. 
ARTICLE 54 
FREEDoM OF ASSETS FROM RES'l'RICTION 
To the extent necessa;ry to carry out the purpose and functions of the 
Bank and 'Subject to the provisions of this Agreement, all property and 
other ,assets of the Bank shall be exempt from restrictions, regulations, 
controls and moratoria of any nature. 

+, ... -
ARTICLE 55 
PRIVILEGE FOR COMMUNICATIONS 
Official communications of the Bank shall be accorded by each member 
the same treatment that it accords to the official communications of 
other members. 
ARTICLE 56 
PERSONAL IMMUNITlES AND PRIVILEGES 
1. All governors, directors, alternates, officers and employees of the 
:a~nk and experts and consultants performing missions for the Bank: 
5 
(i) shall be immune from legal process with respect to acts 10 
performed by them in their official capacity; 
(H) wh~re they are not local nllt~nals, shall be aceorded the 
same immunities from immigration restrictions, alien registration 
reqUirements· and national service obligations, and the same facilities 
as regards exchange regulations as are accorded by members to the '5 
rep~atives, officials and employees of comparable Il'ank of other 
members; and 
{iU) sballbe granted the same treatment in respect 01. travel-
ling facilities as is accorded by members to representatives, oftlcials 
and ~mployees of comparable rank of other members. 
2. Experts and consultants performing missions for the Bank shall 
be accorded sUch immunities and privileges as 'are, in the opinion of 
tDe Bank, necesSl8:ry fv the independent exercise of their functions 
cluriDg the period of their mission, including the time spep.t on joumeys 
in C&DDexion therewith. 
I., ARTICLE 57 
EXEMPTION FROM TAXATION 
20 
1. The Bank, its properly, other assets, income and its operations and 
trusaetiGDI shall be exempt from all taxation and from all customs 
dU:tiel. The Beak· shall also be exempt from any obligation relating to 
the payment, withholding or collection of any tax or duty. 30 
2. No tax shall be levied on or in respect of salaries and emoluments 
paid by the Bank to directors, alternates, officers and other professional 
staft of the Bank. 
3. Nn' tax of any kind shall be levied on any obligation or secuiity 35 
issued by the Bank, including, any dividend or interest thereon, by 
whomBOeVer held~ 
(i) which discriminates against such obligation or ·security 
solely because it is issued by tht:. Bank; or 
(ii) if the sole' j'urisdictional 'basis for such taxation is the place 
, or, curreney in which it is issued, made payable or paid, or the 40 
laeation of any offtce or place of business maintained by _ the Bank. 

5 
.. 
5 
4. No tax of any lQ.nd shall be levied on any obligation or security 
guaranteed by the Bank, including any dividend or interest thereon, by 
vvhor.nsoever held: 
(i) which discriminates against such obligation or security 
solely because it is guaranteed by the Bank; or 
(ii) if the sole jurisdictional basis for such taxation is tbe loca-
tion of any office or place of business maintained by the Bank. . 
ARTICLE 58 
NOTIFICATION OF IMPLEMENTATION 
10 Eaeh member shall promptly inforr.n the Bank of the speclfte aettea 
vvAteh it has taken to make effective in its territory the proviliOM of 
thlis Chapter. 
ARTICLE 59 
ApPLICATION OF IMMUNITIES, EXEMPTIONS AND PRIVlLBCES 
The imr.nunities, exer.nptiOlls and privileges provided in this Cn.,ter 
T5 are granted in the interests of the Bank. The Board of Directon lIIay 
waive, to such extent and upon such conditions as it r.nay determine, 
the immunities and exemptions provided in Articles 52, 54, 56 and 57 of 
this Agreement in cases where its action would in its opinion further 
20 the interests of the Bank. The President shall have the right and the 
duty to waive the ir.nmunity of any official in cases where, in his 
opinion, the immunity would impede the cO'Urse of justice and can be 
waived without prejudice to the interests of the Bank. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AN~ REASONS 
indi~ h~ decided to become a member of the 'African Development 
Bank' by acceding to the Agreement establishing the African Development 
Bank. Chapter VII of the Articles of the Agreement provides for granting 
to the Bank and its officers and employees, certain status, immunities, 
exemptions and privileges in the territory of each member country. 
Article 50 of the Agreement stipulates that to enable the Bank effectiv~ly 
'to fulfil its purpose and carry out functions entrusted to it, stat'.1s, 
immunities, exemptions and privileges set forth in Chapter :VII of the 
Agreement shall be accorded to the Bank in the territory of each 
member. By this Bill, it is proposed to enact the neces~ry legislation 
to give effect to the provisions of the said Chapter VII of the Agreement. 
Provision has also been made in the Bill empowering the Central Gov,ern-
· ment "to make payments to the Bi:mk towards S'Ubscriptions and other 
'charges ~nd for matters connected therewith. 
· ' . N-EW DELHI; PRANAB MUKHERJEE. 
· The 29th January, 1983. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 117 AND 274 
OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 114\AFDBi82, dated the 1st March; 1983 from 
Shri Pranab Kumar Mukherjee, Minister of Finance to the Secretary, 
Lok Babha.] 
The Pr~ident, having been informed of the subject matter of the 
proposed Bill to implement the International agreement for the establish-
ment and operation of the African Development Bank and for matters 
connected therewith, recommends the introduction of the Bill in Lok 
Sabha under articles 117 (1) and 274(1) of the Constitution of India and 
also consideration of the Bill by Lok Sabha under article 11.7 (3) of the 
Constitution. 
The above recommendation was made by the President on the 1st 
February, 1983. 
8 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Sub-clause (1) of clause 3 of the Bill makes provision for payments 
of the nature mentioned therein to the Bank after du~ appropriation 
made by Parliament by law. Sub-clause (2) of the same clause envisages 
the creation and issuing to the Bank by the, Central Goveriunent, if it 
thinks fit so to do; of certain non-interest bearing and non-negotiable 
Note~ , or other obligations. It is not possible to make at this stage a 
;precise estimate of the expenditure that would be "involved on account 
of these provisions. However, in accordance with the initial negotiations 
conduct.ed by the representatives ,of the Government of India 
and the Management of the African Development Bank, India 
is expected to be allocated 1100 shares; each costing ten thou, 
sand Bank Units of Account (1 Bank Unit, of Account being 
currently equivalent to US $ 1.33). The total cost of the 1100 sharges 
will be 11,000,000 Bank Units of Account or US'$ 14.63 million. Of our 
total subscription only 25 per cent, is expected to be paid-in and the 
rest will Il'emain outstanding as callable capital. The paid-in portion of 
US $ 3·6575 million has to be remitted in five equal instalments· of 
approj(imately US $ 731500 each. Accordingly, our financial liabilities 
are lJrojected to be as under:-
0'55 0'55 
2. All the above payments 
exchange. 
In Million Bank Units of Account 
1985 1986 TOTAL 
0'55 0'55 2'75 or US, 3,6575 
million at current 
rote, of exchan;e. 
will have to be made in free foreign 
3. Article 5(3) of the Agreement establishing the Bank permits the 
Management of the Bank to call for a General Capital Increase from 
time to time. It is therefore expected that the Management would 
exercise this right. Any payments that may have to be made by India 
on account of such General Capital Increases cannot be foreseen at this 
d~ I 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 5 (2) of the Bill confers power on the Central Government 
to amend the Schedule in confonnity with any amendmelltB,duly made 
.lId· -adopted, of the provisions of the Agreement set out therein . 
. "2. Clause ·6 of the Bill confers power on the "Central Government to 
make rules for carrying O'lIt pwrposes of the Act. The immunities, 
exemptions and privileges of the African Development Bank and its 
offteials and employees having been specified in the Schedule to the 
Bm., occasions for making rules, if any, will be few and far between. 
Ewn if such an occasion arises, as the immunities, exemptions and 
prtvileges have been specified in the Bill, it is clear that rules, ifany., 
win be confined to matters of procedure and other matters or minar 
debril relating to the enjoyment of those immunities, exemptions and 
prioIf1eges and their waiver. For instance, if the Bank decides to waive 
any ·of the immunities, exemptions or privileges, a rule may be neees-
aary prescribing the manner in which and the officer of the Govem-
ment to whom such waiver shcruld be communicated~ 
3. The delegation df legislative power is thus of a normal character. 
'8 

, 
LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to implement the international agreement for the establit!tment and 
operation of the African Development Bank and for matters connec-
ted therewith. 
. ... 
• 
(Shri P1'anab KUmar Mukherjee, Minister of Finance.) 