ClRRIGENDUf; 
to 
THE SPECI\L ,-1':. d\F::t nL· \\.;3 (n«·t.'VNIT:ES ,,\'.!:J EXBJIPTIlNS) 
51 LL, 1 (HH 
P "ge ~, 11. nc 32,-
~.J£ "pr:1!'ticulr" r~.:.d "pt)rtiCL:Lu" 
]\iEV',r £'ELHI; 

As INTRODUCED IN WK SABRA o!t 
"2 lfJlIt> 198' 
Bill No. 21 ot rMt 
'tHE SPECIAL BEARER BONDS (IMMUNIT£ES AND EXEMPTIONS) 
BILL, 1981 
A 
BILL 
to provide for certain immunities to holders of Special Bearer Bonds, 
1991 and for certain exemptions from direct tares in reiation to Buch 
bonds and fOT matters cOnnected t~ewith. 
WHEREAS for effective economic and social planning it is necessary to 
canalise for productive purposes black money which has become a serious 
threat to the national economy; 
Aft'!) WHBM:AS with a view to such canalisation the Central Govern-
S ment has decided to issue at par certain bearer bonds to be known as 
the ~cial Bearer Bonds, 1991, of the face value of ten thouSBlld rupees 
and redemption value, after ten years, of twelve thousand rupeesj 
AlCD WHJi1tKASit is expeldiertt to provide for certain immunities and 
e.snptions tonmder it possible fot persons iIi possession of black money 
to to invest the same in the said Bonds; 
BE ifenacted by Parliament in the Thirty-second Year of the Republic 
6f 'India Is follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Special Bearer Bonds (Immunities Short 
and Exemptions) Act, 1981. title, 
(2) It e:rtends to the whole of India. 
extent 
and 
com-
mence-
ment. 

l)eftnl. 
tlon. 
Immuni-
ties. 
Acquisi-
tion, etc., 
of Bonds 
not to be 
taken into 
account 
forcer-
tain pro-
ceedlnp. 
(3) It shaU be de~med to have come into force on the 12th day o'i. 
January, 1981. 
2. In this Act, "Special Bearer Bonds" means the Special Bearer Bonds, 
1991, issued by the Central Government. 
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the S 
time being in force,-
(a) no person who has subscribed to or has otherwise acquired 
Special Bearer Bonds shall be required to disclose, for any purpose 
whatsoever, the nature and source of acquisition of such Bonds; 
(b) no inquiry or investigation shall be commenced against any 10 
person under any such law on the ground that such person has sub-
scribed to or has otherwise acquired Special Bearer Bonds; and 
(c) the fact that a person has subscribed to or has otherwise 
acquired Special Bearer Bonds shall not be taken into account and 
shall be inadmissible as evidence in any proceedings relating to any IS 
offence or the imposition of any Qenalty under any such law. 
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply in relation to prosecution 
for any offence punishable under Chapter IX or Chapter XVII of the 
Indian Penal Code, the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 or any offence 45 of 1860. 
which is punishable under any other law and which is similar to an 20 2 of 1947. 
offence punishable under either of those Chapters or under that Act or 
for the purpose of enforcement of any civil liability. 
E.t-planation.-For the purposes of this sub-section, "civil liability" 
does not include liability by way of tax under any law for the time being 
in force. 2S 
4. Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of section 3, 
the subscription to, or aCq'uisition of, Special Bearer Bonds by any person 
shall not be taken into account for the purpose of any proceedings under 
the Income-tax Act. 1961 (hereinafter referred to as the Income-tax Act), 43 of 1961. 
the Wealth-tax Act, 1957 (hereinafter referred to as the Wealth-tax Act) 30 27 of 1915'. 
or the Gift-tax Act, 1958 (hereinafter referred to as the Gift-tax Act) 18 of 1958. 
and, in particulr. no person who has subscribed to, or has otherwise 
acquired, the said Bonds shall be entitled-
(a) to claim any set-off ot relief in any assessment, re-assessment, 
appeal, reference or other proceeding under the Income-tax Act or to S, 
reopen any assessment or re-assessment made under that Act on the 
ground that he has subscribed to or haa otherwise acquired the said 
Bonds; 
(b) to claim in relation to any period before the date of maturity 
of the said Bonds, that any asset which is includible m ~ net wealth 4d 
for any assessment year under the Wealth-tax Act has been converted 
into the said Bon?Si or 
(c) to claim in relation to arty period before the date of maturity 
of the said Bonds, that any asset held by him or any sum credited in 
his books of account or otherwise held by him represents the consi- 45 
deration received by him 'for the transfer of the said Bon!H. 

1 of 1981. 
5 
3 
5. In the Income-tax Act,-
(a) in section 2, in clause (14), after sub-clause (iv) , the follow-
ing sub-clause shall be inserted, namely:-
"(v') Special Bearer Bonds, ·1991; issued by the Central Gov-
enunent;"; 
(b) in section 10, in clause (15), after sub-clause (Ui), the follow-
ing sub-clause shall be inserted, namely:-
"(ib) premium on the redemption of Special Bearer Bonds, 
1991;". 
10 6. In section 5 of the Wealth-tax Act, in sub-section (1), after clause 
(.rvia), the following clause shall be inserted, nameIy:-
"(xvib) Special Bearer Bonds, 1991;". 
7. In section 5 of the Gift-tax Act, in sub-section (1), after clause' 
(iita) , the follOwing clause shall he inserted, namely:-
15 "(iiib) of prOfPerty in the form of Special Bearer Bonds, 1991;". 
8. (l) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the 
provisions of this Act, remove the difficulty. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after 
20 it is made, be laid before each House of Parliament. 
9. (1) The Special Bearer Bonds (Immunities and Exemptions) Ordi-
nance, 1981, is hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken 
under the Ordinance so repealed shall be deemed to have been done or 
25 taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act. 
Amend-
ment 
of Act 43 
of 1961. 
Amend-
mentof 
Act 27 
of 1957. 
Amend-
me..lt of 
Act 18 
of 1958. \ 
Power to 
remove 
difftcul-
ties. 
Repeal 
and 
saving. 

STATEMENT OF OBJE.cT~ AND REASONS 
With a view to reducing the liquidity in the economy and controlling 
prices and canalisiDg for productive PW'Poses black mODey wch has 
become a serious threat to the nation, tile Government decided to' ilsue 
Special Bearer ~onds, 1991. It was considered necessary to provide for 
certain immunities and exemptions to render it possible for p~rsons in 
possession of black money to invest the same in these bonds. An Ordi-
n~e called the, Special Beare:- Bonds (Immunities and Exempt;iona) 
Ordinance, 1981 was accordingly promulgated by the President on the 
12th January, 1981. 
2. The Ordinance provides for certain immunities in favour of 
persons subscribing to. or otherwise acquiring, the bonds. It providf:!s 
that such persons shall DOt be required to disclose for ~y purpose 
whatsoever the nature and source of acquisition of the bonds. It prohi-
bits any inquiry or investigation against any such person under any law 
on the ground that such person has subscribed to, or has otherwise 
acquired, the bonds. It makes the fact of subscription to, or acquisition 
of, the bonds inadmissible in evidence in any proceedings relating to 
any offence or imposition of any penalty under any such law. These 
immunities have been maqe subject to an exception in relation to prese-
cution for certain offences relating to property or prevention of corrup-
tion. The Ordinance also provides that the acquisition of the bonds shall 
not he taken into account for the purpose of any proceedings under the 
Income-tax Act, 1961, the Wealth-tax Act, 1957 and the Gift-tax Act. 
1958. The bonds themselves have been exempted from wealth-tax. 
The premium payable on the redemption of the bonds has been exempted 
from income-tax. It has also been provided that transfer of the bonds 
will not attract any liabilit,- to capital gains tax or gift-tax. 
3. The Bill seeks to replace the aforesaid Ordinance. 
R. VENKATARAMAN. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 20th February, 1981. 

Memorandum regarding modifi.ca,ti&A,J. c~ned in the Bill to replace the 
Special Bearer Bcm.ds (Immunities and Exemptions) Ordinance, 1981 
Except for the modifications in. sub-clau.es (b) and (c) of clause 4 
[substit'ution of the words "at any time" by the words "in relation to 
any period" in both the sub-clauses and amplification of sub-clause (c) 
to cover assets in addition to money] to make the intention clear, the 
provisions of the Bm are on the lines o'f the Ordinance. 

Deftni-
tions. 
Incomes 
not 
included 
in total 
income. 
Exemp-
tions in 
respect 
ot certain 
assets. 
Exemp-
tion in 
respect 
ot certain 
litts. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE INCOME-TAX AcT, 1961 
(43 OF 1961) 
• • • • • 
a In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
• • • • • 
(14) "capital asset" means property of any kind held by an 
assessee, whether or not connected with his business or profession, 
but does not include-
• • • • • 
10. In computing the total income of a previous year of any person, 
any income falling within any of the following clauses shall not be 
J 
included-
• • • • • 
(15) (i) monthly payment on the IS-Year Annuity Certificates 
issued by or under the authority of the Central Government or such 
other annuity certificates issued by or under the authority of that 
Government as that Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, specify in this behalf, to the extent to which the amO".lllts of 
thle 'c!ertlificates do not exceed in each case the maximum amount 
which is permitted to be invested therein; 
(ia) annual payment on National Defence Gold Bonds, 19'80; 
• 
• 
• • • 
EXTRACT FROM THE WEALTH-TAX ACT, 1957 
(27 OF 1957) 
• • • 
• 
• 
5. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1A), wealth-tax shall 
not be payable by an assessee in respect of the following assets, and such 
assets shall not be included in the net wealth of the assessee-
• 
• 
• • • 
ExTRACT FROM THE GIFT-TAx ACT, 1958 
(18 OF 1958) 
• • • 
• 
• 
5. (1) Gift-tax shall not be charged under this Aet in respect of gifts 
made by any person-
• • • • • 

toK 8ABitA 
I !5J 
n II 
A. 
BILL 
to provide for certain immunities to holders of Special Bearer Bonds, 
1991 and for certain exemptions from direct taxes in relation to such 
bonds and for matters connected therewith. 
(Shri ll. Venkataraman; Minister Of .F.inanc,,) 