As INTROBUCED IN Lok SABHA

: मद 1०-26 ० 2005
THE WORKING JOURNALISTS’ AND OTHER NON-JOURNALIST.
MEDIA:EMPLOYEES” WELFARE FUND BILL, 2003
By
‘Sani G.M, Banatwaia, MP,
3
BILL

ta provide for the’ constitution of a Welfare Fund in every State arid Union territory for
the benefit of Working: Journalists! and other Non Journalist Media Employees’ and for
matters connected therewith of incidental thereto

Bei: enacted: by Parliament: in; the- Fifty-fourth: Year. of thé Republic of India as

Cuaviur :
’ PRELIMINARY.
(1) This Act may be called the Working Journalists’ and other Non-Journalist Media - Short tile, o&-
Noyees" Welfare Find Act, 2003, ; fent and com-

mencement.

OO. Itextends to the whole of India.

(Gy lt shalt Come: into’ force on such date as the Central Govemiment may. By 10018:
appoint, and different dates may: be appointed for different provisions of this Act and
different States, atid any reference in: any such provision to the. commencement of the Act
construed: in relation. fo any State-as:a reference to. the coming into:force-of that.
Vision in that State.



Defivitions,

38-0F 1949,

4 of 1938,

45 of 1955,

2

cin this Act, inless thé context otherwise réquires,:—~

(ay “appropiate Government" means,—

(ऐ in-the case of a State specified in the First Schedule to the Constitution,
the State Government;

(ii) jin the case of a: Union territory specified in the First Schedule to the ¢-
Constitution, the Central Government;

(b)“Chaitperson” means the Chairperson of the Trustee Committee referred to
in clause (८) of sub-section (2) of section 9;

(c). “chartered accountant” means. a chartered. accountant as defined in clause
(0) of sub-section (/) of section 2 of the Chartered Accountant Act, 1949 and who has fe
obtained a certificate of pactice under sub-section (7) of seotion 6 of that Act;

(@) “dependent” means the spouse, parents or minor children of a member of the
Fund;

(शो “employee” means 2 working journalist or a non-journalist employed. in a
Inedia establishment; is

0) “Fund” means the "Working Journalists and other Non-Journalist Media
Employees’ Welfare Fund" constituted under sub-section (2) of section 3;

(g)"insurer" shall have the meaning assigned to it in clanse (9) of section 2 of.
the Insurance Act, 1938;

(2) "media establishment" shall include anewspaper establishment as defined in ge.
clause: (वी) of section 2 of the Working Journalists and other Newspaper Employees
{Conditions of Service) And: Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1955; any television
network or any such establishment as may be for the production and broadcasting of
‘the programimes through radio or television;

("member of the Fund" means:a working journalistor.anon-journalist iedia as
employee. admitted: to the: bonefits-of the Fund aad.who-continues:-to-be a member
thereof under the provissins of this Acts”

G) “notification” means a siotification published: in: the: official. Gazette. of the
appropriate Government and the expression “notified” shall be cotisitued accordingly;

(4) “non-journalist media employee” means any person, other than a working gw.
journalist, employed to do any work in, or in relation to, any media establishment:

"prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under: this Aict;

(की Sschechiled: bank" shall have the meaning. assigned to it in-clause(e) of.
section 2 of the Resér've Bank of India Act) 1934s.

(ny “State” means a State specified in the First Schedule tothe Constitution and 8
shall inchade’a Union tertitory:

fo) “Frustee: Conimittee”-roats:the: Working Journalists’ And-other Non-
journalist Media Employees’ Welfare Furid Trustee Committee established under sub-
section (/) of séctioti-8:

: (py “Working jourmalist’ means a person whose’ principal avocation is that-of.a;4e
journalist and inclides an editot,'a leader writer, feature-writer, sub-oditor, reporter.
comespondent, ‘anchor, :cattoonist, or calligraphist, but does ‘not;:include any ‘such
perion who is employed mainly: in « managerial or administrative capacity: and:

(g) words and: expressions: tised and indi defined ‘ix this “Act but defined inthe
‘Wotking Jouriialists:And othel: Newspiiper Employees (Conditions of Service) And’ ye
‘Miscellaneous Provisions, Act,1955 (Act'No-.45-of 4955) shall have the meanings
respectively assigned to them: in that Act.



. (तक as

Constitution of Working Journalists” and. other. Non-Journalist
Media Employess’ Welfare Fund हु
Working.

3, (४) The appropriate Government shall by notification constitute.a fond
goto: be called the “Working Journalists’ “and ‘other ‘Non-Journalist: Media Journals!
nd other.

Bimployess” Welfare: Fund, Kon.
: (2) There shal be credited to thé Find: : Journalist
8 n
(a) any: grant, which. may be-made. by: the Central Gavernment ora Eiployees,
State Government to. the Fundy wane

(by any'sums- borrowed: ander section 17;
"(ey all sums collected under sub-sections (3), (4), (6). and.(10).of section 22;,

“0 (dal sums. received from the Life Insurarice Corporation of, ‘India.or any other
insurer Orc-the. death. or disablement of any member. of the. Fund. under any. Group
‘Insurance Policy under section 7;

fe) आर profit, dividend, tefund or any. other amount ‘received from, the: Life
Insurance Corporation of India or any other insurer in respect of policies of Group
Thsurance of the-menibers of the Fund;
2: G) anyuintorost or dividend or other return on aay investment made out of any
part of the Fund, and
¢g) all woluntaty. donations or contribution received from any association, firm or

| Governmiont shall contribute to the Fund-sich grants as may be
carry out the purposes ofthe Act aid ati ainttal grant of an amount equal to not
‘cent of the amount collected by the Fund imder sub-sections (3) and (4) of
the members of the Fund.
‘Govertiment shall contribute to the Fund such grant, not being fess than:
unis payable under section 5, as itmay deer fit.
amounts: due and payable. under this Act and all expenditure relating fo the
administration of the Fund shall be paid out of the Fund.
id shall vest in and-be hekt by the Trustee. Committee, and subject to the Vesting and
: shall be applied by the Trustee Committee for thé benefit and welfare... Application of
ti and other tion- journalist media enmployees and forthe purposes of Fond.

hiGmber of the Furd shall be entitled to,— Pension’ and
, is eas ‘i ox-gratia
dor pension) as may be prescribed, on ‘his coasihg to bea working — grant or
relief to

journalist wiedid employce whohasbeen amember of the Fund for

4 ai peng rie ; every

five years; somber of
lich: ex-gratia’ grant or telief; बढ may be presetibed, on: his suffering any the Fund.

‘disability: inthe covttse:of his: duty:

001०८ or the legal:heir of a member of the Fund stiall be entitled to such का

‘iay be prescribed oni the deatti of a member in the course of his duty.

van application made to it by.a member of the Find, and.” Bx-gratia

th)

5 कण: the genuiniéness-of the claim: pra a

ze oe arati ० . ०" ing to.

५ W exegratia grant 70 such member from the Fund. members of
the Funds

6 case. of his hospitalisation or involving major surgical

3


‘Group Life: ty:
aakence for
miemmhees:: of.

Hig Fund and";

other hevetite,

Establisiiment
of: | Trustee
Commnittet,

Composition

of) Turdiee 1

Committee.

4

GD-it he is sulfeciag. from tuberculosis, teprosy, paralysis, cancer,
unsoundiess of mind or frontsich:othet serious disease or disability;

(6). may: advatice such. loan:on-suich: terms and conditions as the ‘Trustee: Com-
initted inay deetti fit, for a purpose as may contribute towards the welfare of the member
ef the Fund or his family,

‘The Tristee Comunitine may; for the welfare of the members of the Fand,—

(०४ obtain, from the Life Insurance Corporation of Jndia or an} other inguber;
Policies of Group Insuraiice on the life of thie mentbers of the Fundy

(6) provide; in gech namnner' as nay be prescriber, for iivedical and edincationi
facilities for‘ the menshers of the Fond: and their dependents;

{c) provide monies to the saembers of the Fund for the purchase of books or
necessary electronic’ items;

=

(d) provide widnies to constenct ‘or inaintain common Faellities for .

the: mennbers af the Fund?

(९) provide funds for any other purpose which the Trustee Cammittes
wtiay specify? and

{/) provide such other benefits as may. be prescribed,
Cuarrer TL
‘ESTARLISHMENT oF TRUSTEE COMMITTEE

है. (7) With effect from such date as the appropriate Government may, by notification,
appoint in this behalf, there shall be established a Trustes Committee to be called the
“Working Journalists and. other Non-Journalist Media Employees’ Welfare Fund Trustee
Cormutres,””

(2) The Trustee Conimitice सता bo'a hody corporate having perpetual successida and
4 common’ seal with power to acduire,.-hold.and dispose Of property’ nik Shall, by the’ said
nainia; sueand.be sued. .

9. (2) Every Trustes Committee shall corsistof
(व achairpérson!

(#) two Working Journalists (o be elected from among the. Working Journalists
who are siembers of the Farid;

(e):t6;non-journalist आएगीब: eraployees. to, be.clected. from-among, the, non-
journalist media employees. who are memnbers-of the Fund.

(ed) one Member of Parliament from the State to be elected from among the total
tnembers of Parliament from the State;

(०); one: Member of the: State: Legislature to be. elected from, among the total
membors-of the State Legislature;

40 two members to: bo siominated by the appropriate Government representing
Eminent Journalist Organisations; ° 57.

(ey Wo ex-Officis tembers as unders—:

(0-18 Secretary to.the appropriate Government in its Law Department or
Ministry;

0. GE) the. Secretary to. the. appropriate: Government in. 15 Départient or
».. Ministry of Social Welfare; and

(A) a Secretary to-the Trustee Committee appointed under sub-section (4).

aa

ay

3s

ue



ce

5
12) Blection.of the memibers specified in clauses (b) and (c) shall be held in. the mariner

ae fray ‘be prescribed:

(3) Whenever the Trustee Committes is constituted. or.reconstituted the méambers of
the Trostee Committee present-at the wieeting comyeried for the purpose shall elec? one दिलाई

‘gc "amongst Hieniselvés, save and except the. Séoretary td the. Trustee: Committee, ds: the

Chairperson of the Tiistce Committes.
{4}: The Secretary io the Trustee Committes shall be a ‘Person Hot below tis rank of

Deputy Secretary in the State.to be appointed by the appropriate Government in consultation
“with the ‘Trustee Camtbittee. कि

४ (5) The members of the Trustee, Committee shall be’ appointed hy: the ‘appropriate.
Government by notificatan in the official Gazetie,

oo 30-CO Bvery member of the Trustee shall hold office for a perind not exceeding three
‘years from the date on which he enters upon his office.

: (21 The Chairperson elected under sub-section (3) of section 9 shall hotd office for a

° period not exceeding three years from the date.on whicl hé entets upon his office.

2. (3)-The Secretary to the Trustee Conimittee shall hold office for a period not exceeding,
fhres years from the date‘on. which he enters. upon his office.
व, (7) The approprinte Government shall remove from office the Chairperson or any
snember of the Trustee Committee who,
(ay is, or af any:time has been, adjudged as an insolvent; or
ato ¢by hag become physically or mentally incapable of acting as the Chairperson or
‘a Memiber.of the Trustee Committee;

Gey has-been convictd of an offence, which:in'the opinion of the appropriate
jovernment, involves moral wrpitide; or:

= Gdyhas acquired sacl financial or other interest as is tikely-to affect prejadicially
functions as the Chairperson or 4 member of the Trastee Committes; or

ey jus atlusedl his: pogition:ds to render bis continuation in office detrimental 16:
the:publi¢ interest; or

at why time has been, absent without leave of the Trustee Committee for
we. meetings of the ‘Trustec'Committee

ferred to-dn clause: (ay of sub-section (7) of section: 9 may.
‘ontlis’ notlee: in writing to the. Secretary. to. the Trustes,

lected जावेद clause (6); (c3, (a) or (2) of sub-section { Fyof section 9 may
‘giving: Gné: month's notice, in. writing, to the Secretary to the Trustee
Sich resignation being accepted by the Trustee Committee, such Member

under clause 8) of sub-section (7) of section 9 may resign his
10076 to. the appropriate Govermtient concerned and on such
ig accepied by the said Goverimenit’such Member shalt vacate his office

tn the. office of the Chairperson shall be filled 0, as soon as may.
‘the: Trustee: Committee present at the meeting conversed for the
0050 elected shall hold office only: long as the Chairperson in

Yer of
‘Office.

Disquiitigiea.
पंठा ath ree
fiovanl of
Chatiperson.
ar Member of
“Teastes Conte
mittee.

Resignation
by, Chaisper-
son and Mem-
bers of Trustee
Commins.

Filting ap of
Casual Vacate
cies.


“ 6

whose. place he'is elected would have been entitled to hold office if the vacancy had not
agcried, :

(2) Any Vacancy in. the office of a mertiber elected under clauses (by to (६) of sab-
‘section (/) of sectioh: 9-shall be filled up, as 8007 as may be, by the conceried electorate and
the Member’ soclected shail hold office for the remaining period of the Member in whose “f°
place he 193 been: elected. :

GY Any vacancy it the office of a member nominated under clause (1 of sub-section
(of section 9 shall be filled ‘up; ds don as may be, by the apprdpridté Government and the
Member so-nominated shall hold office for the remaining period: of the member in.whose

place he has been nominated... 19:
Viicancies atc. 44. No act or proceeding of the ‘Trustee Committed shall be invalid by reason of
Totto invalie
date pretend: @ any vacancy in; or any defect in the constitution of the Trustee Committee;
ings of Trustee or :
Committee, «
(0) any defect or irregularity in the election or fomination of & person acting as
the Chairperson or'a member of the Trustee Committee; or 7 is
(ले diy itrégularity in'the procedure of the Trustee Committee not affecting the
merits of the case,
Meetings’ of 45. (J) The Tristee Committee shall meet at least once in every three calendar months,
Rete Com and at least four such meetings shall be held in every year to transact business under this
nee Act and the rules made thereunder,
(2}Four members of the Trustee Committee sball form the quorum for a. meeting of the
"Trustee commnines,
(3) The’ Trustee Committee may, subject to the approvat of the appropriate Govern
ment wake rules governing the procedure and conduct of business at its meetings.
Functions of 16. (17) Subject to the provisions of this Actthe Trustee: Committee shall administer thie. $7
Trustee Com. fund:
mnittee.

(2) Without prejudice to:the generality, of the provisions contained insub-section (7),
the ‘Trustee Committed shall-—~

“(a Old tH amounts and assets belonging to the fund-in Trust;

(by receive applications for admission or readmission tb the fund, ‘and dispose of 3°
such application within ninety days fromthe date of receipt thereof,
(¢) receive applications:from the members of the fund, their nominees of legal
heirs) 88 the-case smnay be; faripayment out-of the. fund, conduct. such enquiry as it
© deems nedessaty-and dispdse wf the applications within three-months from the date of
-recelpt ‘thereof; m .
(d) record: in the minute book of the Trustee ‘Committee; ins dézisions on the
‘applications;
(९) pay ‘to the: nemiberhf the fuid or their nomineds or legal heirs, as the case
may be, their dues under thisAct; 7 हे
{fy send: such: petiodicat and annual reports as:may be prescribed; to the’ te
‘appropriate Government; a
(%) corhmunicdte to the: applicants by: registered:post with acknowledgement
due‘ or through electronic made, the. decisions of the Trustee Conimitte in respect ‘at
applications for adanission:or.re-admiasion (0 the fund or claims to the benefit of the u
fund; ‘and



(iY do such other-acts:as-are; or may: be, required. 10:09 done under. this: Act and the.
fules:tiade thereuricer:

17 (7) The Trustee Committee may, with the’ priar approval of the Central Governe Botrawitgs

jnent Borrow, from time to time; any sum required for carrying out the purposes of this Aer,” a8d:") invest:
ments.

(2):The Trusted Committee shall deposit all monies and receipts forming part. of the

“fund any scheduled bank or invest the same in-debt instrument of any Corporation owned

“ot controlled by. the Central or State Government’ or in loans floated by the Central or'State:

_ Govertinient or in any other manuer as it may deem fit, with the prior approval of the Central
Government. E

18, (2). The. Trustee, Committee: shall maintain proper, accounts. and. other relevant ‘Accouins aud
ords-and prépaté an-dtinual katément of accounts and annual report in. sucty matiner ag). Audis.
coilay be preseribed
cae (2). The accounts of the Trustee Committee’ shall be audited. annually by a Chartered:
‘Accountant appotiited by. the appropriate Govertinent:

& 2 s@3) The accounts‘of the: Trusted: Committee as-atdited. by the Chartered Accountant
“together with his. audit report shall be forwarded to the Contral-and: State Gavernmonts: by.
sComunittee and the Central Govetamentmay issue such ditections; as. it may deem fit, to

‘runteo Commiti¢e ini respect thereof:

dy Phe: Trustee Committee: shal] comply: with the directions issued by. the Contral
¢3y The Trustice Committee shall pay from the fund the charges for the audit as may be
fixed by the appropriate Government.

The annuat statement of accounts and thé ainmal report shall be laid before each...
of Parlinmest and’ before.dach- House:of the: State Legishitures concerned where it
४0149 Houses 07 where stick Legislanire consists of one House, before that Bouse,

Powers, and: *
duties sf See-
retary.

‘figister’s and other records'as may. be prescribed from
respondenice relating to-the Trustee Committee;

Wusiness wunsacted by the Trustee Commit-

488 ore or may’ beditected by the Trustes Commniitied arid the:



8

cane aad 20. The Chairperson and the members of the Trustee Coniniities shall be entifled to he
ay, MO paid stich travelling alid daily allowahces as may be prosoribad.

४00९६ te
“Chaispergan:
and: Menihers
oP RUstee
Committee, :
ating 24. (2) Ab appeal agattist any decision or order’ of the Teustes Committee shall lig:td
eines the appropriate Goverment. &
Bae of: (2) The appeal shall he in the prescribed form dnd shall be accompanied hy a copy of. s-
Comnainree: the: decision or order appealed against.
oo (3)'Phe appeal shall be filed within thirty days from the receipt af the decision or order.
हि ‘appealed against:
(कक TV.

: MeNsersur Ano: कार or THE PUNE i

Membership ins 22.0) Every. working jourtialist and every other:non-journalist media employes in a

Pund.
and: Sine: shall, be entitled: to. apply,.in such form. as may be prescribed, for. membership.of the

Working: Journalists'and other Nox-Journalist Media Employees" Welfare Fund’ constituted
in, that State by the appropriate Government undet-sub-section (1) of section 3:

(2) Onreceipt: : of at application under sub-section (2), the: Trustee Comttities shall 1$™
make. such. inguliry as it deems fit arid. cither admit: the. applicant to the. tnembership: of the:
Fund of, for reasons to be recorded in writing, reject the application:

Provided that no: order rejecting an apptication shall be passed: undess the’ applicant
has-been given an opportunity of being heard,

(3) Every. applicant shalt pay ar application fee-of two. hundred rupees along. with the’ 2.0.
application: to-the/account of.the Trustee. Committee:

(4) Every: member of thé fimd shall-pay an annual subscription of fifty rupees to the:
fund:on: of before the 31st day af March every: year:

Provided that every person, who makes an application tinder sub-section.(1), shall pay
हि his first doval subscription within three months of his becoming a-member'of the fund 2g

Provided: further that-a.senior working jouralist.or.a senior non-journdlist media:
employee, as determined on the basis of his approximate annual income. by the rules made,
undet this ‘Act, shall pay. an antival subscription, not being more than one'thousand rupees,
ag prescribed. ; हा

(5) Any member of the. Fund who: fails to pay the आओ sutiseription for any years $e
before the 3 fst day of March of that year, shall bé liable to-he removed from the membership.

{6) Amember of the Fund removed from the membership of the fund under sub-section,
{3} may. be re-admitted to the fund, on payment of arrears alangwith re-ndmission fce of tex
rupees within six months fom: the date. of'suehrremovak.

(7) Every member of the Bund shill, at the time of admission to the membership in the: “2 57
Pond, make nomination conferring an one of more of his dependents the tight to receives in
the event of his dealth: uty amount payable to the members. under.this Act.

(68) 164 montber of the Hund nominates niore than one person under sub-section (7)che
shall specify in the nomination, the amdunt or share payable to each: of thé nomiinge:
(9): Amember of the Fund may, atany Gime caticel's nomination: by sending votice i tra:
‘writing to the. Trustee Committee.
(70) Every member of the Fund, who cancels his nomination under sub-section (9),
shall make ॥ fresh nomination alongwith a registration 168 of rupees five.



(77) Every member of the Fund: who cedses to be'a Working jourtialist-or other nos-

journalist modid employes shall, within fifteen days of such cessation; intiniate the fact to. the

‘Trustee Corinnittee andif any motiber of the fund fails todo so without sufficient reascn, the:

“Trustee Comintittee: may reduce, in accordsince with such principles ax may-be: prescribed,
57 086 amount payable'to the member under this'Act,

23. (2)-The interest of any.temiber inthe Pund, or the right of wnieiber of the Fund or Resitictiow on
ig nomitiee’ or: legal: hieir:to' receive: any ‘amount fromthe Fund,’ shaff:not be assigned, : alienation,

lionated Of charged and shall not be linbie to attachment under any decree or order of कगार
‘court, tribunal of other auttiority, 5. of Member. ia
“Pund.

: {2} No creditor shail be entided to proceed against the Furid or the interest therein of.

कमर nemnber of the fund or his nominee or legal heir.

१: Explanation: गत the porpase'of this section, “‘creditor” includes:the State or an
official assigiwe dr official receiver appoirited under the law relating to insolvecy for the time

cbetag tn force.

5 (प्रक्षकह V:
MISCELLANEOUS

Cho. Md Nobwithstanding anything contained in the Incoiie-tax Act; 19617 or any other | Bxemption
‘enactment forthe time being in force relating to tax, profits or gains, the income accrued to. from income,
the चित constituted under sub-section (1) of section 3-shall be exempted from incomie-tax... &

25. Notwithstanding’ anything contained in the Income-tax‘Act, 1961 all voluntary” Rebate or de-

ayable by the donee, a¢ may be prescribed. ineome-tax,

26.:No. such prosécotion or legal proceedings’ shall-lie against the. appropriate ::. Protection of
‘Government or the Trusted Comumiitteeor the Chairperson or a member or the Secretary ofthe. tstien taken
‘ommntittee of any person for anything which is in good faith done of intended tobe. #4 faith.

under this’ Act or the rofes made thereunder. :
27, The Trustes Committee and the appropriate Government shall, for the purpose of Power to

आए ehiquiry under this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a.civif- court while trying. s¥™moe
मल the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 in respect of the following maters, namely:  “ynenes and
7 (को enforebig the atiendatice of ainy. persct oF examining hitn-ow out; "' evideage.
requiring tie discovery and production of documents;

(é) receiving evidence on oath: हे ,

:(@) issiting Cortmission for the examination of witnesses; and

any other miattor which may: be prescribed.

‘at any time the appropriate: Government ig of the opinidn:— Power of

appropriate

discharge the fimotions or perform the cities imposed on it by or under ” {0 theriede
of this ‘Actor Commines;

i stoe Conirtilttec has persistently defaultedin complying with any
॥ by the appropriate Government uncer this Act or in the discharge of
Gr performance of the duties imposed:on it by or under the provisions of

exist which rendet it necessary inthe public interest so te

lonations mide to the fund shall qualify for such rebate or deductions froitt the incoihe-tax  ductions from 1

that otaccount of cittunistunces beyond the controt of the Trusted Coimmittes, Government: :



10:

the appropriate Goverment may by Hotification and Tor redsonsto'be specified therein,
Suptrsedé ‘the ‘Triste Comimitiee for suck period not exceeding: six:monthe, ‘as may. be
Specified in the notitiedtion ‘and appoint in consiltation with the: Chief Justice ofthe ‘High.
Coutt having. Jurisdiction, a Fudge.of the High Court to-be: the Comptroller of the Triste

Provided that before: issuing any sich ‘Notification, the: ‘Appropriate Government shall
give dressonable Opportunity:to the Trustee Comunittes to thake reptesentition agdingt the.
Proposed superseasion and shalt Consider the representation; ifany,of the Trastes ‘Committee:

(2) upon the publication of anotification Sunder sub-section (1) superseding the’Triistaa :
Committers: * ८ zg ,

(a) the Chairperson, miémberd and the Secretary of the Trustes Caminittes shall, :
as from thé date of Supetscssion, vacate’ their Officeas sich:

(2) all powers; functions and duties, which may, by or under the provisions of:
this:Act,. be exercised or discharged by:or on behalf of the Trustes Committed shall:
Until the ‘Trustee Committee is recotistitated tinder sub-section (3), be exercised and दा
Gischarged by the Controller of the Trustee Committee; and

(2) all: properties and fusid owned. by the: Trustee. Committee shall, until the

 Trustes: Comuniittoe: 18: reconstitted: under. sub-section: (3) vest in: the appropriate
G)On sr before he expiration of the period of supersession Specified in the riotification: a

iSsued, under’ sub-section (2), the -appropridts’ Goverment shall. Teconstitute thé Triste

re

te

State Legislature, where jt consists of tivo Houses or where sich Legistatute-consiste of ore
House, before thar ‘House,'as the case: may: be, at the earliest.

Power: of 29: 1) the Centeal ‘Goverment may, by notification, stiake rules for ‘carrying out the 30
Central provisions of this Act! eaten

Goverment’ ; :

to make rales, {2} In particniar andl without prejudice to the generality of thé foregoing power, such

“वर्ल्ड may provide for alf cr. any of the following matters, 14000 41 ॥

(8) the amount, of stipend:ict’peiisiom under (0158 (@) of sub-section (i) of
section 5; :
(6) the aniount of ex.gecitia grint or relief liner tause.(b) of sub-section (3 of
section 55.0 पु
हि (€).the amount of ex-gratia grain ox relief under sub-section (2) of section'S;

i thd manner of providing médical and educational facilities under clause (by of:
section 7; Wo

te} the other benefice tobe provided unider clause {f). of section 7:

(the manner of election of members of'ttie Thustes Continiittes under ctatises, «by.
and'{c) of sub-section (1७४ Section’ 9; ‘
1. (89116 periodical and annhal reports to'be sent under claus (tY of sub-section» hen
Gyof section 16: i

(A) the form and the: thariner in- which the annual statement of accounts dnd the
atinual report shall be prepared :ntider sub-section (Df section 18;



ay

१81

(06 fonts, ‘registers and other records to be maintained under clause.(4) of
adotion 19; :

0) the. rates of: ‘travelling and daily allowances payable. 10 the Chairperson and
the Members of the Trustee Committee under section 20;

(k) the form’ of appeal under sub-seetion (2}.of tection 21;
(Othe forth in' which application may be made for niembership of the fund under
‘sub-section: (1) of section. 22; "
2 (0 determination of the annual subscription, of senior working journalists. or
othér seiiior non-journalist media employees परत sub-section, (4) of section 22;
[/o 00 the principles it accordance with which the amaunt payable to a member of,
the fund-be reduced wider sub-section (17) of section 22; हि :
= (a) the rebate or deduction: from the inconie-tax under section 25;

“(@) power to susimon Witnesses and take evidence uider clayse.(¢) of section
27 and:
: (gy aly other aiatter which is to be, or may be! prescribed.

--40. Every rule made under this Act by the Central Goverment shalt be laidas soon as
ay. be after it-is'made, before cach: House of Parliament, while it is in session for व total
iperiod of thirty days whioh may be comprised in one session or in two or tore successive
sessions, and if, hefote the expiry of the session immediately. following the session or the
cessive Session aforesaid, both Houses agree jn making any modification in the rule or.
sth Houses agree that the mule should not te made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only

Shodified form or-be-of-no effect; ag-the case may: be; so;. however; that any such

‘cation or annulment shall be: without. prejudice ‘to ihe validity of anything

‘pieviously dono undor that rule.

Rules: to. be.
taid | before.
Parliament:



STATEMENT OR OBJECTS AND REASONS.

‘The iinportarice of the media, ‘both print and electronic, can never be exaggerated in
demioerdey. The Bill socks to establish a welfare fund-for the benefit of working journalists
‘and other non-journalist tnedia employees; thus extending a comprehensive social security
system 10 this segment. of the society. “

‘At present the Ministry of Infortnation: and. Broadcasting ‘bas set up @ Journalists
‘Welfare Fund for providing one-time ex-gratia felief of Rs. 1 Fakhito the family of the journalists
who suffesloss of lifo ‘or petinanent disability due to- unnatural causes in. the course of their.
duiy. The Bill sceks io establisti a substantial welfare, scheme through the constitution of a,
Statixtory Workiig’ Journalists and other Non-journalist Media Exiployeés’ Welfare Fund,

‘The Fund to be constituted in every Stats by. the State Government and in Union,
territory by the Central Government, shall be applied for the benefit dnd: welfare of the
Member working journalists and other non-journalist media employdes through

(a) stipends of pensions; है
(py ex-gratia grant, ‘orrelief of suffering any injury-or disability;
(ले ex-gratia grant or felief to a nominee or legal heir in the event of death on duty: ;

(di ex-gratia grant on hospitalisation or major: surgical operatiog or incase of ireatiment
foramajor disease; .

(e}loans for any purpose which may contribute towards Welfare of members and their:
faamifiess * :

(fj provision for medical and educational facilities;
(p)provision for, puickase of books or necessary: electronic items;
(A) constriction'and maintenance of common: facilities for alf} and:
{H provision of such, other benefits.

पु ‘There is also'a provision, for Group Life Insurance.

“The Fund shalt be adeninistered by a’ Trustee Committee. which shall be a body corporate.

The Fund’ shall receive: gratits' from the State’ and, the, Central: Governments, voluntary
donations, fees'and.annial: subscriptions frogn:its members, etc, Every working journalist
and every other non-journalist media employee shall be entitled to apply for membership of
the Fund.

‘the Bill seoks to achieve thie above cbjectives:

‘New Delhi; : G:MCBANATWALLA
February 27, 2002. हे

2



*

PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICES 117 AND 274 OF THE

[Copy: of Jemer No,, 15/6/2002-Press,. dated 16: geil 2003 fromt'Shii Ravi Shankar:
‘Prasad, Minister of State in the Ministry of Information and Broadeasting to the Secretary~
General, Lok Sabha}: an :

“The President; hiiving been inforivied of subject miter of | the Working Joumaliets and:
‘cthet Nots-Feumaliat Madia Employees" Welfare Pund Bill, 2003 by Shi G.M. Banatwalla,
MBS recontinends under atticlie 1170): and’ 2741): for introduction: and: isnder “article
170) 9 the Constitution: for consideration of the Bill by ‘Lak Sabha.

|
|


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
“i. Chaise 3 of the Bill sedks to brovide for the: constitution ofa ‘Working’ Journalists
"and ‘athter Non: Journalist Media ‘Employees Fund? in'every Stats anid Union ‘Tertitory: The
members of the Find: shall. be paid stipends, pensions, relict | amounts, ¢x- gratia grants and.
Joans-in. accordance’ with clauses: S:and-6-of the. Bil. Clause, 7. involves. expenditure:on
‘Various items of Such benefits like: inedical and educational facilities, purchase of books:or

The aforesaid piovisions are expected to involve: 4 recurring expenditure: of about
one hundred crore, tupees per annum and a non-recurring expenditure of about sixty lakh,
rupees, : :

14



MEMORANDUM OF DELEGATED LEGISLATION

‘The Bill seeks to empower the Cemval Government to make rules for carrying out the
provisions of the Bill. In particular, the rules may provide for matters advmbrated in Clause.
29 of the Bill which include: the determination. of stipends, pension: relief’ and ‘ex:gratia.
grants payable: under the. Act, the manner.of providing medical and educational facilities
and'other benefits; the forms, registers and other records to be maintained, the determination
ofannual: subscription from senior workiiig journalists and- other senior hon-journalist,
iriedia employees, etc,

‘The delegated legislation is of a normal character.

is

i
i


a eeremrayns enh ROSACEAE,

LOK SABHA.
: :
pasion
A
SL
to provide for the constitution of ६ Welfare Fond in every State and Union territory for
the benefit. of Journalists" tnd other Non-Journalist Medi:

(Shri it, Randwatta: MP)

MGIPMFIND—s4zet 21.04.3003,