As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

Bill No.-26 of 2000

THE TELECOM REGULATORY AUTHORITY OF INDIA
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000

A
हि . BILL .
to amend the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997.

Beit enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (Amendment)
Act, 2000.

*(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 24th day of January, 2000.

of 1997, 5 2. In the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997 (hereinafter referred to as
हा the principal Act), in the long title, for the words “Telecom Regulatory Authority of India to
regulate the telecommunication services,", the words “Telecom Regulatory Authority of
India and the Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal to regulate the
telecommunication services, adjudicate disputes, dispose of appeals and to protect the
lo interests of service providers and consumers of the telecom sector, to promote and ensure

orderly growth of the telecom sector” shall be substituted.

Short title and
commencement.

Amendment of
ong title.


Amendment of
section 2,

Amendment of
section 3.

Substitution oF
section 4.

Qualifications
for appointment
of Chairperson
and other
members.

Amendment of >
section 5.

3. In section 2 of the principal Act,—-
(a) after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—

‘(aa) “Appellate Tribunal” means the Telecom Disputes Settlement and
Appellate Tribunal established under section 14;’;

(9) after clause (2), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 5

‘(ea) “licensor” means the Central Governmentor the telegraph authority
who grants a licence under section 4 of the Indian Telegraph Act,-1885;’; 13 of 1885,

(८) in clause (7), for the word “Government”, the words “Government as a service
provider” shall be substituted;

(व) in clause (४), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:— \o

“Provided that the Central Government may notify other service to be
telecommunication service including broadcasting services.”.

4, In section 3 of the principal Act, for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall

be substituted, namely:—

“(3) The Authority shall consist of a Chairperson, and not niore than two 15
whole-time members and not more than two part-time members, to be appointed by
the Central Government.”.

5. For section 4 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,

new section for namely:—

“4, The Chairperson and other memibers of the Authority shall be appointed by 26
the Central Government from amongst persons who have special knowledge of, and
professional experience in, telecommunication, industry, finance, accountancy, law,
management or consumer.affairs:

Provided thal a person who is, or has been, in the service of Government shall
not be appointed as a member unless such person has held the post of Secretary or 25°
Additional Secretary,.or the post of Additional Secretary and Secretary to the
Government of India or any equivalent post in the Central Government or the State
Government for a period of not less than three years.”.

6. In section 5 of the principal Act,—

(व) for sub-sections (2) and (3), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, 30
namely:—

“(2} The Chairperson and other members shall hold office for a term not
exceeding three years, as the Central Government may notify in this behalf,
from the date on which they enter upon their offices or until they attain the age
of sixty-five years, whichever is earlier. 35

(3) On the commencement of the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India
(Amendment) Act, 2000, a person appointed as Chairperson of the Authority
and every other person appointed as member and holding office as such
immediately before such commencement shall vacate their respective offices
and such Chairperson and such other members shail be entitled to claim yo
compensation not exceeding three months pay and allowances for the premature
termination of the term of their offices or of any contract of service. aH

(b) in sub-section (5), for the words “other members”, the words “whole-time
members” shall be substituted;



3

(c) after sub-section (6), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—

“(6A) The part-time members shall receive such allowances as may be
prescribed.”;

(d) in sub-section (7), the words, brackets and figure “or sub-section (3)” shall
be omitted;

(८) in sub-section (8),—

(i) in clause (b), for the words “two years”, the words “one year” shall be
substituted;

(ii) after clause (b), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—

“Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall apply to
the Chairperson or a member who has ceased to hold office under sub-
section (3) and such Chairperson or member shall be eligible for re-
appointment in the Authority or appointment in the Appellate Tribunal.”.

7, का section 7 of the principal Act, for sub-sections (2) and (3), the following sub-
15 section shall be substituted, namely:—

“(2) No such member shall be removed from his office under clause (d) or
clause. (2) of sub-section (7) unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of
being heard in the matter.”,

8. In section 10 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),—

(a) for the words “determined by regulations”, the word “prescribed” shall be
substituted;

(b) after sub-section (2), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—

“Provided that any regulation, in respect of the salary and allowances
payable to and other conditions of service of the officers and other employees of
the Authorily, made before the commencement of the Telecom Regulatory
Authority of India (Amendment) Act, 2000, shall cease to have effect immediately
‘on the. notification of rules made under clause (ca) of sub-section (2) of section
35.7,

9, In section 11 of the principal Act,—
(a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—

“(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Telegraph Act,
1885, the functions of the Authority shall be to—
(a) make recommendations, either suo motu or on.a request from
the licensor, on the following matters, namely:~-

(2) need and timing for introduction of new service provider;

(ii) terms and conditions of licence to a service provider;

(iii) revocation of licence for non-compliance of terms and
conditions of licence;

(iv) measures to facilitate competition and promote efficiency
in the operation of telecommunication services so as to facilitate
growth in such services;

(¥) technological improvements in the services provided by
the service providers;

(vi) type of equipment to be used by the service providers
after inspection of equipment used in the network;

Amendment of
section 7.

Amendment of
section 10.

Amendment of
section 11,



4

(vit) measures for the development of telecommunication
technology and any other mater relatable to telecommunication
industry in general;

(viii) efficient management of available spectrum;

(b) discharge the following functions, namely:—

5
{i} ensure compliance of terms and conditions of licence;
(i) notwithstanding anything contained in the terms and conditions
of the licence granted before the commencement of the Telecome
Regulatory Authority of India (Amendment) Act, 2000, fix the terms and
conditions of inter-connectivity between the service providers; fo

(ii) ensure technical compatibility and effective inter-connection
between different service providers;

(iv) regulate arrangement amongst service providers of sharing their
Tevenue derived from providing telecommunication services;

(v) lay-down the standards of quality of service to be provided by js
the service providers and ensure the quality of service and conduct the
periodical survey of such service provided by the service providers so as
to protect interest of the consumers of telecommunication service;

(vi) lay-down:and ensure the time period for providing local and
Jong distance circuits of telecommunication between different service eo
providers; .

(vil) maintain register of inter-connect agreements and of all such
other matters as may be provided in the regulations;

(viii) keep register maintained under clause (vii) open for inspection
to any member of public on payment of such fee and compliance of such ag
other requirement as may be provided in the regulations;

(iz) ensure effective compliance of universal service obligations;

‘ : (c) levy fees and other charges at such rates बात वा respect of such services
as may be determined by regulations;

(व) perform such other functions including such administrative and financial ३०
functions as may be entrusted to it by the Central Government or as May be
necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act:

Provided that the recommendations of the Authority specified in clause (a)
of this sub-section shall not be binding upon the Central Government:

|] Provided further that the Central Government shall seek the recommenda- 35
tions of the Authority in respect of matters specified in sub-clauses (i) and (४) of
clause (a) of this sub-section in Tespect of new licence to be issued toa service

a provider and the Authority shall forward its recommendations within a period

of sixty days from the date on which that Government sought the

recommendations: ४४०

Provided also that the Authority may request the Central Government to
furnish such information or documents as may be necessary for the purpose of
making recommendations under sub-clauses (@ and (ii) of clause (a) of this sub-
section and that Government shall supply such information within a period of
seven days from receipt of such request: us

Provided also that the Central Government may issue licence to aservice
Provider if no recommendations are received from the Authority within the period
specified in the second proviso or within such period as may be mutually agreed
upon between the Central Government and the Authority: हु



5

Provided also that if the Central Government, having considered that
recommendation of the Authority, comes to a prima facie conclusion that such
recommendation cannot be accepted or needs modifications, it shall refer the
recommendation back to the Authority for its reconsideration, and the Authority
may, within fifteen days from the date of receipt of such reference, forward to
the Central Government its recommendation after considering the reference made
by that Government, After receipt of further recommendation if any, the Central
Government shall take a final decision.”;

(8) in sub-section (3), for the words, brackets and figure “under. sub-section
(797, the words, brackets and figures “under sub-section (/) or sub-section (2)” shall
be substituted. हु

19. In section 13 of the principal Act, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:-—

“Provided that no direction under sub-section (4) of section 12 or under this
section shall be issued except on the matters specified in clause (6) of sub-section (J)
of section 11.”.

11, For Chapter LV of the principal Act, the following Chapter shall be substituted,
namely:— हे

‘CHAPTER IV
APPELLATE TRIBUNAL

14.'The Central Government shall, by notification, establish an, Appellate Tribunal
to be known as the Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal te-—

(व) adjudicate any dispute—

(i) between a licensor and a licensee;

(ii) between two or more service providers;
(iid) between a service provider and a group of consumers:

Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply in respect of matters
relating to—

(A) the monopolistic trade practice, restrictive trade practice
and unfair trade practice which are subject to the jurisdiction of the
Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission established

Trade Practices Act, 1969;

(B) the cornplaint of an individual consumer maintainable before
a Consumer Dispates Redressal Forum or a Consumer Disputes
ay Redressal Commission or the National Consumer Re¢ressal
Commission established under section 9 of the Consumer Protection
Act, 1986;

(C) the dispute between telegraph authority and any other
person referred to in sub-section (D of section 78 of the Indian
Yo ‘Telegraph Act, 1885;

(b) hear and dispose of appeal against any direction, decision or order
of the Authority under this Act.

14A. (/) The Central Government or a State Government or a local authority or
any person may make an application (o the Appellate ‘Tribunal for adjudication of any
4s dispute referred to in clause (a) of section 14,

(2) The Central Government or a State Government or a Jocal authority or any
person aggrieved by any direction, decision or order made by the Authority may prefer
an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal.

under sub-section (J) of section 5 of the Monopolies and Restrictive _

Amendment of
section 13.

Substitution of
new Chapter for
Chapter TV.

Establishment
of Appellate
Tribunal.

Application for
settlement of
disputes and
appeals to
Appellate
Tribunal.


Composition of
Appellate
Tribunal.

(3) Every appeal under sub-section (2) shall be preferred within a period of
thirty days from the date on which a copy of the direction or order or decision made by.
the Authority is received by the Central Government or the State Government or the
local authority or the aggrieved person and it shall be in such form, verified in such

manner and be accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed: ~ S

Provided that'the Appellate Tribunal may entertain any appeal after the expiry
of the said period of thirty days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not
filing it within that period,

- (4) On receipt of an application under sub-section (/) or an appeal under sub-
section (2), the Appellate Tribunal may, after giving the parties to the dispute or the (७
appeal an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders thereon as it thinks fit,

(5) The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every order made by it to the
Parties to the dispute or the appeal and to the Authority, as the case may be.

(6) The application made under sub-section (/) or the appeal preferred under

sub-section (2) shal! be dealt with by it as expeditiously as possible and endeavour is

shall be made by it to dispose of the application or appeal finally within ninety days
from the date of receipt of application or appeal, as the case may be:

Provided that where any such application or appeal could not be disposed of
within the said period of ninety days, the Appellate Tribunal shall tecord its reasons in

writing for not disposing of the application or appeal within the said period, do

(7) The Appellate Tribunal may, for the purpose of examining the legality or
propriety or correctiess, of any dispute made in any application under sub-section (/),
or of any direction or order or decision of the Authority referred to in the appeal
preferred under sub-section (2), on its own motion or otherwise, call for the records

relevant to disposing of such application or appeal and make such orders as it thinks fit. 25°

14B. (1) The Appellate Tribunal shall consist of a Chairperson and not more
than two Members to be appointed, by notification, by the Central Government.

(2) The selection of Chairperson and Members of the Appellate Tribunal shall
be made by the Céntral Government in Consultation with the Chief Justice of India,

(3) Subject to the provisions of this Act — go

(4) the jurisdiction of the Appellate Tribunal may be exercised by the
Benches thereof;

(6) a Bench may be constituted by the Chairperson of the Appellate
Tribunal with one or two Members of such Tribunal as the Chairperson may

deem fit; है 35

(८) the Benches of the Appellate Tribunal shall ordinarily sit at New Delhi
and at such other places as the Central Goverament may, in consultation with
the Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal, notify;

(@) the Central Government shall notify the areas in relation to which each
Bench of the Appellate Tribunal may exercise its jurisdiction. ue

(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), the Chairperson of

the Appellate Tribunal may transfer a Member of such Tribunal from one Bench to
another Bench. हु

(5) If at any stage of the hearing of any case or matter it appears to the Chairperson

or a Member of the Appellate Tribunal that the Case or matter is of such a nature that us
it ought to be heard by a Bench consisting of two Members, the case or matter may be
transferred by the Chairperson to such Bench as the Chairperson may deem fit.

"IN a erase 7:



ne”

lo

as

7

HC. A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Chairperson ot a
Member of the Appellate Tribunal unless he—

(a) in the case of Chairperson, is, or has been, a Judge of the Supreme
Court or the Chief Justice of a High Court:

s (6) in the case of a Member, who has held the post of Secretary to the

Government of India or any equivalent postin the Central Government or the
State Government for a period of not less than two years or a person who is well
versed in the field of technology, telecommunication, industry, commerce or
administration.

14D. The Chairperson and every other Member of the Appellate Tribunal shall
hold office as such for a term not exceeding three years from the date on which he
enters upon his office:

Provided that no Chairperson or other Member shall hold office as such after he
has attained,— *

(a) in the case of Chsicperson, the age of seventy years;
(9) in the case of any other Member, the age of sixty-five years.

148, The salary and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions
of service of the Chairperson and other Members of the Appellate Tribunal shall be
such as may be prescribed

Provided that neither the salary and allowances nor the other terms and conditions
of service of the Chairperson or a Member of the Appellate Tribunal shall be varied to
his disadvantage after appointment.

14F, If, for reason other than temporary absence, any vacancy occurs in the
office of the Chairperson or a Member of the Appellate Tribunal, the Central
Government shall appoint another person in accordance with the provisions of this
Act to fill the vacancy and the proceedings may be continued before the Appellate
Tribunal from the stage at which the vacancy is filled,

14G, (7) The Central Government may remove from office, the Chairperson or
any Member of the Appellate Tribunal, who—

(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; of

(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central
Government, involves moral-turpitude; or

(८) has become physically or mentatly incapable of acting as the
Chairperson or a Member; or

2(4) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect
prejudicially his functions as the Chairperson ora, Member;-or

(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office
prejudicial to the public interest.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (J), the Chairperson ora
Member of the Appellate Tribunal shail not be removed from his office on the. ground
specified in clause (d) or elatise (e) of that sub-section unless the Supreme Court ona
reference being made to it in this behalf by the Central Government, has, on an enquiry,.
held by it in accordance with such procedure as it may specify in this behalf, reported
that the Chairperson or a Member ought on such ground or grounds to be removed.

(3) The Central Government miay suspend from office, the Chairperson or a
Member of the Appellate Tribunal in respect of whom a reference has been made to
the Supreme Court under sub-section (2), until the Central Government has passed an
order on receipt of the report of the Supreme Court on such reference,

Qualifications
for appointment
of Chairperson
and Members.

Term of office.

Terms and
conditions of
service,

Vacancies,

Removal and
resignation,

|
|



Staff of
Appellate
‘Tribunal.

Distribution of
business
amongst
Benches.

Power of

Chairperson to

transfer cases,

Decision to be
by majority.

Members, etc.,
to be public
‘servants.

Transfer of
pending cases.

‘Transfer of
appeals.

Civil court not
to have
jurisdiction:

aed ‘|

8

14H. (1) The Central Government shail provide the Appellate Tribunal with
such officers and employees as it may deem fit. an

(2) The officers and employees of the Appeliate Tribunal shall discharge their
functions under the general superintendence of its Chairperson.

(3) The salaries and allowances and other conditions of service of the officers S
and employces of the Appellate Tribunal shall be such as may be prescribed.

14-1, Where Benches are constituted, the Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal
may, from time to time, by notification, make provisions as to the distribution of the
business of the Appellate Tribunal amongst the Benches and also provide for the matters
which may be dealt with by each Bench, . to

14J. On the application of any of the Parties and after notice to the parties, and
after hearing such of them as he may desire to be heard, or on his own motion without
such notice, the Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal may transfer any case pending
before one Bench, for disposal, to any other Bench.

14K. If the Members of a Bench consisting of two Members differ in opinion on ts
any point, they shall state the point or points on which they differ, and make a reference
to the Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal who shall hear the point or points himself
and such point or points shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority who
have heard the case, including those who first heard it,

14L. The Chairperson, Members and other officers and employees of the 20
Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section
21 of the Indian Penal Code. — 45 of 1860,

14M. Alll applications, pending for adjudication of disputes before the Authority
immediately before the date of establishment of the Appellate Tribunal under this Act,
shall stand transferred on that date to such Tribunal: ag

Provided that ail disputes being adjudicated under the provisions of Chapter [V
as it stood immediately before the commencement of the Telecom Regulatory Authority
of India (Amendment) Act, 2000, shall continue to be adjudicated by the Authority in
accordance with the provisions contained in that Chapter, till the establishment of the
Appellate Tribunal under this Act: हि “ge

Provided further that all cases referred to in the first proviso shall-be transferred by the
Aathority to the Appellate Tribunal immediately on its establishment under section 14,

14N. (/) All appeals pending before the High Court immediately before the
commencement of the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (Amendment) Act, 2000,
shall stand transferred to the Appellate Tribunal on its establishment under section 14. 35

(2) Where any appeal stands transferred from the High Court to the Appellate Tribunal
under sub-section (J),— .
(a) the High Court shall, as soon as may be after such transfer, forward the
records of such appeal to the Appellate Tribunal; and :

(0) the Appellate Tribunal may, on receipt of such records, proceed to Uo
deal with such appeal, so far as may be from the-stage which was reached
before such transfer or from any earlier stage or de novo as the Appellate
Tribunal may deem fit.

15. No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or procéeding in respect
of any matter which the Appellate Tribunal is empowered by or under this Act to determine us
and no injunction shall be granted by any court or other authority in respect of any action
taken or 10 be taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or under this Act,



9

16, (7) The Appellate Tribunal shall not be bound by the procedure laid down
by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, but shall be guided by the principles of natural
justice and, subject to the other provisions of this Act, the Appellate Tribunal shall
have powers to regulate its own procedure.

(2) The Appellate Tribunal shall have, for the purposes of discharging its functions
under this Act, the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely:—-

(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining
him on oath;

(6) requiring the discovery and production of documents;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;

(वी) subject to the provisions of sections 123 and 124 of the Indian Evidence
Act, 1872, requisitioning any public record or document or a copy of such record
or document, from any office;

(९) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;
(f) reviewing its decisions;
(g) dismissing an application for default or deciding it, ex parte;

(h) setting aside any order of dismissal of any application for default or
any order passed by it, ex parte; and

(8 any other matter which may be prescribed.

(3) Every proceeding before the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be judicial
proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purpose of section
196 of the Indian Penal Code and the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be a civil
court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973,

17. The applicant or appellant may either appear in person or authorise one or
more chartered accountants or company secretaries or cost accountants or legal
practitioners ण any of its officers to present his or its case before the Appellate Tribunal.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this section —

{a) “chartered accountant” means a chartered accountant as defined in
clause (0) of sub-section (/) of section 2 of the Chartered Accountants Act,
1949 and who has obtained a certificate of practice under sub-section (7) of
section 6 of that Act;

(29) “company secretary” means a company secretary as defined in clause
(c) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Company Secretaries Act, 1980 and
who has obtained a certificate of practice under sub-section (1) of section 6 of
that Act;

(c) “cost accountant” means a cost accountant as defined in clause (b) of
sub- section (/) of section 2 of the Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959 and
who has obtained a certificate of practice under sub-section (/) of section 6 of
that Act;

(4) “legal practitioner” means an advocate, vakil or an attorney of any
High Court, and includes a pleader in practice.

18, (7) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908 or in any other law, an appeal shall lie against any order, not being an interlocutory
order, of the Appellate Tribunal to the Supreme Court on one or more of the grounds
specified in section 100 of that Code.

(2) No appeal shall lie against any decision or order made by the Appellate
Tribunal with the consent of the parties.

Procedure and
powers of
Appellate
Tribunal,

Right to legal
representation.

Appeal to
Supreme
Court.



Orders passed
by Appellate
‘Tribunal to be
executable as a
decree,

Penalty for
wilful failure to
comply with
orders of
Appellate
Tribunal.

Amendment of
section 23,

Amendment of
section 33.

Amendment of
section 36,

(3) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred विधि @ period of ninety
days from the date of the decision or order appealed against:

Provided that the Supreme Court may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the
said period of ninety days, if itis satisified that the appellant was prevented by sufficient
cause from preferring the appeal in time. Ss

19, (1) An order passed by the Appellate Tribunal under this Act shall be
executable by the Appeilate Tribunal as a dectee of civil court, and for this purpose,
the Appellate Tribunai shall have all the powers of a civil court.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the Appeilate Tribunal
may transmit any order made by it to a civil court having local jurisdiction and such (०
civil court shall execute the order as if it were a decree made by that court.

20. If any person wilfully fails to comply with the order of the Appellate Tribunal,
he shail be punishable with fine which may extend to one lakh Tupees and in case of a
second or subsequent offence with fine which may extend to two lakh tupces and in
the case of continuing contravention with additional fine which may extend to two 1६४7
lakh rupees for every day during which such default continues.’.

12. In section 23 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following Explanation

shail be inserted, namely:—

“Explanation.—-For the removal of doubts, itis hereby declared that the decisions
of the Authority taken in the discharge of its functions under clause(b) of sub-section 20
(1) and sub-section (2) of section 11 and section 13, being matters appcalable to the
Appellate Tribunal, shall not be subject to audit under this section.",

13. In section 35 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),—~
{a) after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—

"(aa) the allowances payable to the part-time members under sub-section ag
(6A) of section 5;";

(b) after clause (०), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—

"(ca) the salary and allowances and other conditions of service of officers
and other employees of the Authority under sub-section (2) of section 10;";

(०) after clause (4), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 3३०

“(da) the form, the manner of its verification and the fee under sub-sectiorr
(3) of section 14A;

(db) the salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions
of service of the Chairperson and other Members of the Appellate Tribunal
under section 14E; 3

(de) the salary and allowances and other conditions of service of the officers
and employees of the Appellate Tribunal under sub-section (3) of section 14H;

{dd) any other ‘power of a civil court required to be prescribed under
;clause (i) of sub-section (2) of section 16;".

14. In section 36 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),— Yo
{a) clause (c) shall be omitted;

(b)in clause (d), for the words, brackets and letter "under clause (127, the words,
brackets and letters, “under sub-clause (vii) of clause (b)" shall be substituted;

(c}in clause (e), for the words, brackets and letter “under clause (m)", the words,
brackets and letters “under sub-clause (viii, i) of clause (b)" shall be substituted; us



(4) in clause (), for the words, brackets and letter “under clause (p)", the words
and letter “under clause (c)" shail be substituted.
15, (7) The Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (Amendment) Ordinance, 2000 is
hereby repealed.

Ss (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action takert under the principal
Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under
the corresponding provisions of the principal Act, as amended by this Act.

yd. 2 of 2000.

Repeal and
saving.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Telecom Regulatory Authority of India was established under the Telecom
Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997 (24 of 1997) to regulate the telecommunication
services and for matters connected therewith. During the course of the functioning of the
said Authority, certain issues had come up which were hindering the growth of telecom
sector, The President while addressing the Joint Session of Parliament on 25th October,
1999 had stated that the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India will be strengthened to
increase investor’ confidence and create a level playing field between public and private
operators by making suitable amendments in the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India
Aci, 1997. In pursuance thereof, the Central Government constituted a Group on Telecom
and IT Convergence under the Chairmanship of the Finance Minister on 13.12.1999. One
of the terms of references of the Group was to consider and make recommendations to the
Central Government with reference to strengthening the Authority through suitable amend-
ments in the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997, The Group submitted its
recommendations to the Central Government and the recommendations have been accepted
by the Central Government.

2, As Parliament was not in session and in view of the urgency to remove the
impediments in the growth of this infrastructure sector, the President was pleased to prom-
ulgate the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (Amendment) Ordinance, 2000 on the
24th day of January, 2000,

3. The salient features of the amendments effected by the said Ordinance are as
follows:—
(i) a clear distinction has been made between the recommendatory/advisory
and the regulatory functions of the Authcrity as envisaged under sub-section (1) of
section 11 of the Act;

(ii) seeking of recommendations of the Authority in respect of matters specified
in sub-clauses (i) and (ii) of section 11(1) (a) of the Act has been made mandatory for
the Central Government;

(iti) the functions of the Authority, inter alia, now include:—

(a) to fix the terms and conditions of interconnectivity between service
providers;

(b) to lay down the standards of quality of service to be provided by the
service providers and ensure quality of service;

(०) tomake recommendations on efficient management of available spec-
trum; -

(iv) the composition of the Authority has also been changed. The Authority will
now consist of a Chairperson and not more than two whole-time members and not
more than two part time members to be appointed by the Central Government. The
Chairperson and other members of the Authority shall be appointed from amongst
persons having special knowledge of, and professional experience in, telecommuni-
cation, industry, finance, accountancy, law, management or consumer affairs;

(v) tariff setting function of the Authority has been brought under the purview of
sub-section (3) of section 11;

(vi) further, the decisions of the Authority taken in discharge of its functions
under sections 11(1)(b), 11(2) and 13 which are appealable to the Appellate Tribunal
shall not be subject to audit by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India;

12 ~



13

(vii) new provisions have been made for establishment of a Tribunal known as the
Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal for adjudicating disputes between
a licensor and a licencee, between two or more service providers, between a service
provider and a group of consumers, and also to hear and dispose of any appeals from the
direction, decision or order of the Authority,

4, The Bill seeks to replace the said Ordinance.

New DELH, RAMVILAS PASWAN.
The 18th February, 2000.



FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 11 of the Bill proposes to provide for establishment of an independent statu-
tory appellate body, namely, the Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal. The
recurring expenditure towards the pay and allowances of the Chairperson and Members of
the Appellate Tribunal and the officers and other employees of the Appellate Tribunal is
estimated approximately at Rs. 3.95 crores per annum, Non-recurring expenditure onitems
such as furniture, office equipments, vehicles, etc.; of the Appellate Tribunal is estimated
approximately at Rs. 39 lakhs. The Bill if enacted will not incur any other recurring or
non-recurring expenditure.

14



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 13 of the Bill seeks to amend section 35 of the Principal Act which empowers
the Central Government to make rules by notification to carry out the provisions of the Act.
‘The matters in respect of which such rules may be made are specified therein. These matters
relate, inter alia, to the allowances payable to the part-time members of the Authority; the
salary and allowances and other conditions of service of officers and other employees of
the Authority; the form, the manner of its verification and the fee; prefer an appeal against
the order of the Authority before the Appellate Tribunal; the salary and allowances payable
to and the other terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and other Members of
the Appellate Tribunal; the salary and allowances and the other terms and conditions of
service of the officers and employces of the Appellate Tribunal; and any other power of a
civil court required to be prescribed by the Appellate Tribunal.

2. The matters in respect of which niles may be made are matters of administrative
detail and procedure and, as such, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.



ANNEXURE
FacrrAcr's FROM THE TELECOM ReGuLatory AuTHority oF Inpia ACT, 1997
(24 oF 1997)
An Actto provide for the establishment of the Telecom Regulatory Authority

of India to regulate the telecommunication services, and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.

* * * + *
Definitions. 2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* * « * *

(0) "service provider" means the Government and includes a licensee;

(k) “telecommunication service" means service of any description (including
electronic mail, voice mail, data services, audio tex services, video tex services, radio
paging and cellular mobile telephone services) which is made available to users by
means of any transmission or reception of signs, signals, writing, images and sounds
or intellegence of any nature, by wire, radio, visual or other electro-magnetic means
but shall not include broadcasting services.

|
Bt * * * * *

|

CHAPTER I
TeLecom Reautarory AUTHORITY OF INDIA
Establishment 3. (7) * * * * रू

| and

| incorporation (3) The Authority shall consist of a Chairperson, and not less than two, but not exceeding

| of Authority. 55 members, to be appointed by the Central Government.

“| * * * न *
Qualifications 4. (1) The Chairperson shall be a person who is or has been a Judge of the Supreme
for appointment Coyrt or who is or has been the Chief Justice of a High Court.
of Chairperson
and other (2) A member shall be a person who has special knowledge of, and professional

i members. experience in, telecommunication, industry, finance, accountancy, law, management and
: consumer affairs:
Provided that a person who is or has been in the service of Government shall not be
appointed as 4 member unless such person has held the post of Secretary or Additional
Secretary, or the post of Additional Secretary and Secretary to the Government of India or
any equivalent post in the Central Government or the State Government fora period of three
: years,
! Term of office, 5.(1) * * * x +
4 conditions of
i हा etc. of (2) The Chairperson shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which
| ee he enters upon his office,
i
| ' (3) A member shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which he

enters upon his office or until he attains the age of sixty-five years, whichever is earlier.

* * * * * *

16



7

(5) The salary and aflowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of service
of the Chairperson and other members shall be such as may be prescribed.

* * * * *

(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2)or sub-section (3), a member
may—

(a) relinquish his office by giving in writing to the Central Government notice
of not less than three months; or ~

(0) be removed from his office in accordance with the provisions of section 7,
(8) The Chairperson or any other member ceasing to hold office as such, shall—

* * * * *

(8) not accept any commercial employment, for a period of two years from the
date he ceases to hold such office.

* * * * *

7. (725 . * + *

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section(/), no member shall be removed
from his office on the ground specified in clause (d) or clause (e) of that sub-section unless
the Supreme Court on a reference being made to it in this behalf by the Central Government,
“has, on arenquiry, held by it in accordance with such procedure as prescribed in this behalf,

reported that the member ought on such ground or grounds to be removed.

(3) The Central Government may suspend from office a member in respect of whom a
reference has been made. to the Supreme Court under sub-section (2) until the Central

‘reference.

10. (/) * * * * *

(2) The’ salary and allowances payable to and the other conditions of service of the
officers and other employees of the Authority appointed under sub-section (() shall be such
as may be determined by regulations.

रे CHAPTER III

POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE AUTHORITY

AL. (7) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885, the
functions of the Authority shall be to—

(4) recommend the need and timing for introduction of new service provider;
(6) recommend the termis and conditions of licence to a service provider;

(c) ensure technical compatibility and effective inter-connection between
different service providers;

(d) regulate arrangement amongst service providers of sharing their revenue
derived from providing telecommunication services;

(e) ensure compliance of terms and conditions of licence;

(/) recommend revocation of licence for non-compliance of terms and conditions
of licence;

(8) lay down and ensure the time period for providing local and long distance
circuits of telecommunication between different service providers;

Government has passed an order on receipt of the report of the Supreme Court on such *

Removal and
suspension of
‘member from
office in certain
circumstances.

Officers and
other employees
of Authority.

Functions of
Authority.



Power of
Authority to
issue directions,

Authority 10
settle disputes.

18

(h) faciliate competition and Promote efficiency in the operation of
telecommunication services 5० as to facilitate growth in such services;

(i) protect the interest of the consumers of telecommunication service;

0) moniter the quality-of service and conduct the periodical survey of such
provided by the service providers; .

(k) inspect the equipment used in the network and recommend the type of
equipment to be used by the service providers;

() maintain register ot inter-connect agreements and of all such other matters as
inay be provided in the regulations:

(mm) keep register maintained under clause (2) open for inspection to any member
of public on payment of such fee and compliance of such other requitements as may
be provided in the regulations;

(1) settle disputes between service providers;

(o) render advice to the Central Government in the matters relating to the
development of telecommunication technology and any other matter relatable to
telecommunication industry in general;

(p) levy fees and other charges at’such rates and in respect of such services as
may be determined by regulations:

(प्‌) ensure’effective compliance of universal service obligations:

. (7) perform such other functions including such administrative and financial
functions as may be.entrusted to it by the Central Government or as may be necessary
to carry out the provisions of this Act. रे

* * * * *

(3) While discharging its functions under sub-section (7), the Authority shall-not act
against the interest of the sovereignty and-integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly
relations with foreign States, public order, decency or morality,

* * a) * x

13, The Authority may, for the discharge of its functions under sub-section (1) of
section 11, issue such directions from time to time to the service providers, as.it may consider
necessary. \

CHAPTER IV
SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES

14, (7) Ifa dispute arises, in respect of matters referred to in sub-section (2), among
service providers or between service providers and a group of consumers, such disputes
shall be adjudicated by a bench constituted by the Chairperson and such bench shall consist
of two members; 7

Provided that if the members of the bench differ on any point or points they shall state
the point or points on which they differ and refer the same to a third member for hearing on
such point or points and such point or points shall be decided according to. the opinion of

» that member.

29) The bench constituted under sub-section (2) shall exercise, on and from the appointed
day all such jurisdiction, powers and authority as were exercisable immediately before that
date by any civil court on any matter relating to—

(0 technical compatibility and inter-connections between service providers;

(ii) revenue sharing arrangements between different service providers;



1908. .

19

(iii) quality of telecommunication services and interest of consumers:

Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply in respect of matters relating

(a) the monopolistic trade practice, restrictive trade practice and unfair trade
practice which are subject to the jurisdiction of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade
Practices Commission established under sub-section (/) of section 5 of the Monopolies
and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969:

(6)-the complaint of an individual consumer maintainable before a Consumer
Disputes Redressal Forum or a Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission or the
National Consumer Redressal Commission established under section 9 of the Consumer
Protection Act, 1986;

(ce) dispute between telegraph authority and any other person referred to in sub-
section (/) of section 7B of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885. :

15.(/) An aggreived person may make an application in respect of matters referred to
in sub-section (2) of section 14 within such period as may be prescribed.

Explanation..For the purposes of this sub-section, the expression "aggrieved person"
means—

(7) any service provider who has a dispute in respect of matters referred to in
clauses (7) and (i) of sub-section (2) of section 14;

(ii) where‘any loss or damage is caused to a group of consumers, any member
representing such group of consumers.

(2) On receipt of an application made under sub-séction (4), the Authority may, after
giving the parties an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders as it thinks fit preferably
within a period of six months from the date of filing of such application and shall record
reasons in writing if final order cannot be passed within the said period.

(3) While arriving at a decision, the Authority shall record in writing the reasons for
such decision.

(4) Every decision of the Authority shall be published in the annual report of the
Authority.

(5) The orders and directions of the Authority shall be binding on the service providers,
Government and all other-persons concerned.

16, (7) The Authority shall be guided by the principles of natural justice.

(2) The Authority shalt have, for the purpose of discharging their functions under this
Chapter, the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908 in respect of the following matters, namely:-—~

(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him
on oath:

(8) requiring the discovery ahd production of documents; .
(c) receivirig evidence on-affidavits; " oO

(व) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses“dr documents;
(e) reviewing its decisions;

(f dismissing an application for default or decidin, 8 it ex parte;

(g) setting aside any order of dismissal of any application for default or any
order passed by it ex parte;

(A) any other matter which may be prescribed.

Filing of
application to
Authority and
procedure for
passing order by
it.

Procedure and
powers of
Authority:



20

(3) Every proceeding before the Authorit
withing the meaning of sections 193 and 228
Indian Penal Code and the Authorti
of section. 195 and Chapter XXVI

'y Shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding
, and for the purpose of section 196 of the
'y Shall be deemed to be a civil court for all the purposes
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

Right to legal 17. The applicant may either appear in

person or authorise one or more legal
representation.

practitioners or any of its officers to present his or its case before the Authority,

Appeal to High 18. Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the Authority may file an appeal
Court. to the High Court within thirty days fr

‘om the date of communication of the decision or order

of the Authority to him: रू
Provided that the High Court may,
sufficient cause from filing the appeal
further period not exceeding sixty days,

if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by
within the said period, allow it to be filed within a
Orders passed 19, Every order made by the Authority

under this Act or the order made by the High
by Authority or . Court in any appeal against any order of the

Authority shall, on a certificate issued by any

High Court to officer of the Authori ty or the Registrar of the High Court, as the case may be, be deemed 10
be exccuable be decree of the civil court and shall be executable in the same manner as a decree of that
court, : .
Penalty for 20, If any person iilfully fails to comply with the orders of the Authority or any order
wilful failure (0 of the High Court, as the case may be, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to
comply with . न न
orders of one lakh rupees and in case of a second or subsequent offence with fine which may extend to
Authority or two lakh rupees and in the case of continuing contravention with additional fine which may
High Court. extend to two lakh rupees for every day during which the default continues.
* है * * * *
Accounts and 23. (1) * * दि * * *
audit. (2) The accounts of the Authority shall bé audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred
in connection with such auditor shall be payable by the Authority to the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India. «
* पु * * *
Power to make 35. (J) * * * * *
rales,

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—

* ok * * *

Power to make 36. (1) * * + + +
regulations. (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—

* * * * *
(c) the salaries and allowances payable to and the other conditions of service of
officers and other employees of the Authority under sub-section (2) of section 10:

(d) matters in respect of which register is to be maintained by the Authority
under clause (1) of sub-section (7) of section 11;

(९)1०४५ of fee and lay down such other requirements on fulfilment of which a
copy of register may be obtained under clause (m) of sub-section (7) of section il;

. (f) levy of fees and other charges under clause (2) of sub-section (7) of
section 11,

* * *

45 of 1860,
2 of 1974,

४
है|

{



LOK SABHA

A
BILL
to amend the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997.

(Shri Ramvilas Paswan, Minister of Communications)

MGIP(PLU)MAND—3637LS—21-2-2000,