AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

| । MAR 7908

६९३

Bill No. 26 of 2005
SELLY CAE NN A TO

____ THE WORKING JOURNALISTS AND OTHER NEWSPAPER EMPLOYEES
____ (CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
| (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005

By

4
nv

SHRI IQBAL AHMED SARADGI, M.P.
A

th ler to amend the Working Journalists and other Newspaper Employees (Conditions
om of Service) and Miscellaneous Provisions A ct, 1955. हे

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as

jo.
——
fay

1, (/) This Act may 06 called the Working Journalists and other Newspaper Employees Short title and
litions of Service) and Miscellaneous Provisions (Amendment) Act, 2005. commencement.

2) It shall come into force at once.

2. In Chapter II of the Working Journalists and other Newspaper Employees (Conditions

insertion of
108) and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1955 , after section 13AA, the fo

llowing sections _new sections

nserted, namely:— os | aes 3 hg
a _ "13AB. (/) The Central Government Shall establish a Fund to be known as the Establishment
forking Journalists Welfare Fund, which shall consist of— of a Working
oa Journalists

E ‘ (a) a contribution of rupees fifty crore by the Central Government;

Welfare Fund.


Board of
Trustees..

Duties of
Board of

Trustees. :

134९. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Board of Trustees.

2
(b) contributions from newspaper establishments in such manner as may be
prescribed 4

(c) voluntary donations from any individual or organisations; and

(d) monthly contributions from working journalists at such rates as may
determined by the Board of Trustees constituted under section 13AC ।

(2) The fund shall be managed by the Board of Trustees

(2) The Board of Trustees shall have one Chairman, who shall be nominated by
the Central Government and shall consist of as many other members as are, in the
opinion of the Central Government, required to manage the fund and all such members 3 ‘
shall be elected from representatives of organisations representing the working
journalists and other newspaper employees in the country | |

13 AD. The Board of Trustees shall:-—

(a) render adequate financial assistance to working journalists in case of infirmity
or disability due to accident or old age

(b) render adequate financial assistance to the dependants of a working journalist —
who dies prematurely due to an accident or otherwise: and | a.

os
i

es:
(c) initiate such welfare measures for working journalists as may be deemed fit.", —


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Press is known as fourth estate in a democratic State. In a democracy like ours, press
plays a very significant role in its proper functioning. Journalists play vital role in covering
news of public importance and keeping the press function properly. In the era of information
technology, journalists have to put in extra effort to collect news undeterred by hostile
atmosphere and violence. Sometimes they have to perform their job notwithstanding risk to
their lives. There have been cases when journalists either lost their lives or become crippled

in accidents during the course of their job. In such a situation, the family members and
dependants of such journalists are left in helpless conditions.

It is, therefore, necessary to amend the existing statute "The Working Journalists and
Other Newspaper Employees (Conditions of Service) and Miscellaneous Provisions Act,

1955" with a view to providing for establishment of working journalists fund for welfare of
working journalists in various newspaper establishments in the country. This will go a long
_ way in instilling a sense of fearlessness in the minds of working journalists.

Hence this 811.

i

New Deu; IQBAL AHMED SARADGI
February 4, 2005. |

&&


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill provides for the establishment of Working Journalists Welfare
Fund and for establishment of a Board of Trustees. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure .
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees fifty crore is likely
to be incurred as recurring expenditure every year

A non-recurring expenditure of rupees ten crore is also likely to be incurred.



4
-
’ 4
हे F LOK SABHA —
| Yn .. j | : ; मु weg :

4 | A
: : : BILL | |
3 | _ further to amend the Working Journalists and other Newspaper Employees

1 | (Conditions of Service) and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1955.

"i

i

pty
e

Corben wk s. 435. *
ar

aan (Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi, M.P.)

a

= a) oe ee ५

eri 5: , 73: -<- ७ >>

MGIPMRND—4342LS (S-1)—21-02-2005. | ४