     AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
                                                              Bill No. 26 of 2022
THE APP DEVELOPERS (PROTECTION) BILL, 2022
By
SHRI LA VU SRI KRISHNA DEV ARAYALU, M.P.
A
BILL
to ensure the promotion and protection of app developers against coercive policies
by app regulators with a view to provide a favourable ecosystem for their
growth and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the APP Developers (Protection) Act, 2022.
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, it shall come into force on such
date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint
and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and any
reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed
as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
Short title
and
commencement.
5

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ‘app developer’ means Indian businesses and startups involved in software
engineering resulting in the creation, testing and programming of apps for mobile
phones;
(b) ‘app marketplace’ means an online digital distribution platform listing software
applications for mobile devices;
 (c) ‘app regulator’ means Google’s Play Store and Apple’s App Store;
(d) “Committee” means the National Committee on Regulation of Single
Application (App)  Marketplaces constituted under section 9;
(e) ‘consumer’ means a person who purchases goods and services for personal
use;
 (f) ‘in-app billing’ means in-app purchases made from directly within a mobile
application on Google’s Android and Apple’s IOS platform;
 (g) ‘in app purchases’ means buying goods or services from inside an application
on a mobile device;
 (h) ‘single app marketplace’ means Google’s Play Store and Apple’s App Store
through which all app developers have to route their payments and applications;
 (i) ‘operating system’ means the system software used by Google and Apple to
manage hardware and software resources, and provide common services on mobile
phones; and
(j) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. No app regulator shall compel any app developer to route in-app purchases
through their operating systems or stores by threatening negative consequences or
actions otherwise detrimental to the growth, profitability and expansion of the apps
of an app developer.
4. It shall be the duty of the app developers to provide alternative payment options
to the consumers of their choice for usage of apps developed by them in addition to
the existing in-app billing.
5. No app regulators shall by any means delay the evaluation of or unfairly delete
apps from their Play Store or App Store, respectively as a means of retaliation or
coercion against app developers.
6. (1) No app regulator shall charge commission on app developers exceeding
an amount of ten per cent. for each in-app purchase.
(2) The commission charge to be paid to the app developer under sub-
section (1) shall be the product of separate negotiations between the app regulator
and app developer as opposed to the imposition of a carte blanche commission.
         7. (1) No app regulator shall increase the annual fees taken from app developers
to make up for the losses incurred through the cap on commission fees charged to app
developers under sub-section (1) of section 6 or for making available alternative
payment options for app developers beyond in-app billing systems as provided under
section 4:
Prohibition of
in-app billing
solely through
Google and
Apple operating
systems.
5
2
Definitions.
15
Ten per cent.
cap on
commission
charged by app
regulators.
20
25
30
35
40
10
App developers
to provide
alternative
option of
payment.
Prohibition of
unfair delay of
evaluation of
deletion of
apps.
Regulation of
annual fees
charged by app
regulators.

Provided that in case the app regulator intends to increase their annual fees, a
proposal shall be submitted to the Committee on the proposed change and the reasons
therefor.
8. Any app developer may make an application to the Committee constituted
under section 9 regarding abuse by the app regulators in such manner as may be
prescribed.
9. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute a Committee to be known as the National Committee on Regulation
of Single Application (App) Marketplaces  to look into matters pertaining to the
development and security of app developers in such manner as may be prescribed.
 (2)  The Committee shall consist of,—
(a) Chairman of the Competition Commission of India, Chairperson—
ex-officio;
(b) a member of the Competition Commission of India, ex-officio member;
(c) an official of the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology,
not below the rank of Joint Secretary, ex-officio member;
(d) a reputed academic or expert working in the field of technology
or app development with sufficient experience in the field,
member;
(e) a reputed academic, businessperson or expert in the field of the
growing start-up and app development ecosystem in India,
member;
(f) a legal expert, preferably with specializations or expertise in the
field of technological and corporate law, member,
to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may prescribed.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions
of services of members mentioned under clause (d), (e) and (f) of sub-
section(2) shall be such as may be prescribed.
  10.  (1) The Committee shall,—
 (a) advise the Central Government, particularly the Union Ministry of
Electronics and Information Technology regarding the welfare of app
developers and creating an ecosystem for their growth;
 (b) recommend to the Central Government to take effective steps to ensure
the protection and promotion of app developers;
 (c) recommend to the Central Government to take effective steps to prevent
the coercion of app developers by app regulators with extractive and
rent seeking practices;
 (d) look into the impact of specific policies of app regulators and their
impact on app developers;
 (e) keep abreast of the international happenings and outcomes concerning
app regulators, including but not limited to, specific legislation enacted
in other States pertaining to their regulation, specific Court cases and
disagreements between app developers in other States and app
regulators, to gauge their applicability in the Indian context and
determine best practices in this regard;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Application by
App developer
against abuse
by the app
regulator.
Constitution of
National
Committee on
Regulation of
Single Applica-
tion (App)
Marketplaces.
Functions of
Committee.
3
45

 (f)  review applications submitted by app developers under section 8 against
abuse by app regulators on account of unfair delay of evaluation or
deletion of their apps on the Play Store and App Store, respectively;
 (g)  recommend to the Central Government the rate of increase in the annual
fees charged by the app regulators on the app developers; and
 (h) furnish an annual report with recommendations and protections for the
promotion of app developers and measures to regulate and curb
exploitative practices of app regulators to the Central Government in
such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Committee may, in consultation with the Central Government, make
regulations, consistent with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder,
for the discharge of its functions and perform its duties under this Act.
11. If any app regulator contravenes any of the provisions of—
(a) sections 3, 4 and 5 and is found to be unduly carrying an app developer to
route his payment through their operating system via in-app billing, such app regulator
shall be liable to fine which shall not be less than rupees five lakh or two times the
loss ensure by the app developers, whichever is greater;
(b) sections 6 and 7 and is found to be unduly charging commission in excess to
what is prescribed, such app regulators shall be liable to a fine which shall not be less
than three per cent. of its annual earnings in India or rupees twenty-five crore,
whichever is greater.
12. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by general or special order published in the Official Gazette,
make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it
to be necessary or expedient for the removal of the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two
years from the date of the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is
made, be laid before each House of Parliament.
13. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of the
provisions in any other law, for the time being in force, relating to e-Commerce selling.
14. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or
the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in
the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Penalty.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Act not in
derogation of
other laws.
Power to make
rules.
5
15
20
25
30
35
40
10
4

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India has a fast-growing digital ecosystem, with a significant number of
startups and nascent businesses who are entering the app-market. The effect of the
rent seeking and anti-competition practices of the app regulators harm the developing
digital industry not simply by eating into the revenues of the app developers but
also by preventing some apps from even reaching the market. This is in direct
contravention to the idea of Aatma Nirbhar Bharat.
The promotion of the Standup India scheme, Startup India scheme, Make in
India scheme and in the recent years, Productivity Linked Scheme (PLS) for various
sectors, demonstrate the centrality of indigenous production of goods and services.
The drive to cultivate the entrepreneurial spirit and cement it as a part of the Indian
ethos is being hampered by the policies of app regulators and necessitates addressing
at the earliest.
In order to facilitate the development and promotion of app developers and
protect them from coercive policies by app regulators the proposed Regulation of
Single Application (App) Marketplaces Bill, 2021, seeks to,–
(a) ensure that app regulators do not force app developers to route their in-app
billing through their operating systems or stores;
(b) ensure that app developers are free to direct consumers to alternative routes
of payment of their choice for app-purchases;
(c) constitution of the Committee on Regulation of Single Application (App)
Marketplaces to serve app developers in the Council;
(d) ensure the protection and welfare of app developers against coercive,
anti-competition and rent seeking practices of app regulators; and
(e) ensure a ten per cent. cap on the commission fees charges by app regulators
for in-app purchases.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
   NEW DELHI; LA VU SRI KRISHNA DEV ARAYALU
November 18, 2021.
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 9 of the Bill provides for the Central Government to constitute a National
Committee on Regulation of Single Application (App) Marketplaces to look into
matters pertaining to the development and security of app developers. It also provides
for the appointment of members to the Committee. The Bill, therefore, if enacted,
would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, it is
estimated that an expenditure of rupees ten crore per annum would be involved from
the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees four crore is also likely to be
involved.
6

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
        Sub-section (2) of section 10 provides that National Committee on Regulation
of Single Application (App) Marketplaces may, in consultation with the Central
Government, make regulations, consistent with the provisions of this Act and the
rules made thereunder, for the discharge of its functions and perform its duties under
this Act. Clause 14 empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purpose of this Act. As the matters in respect of which rules and regulations
may be made under the aforesaid provisions are matters of procedure and
administrative details only. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a
normal character.
7

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to ensure the promotion and protection of app developers against coercive
policies by app regulators with a view to provide a favourable ecosystem
for their growth and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu, M.P .)