As introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 26 of  2024
THE TRANSGENDER PERSONS (PROTECTION OF RIGHTS) 
AMENDMENT BILL, 2024 
By
Dr. Shashi  Tharoor, M.P.
a
BILL
to amend the Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 2019.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Amendment 
Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After section 8 of the Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 2019 (hereinafter 
referred to as the principal Act), the following section shall be inserted, namely:– 
Short title and 
commencement.
5
Insertion of new 
section 8A.
40 of 2019.

“8A. (1) Every Government establishment shall reserve at least one per cent. of 
the total vacancies for transgender persons in each category including General, the 
Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward Classes, meant to be 
filled by direct recruitment in such manner as may be prescribed: 
Provided that if sufficient number of transgender persons are not available, such 
unfilled vacancies shall be filled by male or female candidates belonging to the same 
category in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) For the purpose of direct recruitment of transgender persons under sub- 
section (1), there shall be a separate column of “Others” along with the male and female 
categories in the Gender Section of the application form for all such posts.”.
3. After section 13 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:–
“13A. Every educational institution funded or recognised by the appropriate 
Government including preschool, primary, secondary and higher education and 
universities (including a technical, trade, or vocational school) shall reserve at least of 
one per cent. of the total seats in each class or course for the transgender persons in such 
manner as may be prescribed.”.
2
Reservation in 
Employment.
Insertion of new 
section 13A.
Reservation 
in Educational 
Institutions.
5
10
15

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
For centuries, the transgender community has been ostracized across the world leading 
to denial of basic human rights that cisgender individuals enjoy. This extreme social 
exclusion has translated to increased marginalisation and limited access to opportunities. 
Offering a glimmer of hope, the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India passed a landmark 
judgement on the April 15, 2014 which acknowledged the rampant discrimination faced by 
the transgender community and recognised their constitutional rights to equality, liberty and 
dignity. As a means to uplift the trans people, the Court further directed the Central and State 
Governments to take proactive steps towards the advancement of their community. This 
included extending “all kinds of reservation in cases of admission in educational institution 
and for public appointments” as the community is “entitled to reservation in the matter of 
appointment, as envisaged under Article 16(4) of the Constitution”. 
In 2021, the Central Government had moved a Cabinet note proposing to add transgender 
persons to the list of Other Backward Classes (OBCs). Although created with the right 
intentions of addressing the plight of the transgender community, the proposed legislation 
amounts to vertical reservation for the community which fails to account for the intersection 
between caste identities and the diverse notion of gender.
Such an arrangement results in certain caste groups left with entrenched discrimination 
and stigma on both these accounts. According to a study conducted by the Centre for Law 
and Policy Research on the experience of intersectionality, Dalit transgender persons faced 
the most violence in school and were especially vulnerable to sexual violence at work with 
33 per cent. reporting sexual assault and harassment at work. They also faced harassment 
in their interactions with police officials: 23 per cent. of Dalit transgender persons were 
forcibly denuded or stripped by the police and 19 per cent. were sexually assaulted when 
they approached the police seeking assistance. It extended to matters pertaining to accessing 
public transport and public spaces as well such as parks (50 per cent.), police stations  
(46 per cent.) and Government hospitals (43 per cent.). Furthermore, 56 per cent. of Dalit 
transgender respondents were forced to engage in sexual activity to access shelter, food or 
gain employment. 
In the state of Karnataka, horizontal reservation has been implemented for transgender 
persons in the state civil services across all caste categories by providing 1 per cent. separate 
reservation for transgender persons within each ‘vertical’ SC/ST/OBC/General category. 
This adequately tries to redress the discrimination received by the community of complex 
social and economic dimensions. 
A policy of horizontal reservation recognises the intersectionality of caste, class and 
gender and the nuances of discrimination, creating an environment that is inclusive and 
allows every individual of the transgender community to thrive in every space of society
Hence this Bill.
New Delhi;                                                                                       SHASHI THAROOR 
 June 18, 2024.

ANNEXURE
[Extracts from the Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 2019]
(Act no.  40  of 2019)
*  * * * * *
8. (1) The appropriate Government shall take steps to secure full and effective 
participation of transgender persons and their inclusion in society. 
(2) The appropriate Government shall take such welfare measures as may be 
prescribed to protect the rights and interests of transgender persons, and facilitate their 
access to welfare schemes framed by that Government. 
(3) The appropriate Government shall formulate welfare schemes and programmes 
which are transgender sensitive, non-stigmatising and non-discriminatory. 
(4) The appropriate Government shall take steps for the rescue, protection and 
rehabilitation of transgender persons to address the needs of such persons. 
(5) The appropriate Government shall take appropriate measures to promote and 
protect the right of transgender persons to participate in cultural and recreational 
activities.
*  * * * * *
13. Every educational institution funded or recognised by the appropriate 
Government shall provide inclusive education and opportunities for sports, recreation 
and leisure activities to transgender persons without discrimination on an equal basis 
with others.
*  * * * * *
4
Obligation of 
appropriate 
Government.
Obligation of 
educational 
institutions to 
provide inclusive 
education to 
transgender 
persons.

LOK SABHA
a
BILL
to amend the Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 2019.
(Dr. Shashi Tharoor, M.P.)