THE NATIONAL MINIMUM PENSION (GUARANTEE) BILL,  2008
By
SHRI C.K. CHANDRAPPAN,  M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for payment of guaranteed minimum pension to all pensioners
in the country and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the National Minimum Pension (Guarantee) Act, 2008.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint but which shall not be later than three months from the date
of assent.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 26  of 2008
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) "Board" means the National Pension Board constituted under section 3;
(ii) "Fund" means the National Pension Fund constituted under section 5; and
(iii) "Pensioner" means any person who has served in any office under the
Central Government or a State Government or any public sector enterprise or any
other statutory agency set up by the Central Government or a State Government and
is getting pension by virtue of service rendered by him; and
 (iv) "Prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3.  (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Board to be known as the National
Pension Board.
(2)  The Board shall consist of—
(a) a retired judge of the Supreme Court or the High Court, as the case
may be, to be appointed by the Central Government as Chairman;
(b) the Secretary to the Government of India incharge of the Ministry of
Labour and Employment who shall be Member-Secretary of the Board, ex-
officio;
(c) the Secretary to the Government of India incharge of the Ministry of
Finance as member;
(d) three members representing major trade unions, to be nominated by
the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed;
(e) two members representing Public Sector Enterprises, to be nominated
by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed;
(f) two members representing pensioners, to be nominated by the Central
Government in such manner as may be prescribed; and
(g) two members of Parliament of which one shall be from Lok Sabha and
one from Rajya Sabha, who shall be nominated by presiding officers of the
respective House; and
(h) one member who shall be an eminent economist, to be nominated by
the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairman and other members of the Board, shall be such as may be
prescribed by the Central Government.
(4) The Central Government shall provide to the Board such number of officers
and other employees as it thinks fit for the purposes of this Act.
4. The Board shall perform the following functions,—
(i) to maintain the record of such pensioners who are getting less than rupees
three thousand and five hundred as monthly pension;
(ii) to ensure that no pensioner is paid less than rupees three thousand five
hundred as monthly pension;
(iii) to pay such pensioners who are getting less than rupees three thousand
five hundred as monthly pension, the difference of the amount in such manner as
may be prescribed;
(iv) to administer the Fund; and
(v) to perform such other functions with regard to pensioners as may be assigned
to it by the Central Government.
5. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a fund to be known as the National
Pension Fund with a corpus of rupees fifty thousand crore.
National
Pension
Board.
Functions of
the National
Pension Board.
National
Pension Fund.
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(2) The Central Government, the State Governments and the pensioners shall
contribute to the Fund in such ratio as may be prescribed.
(3) Such other sums as may be received by way of donation, contribution or
assistance from individuals, organisations or otherwise shall also be credited to the
Fund.
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation by the Parliament, release
the necessary funds to the National Pension Board for effective implementation of the Act.
7. The Central Government shall cause to be placed before both Houses of Parliament
an annual report giving full account of the activities and performance of the Board.
8.  (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid,  as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of  the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Release of
funds.
Annual
report to be
placed
before
Parliament.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The condition of a large number of pensioners in India is miserable, sad and frustrating.
They deserve a more decent treatment from the society. They are pensioners because they
served the society once.
It is, therefore, the responsibility of the society to treat them with respect and try to
solve their  problems to the extent possible.
This Bill seeks to provide for payment of minimum pension to every pensioner. Though
it would not solve all the problems of the pensioners, it would provide them some kind of
relief. It would also give them a sense of satisfaction that their problem got a sympathetic
consideration.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; C. K. CHANDRAPPAN
November 11, 2007
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of a National Pension Board.
Clause 4 of the Bill provides that the Board shall ensure that every pensioner is paid the
minimum pension under the provisions of the Act. Clause 5 of the Bill provides for
constitution of  a National Pension Fund. Clause 6 of the Bill provides for release of funds
to the National Pension Board by the Central Government. The Bill, therefore, if enacted,
would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a
recurring expenditure of rupees thirty thousand crore will be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees fifty thousand crore is also  likely to be
involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill.
As the rules will relate  to matters of  detail only, the delegation of legislative power is
of a normal character.
6

LOK   SALOK   SABHABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for payment of guaranteed minimum pension to all pensioners in the country
and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri C.K. Chandrappan, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—695LS1(S5)—04.03.2008.