1
THE ABOLITION OF BEGGING BILL, 2014
By
SHRI SHARAD TRIPATHI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for abolition of begging and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth  Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Abolition of Begging Act, 2014.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ‘‘appropriate Government’’ means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) ‘‘beggar’’ means a person who indulges in begging;
Bill No.  26 of  2014
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Definitions.
5

2
(c) ‘‘begging’’ means—
(i) soliciting or receiving alms in a public place including railways, bus
stops, road sides or any other place where public has access;
(ii) exposing or exhibiting any wound, deformity or disease of self or of
any other person or of an animal for the purpose of soliciting or collecting alms;
(iii) allowing one self to be used as an exhibit for the purpose of soliciting
or collecting alms;
but does not include—
(i) soliciting or receiving money or food or gift by executing an act of art or
music or dance or acrobatics or painting at any public place; and
(ii) soliciting or receiving money or food or any offering in connection
with any religious practice or a custom involved in any religion;
(d) ‘‘child’’ means a boy or a girl who has not attained the age of eighteen years;
(e) ‘‘children’s home’’ means a children’s home established under the Juvenile
Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000;
(f) ‘‘prescribed’’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(g) ‘‘receiving centre’’ means a centre established under section 5.
3. Begging by any person in any manner is hereby abolished.
4. Whoever forces or encourages any person, including a child in his care, custody or
charge, for begging shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not
be less than ten years.
5. (1) Any person found begging shall be arrested by the police and before making
every such arrest, the officer-in-charge of the concerned police station shall satisfy himself
as to the bona fide of the arrested beggar.
(2) Any person, other than a child, arrested on the ground of begging shall be sent to
a Receiving Centre, to be established in every district by the appropriate Government,
wherein such person shall be provided with facilities for his rehabilitation.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, facilities for rehabilitation includes
medical care, sustenance and training in agricultural or industrial or other pursuits aiming at
providing gainful employment to the beggars.
(3) Any child arrested on the ground of begging shall be sent to a children’s home.
(4) Every child sent to a children’s home shall be provided with food, medical care and
education free of cost.
6. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Fund to be known as the Beggars’
Welfare Fund for the welfare of the beggars.
(2) Every beggar shall be provided with such financial assistance in such manner as
may be prescribed, out of the Fund, for self-employment.
7. (1) The appropriate Government shall, for the purpose of providing employment
opportunities to beggars, formulate such schemes, work out such plans, including plans
for provision of education, and create such suitable infrastructure in every district, as it
considers appropriate.
56 of 2000.
Abolition of
begging.
Punishment
for forcing or
encouraging
any person
for begging.
Arrested
beggars to be
sent to
receiving
centres.
Constitution
of Beggars’
Welfare Fund.
Formulation
of schemes,
plans for
beggars.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
S3\F\BILL 2013\LS\3401LS(E)
(2) The appropriate Government shall set up destitute homes in every district for
providing food, shelter and protection to the old, infirm, helpless and destitute persons to
ensure that they do not indulge in begging.
8. (1) Any person who maims himself or other persons for the purpose of soliciting or
collecting alms shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to
ten years.
(2) Where a person maims any child or woman or any person who is above the age of
sixty years for the purpose of soliciting or collecting alms shall be punished with imprisonment
for a term which shall not be less than ten years.
9. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, an
offence under this Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable.
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.
Punishment
for maiming.
Offence to be
cognizable
and non-
bailable.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Despite welfare measures taken by the Central and the State Governments, the menace
of begging continues unabated all over the country, especially in the metropolitan cities and
urban areas.
Drives launched by the State Governments and Union territory Administrations and
anti-begging legislations enacted by various State Legislatures to curb this menace have
failed to achieve the desired results. Today the menace of begging has assumed criminal
proportions.
Thus, a legal framework has to be created at the national level to tackle the menace of
begging and also to create an environment in the society wherein a life of dignity is assured
to persons indulged in begging.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SHARAD  TRIPATHI
June 11, 2014.
4

5
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for establishment of ‘‘Receiving Centres’’ by the appropriate
Government. Clause 6 provides for constitution of the Beggars’ Welfare Fund by the Central
Government. Clause 7 provides for formulation of schemes and providing suitable
infrastructure in every receiving centre or destitute home established in every district for the
purpose of creating employment opportunities for beggars. The Central Government would
have to incur expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India for the establishment of
receiving centres, destitute homes and creating suitable infrastructure in such centres or
homes in respect of Union territories. As far as the establishment of Receiving Centres,
destitute homes and providing infrastructure in such centres and homes in the States is
concerned, the State Governments will incur expenditure from their respective Consolidated
Funds. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It
is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be involved.

MEMORANDUM   REGARDING   DELEGATED   LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

GMGIPMRND—684LS(S3)—27.06.2014.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for abolition of begging and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
————
(Shri Sharad Tripathi, M.P.)