THE PREVENTION OF UNSOLICITED TELEPHONIC CALLS AND
PROTECTION OF PRIVACY BILL, 2009
By
SHRI BAIJAY ANT PANDA, MP
A
BILL
to prohibit unsolicited telephone calls by business promoters or individuals to persons
not desirous of receiving such calls and for the protection of individual privacy of
citizens and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This  Act may be called the Prevention of Unsolicited Telephonic Calls and
Protection of Privacy Act, 2009.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 26 of 2009
Definitions.
5

2
(b) words and expressions used but not defined in this Act but defined in the
Indian Penal Code, 1860, the Indian  Telegraph Act, 1885 and the Information Technology
Act, 2000 shall have the same meaning as is respectively assigned to them in those
Acts.
3.  (1) The making of unsolicited telephone calls for promoting business interests or
for any other commercial purpose or for harassment is hereby prohibited.
(2) Whoever contravenes or causes to be contravened the provisions of sub-section
(1) shall be guilty of an offence under this Act.
4. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, no
cellular service provider shall pass on the personal information including telephone number
of their subscribers to any telemarketing service provider, banks, insurance companies or
any such agency so as to protect the subscribers from unsolicited telephone calls.
5. (1) Every person shall have the right to privacy and freedom to lead and enjoy his
life without unwarranted infringement thereof.
(2) No person shall be deprived of the right provided under sub-section (1) except
according to procedure established by law for the time being in force.
(3) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be guilty of an offence
under this Act.
6. No person shall use a cellular phone having built in camera if it does not produce a
sound of at least sixty-five decibels and flashes a light when used to take a picture of any
person or any other object.
7. Subject to public order, morality and health no person with a view to blackmail any
person or for making commercial gains therefrom, shall photograph:—
(a) any part or whole of a human body whether nude or semi-nude or otherwise
without the consent of the person concerned; and
(b) any part or whole of a human body at a public place without the consent of
the person concerned.
8. (1) Whoever contravenes or causes to be contravened the provisions of,—
(i) section 3 shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be
less than two years but may extend to four years and also with fine which may extend
to two lakh rupees;
(ii) section 5 shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be
less than five years but may extend to seven years and also with fine which may extend
to five lakh rupees;
(iii) section 6 shall be punishable with imprisonment for six months or with fine
which may extend to two lakh rupees or with both.
(2) Any company providing cellular service which contravenes the provisions of
section 4 shall be punished with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees and suspension of
its licence for a period of one year.
9. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 every
offence punishable under this Act shall be cognizable.
10. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
Prohibition of
making
unsolicited
telephone
calls.
Cellular
service
providers not
to pass on
information
of subscribers.
Right to
privacy.
Restriction on
use of
cellphone
camera.
Restrictions of
photography
violating
privacy.
Penalty.
Every offence
to be
cognizable.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
45 of 1860
13 of 1885
21 of 2000
2 of 1974
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to
make rules.
5
10

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Of late, telephone subscribers of both mobile phones and land line phones, are facing,
the problem of unsolicited calls from telemarketing service providers, private banks, insurance
companies and money lenders offering loans, credit cards, motor vehicles and so on and so
forth offering various incentives, schemes and gift offers in order to promote their business
interests. Many a time these calls create nuisance particularly when they are made when a
person is attending meetings or official work or family functions etc. and more so such calls
are also made at odd hours.
In case of land line phone MTNL or BSNL publish telephone directories but in case of
cellular phones, the cellular service provider companies give the personal information of
subscribers to other telemarketing agencies. The menace of unsolicited phone calls needs to
be stopped by providing deterrent punishment through legislation.
Similarly, the much published Multi Media Messaging Service (MMS) episode of a
Public School in Delhi, the case of a Pune based landlord intruding on the privacy of his
female tenants, videography of unsuspecting newly wed couples on honeymoon in a five
star hotel, have put question marks on citizens' right to privacy. With increasing
commercialization of sex, people use cellphone cameras to secretly capture private images of
girls and women to embarrass and blackmail them. These cameras are used to take up close
photographs of private parts of unwary girls and women in gyms, beauty parlours, swimming
pools, hotel room, bathrooms, etc. or even in busy public places. This shows how the
unscrupulous elements are misusing and exploiting the new advancement in technology,
Hence it becomes the uppermost duty of the State to protect its citizens and the society as
well. In order to control this virtual lawlessness a new law has become necessary to provide
deterrent action against the defaulters.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BAIJAYANT  PANDA
June 5, 2009.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only.
The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
5

LOKLOK SABHA   SA
————
A
BILL
to prohibit unsolicited telephone calls by business promoters or individuals to persons
not desirous of receiving such calls and for the protection of individual privacy of
 citizens and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Baijayant Panda, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2281LS(S5)—24-06-2009.