As IntRODUCED IN Lok SaBHA

28 UL 2006

Bill No. 26 of 2006

THE ENVIRONMENTAL CLEARANCE (SELF-CERTIFICATION)
BILL, 2006

By
‘Suri K.S. Rao, M.P.
A
BILL

to provide for environmental clearance required for important infrastructural projects
on the basis of self-certification and for matters connected therewith.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Environmental Clearance (Self-Certification)
Act, 2006.

5 (2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(i) “certificate” means a certificate submitted by any authority or organisation
under section 4 of this Act;

10 (ii) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and

Short title,
extent and
‘commencement,

Definitions.


Organisation
not required

to get prior
environmental +
clearance.

certificate

regarding
environmental
impact.

Government
to inspect the
project within
thirty days.

Organisations
not to proceed
with the
project until
norms for
environment
are met.

Government
to give clear-
ance as soon
as possible,

Presumption
of clearance if
no intimation
is received
from the
Government
within three
months.

Punishment.

Power to
make rules.

2

(iii) “project” means and includes any project undertaken by any authority or
organisation including a private one, whether in joint venture or individually, for all
developmental and infrastructural works relating to communication facilities
construction of roads, manufacturing plants including power plants, railways, projects
having strategic importance, dams for irrigation and for providing drinking water,
provision of civic facilities, food processing industries, projects in special economic
zones, construction of schools and educational institutions.

3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force or
any judgement of any court or tribunal or judicial authority, no authority or organisation
including any private organisation shall require any prior environmental clearance from the
Ministry of Environment and Forests of the Central Government or any authority constituted
for the purpose for undertaking any project.

Explanation: For the purposes of this section, the term 'Environment' with its
grammatical variations has the same meaning as assigned to it under the Environment
(Protection) Act, 1986.

4. Any authority or organisation undertaking a project shall, before starting work on
the project, submit a certificate to the Ministry of Environment and Forests of the Central
Government that the project is clear from all angles of environmental aspects and it has
satisfied all the norms prescribed for the prevention of environmental pollution.

5. (1) As soon as a certificate is received from an authority or organisation, the
Ministry of Environment and Forests of the Central Government shall, on its own or through
any agency, cause the project inspected at the earliest opportunity but in no case later than
thirty days from the date of receipt of the certificate from an organisation.

(2) If, after the inspection, it is found that the authority or organisation has not
satisfied the norms prescribed for prevention of environmental pollution, the Government
shall issue instructions to the authority or the organisation, as the case may be, to meet the
norms and implement the same.

6. If any authority or organisation does not comply with the directions issued by the
Government under section 5, the Government may prohibit the authority or the organisation
from proceeding with the project until such time as all norms prescribed for environmental
clearance are met.

7. The Government shall give clearance after inspection of a project as soon as possible
and the project shall not be completed until and unless a final clearance is received from the
Government.

8. Ifno communication is received from the Government regarding clearance within
three months from the date of submission of certificate, it shall be presumed that the clearance
has been granted by the Government. ”

9. If any authority or organisation without having received final clearance from the
Government proceeds with the project and completes the same, the Government shall cause
the structures removed and any person who is in charge of the project, by whatever name
called, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years or with fine
of rupees two lakh or with both. *

10. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of the Act.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Environmental clearance is one of the important factors for taking up any project, even
if it is fora development related project. This has been ensured to protect the nature and
environment. But of late it is seen that timely clearance is not given by the environmental
authorities which results in considerable delay in undertaking public developmental works.
The very provision which was formulated to protect the public should not come in the way
of developmental projects which are intended to benefit public at large. Many a time, due to
long delay, the cost of project shoots up manifold.

Therefore, it is proposed that any development work, which is intended for public
benefit, may be undertaken on the basis of self-certification without waiting for environmental
clearance. At the same time a provision has been made to ensure that clearance by
environmental authorities should be given within a fixed time frame. This will ensure that
public projects are not stalled for want of clearance and at the same time environmental
norms are also followed.

The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.

New Detui; K.S.RAO
February 15,2006.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to frame rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

A

BILL
to provide for environmental clearance required for important infrastructural projects
on the basis of self-certification and for matters connected therewith.

(Shri K.S, Rao, M.P)

MGIPMRND—5907LS—08.03.2006.