1
THE RIGHT TO PUBLIC SERVICES BILL, 2017
By
SHRI NINONG ERING, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the delivery of notified public services to citizens within
the stipulated time limit and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right to Public Services Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of the India, except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) "Appellate Authority" means an authority including one belonging to the
local self-Government, notified as such under section 4;
(b) "Designated Public Authority" means an authority or body including one
belonging to the local self-Government and Organizations, owned, controlled or
substantially financed by the Central Government and notified as such for providing
the service under section 4;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 270 of  2017
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
Definitions.
10

2
Right to
obtain Public
Services.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
(c) "eligible person" means a person who is eligible for receiving the services
notified by the Central Government;
(d) "prescribed" means as prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(e) "Reviewing Authority" means an authority appointed or designated including
one belonging to the local self-Government notified as Reviewing Authority under
section 4;
(f) "right to public service" means right to obtain the services notified by the
Central Government under section 3, from time to time, within the stipulated time limit;
(g) "service" means any service notified under section 4; and
(h) "stipulated time limit" means maximum time to provide the service by the
Designated Public Authority or to decide the appeal by the Appellate Authority and
Reviewing Authority as notified under section 4.
3. Every eligible person shall have the right to obtain public services to be notified by
the Central Government, from time to time, in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
4. The Central Government shall, from time to time, notify in the Official Gazette, the
services to be rendered, provisions for fast track Service delivery, Designated Public Authority,
Appellate Authority, Reviewing Authority for the purposes of this Act.
5. (1) The Designated Public Authority shall provide the service notified under section 4,
to the person eligible to obtain the service, within the stipulated time limit.
(2) The stipulated time limit, if not prescribed otherwise in the notification issued
under section 3, shall commence from the date when required application for notified service
is submitted to the Designated Public Authority or to a person subordinate to him authorized
to receive the application, which shall be duly acknowledged.
6. (1) Any application being filed for obtaining services notified under the Act shall be
treated as application under the Act.
(2) The Designated Public Authority on receipt of an application shall, within the
stipulated time limit, provide service or reject the application:
Provided that in case of rejection of application the Designated Public Authority shall
record the reasons in writing and intimate the same to the applicant.
7. (1) Any person, whose application is rejected under sub-section (2) of section 6 or
who is not provided the service within the stipulated time limit, may file an appeal to the
Appellate Authority within thirty days from the date of rejection of application or the expiry
of the stipulated time limit, as the case may be.
(2) Every appeal filed under sub-section (1) shall be duly acknowledged by the Appellate
Authority by providing the Appellant signed receipt of the same:
Provided that the Appellate Authority may admit the appeal after the expiry of the
period of thirty days if he is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause
from filing the appeal in time.
(3) The Appellate Authority may order the Designated Public Authority to provide the
service within the specified period or may reject the appeal, as the case may be.
(4) The Appellate Authority may, along with the order to provide service, impose
penalty according to the provisions of section 8.
(5) The Designated Public Authority or the aggrieved applicant by any order of the
Appellate Authority, may make a second appeal within sixty days from the date of that order
to the Reviewing Authority, who shall dispose the appeal according to the prescribed
procedure:
Notification
of Authorities.
Right to
obtain Public
service within
stipulated time
limit.
Application.
Appeal.

3
Penalty.
Protection of
action taken in
good faith.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Provided that the Reviewing Authority may entertain the second appeal after the
expiry of sixty days, if he is satisified that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause
from filing the appeal in time.
(6) In case of non-compliance of the order by Designated Public Authority for providing
the service under sub-section (3), the aggrieved applicant may submit an application directly
to the Reviewing Authority, which shall be disposed of in the manner as may be prescribed
for second appeal.
(7) The Appellate Authority and Reviewing Authority shall while deciding an appeal
under this section, have the same powers as are vested in civil court while trying a suit under
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 in respect of:—
(a)  requiring the production and inspection of documents;
(b) issuing summons for hearing to the designated public servant and appellant;
and
(c) any other matter such as may be prescribed.
(8) In every appeal, the onus to prove that a delay or denial of service was justified
shall be on the Designated Public Servant or the Appellate Authority as the case may be who
delayed or denied the service.
8. (1) When the Appellate Authority is of the opinion that the Designated Public
Authority has failed to provide service without sufficient and reasonable cause, then he may
impose a penalty which shall not be less than five hundred rupees but which may extend
upto five thousand rupees.
(2) When the Appellate Authority is of the opinion that the Designated Public Authority
having caused delay in providing the service, then he may impose a penalty at the rate of two
hundred fifty rupees per day upto a maximum of five thousand rupees on the Designated
Public Authority.
(3) When the Reviewing Authority is of the opinion that the Appellate Authority has
failed to dispose of the appeal within the stipulated time limit without sufficient and reasonable
cause, then he may impose a penalty of not less than five hundred rupees which may extend
upto five thousand rupees on the Appellate Authority:
Provided that the Appellate Authority shall be given a reasonable opportunity of
being heard before any penalty is imposed on him.
(4) Every penalty imposed under this Act shall be charged as per the rules framed
under this Act, from time to time:
Provided the penalty imposed under this Act shall be in addition to that prescribed in
any other Act for the time being in force.
9. The non-compliance of the orders of the Appellate Authority, unless pending in
second appeal or modified by the Reviewing Authority, or of the orders of the Reviewing
Authority, as the case may be, shall amount to misconduct and the Deginated Public Authority
shall be liable for actions under relevant provisions, including those that have been laid
down for disciplinary action.
10. No Civil  Court shall entertain any suit, application or other proceeding in respect
of any order made under this Act and no such order shall be called in question otherwise
than by way of an appeal as specified under this Act.
11. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other Act, for the time being in force,
the Government of India, may send applications of non-compliance directly to the Appellate
Authority for taking further actions as per the Act.
12. No suit, procecution or their legal proceeding shall lie against any person for
anything which is done in good faith or intended to be done under this Act or any rule made
thereunder.
5 of 1908.
Penalty on
Non-
compliance.
Bar of Civil
Court.
Application
for non-
compliance to
the Appellate
Authority.

4
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
13. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument having effect by
virtue of any law other than  this Act in relation to the services notified under this Act and its
implementation.
14. (1) If any difficuly arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a period of
two years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament.
15. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry out the
purpose of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before
each House of the State Legislature while it is in session for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and if, before
the expiry of the session immediately following the session or successive sessions aforesaid
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the vailidy of anything previously done under that rule.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.

5
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Right to Public Service (RTPS) confers right on every individual citizen to time
bound delivery of services and redressal of grievances. The RTPS legislations are meant to
reduce corruption among the Government Officials and to increase transparency and public
accountability. The States in India have acted as pioneers in this regard. The right to public
service legislations have been introduced in various States following the legislations of the
Madhya Pradesh Government in the year 2010. By now, more than twenty States have
introduced such Acts.
These Acts have enabled the citizens to access Government services and Government
to provide the required services seamlessly. It has been observed that the RTPS Acts have
helped the States in tackling corruption, inefficiency and lack of transparency in the conduct
of Government Affairs. The RTPS strengthens the citizens of India, thereby strengthening
their belief in Government institutions.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide for the delivery of notified public services of the
Government of India within the stipulated time limit.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; NINONG ERING
November 28, 2017.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 15 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the delivery of notified public services to citizens within
the stipulated time limit and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Ninong Ering, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2758LS(S3)—21-12-2017.