AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 270 of 2024
THE HIGHER EDUCA TION SCHOOL, GRADUA TE SCHOOL AND
UNIVERSITY (FREEDOM OF SPEECH), BILL 2024
By
ADV. GOWAAL K. PADA VI, M.P.
A
BILL
to make provision in relation to freedom of speech and academic freedom in
Higher Education  School, Graduate School, Universities,  other
educational institutions and in students’ unions and
for matters connected therewith.
WHEREAS promoting amongst the citizens equality, fraternity and assuring
dignity of an individual is enshrined as one of the goals in the Preamble to the
Constitution of India;
AND WHEREAS, the free speech is one of the foundations of the Constitution;
AND WHEREAS, the freedom of speech is enshrined in the Fundamental
Rights enshrined in Part III of the Constitution:
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Higher Education School, Graduate School
and University (Freedom of Speech) Act, 2024.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.5

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State the Government
of that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “education provider” means an organization or individual that offers
education or related services, support, or assistance;
(c) “Governing Body” means a group of people who formulate the policy
and direct the affairs of a higher education school, graduate school or a University
in partnership especially on a voluntary or part-time basis as constituted under
section 5;
(d) “graduate school” means a higher education school that offers advanced
academic degrees and other qualifications, such as certificates and diplomas;
(e) “higher education school” means the level of education that follows
secondary education and provides advanced academic and professional
knowledge and skills;
(f) “prescribed” means prescribed by Rules made under this Act;
(g) “Student Union” means a student-led organization that represents
students at a college or a university;
(h) “University” means an institution that provides the highest level of
education, in which students study for degrees and in which academic research
is done.
3.(1) The governing body of a registered higher education provider shall take the
steps that, having particular regard to the importance of freedom of speech, are
reasonably practicable for it to take in order to  achieve the objective for the,—
(a) academic workers, academic staff, security and other staff of the education
provider;
(b) members of the education provider;
(c) students, interns and other pupils of the education provider;
(d) teaching faculty, professors and other educators etc. of the education
provider; and
(e) visiting speakers, lecturers and others of the education provider.
4. The Freedom of speech referred to means,—
(a) in relation to an individual, their ideas, their research, their beliefs or
views;
(b) in relation to a body, its policy or objectives or the ideas, beliefs or views
of any of its members;
(c) freedom in respect of access to all information;
(d) freedom as to publication of articles;
(e) freedom as to circulation of information in all means;
(f) freedom in expression of speech, writing, art, culture and actions;
(g) to question and test received wisdom; and
(h) to put forward new ideas and controversial or unpopular opinions, without
placing themselves at risk of being adversely affected in any of the ways.
5. The governing body of a registered education provider shall consist of,—
(a) the Principal or the Dean of the education provider;
(b) one trustee of the education provider; and
(c) one member who shall be a woman.
6.  Every students’ union for students at a registered education provider that is
eligible for financial support shall,—
(a) take the steps that, having particular regard to the importance of freedom
of speech, are reasonably practicable for it to take in order to achieve the objective.
15
20
25
30
35
40
5
10
2
Duty to take
steps to secure
freedom of
speech.
Duty of Student
Unions.
Constitution
of the
governing
body.
Definitions.
45
50

(b) uphold the values relating to freedom of speech and expression; and
(c) forward complaints to the governing body in such manner as may be
prescribed with regard to freedom of speech.
7. (1) No complaint against violation of freedom of speech shall be referred to the
Governing Body under this Act,—
(a) unless the complainant has exhausted any internal procedure for the
review of complaints which is provided by the registered education provider, or
students’ union;
(b) if the subject-matter of the complaint  is being, or has been, dealt with in
another student complaint; and
(c) if proceedings relating to the subject-matter of the complaint, to which
the complainant is or was a party, are being, or have been, dealt with by a court or
tribunal.
(2) Every complaint regarding violation of freedom of speech shall be filed speech
with-in a time limit specified in this behalf by the governing body.
8. (1) The Central Government may issue such guidelines to the appropriate
Government or, as the case may be, the local authority, as it deems fit for carrying out
the provisions of this Act.
(2) The appropriate Government may issue guidelines and give such directions,
as it deems fit, to the local authority or the governing body regarding implementation
of the provisions of this Act.
(3) The local authority may issue guidelines and give such directions, as it deems
fit, to the governing body regarding implementation of the provisions of this Act.
9. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification, make rules, for carrying
out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:
(a) guidelines for the practices of the student union;
(b) internal grievance redressal system or complaint system;
(c) manner and limit for hearing the complaints;
(d) composition of the committee of the General body to hear the complaints;
and
(e) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed or in respect of
which provision is to be made by the State Government by rules.
(3) Every rule, notification and guidelines made or issued by the State Government
under this Act shall, as soon as may be after it is made or issued, be laid before each
House of the State Legislature where there are two Houses, and where there is one
House of the State Legislature, before that House.
10. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make provisions,
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or
expedient, for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two
years from the date of commencement of this  Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made,
be laid before each House of Parliament.
3
Power to make
rules.
Complaints
when to be
registered.
Power to issue
directions.
15
20
25
30
35
5
10
Power to
remove
difficulties.40
45

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In pursuance of Article 19 of the Constitution, it is necessary to guarantee and
protect the Freedom of Speech of students in an academic institution.
Freedom of speech is enshrined in the Constitution of India and forms an integral
part of the Constitution. Freedom of speech lies at the foundation of all democratic
organizations, for without free political discussion no public education, so essential
for the proper functioning of the process of popular Government, is possible. The
Constitution guarantees it’s citizens the right to form associations or unions. Citizens
have the freedom to form social, cultural, economic, or political associations or unions.
Providing for freedom of speech for students in academic institutions which
include graduate school, high school, universities and other academic institutes of
this country is very crucial to encourage participation of students and youth in
nation building for the holistic development of academic institutes, fair and equitable
discussion of intellectual dialogue among is the need of hour. Also to provide exchange
of ideas whether written, oral, virtual, or visual representations, gestures and other
means of expressions is a necessity. The proposed Bill seeks to instill mechanism in
the education institutions which will ensure the freedom of speech and expression in
these places and also provide for mechanism to address grievances related to violation
of freedom of expression.
 Hence this Bill.
    NEW DELHI;        GOWAAL K. PADA VI
November 12, 2024.
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGA TED  LEGISLA TION
 Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the  appropriate Government to make rules for
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only
the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to make provision in relation to freedom of speech and academic freedom in Higher
Education School, Graduate School, Universities and other educational
institutions and in students’ unions and for matters
connected therewith.
.
—————
(Adv. Gowaal K. Padavi, M.P.)