1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE POPULATION (STABILIZATION & PLANNING)
BILL,  2019
By
SHRI SUSHIL KUMAR SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the stabilization of population in the country through setting up of a
National Population Planning Authority at the national level and a District
Population Planning Committee in each district to encourage and promote
 family planning in order to ensure a population which is in tandem and
commensurate with the resources and development of our nation, to
improve health of the women and empower them, recognizing
both men and women as an important stakeholder in the
family planning process, to improve standard of living
of the citizens and for the matters connected
therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Population (Stabilization & Planning) Act, 2019.
 (2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill  No. 270 of  2019
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “annual report” means the report prepared by the National Population Planning
Authority;
(c) “Authority” means the National Population Planning Authority constituted
under section 4;
(d) “Committee” means the District Population Planning Committee constituted
under section 11;
(e) “medicine” means medicine prescribed by a certified medical practitioner for
sterilization and matters connected therewith and incidental thereto;
(f) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(g) “public servant” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it under
section 21 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860; and
(h) “small family” means a family having not more than two living children.
3. For the purpose of this Act, every healthcare professional shall be deemed to be a
“public servant”.
4. (1) The Government shall, within one year of the coming in force of this Act,
establish a National Population Planning Authority for carrying out the purpose of this Act.
(2) The Authority which shall consist of:—
(a) Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare — ex-officio Chairperson;
(b) Chairperson, National Commission for Women — ex-officio member;
(c) Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development — ex-officio member;
(d) Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment — ex-officio
member;
(e) Secretary, Ministry of Human Resource Development — member; and
(f) two persons, with experience of at least fifteen years in the social sector, one
of whom shall be a woman.
(3) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and staff as it
considers necessary for the functioning of the Authority;
(4) The salary and allowances payable to, and terms and conditions of services of the
members, officers and staff of the Authority shall be such as may be prescribed.
5. (1) The Authority shall meet at such times and places as appointed by the Chairperson
and shall abide by such rules of procedure in regard to transaction of business at its meetings,
as may be prescribed;
(2) The expenditure incurred for the meetings shall be borne out of the funds provided
to it by the Central Government.
6. (1) The Authority shall,—
(a) prepare a plan for family planning in the country, which shall include;
(i) conducting surveys across the country;
(ii) formulating a strategy to specifically target the regions with high
maternal and infant mortality rate;
Definitions.
Healthcare
professionals
to be deemed
public servant.
Meetings of
the Authority.
Constitution
of National
Population
Planning
Authority.
Functions of
the National
Population
Planning
Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45 of 1860.

3
(iii) specific identification of the high density and high Total Fertility Rate
(TFR) areas and formulate plans for such regions accordingly;
(iv) creating a mechanism for ensuring quality medicine procurement;
(v) preparing a strategy for ensuring equal participation of both male and
female in the sterilization process;
(vi) evolving schemes for encouraging participation of both the male and
the female in the family planning process;
(vii) preparing a plan for the counselling of the male and the female, to be
implemented by the District Population Planning Committee;
(viii) preparing a strategy to popularize and promote spacing of at least
two years between two children;
(ix) framing school curriculum on the population stabilization and provide
for a mechanism of inclusion of the same;
(b) create awareness on the benefits of a small family through various programmes;
(c) provide for a framework for the training of the healthcare professionals;
(d) examine, recommend and formulate a strategy for integration and convergence
of the existing schemes; and
(e) perform any other function, which the Central Government may prescribe
from time to time.
(2) The Authority shall strive to promote the small family norm and suggest measures
to discourage violation of the small family norm.
7. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, every
person, who adopts the small family norm, shall be entitled to—
(a) one additional increment as incentive if the person is employed with the
Central or the State Government;
(b) free healthcare at all the public healthcare institutions for the entire family;
and
(c) receive such other benefits as may be prescribed by the Central Government
from time to time.
(2) If either or both the children are female, the female child or children, as the case
may be, shall be entitled to free education till the graduation level, the assistance for which
shall be provided by the appropriate Government.
8. The Government shall strive to promote a spacing of at least two years between from
the date of delivery of the first child and the onset of second pregnancy.
9. The appropriate Government shall ensure that people have access to quality and
affordable contraceptive medicines and healthcare pertaining to family planning and matters
incidental and consequential thereto.
10. (1) The appropriate Government shall, as far as possible, designate the eldest
married woman in the household as the head of the household under various welfare
programmes.
Incentives for
adhering to
small family
norm.
Promote
spacing in
child births.
Appropriate
Government
to ensure
access to
quality and
affordable
medicines,
healthcare.
Designating
women as
head of the
household in
welfare
programmes.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
11. (1) The appropriate Government shall constitute a District Population Planning
Committee in every district for purposes of this Act.
(2) The Committee shall consist of—
(a) the District Collector — ex-officio Chairman;
(b) the Chief Medical Officer of the district — ex-officio member;
(c) One representative of the Municipal Council — ex-officio member;
(d) two persons with an experience of at least ten years in social sector, at least
one of whom shall be a woman.
(3) For the purpose of appointments of persons under clause ( d) the appropriate
Government shall consult public representatives of the concerned district.
12. (1) The Committee shall,—
(a) implement the policies and plans formulated by the National Population
Planning Authority;
(b) coordinate and consult with the village Panchayat for formulation and
implementation of the plan at the village level;
(c) provide counselling facilities to male and female pertaining to family planning
and matters incidental and consequential thereto through healthcare professionals;
(d) to carry out an annual survey to collect data on small families in the district;
(e) distribute contraceptives through health-care centres and Non-Governmental
Organizations;
(f) organize sterilization camps;
(g) publicize benefits of having a small family;
(h) engage with non-Governmental Organizations and other social groups for
promoting the small family norm;
(i) recommend to the appropriate Government from time to time regarding
measures to be taken to encourage family planning measures and improve the standard
of living; and
(j) perform any other function, which the appropriate Government may prescribe,
from time to time.
(2) The Committee shall take into account the representation made before it by the
village Panchayat representatives, to be nominated by the village Panchayat, at least one of
whom shall be a woman.
13. The Central Government shall, after due consultation with the concerned State
Governments, and after due appropriation made by the Parliament in this behalf, provide
requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
14. (1) The Authority shall publish once every year, a report in such form and manner
as may be prescribed.
(2) The Central Government shall cause such report to be laid before each House of
Parliament as soon as it is received.
15. The provisions of this Act shall not be in derogation of any other law for the time
being in force.
16. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government, in consultation with the State Governments, may make such order or give such
direction, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it be necessary or
expedient for removing any difficulty:
Constitution
of District
Population
Planning
Committee.
Central
Government to
provide funds.
Functions of
the District
Committee.
Publication of
Annual
Report.
Act not in
derogation of
other law.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
Provided that no such other shall be made under this section after the expiry of three
years from the date of commencement of this Act.
17. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to
make rules.
5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The census of 2011 estimated India's population to be around one hundred and twenty
one crores, which, by 2017 is estimated to come closer to one hundred and thirty crores. As
per Registrar General of India, by 2026, India's population will be 139.9 crore. India, at present,
is world's second most populated country and is set to overtake China by 2030. India accounts
for only 2.4 per cent. of the total area of the world, while accounting for 16.9 per cent. of its
total population, which represents the huge stress that is being created on the resources of
the nation. Such high level of population has further caused and continues to cause high
levels of inequality, poverty, hunger and deterioration in standard of living, which is evident
from India's miserable performance on the indicators of Human Development Index (HDI)
and others.
Article 38 of the Indian Constitution puts the onus on the State to secure a social order
for the promotion of welfare of the people which includes reduction of inequalities in income,
status, facilities and opportunities. However, the existing levels of population make it difficult
to achieve the goals stated under the Directive Principles of the State Policy, whereby State
is overburdened with the responsibility of creating enormous infrastructure to sustain such
high population, besides other stresses such as ensuring healthcare, reducing poverty and
improving quality of life, while the resources to provide such facilities remain limited and
continue to deplete with the rising level of population.
In the light of the given situation, it is imperative that appropriate steps be taken to
stabilize and control the tremendous growth of population so as to distribute the resources
more equally and equitably and to improve the standard of living of the people of India. Such
a policy is a requirement of the time so that the Directive principles of State Policy could be
put in the policy framework in their spirit. There is also a need to recognize the equal
participation of both male and female in the family planning process and need for empowering
women in the decision making process. Emphasis has also to be laid on the educational
levels across the country, especially in the regions of high Total Fertility Rate (TFR). Moreover,
it is also imperative to ensure that the related medicines are available at affordable rates and
that responsibilities are established in the cases of violation of norms by the healthcare
professionals.
The Bill effectively provides for the setting up of a National Population Planning
Authority and a Committee at the district level, measures which shall be initiated to stabilize
and do planning for the population in the country through measures such as spreading
education, awareness, empowerment of women and recognition of both male and the female
as equal partners in the family planning process. The Bill is a significant step towards the
overall development of the nation and ensuring economic as well as social equality.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI ; SUSHIL KUMAR SINGH
October 31, 2019.
6

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a National Population Planning
Authority and appointment of such officers and staffs for its functioning. Clause 5(2) provides
for the Central Government to bear the expenditure incurred for the meetings of the authority.
Clause 7 provides for incentives for small family norm. Clause 9 provides for the appropriate
Government to ensure access to quality and affordable medicines, healthcare. Clause 11
provides for the constitution of a District Population Planning Committee. Clause 13 makes
it obligatory for the Central Government to provide requisite funds for carrying out the
purposes of the Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve an expenditure of rupees five
thousand crore per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees three hundred crore is also likely to
be involved.
7

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 17 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relates to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
8

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the stabilization of population in the country through setting up of a
National Population Planning Authority at the national level and a District
Population Planning Committee in each district to encourage and promote
 family planning in order to ensure a population which is in tandem and
commensurate with the resources and development of our nation, to
improve health of the women and empower them, recognizing
both men and women as an important stakeholder in the
family planning process, to improve standard of living
of the citizens and for the matters connected
therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Sushil Kumar Singh, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—3051LS(S3)—15-11-2019.