1
THE COMPANIES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI RABINDRA KUMAR JENA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Companies Act, 2013.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Companies (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 270  of  2016
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In section 135 of the Companies Act, 2013,—
(i) in sub-section (5), the first proviso shall be omitted; and
(ii) after sub-section ( 5), the following sub-section shall be added at the end,
namely:—
"(6) For the purpose of spending the amount earmarked for Corporate
Social Responsibility activities, the company shall not limit itself to local area or
areas around it where it operates but shall select areas across the country.".
Amendment
of section
135.
18 of 2013.
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Companies Act, 2013, redefines corporate governance rules in India, emphasizing
the creation and expansion of social programs. India's development needs are colossal.
The country is host to some of the world's most arresting social problems, often at massive
scale.
The rules governing how companies are to contribute to Corporate Social
Responsibility (CSR) are fairly basic leaving much of its implementation subject to
interpretation. The Companies Act, 2013, requires covered companies to give preference
to areas in the vicinity of the company's operations for CSR activities, whereas many of
India's most serious social and health problems are located far away from key industrial
centres. It is reasonable to expect that Indian States with the highest levels of economic
activity will receive the largest share of this new CSR spending. This could ultimately
augment regional development discrepancies already evident in India.
There is a mismatch between the regions with high levels of economic activity and
those areas with the most critical social development needs. A few of the critical social
issues are prevalent in India's more developed regions. However, the majority of people
impacted by the social issues outlined in the Companies Act for CSR spending is
concentrated in India's less-developed States and therefore the CSR mandate may ultimately
deprive these States of an important new source of funds to combat their most pressing
social problems.
The world is moving to a dematerialized form of commerce. There is also a need to
ensure that the rules accommodate existing and emerging business models that focus less
on a physical presence. Some of the world's largest companies today and in the future will
have an even smaller operational footprint.
This Bill is to bring more clarity that the CSR mandate of the company and CSR need
of any particular area/region must be treated separately. The Bill seeks to amend the
Companies Act, 2013 with a view to enable companies to spend the amount earmarked for
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) activities in areas all across the country and not
just in local area and areas around it where the company operates.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW D ELHI; RABINDRA KUMAR JENA
October 20, 2016.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE COMPANIES ACT, 2013
(18 OF 2013)
135. (1)* * * * * * *
* * * * * *
(5) The Board of every company referred to in sub-section (1), shall ensure that the
company spends, in every financial year, at least two per cent. of the average net profits
of the company made during the three immediately preceding financial years, in pursuance
of its Corporate Social Responsibility Policy:
Provided that the company shall give preference to the local area and areas
around it where it operates, for spending the amount earmarked for Corporate Social
Responsibility activities:
Provided further that if the company fails to spend such amount, the
Board shall, in its report made under clause (o) of sub-section (3) of
section 134, specify the reasons for not spending the amount.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section "average net profit" shall be
calculated in accordance with the provisions of section 198.
* * * * * * *
* * * * * * *
Corporate
Social
Responsibility.
4

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Companies Act, 2013.
————
(Shri Rabindra Kumar Jena, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2975LS(S3)—18-11-2016.