1
THE RIGHT OF CHILDREN TO FREE AND COMPULSORY
EDUCATION BILL, 2016
By
SHRI RABINDRA KUMAR JENA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education
(Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No.  271 of  2016
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 (hereinafter
referred to as the principal Act), in section 23, after sub-section (2), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:—
"(2A.) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (1), the appropriate Government
may create a pool of teachers for primary schools through a direct recruitment
process.
(2B.) A person shall be eligible for appointment as a teacher under sub-section
(2A), if he—
(i) is below the age of 32 years;
(ii) possesses Senior Secondary School Certificate with seventy per cent
marks or Intermediate with seventy per cent marks or its equivalent;
(iii) has qualified the Central Teacher Eligibility Test (CTET) conducted
by the Central Board of Secondary Education in accordance with the guidelines
framed by the National Council for Teacher Education for the purpose.
or
(iv) has qualified the Teacher Eligibility Test (TET) conducted by the
appropriate Government in accordance with the guidelines framed by the National
Council for Teacher Education for the purpose:
Provided that the total number of teachers recruited under sub-section ( 2A)
shall not exceed twenty per cent. of the total number of teachers recruited in any State
within a calendar year.
3. After Chapter IV of the principal Act, the following Chapter shall be inserted,
namely:—
"CHAPTER IV A
TEACHER QUALITY ASSESSMENT TEST
28A. (1) The appropriate Government shall conduct quality assessment test for
all teachers once in every four years.
(2) The quality assessment test shall consist of the following two components,
namely:—
(a) a written exam; and
(b) evaluation of student performance.
(3) The guidelines, syllabus and question paper for the assessment test shall be
framed by a competent authority notified by the appropriate Government.
(4) The result of the quality assessment test of both the components referred to
in sub-section (2) shall be declared within four months of the date of conduct of the
test.
(5) The appropriate Government shall constitute a Committee in every district
to review the result of the teacher quality assessment test.
(6) The Committee shall consist of—
(a) Member of Parliament representing the district, who shall be
Chairperson—ex-officio;
(b) the District Magistrate concerned, who shall be a permanent member;
and
Amendment
of section 23.
Monitoring of
teacher
quality
through
assessment
test.
Pool of
teachers for
primary
schools.
Insertion of
new Chapter
IVA.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
35 of 2009

3
(c) three persons to be nominated by the District Magistrate in
consultation with Chairperson in such manner as may be prescribed.
(7) The salary and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of
service of the nominated members of the Committee shall be such as may be prescribed.
(8) The Committee shall have power to review the result of teacher quality
assessment test and suggest measures to the appropriate Government for improving
teaching ability and other related qualities of teachers.".
4. In section 30 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall
be substituted, namely:—
"(1) No child shall be required to pass any Board examination till completion of
third class.".
Amendment
of section 30.
5
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The education sector on the whole and especially primary education is facing a major
crisis in the country. The overall literacy rate has seen a constant increase over decades and
reached around 74% in 2011. However, some studies and credible reports suggest that there
is a big crisis building up in the school education sector. While the enrolment into schools is
almost universal at a high of around 97%, the outcomes seem below satisfactory. The Annual
Status Education Report which reports the actual learning levels of school students has
revealed shocking figures over the years. Only 48% of fifth class students can read text
books of second class. Moreover, only 44.1% of eighth class students managed to do a
division in 2014, as against 46% in 2013. In 2014, only about 25% of children enrolled in fifth
class could read simple english sentences. This number is virtually unchanged since 2009.
The situation is worse in middle schools. In 2009, 60.2% of children studying in eighth class
could read simple sentences in english but this figure fell to 46.8% in 2014. The trend shows
stagnation of learning levels and even hints at a decline.
While there may be multiple factors contributing to this crisis, but one major area
which needs reform and accountability is teachers. Teachers have been putting in a lot of
efforts in creating the future leaders in our country since time immemorial. The Governments
also have been spending a huge sum of money into teacher's development and salaries. It is
estimated that about 80% of education expenditure by the Government is on teachers. In
some States, almost half of the Government staff comprises teachers. However, this pumping
of money into teachers' salaries, increased number of staff and training has not resulted in
better ground results. This may lead us to two questions: One, the quality of teachers and
two, their commitment and accountability. It is also observed that the absentee percentage of
teachers is about 25% in many States, whereas the absentee in any other Government
Department is below 10% generally.
The Bill attempts to create a framework which can solve both these problems. It calls
for a teacher quality assessment test once in every four years and an innovative method to
recruit young and bright graduates into the teaching industry. Along with this, this Bill also
amends the no detention policy of the Right to Education Act and reduces the policy only
upto third class. This ensures that no student is promoted after his first three years of
education without learning what is essential for his age or class. On the whole, this Bill is a
small attempt in the right direction to revive the primary education sector, which is in deep
crisis.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RABINDRA KUMAR JENA
October 20, 2016.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for creation of a pool of teachers for primary schools from
class first to class third through a direct recruitment process by the appropriate Government.
Clause 3 provides for teachers quality assessment test for monitoring of teachers' quality. It
also provides for constitution of a committee to review  assessment test results and further
course of action. The expenditure relating to States shall be borne out of the Consolidated
Funds of the respective States. However, the Central Government shall bear the expenditure
in respect of Union Territories. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India. Though, it is difficult to assess the exact expenditure at this
stage, yet, it is estimated that a sum of rupees Two Hundred crore would  be involved as
recurring expenditure per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A sum of rupees Five Hundred crore would also be involved as a non-recurring
expenditure.
5

6
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE RIGHT OF CHILDREN TO FREE AND COMPULSORY EDUCA TION
(AMENDMENT) ACT, 2009
(35 OF 2009)
* * * * * * * * *
23. (1) * * * * * * * * *
(2) Where  a State does not have adequate institutions offering courses or training in
teacher education, or teachers possessing minimum qualification as laid down under sub-
section (1) are not available in sufficient numbers, the Central Government may, if it deems
necessary, by notification, relax the minimum qualifications required for appointment as a
teacher, for such period, not exceeding five years, as may be specified in that notification:
Provided that a teacher who, at the commencement of this Act, does not possess
minimum qualifications as laid down under sub-section (1), shall acquire such minimum
qualifications within a period of five years.
* * * * * * * * *
28. No teacher shall engage himself or herself in private tution or private teaching
activity.
* * * * * * * * *
30. (1) No child shall be required to pass any Board examination till completion of
elementary education.
(2) Every child completing his elementary education shall be awarded a certificate, in
such form and in such manner, as may be prescribed.
* * * * * * * * *
Qualifications
for
appointment
and terms and
conditions of
service of
teachers.
Prohibition of
private tution
by teacher.
Examination
and
compeletion
certificate.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009.
————
(Shri Rabindra Kumar Jena, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2892LS(S3)—18.11.2016.