As introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 271 of 2024
THE SCHEDULED TRIBE COMPONENT (PLANNING,  
ALLOCATION AND UTILIZATION OF FINANCIAL  
RESOURCES) BILL, 2024
By
Adv . Gowaal K. Pada vi, M.P.
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
Clauses
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
3. Earmarking of the Tribal Component from Plan outlays.
4. Communication of plan outlays earmarked as Tribal Component to the department.
5. Schemes to be included under the Tribal Sub-plans.
6. Obligation to cover the Scheduled Tribes in general schemes.
7. Formulation of Tribal Component schemes and preparation of sub-plans by the 
Department.
8. Submission of sub-plans proposed to be included in the Annual plan for appraisal.
9. Appraisal of the Tribal component scheme by the Nodal Agencies.
10. Budget allocations.
11. Tribal sub-plan wing in Finance Department.
12. Constitution of National Council for Development of Scheduled Tribes.
13. Functions of the National Council.
14. Constitution of Nodal Agency. 
15. Nodal Departments.
16. Functions of the Nodal Agency.
17. Norms for allocation of the Tribal Sub-plan Fund to the Tribal Component Schemes. 
18. Recommendation by the Nodal Agency and the Nodal Department.
19. Administrative and technical support to the Nodal Department.
20. Department Level Sub-Plan Support Unit.
21. Implementation of the Tribal component schemes at Divisional Level.
22. Constitution of a P.O. level Committee.

Clauses
23. Necessary measures to be undertaken by respective departments of Government.
24. Constitution of an Evaluation Committee.
25. Transparency and Accountability.
26. Incentives and penalties.
27. Annual Report to be placed before State Legislature.
28. Power to remove difficulties.
29. Power to make rules.
(ii)

As introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 271 of 2024
THE SCHEDULED TRIBE COMPONENT (PLANNING, 
ALLOCATION AND UTILIZATION OF FINANCIAL 
RESOURCES) BILL, 2024
By
Adv . Gowaal K. Pada vi, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the proper and adequate allocation of central funds in the tribal Component 
in proportion to the location, population and problems of the Scheduled Tribes spread 
across the country and to overcome the fluctuations, the variations, to keep track of 
receipts and expenditures and to seek maximum utilization of funds that has  
been laid down in Scheduled Tribe Component outlay over the years.
Whereas, promoting amongst the citizens equality, fraternity and assuring dignity of 
an individual is enshrined as one of the goals in the Preamble of the Constitution of India;
And W hereas, the welfare of the Scheduled tribes is of utmost importance and 
for promoting and appreciation of their fundamental rights enshrined in part III of the 
Constitution;

And Whereas, the discrepancies seen in allocation and expenditure of the funds of 
Central plan outlay in the Tribal Component for country of India over the years has not 
improved the conditions of Scheduled Tribes of India;
And Whereas, with a view to ensure there is allocation of tribal funds which is to be 
provided to Scheduled Tribes in the scheduled areas of the country of India; 
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy- fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Scheduled Tribe Component (Planning, Allocation and 
Utilization of Financial Resources), Bill, 2024.
(2) It extends to the whole of India;
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Department” means a Government Department entrusted with the implementation 
of the tribal component or schemes for the development of the Scheduled Tribes;
(b) “Gaps in development” means differences in development indicators of the 
Scheduled Tribes when compared to the state averages, as may be  prescribed particularly 
relating to human and economic development;
(c) “General Schemes” means schemes included in the annual Plans of the 
Departments which benefit all social groups including the Scheduled Tribes;
(d) “Government” means, the Government of India;
(e) “Nodal Agency” means the committee headed by Minister of Tribal Affairs;
(f) “Nodal Department” means Tribal Affairs Department of Tribal Affairs Ministry;
(g) “Notification” means notification published in the India Gazette and the word, 
“Notified” shall be construed accordingly;
(h) “Prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under the Act;
(i) “National Council” means the National Council for Development of the Scheduled 
Tribes constituted under section 13;
(j) “Scheduled Tribes” shall have the meanings assigned respectively under clause 
(25) of Article 366 and  Article 342 of the Constitution of India;
(k) “Tribal Component” means the Plan approved by the National Council for 
inclusion in the Annual Plan of the Department to bridge the gap in development of 
Scheduled Tribes and shall include the Scheduled Tribe component of general schemes;
(l) “Tribal Component Fund” means a portion of the Total  outlays of the Nation, in 
a financial year, as earmarked under section 3;
(m) “Tribal Component Schemes” means the Tribal Component schemes included in 
the Tribal Component of the Departments;
(n) “Scheduled Tribe habitation” means any habitation where population of 
Scheduled Tribes is not less than 40% of the total population.
(o) “Scheduled Tribe Component” means Tribal Component (earlier called TSP);
(p) “Tribal Advisory Council (TAC)” means Council constituted under the Fifth 
Schedule of the Constitution of India;
2
Definitions
10
5
30
35
25
20
15
Short title, 
extent and 
commencement. 

3. The Central Government shall, in every financial year, earmark in such manner as 
may be prescribed, a portion of the total outlays of the Scheduled Tribe Component which 
shall be proportionate to the Scheduled Tribe population of the country, to be called as  
Tribal Plan Fund: 
Provided that in case of unspent amount out of allocation in a particular financial year, 
the same may be added to the next year allocation, but shall not be carried further beyond 
that year:
Provided further that, the Fund to be earmarked shall be determined at least three 
months prior to the commencement of the next financial year:
Provided also that, the Tribal Component Fund outlay shall be revised according to 
Central annual Plan final outlay:
Provided also that the expenditure of the Tribal Component fund shall be accounted for 
in the manner, hereafter specified in this Act.
4. The Nodal department shall, for every financial year, communicate, in the manner 
prescribed, to the other department, a tentative plan out layout of Tribal Sub Plan Fund as 
earmarked under section 3 for preparation of respective department-wise Tribal Sub-Plan.
5. The Sub-Plans of the departments shall include only such schemes that secure direct 
and quantifiable benefit to the Scheduled Tribes individuals, Scheduled Tribes households 
or the/Scheduled Tribes habitations or Tribal areas and that have the potential to bridge the 
gaps in the development, following the norms laid down in this Act and the rules made there 
under.
6. The departments shall ensure coverage of the Scheduled Tribes in the ongoing general 
schemes consistent with their eligibility for the same.
7. On receipt of communication under section 4, each department, shall after estimating 
the gaps in the development of the Scheduled Tribes, prioritize the development needs of the 
Scheduled Tribe through a consultative process, as may be prescribed, and shall formulate 
Tribal Component schemes and prepare the Sub-Plans comprising of the Tribal Component 
schemes within the Centre Plan priorities communicated under section 4. 
8. Each Department, excluding the departments separately notified under this Act, 
shall submit, each year to the Nodal Department, the Sub-Plans comprising of the Tribal 
Component Schemes proposed to be included in the annual plans, for appraisal by the Nodal 
Agency concerned, within such time frame and in such format, as may be prescribed.
9. The Nodal Agency for Tribal Sub-Plan, shall take up appraisal of the Tribal 
Component schemes respectively submitted by departments, to ensure conformity with the 
provisions of this Act.
10. The annual Tribal Component approved by the National Council shall be included 
in the Demands for Grants of the departments under the relevant head of account for the 
Tribal Sub-Plan.
11. There shall be an exclusive Secretary in Ministry of Finance, Department of  
Finance for performing the functions relating to budget implementation and allocation 
according to the provisions of this Act within the overall discipline of the ways and 
means, whose position shall be determined by the Finance Department.
12. The National Council shall be formed and to meet as decided,–
(1) Within one month, after the commencement of this Act, the Government shall, 
by notification, constitute a Council under the Chairperson of Prime Minister, to be 
10
3
Earmarking 
of the Tribal 
Component 
from Plan 
outlays.
5
30
40
35
25
20
15
Communication 
of plan outlays 
earmarked 
as Tribal 
Component to 
the department.
Submission 
of sub-plans 
proposed to be 
included in the 
Annual plan for 
appraisal.
Formulation 
of Tribal 
Component 
schemes and 
preparation of 
sub-plans by the 
Department.
Obligation 
to cover the 
Scheduled 
Tribes in general 
schemes.
Schemes to be 
included under 
the Tribal Sub-
plans.
Constitution 
of National 
Council for 
Development 
of Scheduled 
Tribes.
Tribal sub-plan 
wing in Finance 
Department.
Budget 
allocations.
Appraisal 
of the Tribal 
component 
scheme by the 
Nodal Agencies.
45

known as the National Council for Development of Scheduled Tribes to exercise the 
powers conferred and to perform the functions assigned to it under the Act and the 
rules made there under;
(2) The Council should invite all Chief Minister and Tribal Ministers of the State and 
Members of Parliament from the Scheduled Tribes constituencies as member of the National 
Council;
(3) The National council shall meet at least two times in a year;
13. The National Council shall,– 
(a) advise the Central Government on all the policy matters relating to Tribal  
Sub-Plan;
(b) suggest measures for proper planning and implementation of the schemes by the 
departments;
(c) approve the Annual Tribal Component proposals of the Departments;
(d) consult Tribal Advisory Council of all states constituted under Fifth Schedule 
of the Constitution for suggestions and recommendations at least four times in the 
financial year; and
(e) perform such other functions as may be prescribed.
14. A Nodal Agency headed by the Union Minister of Tribal Affairs, shall be constituted 
in the manner prescribed, for Tribal Component and shall exercise the powers conferred and 
perform the functions assigned under this Act;
15. The Tribal Department or whatsoever name called in each State shall act as Nodal 
Departments to perform its functions and exercise its powers under the Act. 
16. The Nodal Agency, in consultation with the respective Nodal Department shall 
perform the following functions, namely–
(a) evaluate and appraise the Tribal Component proposed by the departments for 
ensuring conformity to the provisions of this Act;
(b) prepare the Centre Tribal Component for placing before the National Council for 
Development of Scheduled Tribes for consideration and approval;
(c) review the implementation and monitoring of the Tribal Sub-Plan programme;
(d) identify impediments and suggest measures for overcoming the impediments;
(e) co-ordinate with the departments for preparation of the State level and district 
level Tribal Sub-Plan;
(f) maintain transparency in expenditure; maintain scheme wise; district wise, village 
wise and beneficiary wise details as may be prescribed;
(g) set up a web portal for tracking the progress of the implementation, expenditure, 
output and outcome indicators as may be prescribed of Tribal Sub-Plan; and
(h) facilitate at least annual social auditing of expenditure of Tribal Component 
funds and facilitate analysis of improvement in Human Development. Index against the 
projections for the State and district:
Provided that the directions of the Nodal Agency shall be binding on the Departments.
17. The Nodal Agency, while indicating allocation of the Tribal Sub-Plan Fund to the 
Tribal Component schemes shall follow the following norms namely,–
(1) for schemes exclusively benefiting the Scheduled Tribes individuals or Scheduled 
Tribes households, one hundred per cent. of scheme cost shall be allocated and accounted 
for under Tribal Component fund;
Norms for 
allocation 
of the Tribal 
Sub-plan Fund 
to the Tribal 
Component 
Schemes.
Functions of the 
Nodal Agency.
Nodal 
Departments.
Functions of 
the National 
Council.
10
5
30
40
35
25
20
15
45
4
Constitution of 
Nodal Agency.

(2) for schemes benefiting the Scheduled Tribe habitations, one hundred per cent. of 
scheme cost shall be allocated and accounted for under the Tribal Component fund:
Provided that in case of other habitatiors, the cost shall be allocated and accounted for 
under or Tribal Component in proportion of the population of the Scheduled Tribes;
(3) for general social sector schemes, which includes education, health, women and 
child, labour, physically handicapped included in the Sub-Plans, benefiting the Scheduled 
Tribes individuals or Scheduled Tribes households, along with others, the scheme cost 
shall be allocated and accounted for under Tribal Sub-Plan, in proportion Scheduled Tribe 
population. 
18. The schemes that fulfill the norms laid down in the Act shall be recommended 
by the Nodal Agency for inclusion in the annual financial proposals of the departments 
and aggregated for placing before the National Council for Development of the Scheduled 
Tribes for consideration and approval as pre-budget process.
19. The Government shall provide required Technical and other staff to the Nodal 
Department with an Administrative and Technical Support Unit as may be prescribed, to 
perform the functions and discharge the duties assigned to it and to assist the Nodal Agency.
20. The departments as identified by the National Council may establish a Component 
Support Unit, as may be prescribed to manage the respective Tribal Sub-Plan.
21. ( 1) The Constitution Divisional Monitoring Committee under the Tribal 
Commissioner as chairperson in each ATC division of the state shall be responsible for 
the implementation of Tribal Component at the divisional and project office level tribal 
Members of the Legislature and the Parliament belonging to the respective division shall be 
the members of the Divisional Monitoring Committee;
(2) The Divisional Monitoring Committee of each division shall review the 
implementation of the Tribal Component periodically;
(3) The Divisional Monitoring Committee shall give priority to the inaccessible, remote 
and hilly areas of the Tribal dominated region followed by the other Tribal dominated 
regions and no funds shall be diverted to the non-tribal areas of the State.
22. (1) There shall be a Project Office (P.O.) Level Committee under the Tribal 
Legislature or Member Parliament or any Tribal member of local bodies as chairperson 
in each district, which shall be responsible for implementation of tribal sub-plan;
(2) The P.O. Level Committee must first give priority to the inaccessible, remote and 
hilly areas of the Tribal dominated region followed by the other Tribal dominated regions. 
Also, no funds must be diverted to the non-tribal areas of the State;
(3) This Committee must also give directions to the head departments of implementing 
authorities to follow the same provision as mentioned above.
23. The respective departments of Government shall take such measures as may be 
necessary, for institutional strengthening at State level and District level by providing 
necessary guidelines, staff and training to the staff in the manner prescribed, for effective 
implementation and monitoring. 
24. There shall be constituted an Evaluation Committee to observe and Study all the 
overall aspects in the interest of development of Tribals keeping in mind the economic, 
social educational upliftment of the Scheduled Tribes.
(1) The committee shall submit a report every 5 years;
(2) The Committee shall consist of – 
(a) Anthropologist;
(b) Economist;
Implementation 
of the Tribal 
component 
schemes at 
Divisional Level.
10
5
25
20
15
Recommendation 
by the Nodal 
Agency and 
the Nodal 
Department.
Department 
Level Sub-Plan 
Support Unit.
Administrative 
and technical 
support to 
the Nodal 
Department.
5
Constitution of 
an Evaluation 
Committee.
Necessary 
measures to 
be undertaken 
by respective 
departments of 
Government.
Constitution 
of a P .O. level 
Committee.
40
35
30
45

(c) Retired Justice;
(d) IAS officer; 
(e) five tribal M.L.A.
(f) tribal Member of Parliament (Two members); and
(g) other Tribals issue related Experts.
25. (1) Each department shall ensure transparency and accountability at all levels in the 
implementation of Tribal Component schemes;
(2) Each department shall, host the documents, as may be prescribed in public domain.
26. ( 1) Government appropriate shall formulate an scheme, to award incentives 
for commendable performance and disincentives for proven negligence and lack of due 
diligence, in discharge of responsibilities under this Act by any functionary or official 
concerned:
Provided that disciplinary action shall be governed by the relevant service/disciplinary 
rules applicable to the Government officials and functionaries.
(2) Whoever being a public servant, willfully neglects his duties required to be 
performed by him under the Act, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend up to one year.
27. The Nodal agency shall place before the National Legislature, an Annual Report on 
outcome of implementation of Tribal Component containing department-wise achievements 
and the un-utilized, funds during the financial year under report.
28. ( 1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of the Act, the 
Government may, by order, make such provisions or give such directions not inconsistent 
with the provisions of the Act as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient for the 
removal of the difficulty:
Provided that no such power shall be exercised after the expiry of a period of two years 
from the commencement of this Act;
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as it is made, before each 
House of the State Legislature.
29. (1) The Government may, by notification in the Gazette, make rules for carrying out 
all or any of the provisions of this Act;
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such 
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:
(a) Determination of gaps in development of the Schedule Tribes;
(b) Year marking of Tribal Component Funds from the plan outlays;
(c) Identification of Tribal Component Schemes and preparation of Sub-Plans by 
the departments;
(d) Preparation of budget proposal of Tribal Component for appraisal by the Nodal 
Departments;
(e) Strengthen the Finance Department for monitoring expenditures under the Tribal 
Sub-Plan;
(f) Constitution of, and transaction of business in the State Council for development 
of Scheduled Tribes; the qualification, disqualification and other allowances to the  
non-official members of the State Council;
(g) Constitution of Nodal Agencies for Tribal Sub-Plan;
Incentives and 
penalties.
Power to make 
rules.
Power to remove 
difficulties.
Annual Report 
to be placed 
before State 
Legislature.
Transparency 
and 
accountability.
10
5
30
40
35
25
20
15
6

(h) Maintenance of a web portal by the Nodal Agency;
(i) Constitution of Administrative and Technical Support Unit in respective Nodal 
Agency;
(j) Department for Tribal Sub-Plan;
(k) Constitution of Component Support Unit at department level;
(l) Constitution of Divisional Monitoring Committees and the connected matters;
(m) Constitution of P.O. Level Committee and the connected matters;
(n) Constitution of Evaluation Committee and the connected matters;
(o) Institutional strengthening at State, Divisional, District and sub-district levél for 
ensuring effective implementation, awareness, mass contact programme, social audit 
and monitoring of Tribal Sub-Plan; and
(p) Procedures for ensuring transparency and accountability in the implementation 
of Tribal Sub-Plan.
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall, immediately after it is made, be laid before, the 
Legislature of the State, if it is in session and if it is not in session, in the session immediately 
following for a total period of fourteen days which may be comprised in one session or in 
two successive sessions and if, before the expiration of the session in which it is so laid or 
the session immediately following the Legislature agrees in making any modification in the 
rule or in the annulment of the rule.
10
5
15
7

8
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In pursuance of Article 244(1), Fifth Schedule (4) and Article 46 of the Constitution of 
India it is considered necessary to provide for earmarking a portion of Centre plan outlay 
for the Tribal Sub-Plan:
(i) To provide for the proper and adequate allocation of Central plan outlay for 
the Tribal Component in proportion to the location, population and problems of 
the Scheduled Tribes spread across the vast Country of India and to overcome the 
fluctuations, the variations, to keep track of receipts and expenditures and to seek 
maximum utilization of funds that has been laid down in Tribal Component outlay over 
the years;
(ii) The Tribal Ministry was set up in 1999 after the bifurcation of Ministry of 
Social Justice and Empowerment, since then less efforts have been taken to better the 
conditions of the Tribals. For it is the need of the hour to make available Financial 
Resources to inaccessible, remote areas and hilly regions which have been deprived of 
the financial aid from the Centre by innumerable reasons. It is also a major concern of 
the Centre to make sure that necessary and neglected Tribals areas are given priority 
at the earliest. It is of urgent necessity to pass this legislation to overcome the defect 
and fallacy in the executive orders passed by the Centre regarding the Financial Tribal 
Component which have allocated funds in a haphazard manner, in the past. This 
particular legislation can provide impetus to the allocation of the financial resources in 
more expeditious manner. There is also a further need of proper Planning and avoiding 
of Under-allocation, Misallocation, Under-utilization, Misutilization of the financial 
funds meant for genuine Tribals in Tribal areas. At the same time to prevent and prohibit 
the allocation and utilization of funds in non-tribal areas of the country. Also Keeping in 
mind, to make such allocated funds non-divertible to any other issue not concerning the 
Tribals or matters attached therewith; Also, to spend for the schemes directly benefiting 
the Scheduled Tribes population; 
(iii) For the development of Tribal People the outdated schemes should be wiped 
out & new schemes should be introduced and implemented. Such schemes should be 
self-reliant or life oriented according to the needs of the Tribals own image, genius and 
tradition. Data should not be collected by mere statistics or amount of funds spent but 
rather by the quality of human character that is evolved. The Central Government or 
the Executives should avoid imposing anything on the Tribal people and let the Tribal 
People develop along the lines of their own genius. At the same time, Government 
should try to encourage in every way the Tribals own tradition and culture;
(iv) For matters connected there with or incidental thereto; and
(v) The Bill is intended to achieve the above objectives.
Hence this Bill.
New Delhi;                                   G O W A A L  K .  P A D A V I  
November 12, 2024

9
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
 Clause 11 of the bill provides for the appointment of Secretary in finance with expertise 
in the finance and related functions of the Tribal Affairs Ministry. Clause 12 provides for 
Constitution of National Council for development of Scheduled Tribes. Clause 22 provides 
for Constitution of a P.O. level Committee. Clause 23 provides for Constitution of an 
Evaluation Committee. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve recurring expenditure of about Rs. five 
crore per annum. 
 A non-recurring expenditure of about Rupees Twenty Crore is also likely to be involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
 Clause 28 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to the matters of detail only, the delegation 
of legislative power is of a normal character.
10

LOK SABHA
a
BILL
to provide for the proper and adequate allocation of central funds in the tribal Component 
in proportion to the location, population and problems of the Scheduled Tribes spread 
across the country and to overcome the fluctuations, the variations, to keep track of 
receipts and expenditures and to seek maximum utilization of funds that has  
been laid down in Scheduled Tribe Component outlay over the years.
(Adv. Gowaal K. Padavi, M.P .) 