1
THE MANAGEMENT OF RELIGIOUS INSTITUTIONS AND PLACES
OF WORSHIP BILL, 2017
By
SHRI SHIV AJI ADHALRAO PA TIL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for management, operation and control of all aspects of religious institutions
and places of worship, which are in direct or indirect control of State and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by the Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Management of Religious Institutions and Places of
Worship Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. 271 of  2017
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "administrative control" means a religious institution or place of worship
shall be deemed to be under the administrative control of the appropriate Government
if the said Government appoints or nominates or has the right to nominate/appoint
one or more persons on the Controlling Body or Management Committee of the
religious institution or place or worship;
(b) "Advisory Board" means a Board constituted under section 11;
(c) "appropriate Government" means in case of a State, the Government that
State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(d) "financial control" means a religious institution or place of worship shall be
said to be under the financial control of the appropriate Government if the said
Government instructs or directs or has the right to direct/instruct about the manner in
which funds collected or earned by the religious institution or place of worship are to
be spend;
(e) "financial year" means year from the 1st April of a year to 31st March of the
subsequent year;
(f) "Management Committee" in relation to a religious institution or place of
worship means any Body or Authority or Committee, by whatever name called, having
power to direct or control any or all of the operations of the religious institution or
place of worship;
(g) "place of worship" means any land or building which is considered sacred
or holy by any community, sect or religion;
(h) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(i) "religious institution" includes any organization, association of persons,
society, trust or board, which is either set up with the intention of carrying out
religious activity/activities or is engaged in any religious activity;
(j) "service" a person shall be said to be in service of a religious institution or
place of worship if he or she has either been authorized by the Managing Committee
or has been traditionally doing any type of work, either full-time or part-time, at or in
relation to the religious institution or place of worship, irrespective of whether he or
she is receiving or not receiving any remuneration for the work.
3. Nothing contained in this Act shall apply to any religious institution or place of
worship, which is not under financial or administrative control of either a State Government
or the Central Government.
4. Any fund or donation or gift, either in cash or kind, collected or received by any
religious institution or place of worship shall not be treated as part of the fund of any
Government or of any Government Institution or Government Society or Government Board.
5. In case of any religious institution or place of worship to which this Act applies, the
appropriate Government's role shall only be of a trustee responsible for ensuring that the
funds, properties, estates and all assets of the religious institution or place of worship are
used strictly in accordance with the tenets, wishes and aspirations of the religion or sect or
community to which the religious institution or place of worship belongs.
6. (1) The appropriate Government shall publish or cause to be published, within
three months of the conclusion of a financial year, full accounts showing details of income,
expenditure, assets, liabilities, investments, sale of assets, and any other matter that is
necessary to give a true and fair picture of the finances of the religious institution or place
of worship under its administrative or financial control during the relevant financial year.
(2) If the income of a religious institution or place of worship exceeds rupees one lakh
Definitions.
Exclusion.
Funds to be
separate.
Government
to be trustee.
Publication of
accounts.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
in any financial year, the accounts of the religious institution of place of worship shall be
duly audited by a Chartered Accountant.
(3) Along with published accounts, it shall also be mandatory for the religious
institution or place of worship to give details in respect of any income or assets of such
institution or place of worship are used for personal benefit of any person in such manner
as may be prescribed.
7. No person shall be appointed or nominated to the Managing Committee of any
religious institution or place of worship or of a group of religious institutions or places of
worship, unless the person being appointed or nominated declares to have full faith and
devotion to the religion, sect or the deity to which the religious institution(s) or place(s) of
worship belongs.
8. No person shall be appointed in the service of any religious institution or place of
worship or of a group of religious institutions or places of worship, unless the person being
appointed declares to have full faith and devotion to the religion, sect or the deity to which
the religious institution(s) or place(s) of worship belongs.
9. (1) The Managing Committee of religious institution or place of worship or of a
group of religious institutions or places of worship shall have the right to remove any
person from the Managing Committee or from service if it is proved to the satisfaction of the
Managing Committee that the person concerned has acted in a manner that violates in any
way whatsoever his/her declaration of full faith and devotion to the religion, sect or the
deity to which the religious institution(s) or place(s) of worship belongs.
(2) In case the person to be removed by the Managing Committee under sub-section
(1) has been appointed by the appropriate Government, the Managing Committee shall
recommend to the Government for removal of such person and on receipt of recommendation,
the Government shall within seven days of receipt of recommendation, remove the person.
(3) A person removed under sub-section ( 2) from the Managing Committee or the
service of a religious institution or place of worship shall be ineligible for the appointment
under the Government.
10. (1) The Managing Committee of a religious institution or place of worship or of a
group of religious institutions or places or worship shall have the right to impose a code of
conduct as well as a dress code for all members of the Managing Committee as well for all
persons in service of the religious institution(s) or place(s) of worship.
(2) The Managing Committee of a religious institution or place of worship or of a
group of religious institutions or places of worship shall have the right to remove any
person from the Managing Committee or from service if it is proved to the satisfaction of the
Managing Committee that the person concerned has acted in a manner that violates in any
way whatsoever the code of conduct or dress code imposed by the Managing Committee.
(3) In case the person to be removed by the Managing Committee under sub-section
(2) above, has been appointed by the appropriate Government, the Managing Committee
shall recommend to the Government for removal of such person and on receipt of
recommendation, the Government shall, within seven days of receipt of recommendation,
remove the person.
(4) A person removed under sub-section ( 3) from the Managing Committee or the
service of a religious institution or place of worship shall be ineligible for reappointment
under the Government.
11. The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute an Advisory Board for deciding policies and rules in respect of management and
activities of religious institutions or places of worship of any particular religion, sect,
deity or community.
Persons on
Managing
Committee.
Persons in
service of
religion
institution or
place of
worship.
Right to
remove on
violation of
declaration.
Right to
impose code
of conduct.
Constitution
of Advisory
Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
Explanation.—The appropriate Government may constitute as many Advisory Boards
as may be necesary for giving effects to the provision of this Act.
12. (1) Every Advisory Board shall have one Chairperson, one General Secretary
and such number of members, as may be specified by the appropriate Government.
(2) The criterian for appointment as the Chairperson, General Secretary and members
of the Advisory Board shall be such as may be prescribed by the apropriate Government
from time to time.
(3) In case an Advisory Board relates to religious institutions and places of worship
or more than one sect, reasonable representation to all sects, to which the Board relates,
shall be provided.
(4) No Government functionary or Officer or employee shall be eligible for nomination
as the Chairperson, General Secretary or member of any Advisory Board.
13. (1) The Advisory Board shall not be involved in day-to-day management or
operations of any religious institution or place of worship.
(2) The Advisory Board will only frame rules and policies, which shall be binding on
all religious institutions and places of worship in the State of the particular religion, sect,
deity or community for which the Advisory Board has been constituted.
(3) The Advisory Board shall be responsible for supervision and control including
audit of finances of Managing Committees of all religious institutions and places of worship
in the State of the particular religion or sect or deity or community for which the Advisory
Board is constituted.
14. The salaries and allowances and terms and conditions of services of the
Chairperson, General Secretary and other members shall be such as may be prescribed
by the appropriate Government.
15. (1) In case the Advisory Board detects irregularities in the working of any
Managing Committee of a religious institution or place of worship in the State of a particular
religion or sect or deity or community for which the Advisory Board is constituted, the
Board shall issue a warning to the concerned Managing Committee.
(2) If the Advisory Board is of the opinion that the irregularity is of serious nature or
the Managing Committee has ignored the warning and has continued with the irregularity,
the Advisory Board shall recommend to the appropriate Government to either remove a
particular person from concerned Managing Committee to reconstitute the Managing
Committee.
(3) The recommendation of the Advisory Board under this section shall be binding on
the appropriate Government and action shall be taken by that Government within a reasonable
time without any delay.
(4) The Advisory Board shall also have power to initiate legal proceedings against
any person found guilty of irregularities under this section.
16. The appropriate Government shall not remove any person from the post of
Chairperson or General Secretary or member of an advisory board or the Managing Committee,
before the completion of his tenure, unless he:—
(a) is proved to be of unsound mind;
(b) is convicted of a criminal offence and punished with imprisonment exceeding
three months;
(c) is found to be indulging in terrorist or anti-national activities;
(d) Indulges in any act for which a recommendation has been received against
him from the relevant Advisory Board or Management Committee under the provisions
of this Act.
Members of
Advisory
Board.
Functions of
Advisory
Board.
Irregularities
by Managing
Committee.
Removal of
Managing
Committee of
Advisory
Board
members.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Supervision
and control of
Managing
Committees.

5
17. (1) Whoever violates of any provision of this Act shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend upto three Years and fine.
(2) A false declaration of one's faith or devotion shall be an offence punishable under
sub-section (1).
(3) Misuse of income or assets of a religious institution or place of worship as well as
use of any such income or asset without due authorization from Managing Committee shall
be an offence punishable under sub-section (1).
18. All Bodies or Committees or Boards existing before the commencement of this Act
for management and control of religious institutions and places of worship in every State
shall be reconstituted to comply with the provisions of this Act within a period of six
months from the date of coming into force of this Act.
19. The provisions of this Act shall have effects notwithstanding anything contrary
contained in any other law for the time being in force.
20. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the forgoing powers such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely,—
(a) the rules relating to Constitution of Managing Committee and Advisory
Boards;
(b) the salary and allowances, and other terms and conditions of the Chairperson
General Secretary and Members of Advisory Boards;
(c) the funds collected by the Managing Committee and the rule of the Advisory
Boards; and
(d) any other matters which may be prescribed.
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Penalty.
Transitional
Provision.
Savings.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

6
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The preamble of the Constitution of India declares India to be a "Secular Democratic
Republic". An essential condition of a secular country is an arm's length distance between
religion and State. Many State Governments have taken over many religious institutions
and places of worship. In many cases, Government representatives and nominees sit on the
controlling bodies of religious institutions and places of worship. In the absence of any
norms or law in this regard, the principles of secularism are often violated. It is therefore, felt
that a Central law is needed to make sure that
(a) religious institutions are independent,
(b) funds collected by any religious institution or place of worship are used in line
with the tenets of religion or sect or community or deity
(c) there is transparency in use of funds,
(d) prominent persons and religious persons of a religion or sect or community have
a say in managing affairs of their religious institutions and places of worship, and
(e) persons misusing religious institutions and places of worship for their personal
ends are duly punished.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SHIVAJI ADHALRAO PA TIL
November 27, 2017.

7
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 12 of the Bill provides for appointment of the Chairperson, General Secretaries
and members of the Advisory Boards of religious institutions and places of worship.
Clause 14 empowers the appropriate Government to provide salaries and allowances for the
functionaries of the Advisory Boards.
The Bill, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
estimated that approximately a sum of rupees One Crore will be met by the Central Government
as recurring expenditure in respect of the Advisory Boards falling under its jurisdiction.
No non recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

8
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 20 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only the delegation of
legislative power is of normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for management, operation and control of all aspects of religious institutions
and places of worship, which are in direct or indirect control of State and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Shivaji Adhalrao Patil, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2648LS(S3)—21-12-2017.