Short title and 
commencement.
5
As introduced in Lok Sabha
 Bill No. 272 of 2024
THE RESERV ATION FOR THE SCHEDULED CASTES, THE 
SCHEDULED TRIBES, THE OTHER BACKWARD CLASSES,  
DE-NOTIFIED TRIBES AND SEMI-NOMADIC COMMUNITIES  
IN PRIV ATE SECTOR BILL, 2024
By
Shri Ganesh Singh, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for reservation for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, the Other 
Backward Classes, De-notified Tribes and Semi-nomadic communities in  
private sector and for matters connected therewith.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as  
follows:–
1.(1) This Act may be called the Reservation for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled 
Tribes, the Other Backward Classes, De-notified Tribes and Semi-nomadic Communities in 
Private Sector Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “private sector” means any organization, establishment, educational institutes or 
institution which is owned fully by private individual or corporation or limited company 
or an organization in which the Government of India or a State has no financial interest 
and wherein not less than one hundred persons are employed; and 
(b) “prescribed” means prescribed by the rules made under this Act. 
3. ( 1) The Central Government shall give due encouragement to private sector to 
make provisions for reservation in favour of persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes, 
the Scheduled Tribes, the Other Backward Classes, De-notified Tribes and Semi-nomadic 
communities. 
(2) The encouragement as provided in sub-section (1) may include-
(i) special concessions under various existing Central schemes; and
(ii) loans from nationalized banks at lower rate of interest. 
4. The Central Government shall cause to be laid an annual report before both the 
Houses of Parliament about the action taken under this Act.
5. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both the Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that 
the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form 
or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
 
Definitions.
10
5
Government 
provide 
incentives to 
Private Sector to 
make provisions 
for reservation.
Annual Report.
Power to make 
Rules.
15
20
25

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
At present reservation is available in favour of persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes, 
the Scheduled Tribes and OBCs under the State. The number of posts and appointments in 
Government sector has come down considerably, especially after the economic liberalization. 
Now, the private sector is more involved in the nation building activities and infrastructure 
and economical projects. Also, people belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled 
Tribes, OBCs find it very difficult to get into Government service due to less number of posts 
available. At present, there is no provision for reservation in favour of persons belonging 
to the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, OBCs, De-notified Tribes and Semi-nomadic 
Communities in services under private sector. But the Government cannot force private 
sector to make reservation for them. This can be done only by providing concessions and 
special schemes to encourage private sector to provide reservation. 
Hence this Bill.
New Delhi ;                                                GANESH SINGH  
November 14, 2024
3

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill.  As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character
4

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to provide for reservation for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, the Other 
Backward Classes, De-notified Tribes and Semi-nomadic Communities in private  
sector and for matters connected therewith.
_______ 
(Shri Ganesh Singh, M.P .) 