                                                            Bill No. 272 of 2022
THE TERMINA TED EMPLOYEES (TEMPORARY BENEFITS)
BILL, 2022
By
SHRI LA VU SRI KRISHNA DEV ARAYALU, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide temporary benefits to the terminated employees including  payment of
unemployment allowance, medical expenses for a certain period after
termination of service and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of
India as follows:–
1. (1)This Act may be called the Terminated Employees
(Temporary Benefits) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
5
 AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the
Government of that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “employee” means any person  employed on wages by an employer,
either directly or through a contractor, to do any skilled, semi-skilled or
unskilled, manual, operational, supervisory, managerial, administrative,
technical, clerical or any other work, whether the terms of employment be
express or implied, and also includes a person declared to be an employee by
the appropriate Government;
(c) “employer” means the owner or director of any establishment or
organisation which is not owned, controlled or funded by the appropriate
Government or an undertaking and who directly or indirectly or through an
agent or any other person, employs any person on regular, casual, contractual
or temporary basis or exercise control over the wages, hours of working and
other working conditions of his employees;
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(e) “primary health care” means essential health care services including
family planning, immunization, prevention of locally endemic diseases,
treatment of common diseases or injuries, provision of essential facilities,
health education, provision of food and nutrition  accessible to individuals
and provided by the appropriate Government;
(f) “secondary health care” includes second tier of health care system,
in which patients from primary health care are referred to specialists in higher
hospitals for treatment; and
(g) “terminated employee” means an employee whose services have
been terminated by his employer on any ground other than the following
grounds, namely:–
(i) proven misconduct causing physical or mental harm or both; or
(ii) fraud; or
(iii) breach of trust; or
(iv) cheating; or
(v) indulging in misappropriation of money with fraudulent means; or
(vi) having been convicted for an offence by a criminal court; or
(vii) having been convicted for an offence other than a criminal offence
punishable by a sentence for a period of more than two years; and
(h) “tertiary health care” includes third level of health care system, in
which specialized consultative care including Specialised Intensive Care Units,
advanced diagnostic support services and specialized medical personnel is
provided on referral from primary and secondary health care.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time
being in force, every employer shall provide to the terminated employee or
his dependant family members the following benefits, namely:–
(a) payment of unemployment allowance at the rate not less than
seventy per cent. of the wages which were being paid to such employee
prior to his termination in such manner as may be prescribed; and
(b) payment for medical expenses incurred which shall not be less
than fifty per cent. of the total cost in case of expenses under primary
5
10
15
20
Benefits to be
provided to the
terminated
employees.
Definitions.
25
25
30
35
40

3
health care and not less than one lakh rupees in case of expenses under
secondary and tertiary healthcare in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The terminated employee shall be eligible for benefits under
clauses (a) and (b) only if such an employee had been employed for a period
of not less than three hundred and sixty-five days by the same employer.
(3) The medical treatment expenses under clause (b) of sub-section
(1) shall also be provided to the dependant family members of the terminated
employee for a period of one hundred and twenty days from the month
subsequent to the month of termination of the employee.
(4) Any agreement between the employer and employee or the agent
of the employee that seek to nullify the provisions of this Act shall be deemed to
be null and void ab initio.
4. The unemployment allowance under section 3 shall be paid for a period
of ninety days from the date of termination of service of employee or until
the employee whose employment has been terminated is employed again,
whichever is earlier in time:
Provided that where the terminated employee is a widow, the
unemployment allowance shall be paid for a period of one hundred and twenty
days.
5. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being
in force, the benefits provided under section 3 shall not be computed for the
purpose of payment of Income Tax.
6. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official
Gazette, constitute an Authority to ensure implementation of the
provisions of this Act.
(2) The composition of and other terms and conditions of the
Authority shall be such as may be prescribed.
(3) The Authority shall, after a period of five years from the date of
its constitution, review the benefits referred to in section 3.
(4) Notwithstanding anything in this Act, the Authority may, if it
deems necessary, exempt certain category of employers from the application
of this Act.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide adequate funds for carrying
out the purposes of this Act.
8. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make
such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to
it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of
two years from the date of commencement of this Act.
9. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything
contained to the contrary in any other law for the time being in force.
10.(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall
be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament,
Duration of
payment of
unemployment
allowance.
Benefits to be
non-taxable.
Constitution of
Appropriate
Authority.
Central
Government to
provide funds.
Power to remove
difficulties.
Act to have
overriding effect.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry
of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both House agree in making any modification in the rule or both
the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be;
so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.
5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The globalised free and capitalist market has evolved into a system
requiring adequate regulation and monitoring of employees welfare on the
one hand and defining who qualifies as an employer on the other. The tendency
to maximize profits at the cost of the welfare of the employees and exploitation
of the necessity of the workers has resulted in unfavourable conditions for
employees.  The rise of the gig economy, gamification of the employees and
the economy, and the ever expanding informal sector in India has on one
hand brought success and wealth while, on the other hand but has also
introduced uncertainty in the future of the employees.
Today the Indian economy is more than ever exposed to international
eventualities and its effect on the daily lives of the people is highly pronounced.
In light of this, the existing social security net is required to be strengthened
and expanded. Such a step will serve not only the interests of workers but
will also provide adequate financial support to them in distressed time. The
Government of India must ensure that the Directive Principles stated in
articles 38, 39(e) and 42 of Part IV of the Constitution are implemented in
keeping with the responsibilities of a welfare State.
The need is to put an obligation on the State to secure a social order for
the promotion of welfare of the people, provide public assistance in cases of
unemployment, old age, sickness, disablement and also ensure that the health
and strength of workers is not abused due to economic necessity.
The Bill, therefore, with a view to ensure social security, seeks to provide
for payment of unemployment allowance and medical expenses to the
terminated employees and their dependant family members for a certain period
of time.
Hence this Bill.
   NEW DELHI;                     LA VU SRI KRISHNA DEV ARAYALU
March 17, 2020.
PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 117(1)
AND 274(1) OF THE CONSTITUTION
[Copies of Letter Nos. DGE-H-11021/28/2021-SS-I and H-11021/28/
2021-SS-I dated 12 September and 16 November, 2022 from Shri  Bhupender
Yadav, Minister of Labour and Employment and  Environment, Forest and
Climate Change to the Secretary General, Lok Sabha.]
I. The President, having been  informed  of the subject-matter of the
Terminated Employees (Temporary Benefits) Bill, 2022  by  Shri Lavu
Sri Krishna Devarayalu, Member of  Parliament, recommends  the
introduction  of  the Bill in Lok Sabha under clause (1) and  the
consideration of the Bill under clause (3) of  article 117 of the Constitution.
II. The President, having been informed of the subject-matter of  the
Terminated Employees (Temporary  Benefits) Bill, 2022 by Shri Lavu
Sri Krishna Devarayalu,  Member of  Parliament,  recommends the
introduction  of the Bill in  Lok Sabha under clause (1) of article 274 of
the Constitution.
5
[*Bill, being  printed in 2022, the year  in the  title of the Bill has been  changed from 2020
to 2022.]

6
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 6 of the Bill provides for the constitution of an Authority to
ensure implementation of the provisions of this Bill. Clause 7 provides that
the Central Government shall provide adequate funds for carrying out the
purposes of this Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a
recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore per annum would involve
from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees thirty crore  is also likely to
be involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make
rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to
matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal
character.
7

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to provide temporary benefits to the terminated employees including  payment of
unemployment allowance, medical expenses for a certain period after
termination of service and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu, M.P .)