Short title and 
commencement.
AS ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Bill No. 273 of 2022
THE PROHIBITION OF EMPLOYMENT AS MANUAL SCA VENGERS AND THEIR 
REHABILITATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
Sඁඋංආൺඍං Sඎඉඋංඒൺ Sඎඅൾ, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Prohibition of Employment as Manual Scavengers and their 
Rehabilitation Act, 2013.
Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prohibition of Employment as Manual Scavengers and
their Rehabilitation (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.

Amendment of 
section 2.
2. In section 2 of the Prohibition of Employment as Manual Scavengers and their 
Rehabilitation Act, 2013 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section (1),
(i) for clauses (d) and (e) the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(d) “hazardous cleaning” by an employee, in relation to sewer or septic tank means 
entering into a septic tank or sewer to manually clean it;’
(e) “insanitary latrine” means a latrine which requires human excreta to be cleaned 
or otherwise handled manually, either in situ or in an open drain or pit into which the 
excreta is discharged or flushed out, before the excreta fully decomposes.
(ii) in clause (g), in the explanation for clause (a), the following clause shall be 
substituted, namely—
‘(a) “engaged or employed” means being engaged or employed on a regular, 
contract, private, casual or daily wage basis or any other forms of employment;’
3. In section 6 of the principle Act, after sub-section (2) the following sub-section shall 
be inserted, namely:–
“(3). If any government agency, body or officer engage in a contract with a 
private entity for sewer or septic tank cleaning and that private entity employ manual 
scavengers for the purpose, then the government officer concerned shall also be liable 
under this act and shall be punished herewith under section 8.”.
4. After section 7 of the Principle Act, the following sections shall be inserted namely:–
“7A. The Central Government shall convert every manhole in the country to 
machine hole by the December 2024 in mission mode.
“7B. The Central Government shall procure sewer and septic tank cleaning 
machines and employ person either on contractual or permanent basis by October 2023:
Provided that:–
(a) preference in employment shall be given to those who left manual scavenging 
and are currently unemployed but willing to work with machines.
(b) minimum wage per day of the persons employed shall be not less than one 
thousand rupees.
(c) person so employed shall be given health insurance by Union Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare and a register in this behalf shall be maintained by the Ministry of 
all such employees, whether contractual or permanent.”
“7C.(1) No private entity shall employ workers for sewer and septic tank cleaning, 
using machines unless the requisite licence has been issued by the  Ministry of Home 
Affairs.
(2) For issuance of licenses, the private entity shall submit details of machines, its 
memorandum and additional details covered under the Companies Act, 2013 in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 
(3) Every employee employed by the private entity shall be eligible for the benefit 
available under section 7B.
(4) The Ministry of Home Affairs shall have power to conduct enquiry into the 
working of the Private Entity as and when it deems fit and it may revoke its license if 
private entity is found guilty of violation of any provision of this Act.
25 of 2013.
Amendment of 
section 6.
Insertion of new 
sections 7A, 7B, 7C 
and 7D.
Conversion of 
manhole into 
machine hole in 
mission mode.
Central to 
procure sewer 
and septic tank 
cleaning 
machine.
Licence to 
Private 
Entities.

7D. No manual scavenger shall be employed in cleaning of sewer and septic 
tanks without machines that have been approved solely by the Union Ministry of Home 
Affairs.”.
5. For section 8 of the principle Act, following section shall be substituted, namely:–
“8. Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 5 or section 6 or section 7 
shall for the first contravention be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to five years or with fine which may extend to two lakh rupees or with both, and 
for any subsequent contravention with imprisonment which may extend to seven years 
or with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees, or with both.”.
6. For section 9 of the Principle Act, the following sections shall be substituted, 
namely:–
“9. Whoever found guilty for the death of manual scavenger due to hazardous 
cleaning of sewer and septic tank shall be punished under section 304 of Indian Penal 
Code, 1860 and the case shall be tried by a judicial officer with rank of not less than 
judicial Magistrate first class;
Provided that the expenditure of the court proceedings on behalf of deceased 
manual scavenger shall be borne by the concerned State Government in case of State 
judiciary and in case appeal goes to Supreme Court, the expenditure shall be borne by 
the Central Government.”
9A. The dependent family members of the deceased manual scavengers who has 
died due to hazardous cleaning of sewer and septic tanks shall be compensated with an 
amount not less than twenty lakh, within two months of death by concerned appropriate 
State Government.”
7. In section 10 of the principle Act, for the words “except upon a complaint”, the 
words, “either suo moto or upon a complaint” shall be substituted. 
8. In section 13 of the principle Act, in sub-section (1) inserted after clause (f), the 
following clause shall be namely:–
“(fa). He shall be given additional five per cent horizontal reservation apart from 
the existing Scheduled Casts or the Scheduled Tribes reservation in education and 
employment opportunities by 31st May, 2023”. 
9. In section 20 of the principle Act, 
(a) after sub-section (1), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:– 
“Provided that at least six inspectors shall be appointed in each district”
(b) in sub-section (2) after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:–
“(da) maintaining a register scavengers present in his district and record deaths 
of manual scavengers happened during hazardous cleaning of sewer and septic tank;”.
10. For section 21 of the principle Act, the following section shall be substituted, 
namely:–
“21. Offences under this Act shall be tried by not less than a first class judicial 
magistrate. 
(a) An appeal against the order of judicial Magistrate First Class under 
Prohibition on 
cleaning of sewer 
and septic tanks 
without machines 
approved.
Substitution of 
new section for 
section 8.
Substitution of 
new section for 
section 9.
Penalty in 
case of death 
of Manual 
Scavenger due 
to Hazardous 
cleaning of 
sewer and 
septic tank.
Compensation 
to the dependent 
family members 
of deceased 
manual scavenger.
Amendment of 
section 10.
Amendment of 
section 21.
Penalty for 
contravention 
of section 5 or 
section 6 or 
section 7.
Amendment of 
section 13.
Amendment of 
section 20.
Offences to be 
tried by a judicial 
magistrate court.

sub-section (1) shall be filed either to the High Court or to the Supreme Court within 
ninety days of the judgement and appeal shall lie with district and session judge.”. 
11. In Section 31 of the Principal Act, in Sub-Section (1) after clause (d) the following 
clauses shall be inserted, namely:–
“(da) conduct survey and invite application for identification of manual scavengers 
to be filled by the applicant on its website or directly by requested post or through mail:
(db) inquire into the application within fifteen days of receipt of such application 
and reject or accept it within this time and the intimation of rejection or acceptance shall 
be sent immediately on the fifteenth day to the applicant;
(dc) identify a person to be a manual scavenger either suo moto or through the help 
of local authorities or any non-Governmental Organisation.
(dd) review application of a migrant manual scavengers for identification and 
being accepted as manual scavengers he shall be provided all the benefits available 
under this Act and provide assistance as mentioned in this act:
Provided that the migrant manual scavenger shall be a permanent resident of that 
place at least for last five years from the date of filling of application for identification.”.
12. After Section 33 of the principle Act, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely:–
“33A. The Central Government shall start awareness programs in general 
public to attract attention to problems of manual scavenging in India and for this 
purpose a separate chapter shall be introduced in school curriculum for students 
above 6th class, to create awareness and address this discriminatory practice.”.
13. After Section 35 of the principle Act, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely:–
“35A. A video application on the internet shall be maintained by the Central 
Government where any person can upload videos of manual scavengers indulging 
in hazardous cleaning of sewer and septic tanks with relevant information 
including place and people involved.
Provided that:–
(a) general public shall have access to view every uploaded videos on the 
application;
(b) the identity of the person who had uploaded video shall be kept secret; and
(c) only special inspector shall have a direct access to uploader’s identity and he 
shall investigate the case within thirty days and upload the summary of the case and 
the action taken under the video on the application, barring the identity of the parties 
involved.”.
Amendment of 
section 31.
Insertions of new 
section 33A.
Awareness 
Programs and 
introducing 
chapter on 
Manual 
Scavenging in 
India in school 
curriculum.
A Centralized 
Web Application 
where people can 
upload videos 
depicting manual 
scavenging.
Insertions of new 
section 35A.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Prohibition of Employment as Manual Scavengers and their Rehabilitation Act, 
2013 was enacted to completely ban manual scavenging in the country. It contains detailed 
provisions to eradicate this discriminatory and menacing practice. However, even after a 
decade of enforcing the bill, Manual Scavenging still persists in the Country. Still, people 
die cleaning sewers and septic tanks. They are neither provided with any safety gears, nor a 
decent wage. Till date, a specific caste is made to do this menial job. They are stigmatized 
as soon as they are born and even in death, they are given no dignity. Throughout their life, 
they inhale toxic gases, are made to clean man holes with bare body and in case of mishaps, 
better to be described a murder; they are given no justice. It is very unfortunate that since 
its inception, hardly any conviction has been recorded in a manual scavengers’ death case 
under this act.
According to the Government’s reply this year in the Parliament, 347 people died 
during sewer and septic tanks cleaning in the last five years (2017-2022). The numbers are 
so grossly under reported, that it makes it hard to rely on them. As per the National Safai 
Karamchari Finance and Development Corporation’s 20th Annual Report (2016-17) there 
were 26 lakh insanitary latrines in the country, of which 13.29 lakh were in urban areas 
and 12.71 lakh in rural areas. The report states that as of 31st March 2017, 12,742 manual 
scavengers have been identified in 13 states, which is prima facie disproportionate. It is 
inconceivable that 13,000 manual scavengers can excavate 26 lakh insanitary latrines. Under 
the Swachh Bharat Mission, sanitary latrines are being built in large numbers displacing 
insanitary ones but it has aggravated the problem instead of reducing it. These sanitary 
latrines require major buildup of sewer and septic tanks which in absence of machines and 
machine holes are to be cleaned by manual scavengers only.
A very large numbers of manual scavengers are contractually employed by private 
entities. Their minimum pay is not fixed and they are not given any social security or health 
and financial benefits. Municipalities provide the contract to these private entities and often 
turn a blind eye when sewers and manholes are cleaned by these manual scavengers in 
direct contact with human excreta and filth. Several instances have been reported when 
District Magistrates refuse to acknowledge manual scavengers in order to provide them 
rehabilitation under this act. In 2018, insanitary latrines were built for a religious festival in 
Karnataka and Avarnas were brought from Uttar Pradesh to clean these toilets. Permission 
to do all this was granted by none other than the deputy commissioner, who is supposed to 
be responsible for the implementation of the 2013 Act. As far as Panchayats are concerned, 
they are mostly ruled by caste based hierarchies. Manual scavengers even face banishment 
from the village when they come out as manual scavengers to the concerned authorities of 
the villages.
Vigilance committee, State and Centre committee meetings hardly take place and 
there is no accountability as such to keep a check on their working. Lack of efficient 
implementation of this Act has resulted in hundreds of deaths across the country in sewers 
and septic tanks. Here, arises a need to make this act more efficient and make concerned 
authorities accountable.
Hence, this Bill.
Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                                                                                          SUPRIYA SULE
November 21, 2022 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of Bill vide proposed new sections 7A and 7B provides that the Central 
Government shall procure machines for cleaning sewer and septic tanks and convert 
every man hole in the country to machine hole. Clause 12 vide proposed section 33A 
provides for the Central Government to start awareness programms in general 
public to attract attention to problems of manual scavengers. Clause 13 vide 
proposed section 35A provides that the Central Government shall introduce a web 
application where people can upload videos if they encounter any scene of manual 
scavenging. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about ten 
thousand crore from the Consolidated Fund of India is likely to be involved.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

ANNEXURE
Eඑඍඋൺർඍ ൿඋඈආ ඍඁൾ Pඋඈඁංൻංඍංඈඇ ඈൿ Eආඉඅඈඒආൾඇඍ ൺඌ Mൺඇඎൺඅ Sർൺ ඏൾඇ඀ൾඋඌ ൺඇൽ ඍඁൾංඋ 
Rൾඁൺൻංඅංඍൺඍංඈඇ (Aආൾඇൽආൾඇඍ) Aർඍ, 2013.
(Aർඍ Nඈ. 25 ඈൿ 2013)
*  *  *  *  * *
2. (d) “hazardous cleaning” by an employee, in relation to a sewer or septic tank, 
means its manual cleaning by such employee without the employer fulfilling his obligations 
to provide protective gear and other cleaning devices and ensuring observance of safety 
precautions, as may be prescribed or provided in any other law, for the time being in force 
or rules made thereunder.
(e) “insanitary latrine” means a latrine which requires human excreta to be cleaned or 
otherwise handled manually, either in situ, or in an open drain or pit into which the excreta 
is discharged or flushed out, before the excreta fully decomposes in such manner as may be 
prescribed.
(g) “manual scavenger” means a person engaged or employed, at the commencement 
of this Act or at any time thereafter, by an individual or a local authority or an agency or 
a contractor, for manually cleaning, carrying, disposing of, or otherwise handling in any 
manner, human excreta in an insanitary latrine or in an open drain or pit into which the 
human excreta from the insanitary latrines is disposed of, or on a railway track or in such 
other spaces or premises, as the Central Government or a State Government may notify, 
before the excreta fully decomposes in such manner as may be prescribed, and the expression 
“manual scavenging” shall be construed accordingly. 
Explanation.—For the purpose of this clause,—
(a) “engaged or employed” means being engaged or employed on a regular or contract 
basis;
(b) a person engaged or employed to clean excreta with the help of such devices and 
using such protective gear, as the Central Government may notify in this behalf, shall not be 
deemed to be a “manual scavenger”;
*  *  *  *  *         *
6. (1) Any contract, agreement or other instrument entered into or executed before the 
date of commencement of this Act, engaging or employing a person for the purpose of 
manual scavenging shall, on the date of commencement of this Act, be terminated and such 
contract, agreement or other instrument shall be void and inoperative and no compensation 
shall be payable therefore. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), no person employed or 
engaged as a manual scavenger on a full-time basis shall be retrenched by his employer, but 
shall be retained, subject to his willingness, in employment on at least the same emoluments, 
and shall be assigned work other than manual scavenging.
*  *  *  *  *         *
7. No person, local authority or any agency shall, from such date as the State Government 
may notify, which shall not be later than one year from the date of commencement of this 
Act, engage or employ, either directly or indirectly, any person for hazardous cleaning of a 
sewer or a septic tank.
*  *  *  *  *         *
8. Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 5 or section 6 shall for the first 
contravention be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or 
with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees or with both, and for any 7 subsequent 
contravention with imprisonment which may extend to two years or with fine which may 
extend to one lakh rupees, or with both.
Deﬁnition.
Contract, 
agreement, 
etc., to be void.
Prohibition of 
persons from 
engagement or 
employment for 
hazardous cleaning 
of sewers and 
septic tanks.
Penalty for 
contravention 
of section 5 or 
section 6.

*   *  *  *  *
9. Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 7 shall for the first contravention be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or with fine which 
may extend to two lakh rupees or with both, and for any subsequent contravention with 
imprisonment which may extend to five years or with fine which may extend to five lakh 
rupees, or with both.
*   *  *  *  *
10. No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act except 
upon a complaint thereof is made by a person in this behalf within three months from the 
date of the occurrence of the alleged commission of the offence.
*   *  *  *  *
13. (1) Any person included in the final list of manual scavengers published in pursuance 
of sub-section (6) of section 11 or added thereto in pursuance of sub-section (3) of section 
12, shall be rehabilitated in the following manner, namely:— 
(a) he shall be given, within one month,— 
(i) a photo identity card, containing, inter alia, details of all members of his family 
dependent on him, and 
(ii) such initial, one time, cash assistance, as may be prescribed;
(b) his children shall be entitled to scholarship as per the relevant scheme of the Central 
Government or the State Government or the local authorities, as the case may be;
(c) he shall be allotted a residential plot and financial assistance for house construction, 
or a ready-built house, with financial assistance, subject to eligibility and willingness of the 
manual scavenger, and the provisions of the relevant scheme of the Central Government or 
the State Government or the concerned local authority;
(d) he, or at least one adult member of his family, shall be given, subject to eligibility 
and willingness, training in a livelihood skill, and shall be paid a monthly stipend of not less 
than three thousand rupees, during the period of such training;
(e) he, or at least one adult member of his family, shall be given, subject to eligibility 
and willingness, subsidy and concessional loan for taking up an alternative occupation on a 
sustainable basis, in such manner as may be stipulated in the relevant scheme of the Central 
Government or the State Government or the concerned local authority;
(f) he shall be provided such other legal and programmatic assistance, as the Central 
Government or State Government may notify in this behalf.
(2) The District Magistrate of the district concerned shall be responsible for rehabilitation 
of each manual scavenger in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1) and the State 
Government or the District Magistrate concerned may, in addition, assign responsibilities in 
his behalf to officers subordinate to the District Magistrate and to officers of the concerned 
Municipality. 
*      *  *  *  *         *
16. Any person included in the final list of manual scavengers, published in pursuance 
of section 14 or added thereto in pursuance of sub-section (2) of section 15 shall be 
rehabilitated, mutatis mutandis, in the manner laid down for urban manual scavengers in 
section 13. 
*      *  *  *  *         *
20. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification, appoint such persons as it 
thinks fit to be inspectors for the purposes of this Act, and define the local limits within 
which they shall exercise their powers under this Act (2). Subject to any rules made in this 
Penalty for 
contravention 
of section 7.
Limitation of 
prosecution.
Rehabilitation 
of persons 
identiﬁed 
as manual 
scavengers by 
a Municipality.
Rehabilitation 
of persons 
identiﬁed 
as manual 
scavengers by 
a Panchayat.
Appointment of 
inspectors and 
their powers.

behalf, an inspector may, within the local limits of his jurisdiction, enter, at all reasonable 
times, with such assistance as he considers necessary, any premises or place for the purpose 
of,— 
(a) examining and testing any latrine, open drain or pit or for conducting an 
inspection of any premises or place, where he has reason to believe that an offence under 
this Act has been or is being or is about to be committed, and to prevent employment of 
any person as manual scavenger;
(b) examine any person whom he finds in such premises or place and who, he has 
reasonable cause to believe, is employed as a manual scavenger therein, or is otherwise 
in a position to furnish information about compliance or non-compliance with the 
provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder;
(c) require any person whom he finds on such premises, to give information which 
is in his power to give, with respect to the names and addresses of persons employed 
on such premises as manual scavenger and of the persons or agency or contractor 
employing or engaging them;
(d) seize or take copies of such registers, record of wages or notices or portions 
thereof as he may consider relevant in respect of an offence under this Act which he has 
reason to believe has been committed by the principal employer or agency; and
(e) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed.
(3) Any person required to produce any document or thing or to give any information 
required by an inspector under sub-section (2) shall be deemed to be legally bound to do so 
within the meaning of section 175 and section 176 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).
(4) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), shall, so far 
as may be, apply to any such search or seizure under sub-section (2) as they apply to such 
search or seizure made under the authority of a warrant issued under section 94 of the said 
Code.
*      *  *  *  *         *
21. (1) The State Government may confer, on an Executive Magistrate, the powers of 
a Judicial Magistrate of the first class for the trial of offences under this Act; and, on such 
conferment of powers, the Executive Magistrate, on whom the powers are so conferred, 
shall be deemed, for the purposes of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), to 
be a Judicial Magistrate of the first class. 
(2) An offence under this Act may be tried summarily.
*      *  *  *  *        *
32. (1) The State Government may, by notification, designate a State Commission for 
Safai Karamcharis or a State Commission for the Scheduled Castes or such other statutory or 
other authority, as it deems fit, to perform, within the State, mutatis mutandis, the functions 
specified in sub-section (1) of section 31. 
(2) An authority designated under sub-section (1) shall, within the State, have, mutatis 
mutandis, the powers of the National Commission for Safai Karamcharis as specified in 
sub-section (2) of section 31.
*      *  *  *  *        *
33. (1) It shall be the duty of every local authority and other agency to use appropriate 
technological appliances for cleaning of sewers, septic tanks and other spaces within their 
control with a view to eliminating the need for the manual handling of excreta in the process 
of their cleaning.
Offences to 
be tried by 
Executive 
Magistrate.
Power of State 
Government 
to designate 
an appropriate 
authority to 
monitor the 
implementation 
of this Act.
Duty of local 
authorities and 
other agencies 
to use modern 
technology for 
cleaning of 
sewers, etc.

(2) It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to promote, through financial 
assistance, incentives and otherwise, the use of modern technology, as mentioned in sub-
section (1).
*   *  *  *  *
35. No civil court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any matter to which any 
provision of this Act applies and no injunction shall be granted by any civil court in respect of 
anything, which is done or intended to be done, by or under this Act.
*   *  *  *  *
Jurisdiction 
of civil courts 
barred.

LOK SABHA
_________
A
BILL
further to amend the Prohibition of Employment as Manual Scavengers and their 
Rehabilitation Act, 2013
__________
(Shrimati Supriya Sule, M.P.) 