1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI KUNWAR PUSHPENDRA SINGH CHANDEL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the official Gazette, appoint.
2. In article 15 of the Constitution,—
(i) in clause ( 1), after the words "place of birth", the words ",complexion,
economic condition" shall be inserted.
(ii) in clause (2),—
(a) after the words "place of birth", the words ",complexion, economic
condition" shall be inserted; and
(b) in sub-clause (a), for the words "access to shops", the words "access
to places of all types of faith and religious worship, shops" shall be substituted.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 273 of  2016
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Amendment of
article 15.

2
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
After a long period of subjugation, the Constitution of India was framed by the
Constituent Assembly keeping in view the Indian cultural values. Freedom has no value
unless the dignity and equality of citizens in the society get established.  Moreover, removal
of all such factors is essential which are responsible for causing a sense of inequality in the
society. The collective efforts are required to be made to achieve the progress of our nation.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Constitution with a view to provide that the
State shall not discriminate against any citizen on the grounds of complexion and economic
condition also. It is also proposed that every one shall have access to places of all faiths
and religious worship.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KUNWAR PUSHPENDRA SINGH CHANDEL
October 26,  2016.

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * *
15. (1) The State shall not discriminate against any citizen on grounds only of religion,
race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them.
(2) No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any
of them, be subject to any disability, liability, restriction or condition with regard to—
(a) access to shops, public restaurants, hotels and places of public
entertainment; or
(b) the use of wells, tanks, bathing ghats, roads and places of public resort
maintained wholly or partly out of  State funds or dedicated to the use of the general
public.
* * * *
Prohibition of
discrimination
on grounds of
religion, race,
caste, sex or
place of birth.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2934LS(S4)—18-11-2016.