5
As introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 273 of 2024
THE SUPREME COURT (USE OF HINDI IN PROCEEDINGS 
AND OTHER PROVISIONS) BILL, 2024
By
Shri Ganesh Singh, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the use of Hindi language in the proceedings of the  
Supreme Court and certain other provisions and  
for matters connected therewith.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy- fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Supreme Court (Use of Hindi in Proceedings and 
Other Provisions) Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by a notification 
in the official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,–
(a) “appointed day” means the date as may be notified by the appropriate Government 
for the purposes of this Act;
(b) “document” means document as defined in section 2 of the Bharatiya Sakshya 
Adhiniyam, 2023; 
(c) “party” includes any person authorized by the party to the matter or an advocate 
for the party; 
(d) “proceedings” includes pleadings, petition, application, appeal, reference, 
revision, review, affidavit, counter affidavit, other documents filed or received during 
course of conduct of the matter, appearance, leading of arguments, during hearing in 
any matter, judgment, decree or order and such other matters as may be prescribed by 
the Supreme Court or a High Court, as the case may be; and
(e) “Supreme Court” means the Supreme Court of India.
3. (1) From the appointed day, any party to a proceeding before the Supreme Court  
shall have the right to prefer the Hindi language in conduct of such proceedings. 
(2) The party to the proceeding shall make an application to the Supreme Court for the 
conduct of the proceedings in the Hindi language in such manner as may be laid down by 
the Supreme Court under section 4.
4. ( 1) Where any party to a proceeding has made preference for the conduct of the 
proceedings in Hindi language, the Supreme Court shall conduct proceedings before it in 
the Hindi language. 
(2) The Supreme Court may lay down by rules the procedure for conduct of proceedings 
in the Hindi language:
Provided that such procedure shall not entail any additional expense on any party to the 
case for conducting such proceedings in the Hindi language.
5. The Central Government shall,–
(a) bear the expenses of translation of proceedings from Hindi language in 
English language with use of Artificial Intelligence bases tools or translators; and
(b) ensure availability of requisite infrastructure in the Supreme Court for 
conduct of proceedings in the Hindi language in the Supreme Court from the 
appointed day. 
Explanation. — For the purpose of this section, requisite infrastructure includes 
appropriate translation, typing facility in the Hindi language and such other 
facilities as may be necessary for conduct of the proceedings in the Hindi language. 
Measures 
by Central 
Government.
Conduct of 
proceedings in 
the Supreme 
Court.
Right of the 
Party to Prefer 
Hindi language 
during the 
course of 
proceedings.
Definitions.
5
20
25
15
10
30
2
47 of 2023.

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Under Article 348(1) of the Constitution of India, Parliament is empowered to make 
laws for the use of languages other than English for judicial proceedings in the Supreme 
Court. However, the requirement of English alone in proceedings creates a major barrier for 
a significant population of India, who is not proficient in English, thereby making it difficult 
to get justice at the highest level.  
Access to justice is a fundamental right of democracy and is protected under article 14, 
21 and 39 of the Constitution. According to the 2011 Census of India, about 43.63 percent of 
India’s population and more than 52.8 crore people identify Hindi as their primary language, 
while only about 10.6 percent of the population is proficient in English. The Bill seeks to 
remove this linguistic disparity by permitting Hindi-speaking petitioners to “file documents 
and make oral submissions in Hindi in the Supreme Court’’.
Further, Global Best Practices underscore the importance of linguistic inclusivity in 
judicial systems. For example Judicial proceedings are allowed in Canada in both English 
and French, ensuring accessibility in both official languages. In Belgium judicial proceedings 
are allowed in Dutch, French and German, according to regional demographics.  11 official 
languages have been recognized in South Africa, allowing citizens to access justice in their 
mother tongues. In Switzerland, proceedings in legal cases are allowed in German, French, 
Italian and Romance, which reflects its linguistic diversity.  Petitions in 24 official languages 
are accepted in the Court of Justice of the European Union, ensuring fairness and inclusivity.
By enabling the use of Hindi in the judicial proceeding of Supreme Court and by 
implementing translation technologies, India keeps pace with these international standards 
while respecting global standards and its language diversity. This Bill ensures clarity and 
access to justice for all citizens.
Hence this Bill.
New Delhi;                                   G A N E S H  S I N G H  
November 13, 2024

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
 Clause 5 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall take such measures 
as may be necessary ensuring availability of requisite infrastructure to the Supreme Court 
for conduct of proceedings in the Hindi language in the Supreme Court from the appointed 
day. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
However, at this stage, it is not possible to quantify the exact amount of recurring and non-
recurring expenditure likely to be involved.
4

LOK SABHA
a
BILL
to provide for the use of Hindi language in the proceedings of the  
Supreme Court and certain other provisions and  
for matters connected therewith.
(Shri Ganesh Singh, M.P .) 