Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 274 of  2017
THE AADHAAR (TARGETED DELIVERY OF FINANCIAL AND
OTHER SUBSIDIES, BENEFITS AND SERVICES)
AMENDMENT BILL, 2017
By
SHRI KUNWAR PUSHPENDRA SINGH CHANDEL, M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies,
Benefits and Services) Amendment Act, 2016.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other
Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Amendment Act, 2017.
(2)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. After section  33 of the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies,
Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),  the following
section shall be inserted, namely:—
“33A. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
establish an Integrated Complaints Redressal Centre (hereinafter referred to as the
Centre) for redressal of complaints relating to breach of security of identity information
and authentication records of individual including biometric information collected or created
under this Act.
(2) The Services of the Centre shall be made available on all days of the week round the
clock in all the languages included under the Eighth Sechedule to the Constitution.
(3) Any person may register a complaint with the Centre in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(4) Every complaint registered with the Centre shall be disposed of within a period of
forty-eight hours of its receipt in such manner as may be prescribed.
3. For section 42 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be substituted,
namely:—
“42. Whoever commits crime under this Act or any rules and regulations made thereunder,
for which no specific penalty is provided other than this section, shall be punishable with life
imprisonment or with a fine which may extend up to ten lakh rupees or in case of a company,
with a fine which may extend up to five crore rupees, or with both.”.
42A. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish
a Special Court for the purposes of adjudication of cases pertaining to pecuniary
compensation under this Act.
(2) The principal seat of the Special Court shall be at New Delhi with its Benches in
States including at Mahoba district of the State of Uttar Pradesh.
(3) The Special Court and its Bench shall be headed by a Judge having such
qualification as may be prescribed.
(4) The Salary and allowances payable to,  and other terms and conditions of services
of Judge of special Court shall be such as may be prescribed.
Insertion of
new section
33A.
Establishment
of Integrated
Complaints
Centre.
Substitution of
new section
for section 42.
General
Penalty.
18 of 2016.
Establishment
of Special
Court.
5
10
15
20
25

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Aadhaar card has proven a milestone in operating various schemes with transparency.
Aadhaar card has not only provided an identification to citizens but also facilitated the
various functions and activities of life. Incidents of cyber crimes and cyber attacks are
increasing day by day. Hence, there is a need to digitally secure the Aadhaar card data. It is
pertinent to bring the data storage machines—which are being used for Aadhaar data under
the stringent digital security standards. It is also needed to keep a sharp eye on the human
labour engaged in data management so that violation of Right to Privacy of citizens of the
country can be prevented apart from prevention of any other form of loss. Moreover, change
in the information related to Aadhaar card is a continuous process. It is, therefore, necessary
that such changes in Aadhaar card is secured quickly and conveniently.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and
Other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 with a view to:
(a) establish an Integrated Complaints Centre for redressal of complaints relating to
breach of security of identity information and authentication records of individual including
biometric information collected or created under this Act.
(b) establish a Special Court for the purposes of adjudication of cases pertaining to
pecuniary compensation under this Act.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KUNWAR PUSHPENDRA SINGH CHANDEL
November 22, 2017.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that an Integrated Complaints Centre for redressal of
complaints relating to breach of security of identity information and authentication records
of individual including biometric information collected or created under this Act, shall be
established. Clause 3 provides for establishment of a Special Court for the purposes of
adjudication of cases pertaining to pecuniary compensation under this Act. The Bill, therefore,
if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that
a sum of rupees fifty crore per annum will be involved as recurring expenditure.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees five crore will also be involved.
4

ANNEXURE
ABSTRACT FROM THE AADHAAR (TARGETED DELIVERY OF FINANCIAL AND
OTHER SUBSIDIES, BENEFITS AND SERVICES) ACT, 2016
* * * * * * * * * *
42. Whoever commits an offence under this Act or any rules or
regulations made thereunder for which no specific penalty is provided
elsewhere than this section, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to one year or with a fine which  may extend to
twenty-five thousand rupees or, in the case of a company, with a fine
which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both.
* * * * * * * * * *
General penalty.
5

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies, Benefits
and Services) Amendment, Act, 2016.
————
(Shri Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2677LS(S3)—21.12.2017.