1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE WORKING WOMEN (BASIC FACILITIES AND WELFARE)
BILL, 2019
By
DR. T. SUMATHY (a) THAMIZHACHI THANGAPANDIAN,  M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the protection of women from discrimination, and for the basic facilities
like creche, recreational facilities, maternity benefits, hostel and transport facilities,
and for the welfare measures to be taken by the employers and the State for the
women employees working in Government establishments; public sector
enterprises including banks and ports, educational institutions including
universities, colleges and schools; factories, mines, plantations,
agricultural fields, orchards and such other places and for
matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Working Women (Basic Facilities and Welfare)
Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
Bill  No. 274 of  2019
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "child" includes a still born child;
(c) " employer" means,—
(i) in relation to an establishment which is under the control of an
appropriate Government, the person or authority appointed by the appropriate
Government for the supervision and control of the employees or where no
person or authority is so appointed, the head of the establishment;
(ii) in relation to an establishment under any local self-government or
authority, the person appointed by such authority or local self-government for
the supervision and control of the employees or where no person is so appointed
the Chief Executive Officer by whatever name called of the local self-government
or the authority, as the case may be;
(iii) in other cases, the person who or the authority which has the ultimate
control over the affairs of the establishment;
(d) "establishment" include an office of the appropriate Government, quasi
government or department including telegraph office, post office, telephone exchange
a mine, a plantation, an agricultural field, a hospital or nursing home, a shop or any
business establishment, a brick kiln, construction site, any banking establishment,
any private office or house, any school, college university or like institution,
establishment for the exhibition of equestrian, acrobatic and other performances and
any other such place where a women is employed for any work whatsoever;
(e) "factory" means a factory as defined in the Factories act, 1948;
(f) "industry" means an industry as defined in the Industrial Disputes Act. 1947;
(g) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(h) "working woman" means a woman who is employed whether directly or
indirectly through any agency or contractor, as the case may be, for wages in any
establishment, factory or industry.
3. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to ensure that no discrimination
is done by any establishment on gender basis with its women employees particularly in the
matter of payment of wages which are paid to her male counterpart in such establishment.
4. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, every employer shall provide basic child care facilities such as milk, tiffin, clothes,
toys, trained ayahs and other essential facilities for the children of women working in the
establishment.
(2) The appropriate Government shall ensure that every employer of an agricultural
field provide mobile childcare facilities for the working women in his establishment;
 Provided that two or more such employers may provide common childcare facilities
for their establishments.
(3) The appropriate Government shall open such number of creches at such places
as it may deem necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Definition.
Appropriate
Government to
ensure non-
discrimination
and equal wages
for working
women.
Employer to
have childcare
facilities for
working
women.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
5. Every employer shall provide retiring rooms with facilities like bathroom, latrine,
drinking water at the workplace or worksite of the working women and recreational
facilities like radio and television for working women and their children.
6. Every employer shall provide adequate and proper security measures for the
safety of working women in the establishment, factory or industry, as the case may be, and
provide transportation facility free of cost if the working women comes to the workplace
after the sunset or has to leave the workplace before the sunrise.
7. It shall be the duty of the employer to ensure proper and adequate maternity
facilities for the working women.
8. Every employer shall provide hostel and residential facilities both for married and
unmarried working women nearest to their place of work and cheap, safe and quick
transport facilities of such working women.
9. The appropriate Government shall ensure protection from health hazards
particularly for the women working in factories or industries like beedi, tobacco, stone
mines, cashew, fish processing, salt, silk construction projects and such other
establishments as may be prescribed.
10. Every employer shall provide one year child care leave with full salary and other
benefits to the married working women till the child attains eighteen year of age:
Provided that no such facility shall be available for more than two children.
11. (1) The appropriate Government shall maintain a register of working women in
such manner and at such place as may be prescribed.
(2) The appropriate Government may require an employer to furnish for the purposes
of this act, such statistical and other information, in such form and within such period as
may be prescribed.
12. The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force, but save as aforesaid the provisions of this act shall be in addition to and not
in derogation of any other law for the time being applicable to the working women.
13. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of parliament or the Legislative Assembly and the Legislative Council,
as the case maybe, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of
the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Recreational
facilities.
Security
Arrangements.
Maternity
facilities.
Hostel and
transport
facilities.
Protection
from health
hazards.
Child care
leave.
Register of
women
working.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Despite the unabated female foeticides and dwindling population of girls in the country
and the conservative attitude of the society towards women, more and more women are
venturing out of their houses to work to support their families. As a result, the number of
working women in Government services, factories, industries, commercial establishments,
agriculture, mines, fish processing sector, silk industry and so on so forth is increasing day
by day, but their conditions of employment need amelioration. Various basic and essential
facilities which are supposed to be made available to the working women by the Government
and private employers are either absent or not adequate and satisfactory. Unfortunately, in
most of the private sector including agricultural sector, the facilities are rather minimal or
negligible and the working women are an exploited lot there. The existing labour laws also
do not provide for proper medical, educational recreational and other facilities for the
working women and their children. As regards, other social security measures like security,
transport, accommodation have also not been made so far. In many establishments they are
not given equal pay for work. This discrimination has to be stopped.
Hence it has become necessary to provide adequate welfare measures for the working
women.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; T. SUMATHY(a) THAMIZHACHI THANGAPANDIAN
November 4, 2019.
4

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for certain childcare facilities of the working women.
Clause 5 provides for recreational facilities for working women and their children. Clause 6
provides that the appropriate Government to provide adequate and proper security measures
for the safety of working women. Clause 7 provides for maternity facilities. Clause 8 provides
for hostel and transport facilities for the working women. Clause 9 provides for appropriate
Government shall ensure protection from health hazards of the working women. The
expenditure relating to States shall be borne out of the Consolidated Fund of the State
Government concerned. However, the expenditure in relation to Union territories shall be
borne out of the Consolidated Fund of India. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees two thousand
crore may involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees five thousand crore is also likely to involve.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 13 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the protection of women from discrimination, and for the basic facilities
 like creche, recreational facilities, maternity benefits, hostel and transport facilities,
and for the welfare measures to be taken by the employers and the State for the
women employees working in Government establishment; public sector
enterprises including banks and ports, educational institutions including
universities, colleges and schools; factories, mines, plantations,
agricultural fields, orchards and such other places and for
matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Dr . T. Sumathy (a) Thamizhachi Thangapandian, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—3062LS(S3)—15-11-2019.