1
THE  SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FOR ANCIENT MONUMENTS
AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES AND REMAINS IN THE STATE
OF WEST BENGAL BILL, 2019
By
DR. SUKANTA MAJUMDAR, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of West Bengal to meet the costs
of repairs, renovations and preservation of ancient and historical monuments and
archaeological sites and remains including excavation of new archaeological
 sites and remains situated in the State of West Bengal.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance for Ancient Monuments
and Archaeological Sites and Remains in the State of West Bengal Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date  as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title
and
commencement.
Bill No. 275 of  2019
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires "ancient monument" means any
structure, erection or monument, or any tumulus or place of interment, or any cave, rock
sculpture, inscription or monolith which is of historical, archaeological or artistic interest and
which has been in existence for not less than one hundred years and includes—
(i) remains of an ancient monument;
(ii) site of an ancient monument;
(iii) such portion of land adjoining the site of an ancient monument as may be
required for fencing or covering in or otherwise preserving such monument; and
(iv) the means of access to, and convenient inspection of, an ancient monument.
3.  There shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India,
every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as special financial assistance
to the State of West Bengal to meet the costs of repairs, renovations and preservation of
ancient and historical monuments and archaeological sites and remains, including excavation
of new archaeological sites and remains, situated in the State of West Bengal, as may be
undertaken by the State with the approval of the Central Government.
4. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
Definitions.
Special financial
assistane to the
State of West
Bengal.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law.
5
10
15

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The West Bengal is one of the favourite destinations of tourists, both domestic and
foreign. West Bengal located on eastern bottleneck of India stretching from the Himalayas in
the north to the Bay of Bengal in the south, presents some of marvelous landscape features
and natural scenic beauty. Some of India's most preferred travel destinations like; the Darjeeling
Himalayan hill region in the northern extreme of the State and the Sundarbans mangrove
forests in the extreme south.
During the British colonial era, Kolkata enjoyed the privilege of being the capital of
British India and witnessed a spate of frenzied construction of buildings, largely influenced
by the conscious intermingling of Neo-Gothic, Baroque, Neo-Classical, Oriental and Islamic
schools of design. Unlike many north Indian cities, whose construction stresses minimalism,
the layout of much of the architectural variety in Kolkata owes its origins to European styles
and tastes imported by the British and, to a much lesser extent, by the Portuguese and
French.
The different tourist destinations attract the tourists because of various reasons
including its ancient and historical monuments and archaeological sites and remains.
At present, the Archaeological Survey of India is looking after the maintenance and
conservation of 143 monuments/sites. These monuments belong to different periods, ranging
from the pre-historic period to the colonial period and are located in different geographical
settings. They include temples, mosques, tombs, churches, cemeteries, forts, places, step-
wells, rock-cut caves, and secular architecture as well as ancient mounds and sites which
represent the remains of ancient habitation.
Taking care of the monuments is an important duty that devolver on the respective
State Government as well as the Central Government. It needs funds to engage people who
can look after monuments, ensure that the miscreants do not harm them, as also to get the
damaged portion repaired from expert designers and engineers. The Central Government
must provide adequate funds for each monument.
The proper upkeep and maintenance of ancient and historical monuments and
archaeological sites and remains in West Bengal shall boost heritage tourism which will in
turn increase employment, revenue generation and local business in West Bengal.
It is, therefore, necessary that the Central Government should provide special financial
assistance to the State of West Bengal to meet the costs of repairs, renovations and
preservation of ancient and historical monuments and archaeological sites and remains
including excavation of new archaeological sites and remains situated in the State of West
Bengal.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI;  SUKANTA  MAJUMDAR
November 5, 2019.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that there shall be paid such sums of money out of the
Consolidated Fund of India, every year, as Parliament may, by due appropriation, provide, as
special financial assistance to the State of West Bengal to meet the costs of repairs, renovations
and preservation of ancient and historical monuments and archaeological sites and remains
including excavation of new archaeological sites and remains situated in the State of
West Bengal, as may be undertaken by the State with the approval of the Government of
India.
The Bill, therefore, on enactment, will involve expenditure out of the Consolidated
Fund of India. As the sums of moneys which will be given to the State of West Bengal as
special financial assistance by appropriation by law made by Parliament will be known only
after the plans to be implemented by the State Government with the approval of Government
of India are identified, it is not possible at present to give the estimates of recurring expenditure,
which would be involved out of the Consolidated Fund of India at this stage.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to the incurred from the Consolidated Fund of
India.
4

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistan ce to the State of West Bengal to meet the costs
of repairs, renovations and preservation of ancient and historical monuments and
archaeological sites and remains including excavation of new archaeological
sites and remains situated in the State of West Bengal.
————
(Dr. Sukanta Majumdar, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—3095LS(S3)—15-11-2019.