1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI SUNIL KUMAR SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called  the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2015.
2. In the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution,—
(a) existing entries 3 to 9 shall be renumbered as entries 4 to 10, respectively,
and—
(i) before entry 4 as so renumbered, the following entry shall be inserted,
namely:—
"3. Bhojpuri.";
(ii) after entry 10, as so renumbered, the following entry shall be inserted,
namely:—
"11. Magahi.";
Short title.
Bill No. 275 of  2015
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Amendment
of the Eighth
Schedule.
5
10

(b) entries 10 to 14 shall be renumbered as entries 12 to 16, respectively, and after
entry 16 as so renumbered, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:—
"17. Oraon.";
(c) entries 15 and 16 shall be renumbered as entries 18 and 19, respectively, and
after entry 19 as so renumbered, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:—
"20. Rajasthani.";
(d) entries 17 to 22 shall be renumbered as entries 21 to 26.
2
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Twenty-two languages find mention in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution as
national languages which are widely spoken and written by our people. It is believed that it
is in the juxtaposition of these languages only that there is educational, cultural and
intellectual development of our people. Language is not only a tool of communication but
also a symbol of deference and respect. Language also symbolizes history, culture, people,
governance, ecology, politics, etc.
'Bhojpuri' is also known as Bihari, Deswali and Khotla and happens to be a member of
Indo-Aryan branch of Indo-European language family and holds close abuttal to Magahi
and Maithili. Bhojpuri is spoken in the North Central and Eastern region. In particular, it is
spoken in the western part of Bihar, North-Western part of Jharkhand and in the eastern part
of Uttar Pradesh. Many Bhojpuri journals and newspapers are published in the States of
Bihar and Uttar Pradesh.
Bhojpuri is spoken by more than 40 million people in the country.  As per 2001 census,
as many as 3,30,99,497 people have mentioned Bhojpuri as their mother tongue. The history
of Bhojpuri language dates back to the 7th century. Owing to long history of migration from
Bhojpuri areas, this language has made its presence felt in all the continents of this world. It
is one of national languages of Fiji and is called Fiji Hindi.
Bhojpuri culture is popular in the countries like Nepal, Mauritius, Sri Lanka, Thailand,
England and Greece as well. Bhojpuri speaking people account for fifteen to sixty-five
per cent. population in nearly twenty countries. In Mauritius too more than 40 lakh people
speak Bhojpuri. Different forms of Bhojpuri are spoken by Bhojpuri speaking progeny of
plantation workers in many countries like Guinea, Surinam, Fiji, Trinidad and Tobago other
than Bhojpuri, Magahi is one of the principal languages being spoken by the people
residing in the eastern part of India particularly in various districts of Bihar, Jharkhand,
Odisha and West Bengal by lakhs of people. This language carries rich cultural heritage and
conventions of these regions.
Rajasthani is yet another principal language which has rich tradition and is widely
spoken in the States of Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Haryana, Gujarat and Punjab. Nearly
thirty-five million people speak in Rajasthani alone. Endeavours have been made to provide
this language the recognition which it is entitled to. However, this language is yet to receive
proper recognition.
Likewise, Oraon is a popular language of Jharkhand which is spoken not only in the
State but by lakhs of tribal people in West Bengal, Odisha and Chhattisgarh also. This
language has rich tradition history of which dates back thousands of years.
In view of the above, in a bid to promote, consolidate and empower these languages,
it is proposed that Bhojpuri, Magahi, Rajasthani and Oraon languages be included in the
Eighth Schedule to the Constitution and thus given due recognition keeping in view the fact
that these languages are spoken by lakhs of people.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SUNIL KUMAR SINGH
November 17, 2015.
3

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
EIGHTH SCHEDULE
[ARTICLES 344(1) AND 351]
LANGUAGES
1. Assamese.
2. Bengali.
3. Bodo.
4. Dogri.
5. Gujarati.
6. Hindi.
7. Kannada.
8. Kashmiri.
9. Konkani.
10. Maithili.
11. Malayalam.
12. Manipuri.
13. Marathi.
14. Nepali.
15. Oriya.
16. Punjabi.
17. Sanskrit.
18. Santhali.
19. Sindhi.
20. Tamil.
21. Telugu.
22. Urdu.
****

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Sunil Kumar Singh, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2920LS(S3)—02-12-2015.