1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No.  275 of  2017
THE BREAST CANCER (AWARENESS AND FREE TREATMENT)
BILL, 2017
By
SHRIMATI SUPRIYA SULE, M.P.
A
BILL
to create awareness among masses to prevent breast cancer among females, provide
free screening and medical treatment for those diagnosed with breast cancer
and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Breast Cancer (Awareness and Free Treatment) Act,
2017.
(2) It shall extend to the Union territories only.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “breast cancer” means a disease in which cells in the breast begin to grow
out of control to form a lump;
(c) “events” includes seminars, workshops and awareness campaigns;
(d) ‘‘free medical treatment’’  includes supply of medicines, labs labotrary tests
medical therapy and other medical procedure free of cost to breast cancer patients;
(e) “notification” means notification as published by the Official Gazette;
(f) “screening” means the mammography or x-ray of the breast to diagnose
breast cancer; and
(g) “prescribed” means as prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. The Central Government shall take such steps, as may be necessary, for creating
awareness among the masses about the symptoms and treatment of breast cancer through
the means of mass media and by organizing such events as it deem fit.
4. The appropriate Government shall provide for free medical screening in both
urban and rural areas with the aid of local authorities to diagnose cases of breast cancer.
5. The appropriate Government shall provide free medical treatment to every breast
cancer patient in Government hospitals, in such manner as may be prescribed.
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds, from time to time, to the State Governments for the
effective implementation of the provisions of this Act.
7. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force relating to provision of
Special Courts, or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.
8. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made,
before the house of parliament while it is session for a total period of thirty days which may
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry
of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforsaid both
houses agree in making any modifications in the rule of both the houses agree that the rules
should not be made, the rules shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect as the case may be; so, however that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under the rule.
Definitions.
Central
Government
to create
awareness.
Appropriate
Government
to provide
free medical
screening.
Appropriate
Government
to provide
free medical
treatment.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Act to have
override
effect.
Act not in
derogation of
other law.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Breast cancer among females has been a rapid rise in the last decade and according to
Indian Council of Medical Research 1.5 lakh new cases of breast cancer were reported in the
year 2016 along. Moreover, the National Cancer Registry and Indian Council of Medical
Research put breast cancer as the most common cancer in women in India. Breast cancer
accounts for 27 per cent. of all cancers in women in India, with the incidence rising in the
early thirties and peaking at ages 50-64 years. It is castimated that in 28 women is likely
develop breast cancer during her lifetime.
Due to unawareness among masses about the raid rise and severity of breast cancer,
it is usually diagnosed in advanced stage, where the treatment becomes ineffective and
expensive. Recent trends also show that in India younger women are also exposed to the
risk of breast cancer.
The Centre and States Governments should work together to provide free diagnosis
and medical treatment to women affected with breast cancer and help combat this grave
disease.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SUPRIYA SULE
November 28, 2017.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that Central Government shall create awareness amongst
masses about the symptoms and treatment of breast cancer. Clause 4 provides for free
medical screening of women to diagnose breast cancer. Clause 5 provides for free medical
treatment of breast cancer patients. Clause 6 provides that the Central Government shall
provide adequate funds to the State Government for the purpose of this Bill. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
estimated that a sum of rupees one thousand crore would be involved as recurring
expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred crores is also likely to be involved.

5
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to create awareness among masses to prevent breast cancer among females, provide free
screening and medical treatment for those diagnosed with breast cancer and for matters
connected therewith.
————
(Shrimati Supriya Sule, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2753LS(S3)—21-12-2017.