1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI KUNWAR PUSHPENDRA SINGH CHANDEL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment)  Act, 2016.
(2)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No.  275  of  2016
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. After article 371-J of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,
namely:—
"371-K. ( 1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Constitution, the
President may, by order made with respect to the State of Uttar Pradesh or the State of
Madhya Pradesh, provide for any special responsibility of the Governor for—
(a) protection of ownership of land and property of the domiciles of Bundelkhand
region;
(b) entrustment of the right to sell and purchase land only to the domiciles of
Bundelkhand region:
Provided that in case of residents of other States and in case of married women,
the right to sell and purchase land may be undertaken by way of lease for a period of
twenty-one years:
Provided further that the domicile of a particular district of Bundelkhand region
shall not be eligible to purchase land in other districts of Bundelkhand region.
(2) No Act of Parliament in respect of social practices of the people belonging
to Bundelkhand region shall apply to the State of Uttar Pradesh or the State of
Madhya Pradesh unless the Legislative Assembly of Uttar Pradesh or Madhya Pradesh
by a resolution, so decides.
Explanation.—In this article, the expressions—
(a) "Bundelkhand" means districts of Hamirpur, Banda, Jalaun, Jhansi, Chitrakoot
and Lalitpur of the State of Uttar Pradesh and Tikamgarh, Panna, Khajuraho, Sagar,
Damoh, Chhatarpur and Datiya districts of the State of Madhya Pradesh; and
(b) "domicile of Bundelkhand" means such person who on or before 1940 have
been ordinarily residents of the Bundelkhand region and includes progeny of such
persons.
Insertion of
new article
371-K.
Special
provisions in
respect of
Uttar
Pradesh and
Madhya
Pradesh.
5
10
15
20
25

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Vindhyachal or Bundelkhand region is very ancient area of human inhabitation. Even
today the most ancient evidence of human life in India are found here. It is very surprising
that the very area where the early inhabitants of India had set up their ancient accommodation
is today witnessing high rate of elopement. However, on the contrary, by taking advantage
of the poverty and various types of compulsions and difficulties of the residents of the
area, the practice of resourceful people from outside the Bundelkhand region to acquire
land and property using money power is on the rise. This has made significant changes
with regard to land-ownership in the Bundelkhand region. As a result of these changing
circumstances, the residents of Bundelkhand region are feeling cheated at the turn of
events.
Migration is on the rise due to loss of land-ownership and it is posing a serious threat
to the culture and language of the Bundelkhand region as a result of which the danger of
losing the special identity of this society is looming large before them. In addition, the
region has got some unique social practices and there is an urgent need to protect and
preserve the said practices. Therefore, the development of Bundelkhand region is required
to be carried out in conformity with the regional recognitions so that there will not be any
outrage among the people and the culture, language and the special social practices of
Bundelkhand region are protected. As other States have been provided with special provision
under the Constitution, there is a need to include a special provision for Bundelkhand
region in the Constitution for the welfare of the domiciles of Bundelkhand region.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KUNWAR PUSHPENDRA  SINGH CHANDEL
October 10,  2016.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2928LS(S4)—18-11-2016.