1
THE  PREVENTION  OF  BEGGING  BILL,  2019
By
SHRI SUNIL KUMAR SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for prevention of begging and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of  the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Begging Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. 276 of  2019
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Definitions.
5

2
(b) "beggar" means a person who indulges in begging;
(c) "begging" means:—
(i) soliciting alms in a public place, including railway stations, bus stops,
road sides and public transport, by invoking compassion; and
(ii) entering in any private premises for the purpose of soliciting or receiving
alms;
(d) "fund" means Beggars' Welfare Fund established under section 6; and
(e) "rehabilitation centre" means a centre established under this Act where any
person taken into custody on the ground of begging shall be kept till the time he is
rehabilitated.
3. Begging by any person in any manner is hereby abolished.
4. Whoever forces or encourages any person, including a child in his care, custody or
charge, for begging or whoever uses any person as an exhibit for the purpose of begging,
shall, in the first instance, be warned of indulging in such activities and if he indulges inspite
of the warning be punished with a fine of rupees five thousand.
5. (1) Any person found begging shall be arrested by the Police.
(2) Any person so arrested shall be sent to a rehabilitation centre, to be established in
every district by the appropriate Government, wherein such person shall be provided with
facilities for his rehabilitation in such manner as may be prescribed.
6. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Fund to be called the Beggars'
Welfare Fund for the welfare of the beggars.
(2) The fund shall be utilised by the Central Government as and when required for the
welfare and rehabilitation of beggars.
7. (1) The appropriate Government shall formulate such schemes, work out such
plans, including plans for provision of education, and create suitable infrastructure in
every district so as to enable beggars to take up suitable jobs for earning their livelihood.
(2) The appropriate Government shall set up destitute homes for providing food,
shelter and protection, to the old, infirm, helpless and destitute persons so as to discourage
them from indulging in begging.
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions, aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have affect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Abolition of
begging.
Punishment
for forced
begging.
Arrest of
persons found
begging, etc.
Beggars’
Welfare Fund.
Formulation
of schemes
and plans for
beggars, etc.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Despite all efforts made and welfare measures taken by the Central Government and
the State Governments, the practice of begging continues unabated all over the country,
especially in the metropolitan cities and urban areas. There are organised gangs who exploit
innocent children and force them into begging not for the sustenance of these boys and girls
but for gathering alms for the gang leaders and organizers. Some people kidnap children and
force them to go for begging and collect huge amount of money.
The number of beggars in the country has increased manifold. As per an estimate the
number is somewhere around fifty lakhs.
While, the old and infirm beggars can be sent to destitute homes, the other beggars
should be given education and training so that they can get gainful employment.
Therefore, it is high time that a law for prevention of begging be enacted.
Hence, this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SUNIL KUMAR SINGH
November  5,  2019.

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for establishment of "rehabilitation centres" in every
district by the appropriate Government. Clause 6 provides for setting up of Beggars' Welfare
Fund. Clause 7 provides for formulation of schemes and creating suitable infrastructure by
appropriate Government in every district so as to enable beggars to take up suitable jobs. It
further provides for setting up of destitute homes by the appropriate Government. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely
to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of
legislative power is of normal character.
5

MGIPMRND—3097LS(S3)—15-11-2019.
LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for prevention of begging and for matters connected
therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Sunil Kumar Singh, M.P.)