1
THE HANDLOOM WEA VERS (PROTECTION AND WELFARE)
BILL, 2016
By
SHRI RAJESH RANJAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for protection of distressed handloom weavers who are debt ridden, exploited
and are committing suicide for welfare measures like life insurance coverage, interest
free working capital and consumption loan, healthcare, educational facilities to the
children, availability of affordable raw material, modernisation of looms,
housing and compulsory purchase of handloom cloth by Government
and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Handloom Weavers (Welfare) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No.  276  of  2016
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of that
State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "Authority" means the National Handloom Weavers Welfare Authority constituted
under section 3;
(c) "Fund" means the Handloom Weavers Welfare Fund constituted under section 5;
(d) "handloom" means any loom used for production of cloth other than the powerloom
as defined in clause (g) of section 2 of the Factories Act, 1948;
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(f) "weaver" means a person engaged in the production of cloth on a handloom and
includes a person who owns, works or operates on a handloom for the production of cloth;
and
(g) "worker" means a handloom worker engaged by a weaver and who earns wages on
daily or any other basis by working on handloom.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in Official
Gazette, constitute an Authority to be known as the National Handloom Weavers Welfare
Authority for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Authority shall consist of—
(a) a Chairperson having adequate knowledge and professional experience in
handloom sector;
(b) a Deputy Chairperson with such qualification, as may be prescribed;
(c) three members to represent handloom cooperatives;
(d) three members to represent the handloom weavers;
(e) four members to represent the Union Ministries of Finance, Planning, Labour and
Employment and Textiles, to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner, as may
be prescribed;
(f) five members of Parliament, of whom three shall be from Lok Sabha and two shall be
from Rajya Sabha, to be nominated by the Presiding Officers of the respective Houses; and
(g) four members to be nominated by the Government of the States on rotation basis in
alphabetical order.
(3) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property both
movable and immovable and to contract and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.
(4) The term of Office of the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and members of the
Authority and the procedure to be followed in the discharge of the functions of the Authority
shall be such as may be prescribed.
(5) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of the
service of the Chairperson and members of the Authority shall be such as may be prescribed.
(6) The headquarter of the Authority shall be at Hyderabad in the State of
Andhra Pradesh.
(7) The Authority may establish its offices at such other places, as it may deem
necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Definitions.
Constitution
of the
National
Handloom
Weavers
Welfare
Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(8) The Authority shall have a secretariat with such Officers and members of staff
and with such terms and conditions of services as may be prescribed.
4. (1) The Authority shall, subject to guidelines issued by the Central Government in
this regard, in coordination with the State Governments take,  steps for the overall welfare
of weavers including, removal of poverty and indebtedness, raising the standard of living,
modernizing the looms and making easy availability of raw materials at affordable prices
and marketing of handloom cloth.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the Authority
shall,—
(a) formulate and implement welfare policy for the handloom weavers and
workers;
(b) maintain records of handlooms existing in all villages, districts and other
places throughout the country;
(c) maintain a district-wise register of handlooms, handloom weavers and
workers with such particulars and in such manner as may be prescribed;
(d) regulate the service conditions of workers in such manner as may be
prescribed;
(e) fix minimum wages for handloom workers from time to time;
(f) ensure modernization of old handlooms;
(g) encourage and provide all necessary assistance to handloom weavers
cooperatives;
(h) organize exhibitions, melas and such other activities to promote handloom
sector in different parts of the country;
(i) make suitable arrangements for purchase of handloom cloth by Government
agencies on cash and carry basis;
(j) encourage export of handloom cloth and handloom garments; and
(k) perform such other functions as may be assigned to it by the Central
Government from time to time.
5. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Fund to be known as the Handloom Weavers Welfare Fund with a corpus of rupees five
thousand crore.
(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute to the Fund
in such ratio as may be prescribed.
(3) There shall also be credited to the Fund such other sums as may be received by way
of donations, contributions, assistance or otherwise from individuals weavers, workers,
body corporates, financial institutions, firms and partnerships.
(4) The Fund shall be administered by a Board of Trustees, which shall be constituted
by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(5) The Fund shall be utilized for the following purposes:—
(a) providing interest free consumption loans to handloom weavers and workers;
(b) making ex-gratia payments at prescribed rates to each of the bereaved
families of handloom weavers who die in harness;
(c) providing loans at nominal rate of interest for purchasing cotton yarn and other
necessary raw materials to the handloom weavers;
(d) providing insurance cover to handlooms, handloom weavers and workers;
Constitution
of the
Handloom
Weavers
Welfare Fund.
Functions of
the Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(e) providing healthcare facilities to the handloom weavers and workers and their
dependent family members;
(f) providing educational facilities and vocational training to the wards of weavers and
workers; and
(g) such other welfare measures as may be prescribed.
6. (1) It shall be the duty of the Central Government to ensure regular supply of yarn
to the handloom weavers at affordable and subsidized rates.
(2) It shall be compulsory for all Ministries, Departments, subordinate Offices under
the appropriate Government and Public Sector Enterprises to purchase their entire cloth
requirements exclusively from the primary handloom weavers.
(3) The appropriate Government shall ban the export of cotton and cotton yarn.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide to the Authority such sums as may consider necessary for the
efficient functioning of the Authority.
8. (1)  The Authority shall prepare, in such form and manner, as may be prescribed, an
annual report giving a true and full account of its activities during the previous year and
submit it to the Central Government.
(2) The Central Government shall cause the report submitted to it under sub-section
(1) to be laid before each House of Parliament.
9. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years
from the date of the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be, after it is made, be laid
before each House of Parliament.
10. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
that tule.
Central
Government
to ensure
regular supply
of yarn.
Central
Government
to provide
Funds.
Annual Report.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law
for time being
in force.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In a vast nation like ours there are lakhs of handloom units in which millions of weavers
and workers weave cloth on the looms to earn their livelihood. These handloom units are
mainly located in Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh,
Maharashtra and,  in fact, handloom units are there in every part of our country. For most of
the weavers, it is their family profession which passes on from one generation to other and
their entire families are involved in this profession such as dyeing, bleaching, mercerizing,
embroidery, printing, etc. For them, handloom is the only source of their livelihood and
prosperity. Handloom cloth is very popular amongst the people not only in the country but
also abroad, where it is in great demand. In fashion world too, it is very popular.
But, unfortunately, handloom sector is not doing very well and it is at the verge of
collapse and extinction. The foremost reason for this is non-availability of cotton yarn at
affordable prices. The cotton yarn, which is the principal raw material for handloom cloth has
become very costly and it is difficult for the weavers to purchase it from the market. If it is
purchased at market price, then the cloth become prohibitively costly for the buyers. This
situation is leading to closure of the handloom units. One of the primary reasons of costly
cotton yarn is the export of cotton and cotton yarn from the country resulting in scarce
availability of yarn in the country. Other reasons are costly handloom cloth which has gone
beyond the reach of common man, non-purchase of handloom products by the Government
and its organisations, exploitation by private traders, non-availability of easy consumption
and working loans from banks and other financial institutions resulting in exploitation of
weavers by money-lenders, absence of welfare funds for the weavers and any statutory
authority to watch their interest.
Another shocking factor is that this vital sector has been consistently ignored by the
successive Governments at the Centre as well as in the States. As a result, the powerloom
sector and cloth mills have invaded this sector. Their lobby is so strong that it has ensured
non-implementation of the Handlooms (Reservation of Articles for Production) Act, 1985 by
obtaining an injunction from the Court and no Government has tried to get it vacated from
the Court. This way, the very purpose of enacting the law has been defeated. This way, it is
very likely that the handloom sector may vanish in near future, if no concrete, remedial
measures are taken to save this sector.
The most disturbing and sad part is that the frustrated handloom weavers, who are
neck deep in debt trap are committing suicide in various parts of the country. Thousands of
such hapless weavers have already ended their lives and much more are at the verge of doing
so. The circle region of Andhra Pradesh is very much ahead in this regard. Reports of many
starvation deaths of handloom weavers have also come to light, which is no doubt is a blot
on our democratic polity. As such remedial measures have to be taken urgently so that
handloom weavers and handloom factories are saved from extinction. It has, therefore, been
proposed to establish the National Handloom Weavers Authority and also the Handloom
Weavers Welfare Fund for the purpose. Some other miscellaneous provisions have also
been proposed. This will certainly improve the lot of handloom weavers and save them from
starvation and committing suicide in various parts of our nation.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAJESH RANJAN
October 28, 2016.
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to constitute the National Handloom Weavers Welfare
Authority. Clause 4 provides for certain steps to be taken by the Authority for welfare of
handloom weavers and workers. Clause 5 provides for the constitution of the Handloom
Weavers Welfare Fund. Clause 6 provides that the Central Government shall ensure supply
of yarn to handloom weavers at subsidized rates. Clause 7 provides that the Central
Government shall provide Funds to the Authority. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees five
thousand crore may involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees two hundred crore is also likely to be incurred.
6

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
7

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for protection of distressed handloom weavers who are debt ridden, exploited
and are committing suicide for welfare measures like life insurance coverage, interest
free working capital and consumption loan, healthcare, educational facilities to the
children, availability of affordable raw material, modernisation of  looms,
housing and compulsory purchase of handloom cloth by Government
and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto
————
(Shri Rajesh Ranjan, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2931LS(S3)—18-11-2016.