Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
                   
                                                       
          
Bill No. 276  of  2022
THE RIGHT OF WOMEN TO MENSTRUAL LEA VE AND FREE 
ACCESS TO MENSTRUAL HEALTH PRODUCTS   
  BILL, 2022
By
Sඁඋං Hංൻං Eൽൾඇ,  M.P.
A
BILL
to  provide the right to paid leave during the period of menstruation for working women, 
menstrual leave for female students and free access to menstrual health products 
including menstrual cups, tampons and sanitary pads irrespective of status 
or region and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—     
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right to Women to Menstrual Leave and Free Access 
to Menstrual Health Products Act, 2022.
  (2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and commencement.

2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
    ( a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of that 
State and in other cases, the Central Government;   
    ( b) "Authority" means the Female Menstrual Health Products Price Regulating 
Authority established under section 4;     
   ( c) "educational institution" means any secondary or higher secondary school, 
college or institution or University imparting higher education;   
   ( d) "establishment" include an office of the appropriate Government, quasi 
Government or department including telegraph office, post office, telephone exchange, a 
mine, a plantation, an agricultural field, a hospital or nursing home, a shop or any business 
establishment, a brick kiln, construction site, any banking establishment, any private office 
or house, any school, college university or like institution, establishment for the exhibition 
of equestrian, acrobatic and other performances and any other such place where a women is 
employed for any work whatsoever;    
   ( e) "factory" means a factory as defined in the Factories Act, 1948; 
   ( f) "industry" means an industry as defined in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947;  
   ( g) "menstrual health products" means products used to absorb or collect menstrual 
flow including menstrual cups, tampons, sanitary towels, panty liners, sanitary pads and 
articles; 
   ( h) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
   ( i) "working woman" means a woman who is employed whether directly or indirectly 
through any agency or contractor, as the case may be, for wages in any establishment, factory 
or industry.    
    3 . Every women shall be entitled to the following rights:—
(a) In case of working women— Right to paid leave and absence from work for 
three days during her menstruation in any establishment registered with the appropriate 
Government;
       ( b) In case of female students— Right to leave of absence from educational institution 
for three days during her menstruation; and
       ( c) Right to access to free menstrual heath products. 
4.  (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
establish on an Authority to be known as the Female Menstrual Health Products Price 
Regulating Authority for carrying out the purpose of this Act.
   ( 2)  The Authority shall consist of,—
    ( a) Union Minister of Health and Family Welfare, Chairperson, ex-officio;
    ( b) Union Minister of Women and Child Development, Vice-Chairman, 
  ex-officio;  
 ( c) Union Minister of Finance, Education and Labour and Employment, 
Member, ex-officio; and    
(d) six other member to be nominated by the Central Government in such 
manner as may be prescribed:
      Provided that out of six nominated members, four shall be women.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of 
service of members nominated under clause (d) of sub-section (1) shall be such as may 
be prescribed.
Deﬁnitions.

(4) The Authority shall meet at least once in a month and shall regulate its own 
procedure. 
5.  The Authority shall, — 
(a) ensure availability and distribution of menstrual health products free of cost to 
every women;
(b) regulate the prices of menstrual health products;
(c) create awareness, responsiveness and consciousness regarding the importance 
of menstrual health products;
(d) identify and give priority in access to menstrual health products to target group 
including women not enrolled in full-time education or living in poverty;
(e) maintain accounts in accordance with international standards;
(f) collaborate with the appropriate Government regarding availability menstrual 
health products under their jurisdiction; and 
(g) undertake such other functions as it deems necessary for carrying out the 
purposes of this Act.
6.  Every local authority shall endeavour to ensure that menstrual health products are 
available free of cost to every women under its Jurisdiction. 
7.  The Central Government shall for the purposes of redressal of complaints 
under this Act establish grievance redressal mechanism in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by the 
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide adequate funds, from time to time, to the 
State Governments for the effective implementation of the provisions of this Act.
9.  The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other 
law for the time being in force. 
10.  (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.     
        ( 2)  Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in the making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that 
the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form 
or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
 (3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.
  
Duties of Local 
Authority.
Power to make 
rules.
Function of the 
Authority.
Grievances 
Redressal Forum.
Central 
Government to 
provide adequate 
fund.
Act not in 
derogation of 
other law.

STATEMENT  OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 Undoubtedly, menstrual awareness has increased in urban areas, with more 
women opting for sanitary pads rather than cloth. Not only women, people, in general, have 
developed a better understanding of menstruation in metro areas. Innovations in products 
are happening, like menstrual cups, menstrual discs, and much more. 
 Unfortunately, society identifies women as the other half, but only for specific, 
indoor-bound duties, highlighting the biological difference as a mark of inferiority. 
Menstruation and its debilitating nature, though a reality, are often hushed.
 According to research, approximately 40 per cent of girls miss school during their 
periods. The type of absorbent used, lack of privacy at school, restrictions imposed on girls 
during menstruation, the mother's education, and the source of menstrual information were 
all found to be important factors in school absenteeism. Nearly 65 per cent said it had an 
impact on their daily activities at school and that they had to skip class tests and lessons 
as a consequence of discomfort, anxiety, shame, and concerns about leakage and uniform 
discolouration. 
 While access to menstrual products is critical, equal attention should be paid 
to the mental trauma that girls experience during their periods. Girls should receive 
comprehensive counselling on menstruation and other associated issues.  
 The need is to ensure that all who crosses the age of menarche may avail paid 
leave for three days for working women and three days of leave with attendance and 
compensation of academic activities for girl students who menstruate. It is also required  
that access to menstrual products, at no cost shall be available to them as and when required. 
 It is intended to remove any barriers which stop women, girls and trans people 
accessing female health and hygiene products – items which are essential to the health, 
hygiene and wellbeing of those who has crossed menarche till the period of menopause. 
 The idea behind the proposed Bill is that certain circumstances make access 
to sanitary products difficult for women and trans people. These include homelessness, 
coercive, controlling and violent relationships and health conditions such as endometriosis. 
 This bill provides for the novel idea of a type of leave where women and trans 
women may have the option of taking a paid leave for three days from their workplace 
during the period of menstruation. Here 'leave' shall mean full entitlement of a women 
to complete wages during the period of menstruation subject to maximum of 3 days per 
month for a working women and of 3 days for a non-working women including students. 
 Countries like Japan, Taiwan, China, Korea, Indonesia, and Mexico have 
introduced within their legal framework the policy of menstrual leave, for the benefit and 
the welfare of women. Sanitation is considered to be the central pillar of health according 
to the World Health Organisation. Our directive principles of states policy propound 
that necessary provisions shall be made by the state to improve health and hygiene of its 
citizens. Several companies and organizations in the United Kingdom and Australia have 
also introduced within their local constitution, a policy of menstrual leave. But a legal 
framework in India is not envisaged yet. 
 The concept of menstrual leave is an expansion of article 21, the right to life under 
the constitution of India; one should not be expected to work during menstruation, because 
of the menstrual pains, and the body being weak and vulnerable, basic sanitation problems 
like lack of proper sanitary facilities, lack of clean, safe, and private facilities for women, 
and lack of adequate menstruation alternatives result in the infringement of their basic right 
to health and also human right to health. 
 Moreover, due to hormonal actions most menstruating girls and women are 
having mental issues facing those days. Worrying about their physically unfit situation and 

the availability of hygiene facilities, they feel tortured. 
 Our Constitution is always concerned about the protection of the vulnerable as it 
is committed to the principle of inclusiveness. Prioritising women’s health and safety is the 
primary sign of a civilized and egalitarian society.
 Many of developing and developed countries are taking the happiness index to 
evaluate the good governance of their state. As our country is also looking forward to such 
new scales for measuring the well-being of the people, we should also think about such 
revolutionary ideas out of the traditional way of thinking. It is sure that this bill will be a 
milestone in that category which concerns the happiness of nearly half of the population of 
India. 
 Considering all the objectives stated above, in line with the principle of 
inclusiveness as envisioned by our founding fathers, there is a greater urgency for such a 
Bill.
 Hence this Bill.
     Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                                                                    HIBI EDEN      
   November 21,  2022

 FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
 Clause 4 of the Bill provides for establishment of Female Menstrual Health Products 
Price Regulating Authority for carrying out the purposes of this Act. It also provides for 
appointment of member to the Authority. Clause 7 provides for the Central Government 
to establish grievances redressal mechanism for redressal of complaints under this Act.                 
Clause 8 provides for the Central Government to provide requisite funds. The Bill, therefore, 
if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that 
an annual recurring expenditure of rupees fifteen hundred crore is likely to be incurred from 
the Consolidated Fund of India.
 A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be 
involved.

 
 MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
 Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of the Bill.  As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation 
of legislative power is of a normal character. 
                               

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to  provide the right to paid leave during the period of menstruation for working women, 
menstrual leave for female students and free access to menstrual health products 
including menstrual cups, tampons and sanitary pads irrespective of status 
or region and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
————
(Shri Hibi Eden, M.P .)