1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI RAJEEV SATAV, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2015.
2. In article 84 of the Constitution, for clause (b), the following clause shall be substituted,
namely:—
“(b) is, in the case of a seat in the Council of States, not less than twenty-five
years of age and, in the case of a seat in the House of the People, not less than
twenty-one years of age; and”.
Short title.
Amendment
of article 84.
Bill No. 276 of  2015
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
3.  In article 173 of the Constitution, for clause ( b), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:—
"(b) is, in the case of a seat in the Legislative Assembly, not less than twenty-
one years of age and, in the case of a seat in the Legislative Council, not less than
twenty-five years of age; and”.
Amendment
of article
173.
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
After sixty-eight years of independence, India has witnessed a great change. Changes
have occurred not only to various indications of development such as food, health,
education, housing but also considerably on intellectual level. The literacy rate of the
country is continuously increasing so is the development in social, economic, cultural and
intellectual level of common man. Our country and society is witnessing all round
development. Political awareness is also very much evident. The age to vote in the country
is eighteen years and the minimum age to be appointed on a responsible Government post
is twenty-one years. However, on the contrary, the minimum age for being chosen to fill a
seat in the House of the People is twenty-five years. This does not seems to be justified
when we at the age of eighteen years can elect our representative and are eligible to be
appointed on responsible posts at twenty-one years. As such, there should not be any
compulsion to attain the age of twenty-five years to serve the people as their elected
representative in the House of the People.
The Bill proposes for lowering of  the age to twenty-five years and twenty-one years
for being chosen to fill a seat in the Council of States and the House of the People,
respectively. Besides this, the age for being chosen to fill a seat in the Legislative Assembly
of a State, should not be less than twenty-one years and, in the case of a Legislative
Council of a State it should not be less than twenty-five years so that the youth can
contribute in national and public service in a right direction. This would be a change of the
era which would infuse the country and the society with a new energy and speed.
India is a country of the youth, where, the largest youth population of the world
lives. If the population of the youth in the country is largest, their representation in the
Parliament and Legislative Assemblies should also be in proportion of their numbers. As a
result of this provision, politics will reach to better heights. Consequently, the benefit of
the efficient, spilled and dynamic youth having sincere and deep interest in politics will go
to our parliamentary tradition of democratic system. This is the need of the hour, and
hence it is our duty to assimilate all those youths in these important institutions of
democracy, as soon as possible. At the initial stage of life the efficiency and success of the
power of the youth is evident and their maximum contribution may be availed of at this
juncture. In order to fulfil those objectives, there is a need to lower the minimum age for
being chosen to fill a seat in Parliament and Legislative Assemblies and Legislative Councils
of the States.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAJEEV SATAV
November 18, 2015.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
*****
84. A person shall not be qualified to be chosen to fill a seat in Parliament unless he—
(a) * * * * *
(b) is, in the case of a seat in the Council of States, not less than thirty years of age
and, in the case of a seat in the House of the People, not less than twenty-five years of age;
and”.
*****
173. A person shall not be qualified to be chosen to fill a seat in Legislature of a State
unless he—
(a) * * * * *
(b) is, in the case of a seat in the Legislative Assembly, not less than twenty-five years
of age and, in the case of a seat in the Legislative Council, not less than thirty years of age;
and
*****
Qualification
for member-
ship of
Parliament.
Qualification
for member-
ship of the
State
legislature.
4

GMGIPMRND—2937LS(S3)—02.12.2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India
————
(Shri Rajeev Satav, M.P.)