1
THE PAYMENT OF AGRICULTURAL INPUTS GRANTS BILL, 2017
By
SHRI VINOD KUMAR BOIANAPALLI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for payment of non-returnable grants to the farmers for meeting the input
costs in agriculture with a view to promote increased agricultural output
 and decreased farmer credit and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Payment of Agricultural Inputs Grants Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 277 of  2017
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title,
extent and
commencement.

2
2. It shall apply to each and every farmer engaged in agricultural activities in the
country but shall not apply to persons engaged in dairy, piscine, horticultural and any other
non-commercial practices which do not require the use of common agricultural inputs like
fertilizers, machinery, labour or land to yield commercial output.
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "agricultural inputs" includes soil, fertiliser , machinery, tools and other
equipments and substances used in the process of agriculture by the farmers to produce
a favourable yield;
(b) "grant" means a non-returnable payment made by the Central Government
and the State Government to the farmer directly for the purpose of meeting the cost of
agricultural inputs; and
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
4. (1) The Central Government and the State Government concerned, shall ensure
payment of grant to each and every farmer to whom this Act applies for the purpose of
meeting the cost of agricultural inputs.
(2) The grants under sub-section (1) shall be shared by the Central Government and
the State Government concerned in equal ratio.
(3) The grants shall be determined each year in advance by including it in the Annual
Financial Statement after taking into consideration the forseeable factors like monsoon,
drought, floods and crop diseases which affect agricultural output.
(4) The amount of grant to be paid to a farmer shall be determined on the basis of his
land holding.
(5) The grants shall be paid twice in a year, one before the rabi season crop is sown
and second before the kharif crop is sown.
(6) The grants shall be credited to the bank account or krishi account or such other
account of the farmer as may be prescribed:
Provided that every grant paid to a farmer shall be credited to an account which is
linked with the Aadhaar number of the farmer to ensure transparency and efficiency of
payment.
5. (1) For the purposes of making payment of grants under this Act, the Central
Government and the concerned State Government shall maintain records of land holdings
of the farmers in every district and where such records are not available, the Central
Government and the State Government concerned shall expeditiously carry out land surveys
to find out the land holdings of farmers in such districts.
(2) For the purpose of recording, maintaining and updating the data under
sub-section (1), the Central Government and the State Government concerned may take
assistance of local village committees or such other bodies as may be prescribed.
(3) The data under sub-section (1) shall comprise land holding size, crops sown,
common agricultural practices applied, annual yields and such other information as may be
necessary to streamline application of this Act.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power; such
rules may provide for —
(a) the preparation and maintenance of records and other data pertaining to land
holding;
Application
of the Act.
Definitions.
Payment of
grants to
farmers.
Maintenance
of record of
land holdings
of farmers in
every district.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(b) the use of technology and other means to collect such data,
(c) the nature of payments made, in the form of direct benefit transfers, in the
form of credit to accounts, cash coupons, or other methods as it may deem fit,
(d) the minimum requirements to make eligible a farmer to receive benefits under
this Act,
(e) the amount to be paid as part of the benefits under this Act to farmers each
year, by way of notification in the Official Gazette.
(3) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
5
10
15

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
In the current fiscal year 2017-2018, the Union Government has allocated rupees seventy
thousand crores solely for the purpose of subsidising fertilisers. This excludes the sum of
farm loan waivers that are given out by State Governments that also run into tens of thousands
of crores. The plight of farmers in the country as well as the entire agricultural industry is
bleak due to the high dependence on monsoons which are irregular and uncertain. The cycle
of handing out farm loan waivers arises every few years and fails to address the problem at
its roots. The practice of the Government waiving farm loans also damages the credit outlook
as well, since some farmers anticipate such waivers and intentionally choose not to pay off
their debts.
Rather than these repetitive temporary fixes every few years, the Government needs to
pay heed to the needs of the farmers so that such situation of a farm loan waiver does not
arise altogether. Farmers also remain at the mercy of local money-lenders who are not
institutionalised and charge exorbitant rates of interests from farmers which are hard to repay
despite a favourable yield. Subsequently, farmers take loans to pay off previous loans, thus
resulting in a debt trap. This can be done by channelling funds to the farmers to provide for
their input costs. Providing input costs to farmers in the form of a grant can help to ensure
that farmers do not fall victim to the vicious cycle of a debt trap. The Government can pay for
the input costs of the farmers as grants credited directly to their accounts. Such amount can
be paid as a biannual grant, one for the kharif season and one for the rabi season. This grant
if paid on a per acre basis limited by the maximum allowable land holding size as per existing
applicable laws, it will not incur debt on his input costs. In case the farmer is faced with
adversities such as irregular monsoons, droughts, floods, etc. the farmer will not have any
burden to repay any debts and will also save them from harassment at the hands of money-
lenders.
For the purpose of the payment of grants, comprehensive land survey data is required.
In areas where such data is unavailable, steps should be taken to update such data using
latest techniques to ensure accurate logging of land data. Local level village committees may
be engaged for collecting data such as land holding size, crops grown, average costs, etc. to
help streamline the process of calculating amounts to be given to each farmer in different
villages. The grants are also required to be credited directly to the Aadhaar-linked bank
accounts of the farmers twice a year. Linking to Aadhaar will ensure transparency, timely
payments and prevent double payment to farmers cultivating the same piece of land.
As per the Agriculture Census, 2010-11, the average size of operational holding has
declined to 1.15 ha. in 2010-11 as compared to 1.23 ha. in 2005-06. The small and marginal
holdings taken together (below 2.00 ha.) constituted 85.01 per cent. in 2010-11 against
83.29 per cent. in 2005-06. This shows the increasing burden being faced by majority of the
farmers due to decreasing land holding size and increasing input costs. Such circumstances
make agriculture unsustainable since farmers are not able to repay loans that they had taken
to procure fertilisers, machinery, tools and other such input costs.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; VINOD KUMAR BOIANAPALLI
November 27, 2017.
4

FINANCIAL   MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for grants to be paid by the Central Government and the
State Government concerned in equal ratio to every farmer in the country. It also provides
that the grants shall be determined each year in advance by including  it in the Annual
Financial Statement after taking into account the factors like monsoon, drought, floods, crop
diseases, etc. and paid directly to the farmers twice in a year before the rabi and kharif crops
season. Clause 5 provides for maintenance of records of land holdings of farmers in every
district. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. The estimate of funds to be drawn from the Consolidated Fund of India will be
determinable only after the amount of grant payable is decided by the Central and State
Governments, respectively. However, if an amount of four thousand rupees is determined as
the grant payable to a farmer each year, a sum of rupees forty thousand crore would involve
as a recurring expenditure per annum from the Conslodiated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM   REGARDING   DELEGATED   LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for payment of non-returnable grants to the farmers for meeting the input costs
in agriculture with a view to promote increased agricultural output
 and decreased farmer credit and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Vinod Kumar Boianapalli, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2822LS(S3)—22.12.2017.