Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE CHILD LABOUR (ABOLITION)  BILL, 2019
By
DR. MANOJ RAJORIA, M.P.
A
BILL
to abolish the practice of child labour in the country and
for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Child Labour (Abolition)  Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 277 of 2019
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State, and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "child" means a boy or a girl who has not attained the age of eighteen years;
(c) "establishment" includes a household, shop, commercial establishment,
workshop, farm or any residential place where commercial activity is involved, residential
hotel, restaurant, eating-house, theatre or other place of public amusement or
entertainment; and
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. Child labour, in any form, in any establishment in the country, is hereby abolished.
4. Whoever employs a child in  any establishment, shall be punished with simple
imprisonment for a term which may extend upto three years and with fine which may extend
upto rupees one lakh.
5. Any parent or a lawful guardian of a child, who coerces his child into employment,
shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend upto one year and
with fine which may extend upto rupees fifty thousand.
6. ( 1) Any establishment employing children shall remove such children from
employment within a period of six months from the date of coming into force of this Act.
(2) If, after the expiry of the period specified in sub-section (1), any establishment fails
to remove children employed in that establishment, the appropriate Government shall order
closure of such establishment.
7.  (1) The appropriate Government shall establish at least one children home in every
district for rehabilitation of children found employed in any establishment or collecting
rags and waste or begging.
(2) The appropriate Government shall provide a monthly stipend of rupees five hundred
per month to the parents of the children placed in the rehabilitation centres.
(3) The children homes established under sub-section (1) shall provide free boarding
and lodging, education, maintenance and such other facilities to the children, as may be
prescribed, till they attain the age of eighteen years.
(4) Any child who is found employed in any establishment or collecting rags and waste
or begging shall immediately be taken into custody by the police and sent to the nearest
children home.
(5) The appropriate Government shall provide grants to the recognised
non-Governmental organisations working in the field of abolition of practice of child labour
for setting up of the rehabilitation centre:
Provided that in cases of children affected by physical or mental disability, the
specialized rehabilitation centres shall be set up under the supervision of the appropriate
Government.
8.  The provisions of this Act or rules made thereunder shall have effect notwithstanding
anything inconsistent therewith contained in the Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation)
Act, 1986 or any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument having effect of law
by virtue of any law other than this Act.
Definitions.
Closure of an
establishment,
engaging child
labour.
2
Abolition of
child labour.
Establishment
of children
homes and
other welfare
measures for
rehabilitation
of children.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Punishment.
Punishment
to parents or
lawful
guardians for
coercion.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
61 of 1986.

9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the  validity of anything previously done under that rule.
3
Power to
make rules.
5
10

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is sadly the home to the largest number of child labour in the world. An estimated
one per cent. workforce employed in the hazardous industries such as manufacturing crackers,
diamond polishing, glass, brassware, carpet weaving, bangle making, domestic help, mining,
brick kilns, silk manufacturing, agricultural labour and stone quarries, are comprised of children
as workers ranging in the group of 12-18. All this is because children are the source of cheap
labour as they can be paid less wages or can be abused without provoking retaliation.
Poverty is cited as a major cause of child labour, but it is not the only determinant.
Inadequate number of schools or even the expense of providing education leave some of the
children with practically no option but to work. The attitude of parents also contribute to
child labour. Compulsory elementary education may help ameliorate this attitude. The problem
of child labour cannot be eliminated in one stroke. Many countries have enacted laws
providing for ban on buying products of industries where children are employed.
Only multi-dimensional strategies including compulsory elementary education,
eradication of poverty, eradicating parental illiteracy, making child labour illegal will help in
achieving this objective. Stringent legal provisions, severe punishment for violation of laws,
rehabilitation of children already engaged in work have to go along with abolition of practice
of child labour in the country. Therefore, it is high time that a stringent law for abolition of
practice of child labour is enacted.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MANOJ RAJORIA
November  6, 2019

5
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 7 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall establish at least
one children home in every district for the rehabilitation of children found employed in any
establishment or collecting rags and waste or begging. It also provides for payment of
monthly stipend of rupees five hundred to the parents of children placed in children homes.
The expenditure relating the States shall be borne out of the Consolidated Funds of the
respective State Governments. The expenditure relating to Union territory shall be incurred
from the Consolidated Fund of India. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about
rupees fifty crore per annum would involve from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one crore is also likely to be involved.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to abolish the practice of child labour in the country and
for matters connected therewith.
————
(Dr. Manoj Rajoria, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—3121LS(S3)—15.11.2019.