1
Short title
and com-
mencement.
Bill No.  277 of  2016
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE WELFARE OF FAMILIES OF DEFENCE PERSONNEL BILL, 2016
By
SHRI SHRIRANG APPA BARNE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for Constitution of a fund for the welfare of families of defence personnel who
are killed by enemy or terrorist action or get seriously injured during such action.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Welfare of Families of Defence Personnel Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "defence personnel" means a person employed in army or air force or naval
force or in any institution connected with defence of the country and under the Central
Government and who is killed or sustains serious injuries resulting in permanent disability
in any warlike situation or in a terrorist act.
Definitions.
5
10

2
(b) "dependant family member" means—
(i) spouse; or
(ii) son (including adopted sons); or
(iii) daughter (including adopted daughter); or
(iv) in case of unmarried defence personnel, brother or sister who was
wholly dependant on the defence personnel; or
(v) parents, if the defence personnel was their only child.
(c) "Fund" means the Welfare of Families of Defence Personnel Fund constituted
under section 3; and
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Fund to be known as the Welfare of Families of the Defence Personnel Fund with an initial
of capital of rupees five thousand crore.
(2) There shall also be credited for the fund voluntary donations from the citizens.
4. The Fund shall be utilised for providing following facilities in such manner, as may
be prescribed, to the defence personnel or their dependant family members—
(i) free housing facilities;
(ii) free education to the children of defence personnel;
(iii) free health care facilities;
(iv) payment of rupees twenty-five thousand per month to the defence personnel
or his dependant family member, as the case may be, in addition to the pension or the
family pension, as the case may be;
(v) loan facilities for self employment; and
(vi) payment of lump sum amount of rupees thirty-five lakhs to the dependant
family member in case of death of the defence personnel and rupees ten lakhs to the
defence personnel in case of serious injury.
5. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Constitution
of the Welfare
of Families of
the Defence
Personnel
Fund.
Utilization of
Fund.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Our soldiers being the best in world defend the country with dedication, discipline and
utmost commitment. In the recent years, it has been observed that many of our soldiers are
killed mainly due to terrorist attacks or cross border violations. Sometimes they are killed in
mine blast or cross fire. While martyred, the soldiers have umpteen times foiled terrorist
plans of destruction.
In case of death or serious injury of defence personnel, their families remain in utter
poverty. Although the Government is very liberal in giving compensation, yet it is not
adequate keeping in view the rising inflation.
Therefore, as a tribute to our brave soldiers, there is an urgent need  to provide some
facilities to the dependant family members of defence personnel who are martyred or seriously
injured.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SHRIRANG  APPA  BARNE
October 28, 2016.
3

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of a Welfare of Families of the Defence
Personnel Fund by the Central Government. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure
of about rupees Five Thousand Crore per annum would be involved from the Consolidated
Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure will be involved.

5
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for constitution of a fund for the welfare of families of defence personnel who
are killed by enemy or terrorist action or get seriously injured during such action.
————
(Shri Shrirang Appa Barne, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2974LS(S3)—18-11-2016.