1
THE WIDOWS’ WELFARE BILL, 2015
By
SHRI SUNIL KUMAR SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the protection and welfare of widows and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may called the Widows’ Welfare Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) ‘appropriate Government’ means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
Short title
and extent.
Bill No. 277 of  2015
Definitions.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(ii) ‘prescribed’ means prescribed by rules made under the Act; and
(iii) ‘widow’ means any legally married woman whose husband has expired and
who has not remarried and has no source of income or livelihood.
3. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Fund to be known as the Widows’
Welfare Fund.
(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute to the Fund
in such proportion as may be prescribed.
(3) The Fund shall also consist of contributions made by voluntary organizations and
donations or contributions received from other organizations or individuals.
(4) The Fund shall be managed by a Board consisting of—
(i) The Union Minister of Social Justice and Empowerment who shall be its
ex-officio Chairperson;
(ii) one representative of the Union Ministry of Finance;
(iii) one representative of every State Government;
(iv) one representative of the voluntary organizations working in the field of
widows’ welfare to be appointed by the appropriate Government; and
(v) the Secretary of the Union Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, shall
be the ex-officio Secretary to the Board.
4. (1) The Central Government shall formulate a scheme for the protection and welfare
of widows.
(2) The scheme shall provide for—
(i) payment of monthly subsistence allowance to every widow;
(ii) free health care facilities to the widows and their dependents;
(iii) free educational facilities for the dependent/minor children of widows;
(iv) setting up of widows’ homes in every district;
(v) insurance facility for widows;
(vi) financial assistance for marriage of children of the widows;
(vii) loan facilities for self-employment of widows; and
(viii) any other matter deemed necessary or expedient by the appropriate
Government.
5. (1) The appropriate Government shall implement the scheme formulated under
section 4 of this Act.
(2) The expenditure for implementation of the scheme shall be met out of the Widows’
Welfare Fund constituted under section 3.
6. The Central Government shall make provision for suitable employment to every
widow as per her qualifications and experience in services under the Central Government.
7. The appropriate Government shall maintain a register of widows, in such form and
manner, as may be prescribed.
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
Widows’
Welfare Fund.
Formulation
of a scheme
for the
protection and
welfare of
widows.
Implementation
of widows
welfare
scheme.
Provision for
suitable
employment
for widows.
Maintenance
of a register for
widows.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
5

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The condition of widows in the country is very pathetic. There is no scheme for their
protection and welfare. They are left to fend for themselves and nobody takes care of them.
They die of hunger and diseases.
Majority of the widows do not have any source of income. Even their children do not
take care of them.
In these circumstances, it is the responsibility of the State to come forward to undertake
welfare schemes for widows. It is, therefore, proposed in the Bill to set up a Widows’ Welfare
Fund for their protection and welfare.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; SUNIL KUMAR SINGH
November 17, 2015.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of the Widows’ Welfare Fund. The Central
Government has to contribute to the Fund. Clause 4 provides for payment of monthly
subsistence allowance, free health care and other facilities to be provided to the widows.
Clause 5 provides that the appropriate Government shall implement welfare scheme for the
widows. Clause 6 provides that the Central Government shall make provision for suitable
employment for widows. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees three
thousand crore will be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one thousand crore is also likely to be involved.

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Government to make rules for carrying out the
purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the protection and welfare of widows and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Sunil Kumar Singh, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2834LS(S3)—02-12-2015.