5
As introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 277 of 2024
THE DIGITAL PERSONAL DATA PROTECTION 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024
By
Shri Jagdambika Pal, M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy- fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
 1.  (1) This Act may be called the Digital Personal Data Protection (Amendment) Act, 
2024. 
 ( 2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
 2.  In section 9 of the Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023 (hereinafter referred to 
as the principal Act),– 
 ( a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section and explanation thereto shall be 
substituted, namely;–
 “(1). A data fiduciary shall process the personal data of a child or a person with 
disability who has a lawful guardian only after obtaining verifiable parental consent 
Short title and 
commencement.
Amendment of 
section 9.
10
22 of 2023.

or verifiable consent from a lawful guardian, using digitally authenticated consent 
mechanisms which shall be verifiable through digital tools such as two-factor 
authentication, digital certificates, or the consent manager ecosystem. 
 Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub-section,–
 ( 1) Data fiduciaries shall incorporate a range of age-verification mechanisms suited 
to the platform’s risk and service type. 
 ( 2) Parental consent shall be authenticated to ensure compliance with age limits and 
proper oversight.”; and
 ( b) in sub-section (2), the following Explanation shall be inserted, namely;–
 “ Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub-section, “detrimental effect” includes, 
but is not limited to:—
 ( i) the collection or use of personal data that could lead to behavioral profiling, 
targeted advertising, or manipulation, especially for in-game purchases or incentives;
 ( ii) the sharing of personal data that may expose a child to risks such as identity 
theft, online harassment, or addiction;
 ( iii) the processing of personal data that may impair the mental health, safety, or 
moral development of a child.”.
 3.  After section 9 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted:– 
 “9A. (1) The data fiduciaries processing the personal data of children shall adhere 
to the principle of data minimization, collecting only such data as is necessary for the 
provision of services to the child. 
 ( 2) The data fiduciary shall ensure that no personal data of children be retained for a 
period longer than necessary for the specific purpose of processing, unless retention is 
mandated by law in this behalf. 
 ( 3) The data fiduciary shall delete the personal data of children upon termination of 
service or consent withdrawal, as the case may be.
 9B. (1) Any data fiduciary processing a substantial volume of personal data of children 
shall conduct a Data Protection Impact Assessment (DPIA), identifying potential risks 
to child privacy and safety.
 ( 2) The DPIA shall be submitted to the Data Protection Board of India annually along 
with measures taken to mitigate identified risks in such manner as may be prescribed.
 ( 3) Any fiduciary failing to conduct assessments or protect children from systemic 
harm shall be subject to additional penalties under this Act.”.
 4.  In section 12 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), the following provisos shall be 
inserted, namely:–
 “Provided that in case where the Data Principal is a child, the right to request erasure 
may be exercised by–
 ( a) the parent or legal guardian of the child, until the child reaches the age of eighteen 
years;
 ( b) the child herself, once she reaches the age of eighteen years, provided she has the 
capacity to make an informed decision regarding her personal data:
 Provided further that in the event of a dispute between the child and the parent or 
guardian, the Data Protection Board of India shall decide on the right to erasing of the 
personal data of such child.”.
5
10
15
20
2
Restriction 
on processing 
personal data of 
children by data 
fiduciaries.
Insertion of new 
sections 9A and 
9B.
Amendment of 
section 12.
Data Fiduciary 
to conduct 
Data Protection 
Impact 
Assessment 
while processing 
Data of 
Children.
40
35
30
25

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023 represents a significant step in 
safeguarding personal data, including that of children. However, the Act leaves several 
critical issues unresolved, particularly when addressing the digital rights of children, 
especially those from marginalized backgrounds. In India, where digital literacy remains 
low, with only twenty per cent of rural populations being digitally literate and many children 
sharing devices with family members, the parental consent requirement may unintentionally 
exclude children from engaging in vital online services. As the Report of the Group of 
Experts on Privacy (chaired by Justice A.P. Shah) and the Report of the Joint Parliamentary 
Committee on the Personal Data Protection Bill, 2019 highlighted, it is crucial to develop 
flexible data privacy frameworks that do not impede access to essential digital tools, 
particularly for children.
Children from marginalized communities often face disproportionate barriers to access, 
especially in scenarios where parents may not be able to navigate consent procedures due 
to literacy or technical challenges. The current requirement of rigid parental consent, as 
prescribed by section 9 of the Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023, is overly strict 
and limits equitable participation for children in educational and developmental platforms.
The age-gating rules, as currently framed, remain unclear, and there is a need for robust 
age-verification mechanisms that cater to a wide range of platforms with different levels 
of risk. Given India’s diverse socio-economic landscape and aspirations to build a strong 
digital economy, there is a need to provide alternative, flexible methods of age assurance that 
go beyond documentary-based methods and incorporate more technology-driven solutions. 
This can prevent children from being excluded from the digital ecosystem due to logistical 
challenges, while also ensuring their privacy and safety are maintained.
The need is to amend the Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023 with a view to,– 
 (a) strengthen the age-verification process through innovative and diverse 
mechanisms suited to the platform’s risk type;
 (b) establish clearer prohibitions on profiling, particularly in online games and 
services;
 (c) ensure the implementation of Data Protection Impact Assessments (DPIAs) for 
platforms processing substantial amounts of children’s data;
 (d) encourage the use of flexible, digitally authenticated consent systems, such as 
DigiLocker, that can verify both the child’s age and the parent-child relationship in an 
inclusive and streamlined manner;
 The aforesaid amendments will bridge the gap between privacy rights and equitable 
access, ensuring that no child is excluded from India’s growing digital ecosystem due 
to barriers in parental consent while maintaining robust child privacy protections.
Hence this Bill.
New Delhi;                                                                 JAGDAMBIKA PAL  
November 11, 2024

4
ANNEXURE
[Extract from the Digital Personal Data Protection (Amendment) Act, 2023]
(Act no. 22 of 2023)
 * * * * *
 9. (1) The Data Fiduciary shall, before processing any personal data of a child or a 
person with disability who has a lawful guardian obtain verifiable consent of the parent of 
such child or the lawful guardian, as the case may be, in such manner as may be prescribed. 
 Explanation.—For the purpose of this sub-section, the expression “consent of the 
parent” includes the consent of lawful guardian, wherever applicable. 
 ( 2) A Data Fiduciary shall not undertake such processing of personal data that is likely 
to cause any detrimental effect on the well-being of a child.
 * * * * *
 12. (1) A Data Principal shall have the right to correction, completion, updating and 
erasure of her personal data for the processing of which she has previously given consent, 
including consent as referred to in clause (a) of section 7, in accordance with any requirement 
or procedure under any law for the time being in force.
 * * * * *
Processing of 
personal data of 
children.
Right to 
correction 
and erasure of 
personal data.

LOK SABHA
a
BILL
to amend the Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023.
(Shri Jagdambika Pal, M.P .) 