                                                            Bill No. 277 of 2022
THE CRIMINAL LAW (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2022
By
DR. ALOK KUMAR SUMAN, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860 and
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of
India as follows:–
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
5
 AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title,
and
commencement.

2
CHAPTER II
AMENDMENTS TO THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
2. In the Indian Penal Code (hereinafter  this Chapter referred to as the
Penal Code),  after section 304B, the following section shall be inserted,
namely–
“304C. Whoever, being a registered medical practitioner, causes the
death of any person doing the cause of medical treatment due to any
medical negligence shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two  years, or with fine, or
with both:
Provided that causing the death of a person during medical treatment
or intervention done with consent in accordance with the proviso to section 88
of this Code shall not be considered as medical negligence, unless the
contrary is proved supported by a team of medical experts or a medical
Board.
Explanation.— For the purpose of this section, registered medical
practitioner means a person who possesses recognised medical
qualification and registered under the provisions of the National Medical
Commission Act, 2019 (30 of 2019).”.
3. After section 327 of the Penal Code the following section  shall be
inserted, namely–
“327A. Whoever,––
(i) commits or abets the commission of an act of violence against an
healthcare service personnel; or
(ii) abets or causes damage or loss to any property of a healthcare
service personnel, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which
shall not be less than three months, but which may extend to five years,
and with fine, which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees, but
which may extend to two lakh rupees:
Provided that while committing an act of violence against a healthcare
service personnel if a person causes grievous hurt as defined in
section 320 to healthcare service personnel, he shall be punished
with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months,
but which may extend to seven years and with fine, which shall
not be less than one lakh rupees, but which may extend to five lakh
rupees.”.
CHAPTER III
AMENDMENT TO THE CODE ON CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973
4. In the First Schedule to the Criminal Code, under the heading
“I.— OFFENCES UNDER THE INDIAN PENAL CODE”,—
5
10
15
Insertion of
a new section
327A.
20
25
30
35
40
Insertion of
new section
304C.
Causing death
by medical
negligence.
Violence
against health
care service
personnel and
damage to
property.
Amendment of
First Schedule.
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.

3
(a) after the entries relating to section 304B, the following entry shall
be inserted, namely:–
 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6.
304C Causing Simple Non- Bailable Any
death by imprisonment cognizable Magistrate
medical of two years
negligence or fine or both
(b) after the entries relating to section 327, the following entry shall
be inserted, namely:–
1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6.
327A Violence Imprisonment cognizable Non- Court of
against which shall bailable Session
Healthcare not be less
service than three
professionals months but
which may
extend upto
five years and
fine, which
shall not be
less than fifty
thousand but
which may
extend.
5
10
15
20

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Our Constitution guarantees to all persons the right to life and personal
liberty and the equal protection of laws to all classes of citizens. It is
deemed necessary and expedient to enact legislation for the protection of
these rights guaranteed by the Constitution.  In this regard, the
Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Jacob Mathew vs. State of Punjab
AIR2005SC3180; (2005)6SCC1 had afforded necessary guidelines and
procedures, to be adopted by the Central and State Government for
proceeding against a medical professional to be held responsible  under
Section 304A of Indian Penal Code, 1973.
The Ethics and Medical Registration Board of the National Medical
Commission [Letter No. NMC/MCI/EMRB/C-12015/0023/2021/ETHICS/
022426 dated-29/09/2021 in compliance with the mandamus issued by the
Apex Court (vide supra) has framed specific guidelines needed  forprosecution of  doctors  for  causing death  of innocent patients due to‘gross’ medical negligence. The Hon’ble Supreme Court in the aforesaid
judgment (vide supra) had coined a few terms to deal with the cases of death
due to medical negligence. Since the provisions available under section 304
A IPC is generic in nature and as such insufficient to deal with the professional
medical negligence, which is more complex where the help of  medical experts
become necessary. The constitution bench of  the Hon’ble Supreme Court inthe matter of Lalita Kumari vs. State of U.P. & OR’s, [2 SCC 1 : (2014) 1 SCC
(Cri) 524] vide Judgment dated 12.11.2013 (and partially modified on05.03.2014) held that while ensuring and protecting the rights of the accused
and the complainant, a preliminary inquiry(in medical negligence cases) should
be made time bound and in any case it should not exceed 7 days. The fact of
such delay and the causes of it must be reflected in the General Diary entry.
The Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Jacob Mathew vs. State of
Punjab  opined that to prosecute a medical professional for negligence under
criminal law it must be shown that the accused did something or failed to do
something which in the given facts and circumstances no medical professional
in his ordinary senses and prudence would have done or failed to do. The
hazard taken by the accused doctor should be of such a nature that the injury
which resulted was most likely imminent. Negligence to be established by
prosecution must be culpable or gross and not the negligence merely base
upon an error of judgment. And death should have been the direct cause.  The
Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Jacob Mathew vs. State of Punjab
observed that the word ‘gross’ has not been used in section 304A of Indian
Penal Code, 1973, yet it is settled that in criminal law negligence or
recklessness, to be so held, must be of such a high degree as to be ‘gross’.
The expression ‘rash or negligent act’ as occurring in Section 304A of the
IPC has to be read as qualified by the word ‘grossly’.
To cope with the difficulty of unjust litigations against doctors, the
Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Jacob Mathew vs. State of Punjab
issued some guidelines for proper investigations. But almost sixteen years
have passed by and in the absence of a  clear cut section in IPC, our police
responsible to register an FIR , is still groping in the dark to find out a suitable
4

5
Section of law  to proceed with  case of death due to medical negligence
cases, resulting thereby, such cases are registered ‘usually’ under Section
304 IPC, ‘occasionally’ under Section 304 A IPC or ‘sometimes even‘ under
Section 302 IPC. This mix up has made the life of both the complainant and
the accused miserable. The accused is harassed by the police and invariably
the FIR is quashed by the Hon’ble courts for want of proper investigations
and as such justice is eluded for both. This frustrates the general public and
now-a-days, the hapless people, in case of any eventuality, resort to violence
to press for unjust compensation on the spot.
However, in the EPIDEMIC DISEASES (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2020,
some specific Sections to deal with the cases of violence have been added.
Since the incidence of violence is not limited to epidemic period only, the
same provisions are required  to be added  in criminal laws to deal with the
cases of violence during the time of  peace.  The Hon’ble Supreme Court in
the case of Jacob Mathew vs. State of Punjab  quoted that ‘Medical
Professionals in Criminal Law- The criminal law has invariably placed the
medical professionals on a pedestal different from ordinary mortals. The Indian
Penal Code enacted as far back as in the year 1860 sets out a few vocal
examples. Section 88 in the Chapter on General Exceptions provides
exemption for acts not intended to cause death, done by consent in good faith
for person’s benefit. Section 92 provides for exemption for acts done in good
faith for the benefit of a person without his consent though the acts cause
harm to a person and that person has not consented to suffer such harm.
There are four exceptions listed in the Section which is not necessary in this
context to deal with. Section 93 saves from criminality certain communications
made in good faith. The present day scenario demands some new sections in
criminal law to deal with the prevailing situation properly.
Hence this Bill.
   NEW DELHI;                                    ALOK KUMAR SUMAN
November, 22 2022.

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860 and
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
————
(Dr. Alok Kumar Suman, M.P .)