1
THE REPRESENTATION OF PEOPLE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI PRALHAD VENKATESH JOSHI, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of People Act,1951.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Representation of People (Amendment) Bill, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 62 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, for sub-section (5), the
following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
"(5) No person shall vote at any election if he is confined in a prison under a
sentence of imprisonment or transportation after being convicted:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to a person subjected to
preventive detention under any law for the time being in force or is in prison or police
custody but has not yet been convicted.".
Bill No. 278 of 2015
5
Amendment of
section 62.
Short title and
commencement.
43 of 1951.
10
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Section 62(5) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 governing the "right to
vote", stipulates that no person shall vote in any election if he is confined in a prison under
a sentence of imprisonment or transportation or otherwise or is in the lawful custody of the
police. The section was challenged before the Supreme Court as violative of articles 14 and
21, the right to equality and life in Anukul Chandra Pradhan v. Union of India (July 1997).
The Court upheld the constitutionality of the sub-section (5) of section 62 on the rationale
that it curbed criminalisation of politics. Article 14 of the Constitution does permit the state
to make classifications on the application of the law to persons, provided the classifications
are reasonable and have a rational connection to the objective being sought to be achieved.
Further, it took account of practical considerations and ruled that the additional resources
that would be required to allow such persons to cast their vote justified the denial of the
statutory right to vote.
With respect to the argument of criminalisation of politics, it is incorrect to treat persons
who have not been convicted by a court of law as the same as those already convicted and
carrying out their term of imprisonment. Criminal jurisprudence in India mandates the
presumption of innocence unless proven guilty. Denying undertrials and persons in police
custody the right to vote merely because of their location is clearly a violation of the right to
equality and is arbitrary.
The discrepancy in the law is heightened by the fact that persons out on bail can vote.
It is a sad reality in India that not all undertrials are accused of non-bailable offences. Often
they are accused of bailable offence but do not have the resources to pay the surety and get
bail.
With the respect to the argument as to the high costs expended in the process of
allowing undertrials and persons in police custody to cast their votes, it must be noted that
the Act already allows persons in preventive detention to cast their vote. Thus the same
method of postal ballots may be extended to undertrials and persons in police custody.
E-balloting may also be used to allow such persons to cast their vote.
The National Crime Record Bureau's latest figures reveal that there are 2,78,503
undertrials in prisons at present, constituting more than two-thirds (67.6 per cent) of total
persons in prisons. Disenfranchisement of such a large percentage of our citizenry will only
further alienate them. The right to vote lies at the very heart of the idea of full and effective
citizenship and by denying voting rights to prisoners, the State effectively negates their
citizenship status.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; PRALHAD VENKATESH JOSHI
November 18, 2015.
2

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE REPRESENTATION OF PEOPLE ACT, 1951
No. 43 of 1951.
* * * *
62. (5) No person shall vote at any election if he is confined in a prison, whether under
a sentence of imprisonment or transportation or otherwise, or is in the lawful custody of the
police:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to a person subjected to preventive
detention under any law for the time being in force.
* * * *
Right to vote.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of People Act,1951.
————
(Shri Pralhad Venkatesh Joshi,  M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3046LS(S3)—02-12-2015.