1
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
SHRI RABINDRA KUMAR JENA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act,
2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 2 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 (hereinafter referred to as
the principal Act), in sub-section (1),—
(a) after clause (bb), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(bbb) "constitution of an association or body or political party" means
the memorandum or rules and regulations of the association or body or political
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. 278 of  2017
Amendment
of section 2.
43 of 1951.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
party, as the case may be, containing particulars provided under clauses (a) to
(g) of sub-section (4) of section 29A;
(b) after clause (e) the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(ea) "ineligible donor" means:—
(i) a Government company, as defined in section 29B;
(ii) a company that does not comply with the requirements of
section 182 of the Companies Act, 2013; or
(iii) any foreign source, as defined under clause (e) of sub-section (1)
of section 2 of the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 1976;
(eb) "particulars of contribution" shall be the amount of the contribution
received by the political party or the candidate from the political party; the name,
address, and PAN card details, if applicable, of the donor; the type of contribution,
whether cash, cheque, bank transfer or gifts in kind; and the date on which the
contribution was received;'; and
(c) after sub-clause (h) the following sub-clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘(ha) “qualified chartered accountant" means a member of a panel of
chartered accountants, selected for the purpose of inspecting accounts related
to the election by the Comptroller and Auditor General;’.”
3. In section 10A of the principal Act,—
(i) after the words "an account of election expenses", the words "and particulars
of contribution" shall be inserted; and
(ii) in the long line, for the words "a period of three years" the words "a period
of five years" shall be substituted.
4. In section 29A of the principal Act,—
(a) for sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
"(5) The application under sub-section ( 1) shall be accompanied by a
copy of the constitution of the association or body, by whatever name called
and shall contain—
(a) the name of the association or body and, if applicable, any
acronyms or short forms of this name;
(b) the mission, aims and objectives of the association or body;
(c)  the conditions, procedures and requirements for initiating and
maintaining membership in the association or body;
(d) the rights, duties and obligations of membership in the
association or body;
(e)  the general organization and powers of internal divisions of the
association or body, including governing bodies and local bodies at the
national, state, district, ward and block levels, by whatever name called;
(f) the procedure according to which the association or body shall
decide the appointment of its president, treasurer, secretary, and other
office-bearers;
(g) the procedure according to which the association or body shall
elect candidates to stand in local, state and national elections;
(h) the procedure according to which general body meetings can be
requisitioned and conducted;
Amendment
of section
10A.
18 of 2013.
49 of 1976.
Amendment
of section
29A.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
Declaration
and
publication
of
contribution
received by
political
parties.
Maintenance,
audit and
publication of
accounts by
politicial
parties.
(i) the financial structure of the association or body and the
procedure according to which budgetary decisions are enacted;
(j) a specific provision that the association or body shall bear true
faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, and
to the principles of socialism, secularism and democracy, and would uphold
the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India; and
(k) such other matters as may be deemed fit by the Election
Commission.";
(b) in sub-section (9), after the words "name, head office, office-bearers, address"
the word ", constitution" shall be inserted; and
(c) after sub-section (9), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
"(10) Where the Election Commission is satisfied that a registered National
or State political party has failed, refused, or defied, by its conduct or otherwise,
to observe the lawful directives issued by the Commission, including but not
limited to, the provisions of the Model Code of Conduct for Guidance of Political
Parties and Candidates as issued by the Commission in January, 1991 or as
amended by it thereafter, the Commission may either suspend or withdraw its
registration of such party, upon accounting for all available facts and
circumstances and giving the party subject to such penalty a reasonable
opportunity of being heard in this regard.".
5. After section 29A of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"29AA. The Election Commission shall make publicly available, through
electronic and print media, the constitution submitted by each political party under
sub-section (5) of section 29A and shall ensure that constitution of a political party is
available for as long as the party is registered.".
6. For section 29C of the principal Act, the following sections shall be substituted,
namely :—
"29C. (1) Every recognised political party shall maintain, according to the financial
year, complete and true accounts of all amounts received and expenditure incurred by it.
(2) Every political party shall submit the accounts maintained under sub-section
(1) to the Election Commission within six months of the close of each financial year,
duly audited by a qualified chartered accountant.
(3) The Election Commission shall make publicly available, through electronic
and print media, the accounts submitted by each political party under sub-section (2).
(4) The Election Commission shall ensure that the accounts submitted under
sub-section (2) are available for five years after their submission for public inspection,
upon the payment of the prescribed fee.
29D. (1) The treasurer of a political party or any other person authorised by the
political party in this behalf shall, in each financial year, prepare a report in respect of
the following, namely:—
(a) the particulars of any cumulative contribution in excess of twenty
thousand rupees received by such political party from any eligible person in that
financial year;
Insertion of
new section
29A.
Constitution
of a political
party to be
made
available in
public domain
by the
Election
Commission.
Substitution
of new
sections for
section 29C.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
Declaration
and
publication of
election
expenditure
by the
political
parties.
(b) the particulars of any cumulative contribution in excess of fifty thousand
rupees received by such political party from any eligible company in that financial
year;
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, a "cumulative contribution"
shall be the sum of all donations on behalf of any eligible person or company to a
political party within the given financial year.
(2) The report under sub-section (1) shall be in such form as may be prescribed.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), the treasurer of a
political party or any other person authorised by the political party in this behalf shall,
in the report referred to in sub-section (1), disclose the particulars of any contribution
received from any eligible person or company if such contribution received by the
political party in that financial year exceeds twenty crore rupees or twenty per cent of
total contributions, whichever is less.
(4) The report for a financial year under sub-section (1) shall be submitted by the
treasurer of a political party or any other person authorised by the political party in this
behalf before the due date for furnishing a return of its income of that financial year
under section 139 of the Income-tax Act, 1961 to the Election Commission, having been
duly audited by a qualified chartered accountant.
(5) The Election Commission shall make publicly available, through electronic
and print media, the report submitted by each political party under sub-section (1).
(6) The Election Commission shall ensure that the reports submitted under sub-
section ( 1 ) are available for five years after their submission for public inspection,
upon the payment of the prescribed fee.
29E. (1) Every political party contesting an election shall, within thirty days after
the date of an election, lodge with the Election Commission an account of its election
expenses, which shall be a true copy of such account maintained by the political party.
Explanation .—(1) The payment of any election expenditure over twenty
thousand rupees shall be made by the political parties via crossed account payee
cheque or draft or bank transfer.
(2) The account under sub-section (1) shall be in such form as may be prescribed.
(3) The Election Commission shall make publicly available, through electronic
and print media, the accounts of election expenses and contributions submitted by
each contesting  candidate or their election agent under sub-section (1).
(4) The district election officer shall ensure that the aforementioned accounts
are available for five years after their submission for public inspection, upon the
payment of the fee prescribed under Rule 88 of the Conduct of Election Rules, 1961.
29F. (1) Where the Election Commission is satisfied that a political party, without
justification, has failed to lodge audited accounts under section 29C, a contribution
report under section 29D, or an election expenditure report under section 29E with the
Election Commission within such time and manner as prescribed, such political party:—
(a) notwithstanding anything contained in the Income-Tax Act, 1961,
shall not be entitled to any relief under that Act in the given financial year;
(b) shall be liable to a penalty of twenty five thousand rupees for each day
of non-compliance, up to a period of ninety days:
Provided that if default on payment of penalty or lodging of accounts
continues beyond a period of ninety days, the Election Commission shall
43 of 1961.
Penalty.
43 of 1961.
43 of 1961.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
withdraw registration of the political party upon giving a reasonable opportu-
nity of being heard in this regard.
(2) Where the Election Commission finds that any of the report or account
referred to in sub-section ( 1) is false in any particular, it shall levy a fine up to a
maximum of fifty lakh rupees on such political party.
(3) Where, upon scrutiny of the reports or accounts referred to sub-section (1)
or other verification, the Election Committee finds that a political party has accepted
any contribution from an ineligible donor, the party shall be liable to a penalty of five
times the amount of that contribution.".
7. In section 77 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "the date on which he has been nominated",
the words "the date of notification of such election by the Election Commission" shall
be substituted;
(b) after sub-section (3), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:—
"(4) Every candidate at an election shall, either by himself or by his election
agent, keep an account of the particulars of the contributions received by the
candidate after the date of notification of election.
Explanation.—All contributions by a political party to its candidate shall
be made by a crossed account payee cheque or draft or bank transfer.
(5) The total of said contributions shall not exceed such amount as may be
prescribed.".
8. In section 78 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "an account of his election expenses which
shall be a true copy of the account", the words "the accounts of his election expenses
and his contributions received, which shall be true copies of the accounts" shall be
substituted;
(b) after sub-section (1), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:—
"(2) The district election officer shall make publicly available, through
electronic and print media, the accounts of election expenses and contributions
submitted by each contesting candidate or their election agent under sub-
section (1).
(3) The district election officer shall ensure that the aforementioned
accounts are available for five years after their submission for public inspection,
upon the payment of the prescribed fee.
Amendment
of section 77.
Amendment
of section 78.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Constitution of India and the Representation of the People Act, 1951 have pro-
vided for and protected free and fair elections, removed undue influence of money, crime, or
unequally shared information, since 1950. As India's political and financial systems evolve,
electoral laws must regularly be reviewed and reformed to ensure that the lacunae which
encourage misconduct are removed.
The laws governing disclosure of information are crucial for preventing the use of
undemocratic, corrupt, and illegal practices to further political ambitions. Section 29A of the
Representation of the People Act, 1951, specifies the requirements for political parties to
register with the Election Commission, while sections 29C, 77, and 78 provide for the
maintenance and lodging of accounts of donations received by political parties and election
expenses of candidates. To support these current laws, new requirements should be
implemented regarding the disclosure of internal practice and financial status of political
agents. To this end, section 4 of this bill requires a political party to submit a public Constitution
outlining their internal practices in order to register under the Commission, while sections 5,
6, and 7 mandate the provision of financial accounts to the public in order to contest elections.
In these accounts, the majority, if not all, of contributors should be disclosed, and those
parties who fail to follow these rules should be penalized accordingly.
Many cases of electoral misconduct could be avoided if the punishment, or the
possibility thereof, was a strong enough deterrent in the face of significant benefits to a
political career. The penalty for candidates who fail to lodge election accounts, as provided
by section 10A, currently applies for a maximum of three years — an ineffective punishment,
as a disqualified candidate can contest the next election, even if the maximum penalty is
applied to their case. More egregious is the failure of Section 29C to impose an active penalty
on political parties who fail to lodge elections accounts, instead only preventing offending
parties from claiming that year's income tax benefits. Further, Section 29A provides for the
registration of political parties, but does not directly allow the Commission to withdraw this
recognition. If significant electoral offences are committed, the Commission should be able
to sanction political parties through this process. The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the
Representation of the People Act, 1951 with a view to:—
(a) extend the disqualification period such that the candidate cannot participate
in the next election cycle;
(b) expresses the specific power of the Commission to de-register errant political
parties; and
(c) introduces additional penalties for non-compliance of political parties
regarding the submission of financial accounts, including fines and de-recognition of
transgressing political parties.
Hence, this Bill.
N
EW DELHI;
July 3, 2017 RABINDRA KUMAR JENA
6

PRESIDENT’S  RECOMMENDATION  UNDER  ARTICLE 117(l), 117(3)  AND  274(1)
OF THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
————
[Copy of letter No. H.11018/10/2017-Leg. II dated 30 November, 2017 from
Shri P.P. Chaudhary, Minister of State in the Ministry of Law and Justice and Corporate
Affairs to the Secretary General, Lok Sabha].
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Representation of the
People (Amendment) Bill, 2017 (Amendment of section 2 etc.) by Shri Rabindra Kumar Jena,
M.P., recommends the introduction under articles 117(1) and 274(1) and the consideration of
the Bill in Lok Sabha under article 117(3) of the Constitution.
7

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill vide proposed section 29AA, provides for the Election Commission
to make publicly available the constitution of a political party. Clause 6, vide proposed
sections 29C, 29D and 29E provides for the Election Commission to make publicly available
the details of accounts, contributions and expenditure, respectively of a political party. The
Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It
is estimated that a sum of about rupees five crore may involve as recurring expenditure per
annum.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
8

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE REPRESENTATION OF PEOPLE ACT, 1951
(43 OF 1951)
* * * * * *
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* * * * * *
(a) each of the expressions defined in section 2 or sub-section (1) of section 27
of the Representation of the People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950), but not defined in this Act,
shall have the same meaning as in that Act;
* * * * * *
(e) "elector" in relation to a constituency means a person whose name is entered
in the electoral roll of that constituency for the time being in force and who is not
subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in section 16 of the Representation
of the People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950);
* * * * * *
(h) "public holiday" means any day which is a public holiday for the purposes of
section 25 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 (26 of 1881);
* * * * * *
10A. If the Election Commission is satisfied that a person—
(a) has failed to lodge an account of election expenses within the time and in the
manner required by or under this Act; and
(b) has no good reason or justification for the failure, the Election Commission
shall, by order published in the Official Gazette, declare him to be disqualified and any
such person shall be disqualified for a period of three years from the date of the order.
* * * * * *
29A. (1) Any association or body of individual citizens of India calling itself a political
party and intending to avail itself of the provisions of this Part shall make an application to
the Election Commission for its registration as a political party for the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every such application shall be made,—
(a) if the association or body is in existence at the commencement of the
Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, 1988 (1 of 1989), within sixty days next
following such commencement;
(3) Every application under sub-section ( 1 ) shall be signed by the chief executive
officer of the association or body (whether such chief executive officer is known as Secretary
or by any other designation) and presented to the Secretary to the Commission or sent to
such Secretary by registered post.
(4) Every such application shall contain the following particulars, namely:—
(a) the name of the association or body;
(b) the State in which its head office is situated;
(c) the address to which letters and other communications meant for it should be
sent;
9
Interpretation.
Disqualification
for failure to
lodge account
of election
expenses.
Registration
with the
Election
Commission of
associations
and bodies as
political
parties.

10
(d) the names of its president, secretary, treasurer and other office-bearers;
(e) the numerical strength of its members, and if there are categories of its members,
the numerical strength in each category;
(f) whether it has any local units; if so, at what levels;
(g) whether it is represented by any member or members in either House of
Parliament or of any State Legislature; if so, the number of such member or members.
(5) The application under sub-section (1) shall be accompanied by a copy of the
memorandum or rules and regulations of the association or body, by whatever name called,
and such memorandum or rules and regulations shall contain a specific provision that the
association or body shall bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law
established, and to the principles of socialism, secularism and democracy, and would uphold
the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India.
(6) The Commission may call for such other particulars as it may deem fit from the
association or body.
(7) After considering all the particulars as aforesaid in its possession and any other
necessary and relevant factors and after giving the representatives of the association or
body reasonable opportunity of being heard, the Commission shall decide either to register
the association or body as a political party for the purposes of this Part, or not so to register
it; and the Commission shall communicate its decision to the association or body:
Provided that no association or body shall be registered as a political party under this
sub-section unless the memorandum or rules and regulations of such association or body
conform to the provisions of sub-section (5).
(8) The decision of the Commission shall be final.
(9) After an association or body has been registered as a political party as aforesaid,
any change in its name, head office, office-bearers, address or in any other material matters
shall be communicated to the Commission without delay.
* * * * * *
29C. (1) The treasurer of a political party or any other person authorised by the
political party in this behalf shall, in each financial year, prepare a report in respect of the
following, namely: —
(a) the contribution in excess of twenty thousand rupees received by such
political party from any person in that financial year;
(b) the contribution in excess of twenty thousand rupees received by such
political party from companies other than Government companies in that financial year.
(2) The report under sub-section (1) shall be in such form as may be prescribed.
(3) The report for a financial year under sub-section (1) shall be submitted by the
treasurer of a political party or any other person authorised by the political party in this
behalf before the due date for furnishing a return of its income of that financial year under
section 139 of the Income-tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961), to the Election Commission.
(4) Where the treasurer of any political party or any other person authorised by the
political party in this behalf fails to submit a report under sub-section (3) then, notwithstanding
anything contained in the Income-tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961), such political party shall not be
entitled to any tax relief under that Act.
* * * * * *
Declaration of
donation
received by
the political
parties.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
————
(Shri Rabindra Kumar Jena, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2992LSLS(S3)—22-12-2017.