 
As ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Bill No. 279 of 2022
THE AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE PRICE FIXATION 
BOARD BILL, 2022
By
Aൽඏ. A.M. ARIFF, M.P.
ൺ
BILL
to provide for the establishment of an Agricultural Produce Price Fixation Board to fix the 
remunerative support price of agricultural produce including fruits and vegetables
on annual and seasonal basis and for timely intervention by the Government at the 
time of steep fall in prices of such produce in the open market and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Agricultural Produce Price Fixation Board  Act, 2022. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) "agricultural produce" includes wheat, paddy, pulses, sugarcane, cotton, 
Short title and 
extent.
5 Deﬁnitions.

oil seeds, coarse grains like maize, millet, jowar, bajra, gram, soyabean, fruits and 
vegetables such as potato, onion, tomato, cauliflower, cabbage including such other 
agricultural or horticultural produce which are used for human consumption or for any 
medicinal purposes;
(b) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the State Government 
and in the other cases,  the Central Government;
(c) "Board" means the Agricultural Produce Price Fixation Board established under 
section 3;
(d) "Government agency" means and includes any agency of the Government by 
whatever name called or which receives grants from the Government and which is 
engaged in procurement, distribution and canalising agricultural produces; and 
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but not later than six months 
from the date of commencement of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute a Board to be known as Agricultural Produce Price Fixation Board.
(2) The headquarters of the Board shall be at Alappuzha in the State of Kerala. 
(3) The Board shall consist of:— 
(a) a Chairperson and a Deputy Chairperson having relevant educational 
qualifications and experience in field of agriculture, to be appointed by the 
Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed; 
(b) one member from each zonal office of the Board set up under
sub-section (5); 
(c) one member each to represent the Union Ministries dealing with Agriculture, 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution, Food Processing Industries, 
Chemicals and Fertilisers and Finance; 
(d) one member to represent the Indian Council of Agricultural Research; 
(e) four members to be appointed by the Central Government from amongst 
the farmers and agricultural labourers, in rotation from different States in such 
manner as may be prescribed; and 
(f) four members of Parliament, of whom two shall be from Lok Sabha and two 
from Rajya Sabha, to be nominated by the Presiding Officers of the respective Houses.
(4) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual succession 
and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose off property, both movable and 
immovable, and to contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
(5) The Board shall set up one zonal office each in the eastern, western, northern, 
north eastern, central and southern parts of the country comprising of such States 
and Union territories, as may be determined by the Board and each zonal office shall 
consist of such number of members as may be prescribed.
(6) The term of office of the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and the manner of filling 
vacancies and the procedure to be followed in the discharge of their functions shall be such 
as may be prescribed.
4. (1) The Board shall — 
(i) fix and declare minimum remunerative support prices of agricultural produce 
before every sowing season after examining the recommendations of all the zonal 
offices: 
Provided that different prices may be fixed for different produce and for different 
zones; 
Constitution of an Agricultural Produce Price Fixation Board.
10
5
25
20
30
15
35
40
Functions of the 
Board.
2
45

(ii) fix the issue prices of foodgrains for retail sale to consumers every year;
(iii) perform its functions in close liaison with Government agencies, institutions 
including co-operative societies and such other authorities concerned with the 
procurement, supply, distribution, trade of agricultural produce and avoid duplication 
of efforts; and 
(iv) give wide publicity to the remunerative prices fixed for agricultural 
produce through electronic and print media throughout the country.
5. (1) It shall be the duty of each zonal office of the Board to recommend to the Board the 
remunerative support prices of agricultural produce in respect of its jurisdiction. 
(2) Every zonal office of the Board, before recommending the minimum support 
remunerative prices of agricultural produce, shall take into account all relevant factors, but 
in particular, the following, namely:— 
(a) average capital investment made by farmers in growing the produce; 
(b) average labour charges;
(c) interest on loans borrowed for growing the produce; 
(d) premium for crop insurance, if any; 
(e) maintenance cost of the land; 
(f) expenditure on fertilizers, pesticides, seeds and electricity, etc.; 
(g) any concession, rebate or subsidy provided by Government in relation to 
agricultural produce; 
(h) prevailing open market price of each product; 
(i) climatic conditions and incidence of natural calamities like floods, droughts, 
hailstorms, cyclones and untimely rains; and 
(j) average monthly household expenditure of a farmer.
6. (1) In case any farmer fails to sell his produce in the open market at the desired 
prices, the Central Government shall purchase his produce at the price fixed by the 
Board through Government agencies. 
(2) If there is a steep fall in the prices of agricultural produce in the open market, it shall 
be the duty of the appropriate Government to intervene through its agencies in the market 
to ensure that farmers shall get minimum support price of the produce and take such other 
measures as it may deem necessary to handle the situation and protect the interests of the 
farmers.
7. (1) If any farmer is not satisfied with the declaration of price fixed for any agricultural 
produce, he may file an appeal to the Authority designated for the purpose by the Central 
Government within thirty days for reviewing of such price. 
(2) The designated Authority specified under sub-section (1), shall give its decision 
within fifteen days from the date of filing of such appeal.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by 
law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the Board for carrying out the purpose 
of this Act.
9. The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall have effect 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time 
being in force.
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notiﬁcation in the Oﬃcial Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
3
Function of the zonal office.
10
5
25
20
30
15
35
40
45
Government agencies to purchase agricultural produce.Appeal to CentralGovernment regarding price fixation.Central Government to provide funds.Act to have overriding effect.
Power to make 
rules.

thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or
the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modiﬁcation in the 
rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter 
have eﬀect only in such modiﬁed form or be of no eﬀect, as the case may be; so, however, 
that any such modiﬁcation or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of any-
thing previously done under that rule.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The farmers always expect remunerative prices of their agricultural produce in order to 
repay their loans which they borrowed for growing agricultural produce and to meet social 
obligations and household expenditure. But unfortunately, it is an usual phenomenon that 
in the immediate post-harvest period the prices of most of the agricultural produce decline 
very sharply and farmers are left high and dry and at the mercy of unscrupulous traders 
who exploit them to the maximum possible. Data reveals that very often, even the cost of 
production is not recovered by farmers.
At present, the Commission on Agricultural Costs and Prices under the Union Ministry 
of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare for determining the Minimum Support Price (MSP), 
considers (1) Demand and supply; (2) Cost of Production; (3) Price trends in the market, 
both domestic and international; (4) Inter crop price parity; (5) Terms of trade between 
agriculture and non-agriculture; (6) Likely implication of MSP on consumers of that product. 
Using these various parameters, MSP is often fixed even below the cost of production, 
ignoring the right to life and livelihood of the producer. Therefore, there is a need for price 
determination for farmers to take the sole mandate of securing adequate net returns to a 
farmer, over and above the comprehensive cost of production, rather than considering other 
parameters. In view of the above, to uphold the right to life and livelihood of farmers, which 
are their fundamental rights, it is proposed to constitute a statutory autonomous Agricultural 
Produce Price Fixation Board having representation of farmers and agricultural labourers to 
fix the remunerative prices for agricultural produce.
Hence this Bill.
      Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                    A.M. ARIFF 
13, 2022

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of Agricultural Produce Price Fixation 
Board.  It further provides for setting up of zonal offices. Clause 4 inter alia provides that the 
Board shall give wide publicity through electronic and print media about the prices fixed.  
Clause 6 provides that the Central Government shall purchase agricultural produce at the 
prices fixed by the Board.    Clause 8 provides for payment of adequate funds to the Board 
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.  The Bill, therefore, if enacted and brought into 
operation, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that 
a sum of rupees two thousand crore may be involved as recurring expenditure  per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one thousand crore may also be involved. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
_______
ൺ
BILL
to provide for the establishment of an Agricultural Produce Price Fixation Board to fix the 
remunerative support price of agricultural produce including fruits and vegetables
on annual and seasonal basis and for timely intervention by the Government
at the time of steep fall in prices of such produce in the open market and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
_______
(Adv. A.M. Ariﬀ, M.P .)