1
THE CHILD DEVELOPMENT BILL, 2016
By
SHRI BHAIRON PRASAD MISHRA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for all-round development of children and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Child Development Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India
Bill No. 279 of  2016
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(ii) "child" means a person who has not attained the age of eighteen years; and
(iii) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Fund to be known as the Child Development Fund.
(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute to the Fund
in such proportion as may be prescribed.
(3) There shall also be credited to the Fund, donations or contributions received from
other organisations or individuals.
4. Every child shall have the right to—
(i) free education upto senior secondary level in all schools including
Government aided private schools;
(ii) scholarship, in such cases as may be prescribed;
(iii) nutritious food, including mid-day meal in the schools;
(iv) free transport facilities between place of residence and the educational
institutions;
(v) free bicycles, where there are no proper transport facilities;
(vi) free vocational training;
(vii) free access to the games and sports facilities;
(viii) free travel in railways for undertaking educational tour;
(ix) free healthcare facilities;
(x) insurance cover free of cost; and
(xi) physical fitness training.
Explanation.—For the purposes of clause (i), ‘‘free education’’ means education
without payment of charges of fee of any kind and includes supply of books, stationery
items and uniform, free of cost.
5.  It shall be the duty of appropriate Government to implement the provisions of this
Act.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Definitions.
Constitution
of the Child
Development
Fund.
Rights of a
Child.
Appropriate
Government
to implement
the Act.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
20
25
15
30
35
40

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Children are the future of a country. Majority of the children in our country do not have
access to quality educational facilities and sports facilities due to lack of funds with their
parents. In fact, their parents are so poor that sometimes they can't even afford a single
square meal in a day. Consequently, due to the lack of proper nutrition and proper healthcare,
these children become disease prone.
Moreover, in many rural areas children do not have any recreational facilities.
It is, therefore, necessary to bring a law providing basic educational facilities free of
cost and access to sports facilities to every child to ensure all round development of his
personality.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BHAIRON PRASAD MISHRA
October 28, 2016.

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill  provides for the constitution of a Child Development Fund,
Clause 4 confers certain rights on children including free educational scholarship and free
vocational training, etc. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees
ten thousand crore per annum would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty thousand crore is also likely to be
involved.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Act. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for all-round development of children and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2956LS(S3)—21.11.2016.