Bill No. 279 of 2015
THE ELECTRONIC WASTE BILL, 2015
By
DR. KIRIT PREMJIBHAI  SOLANKI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for proper handling and disposal of electronic waste by prescribing norms and
fixing duties on manufacturers, recyclers and consumers with regard to disposal of
electronic waste and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Electronic Waste Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "consumer" means any individual or firm or company using the products
that is capable of generating electronic waste;
(c) "disposal" means disposal of electronic waste according to prescribed norms
to prevent contamination of the environment and harmful effect on human health;
(d) "electronic waste " means waste generated from discarded television, personal
computer, floppy, audio-video CD, battery, cell phone, refrigerator, air conditioner,
electronic toys, telephone, washing machine, electronic switch and such other products;
(e) "municipal authority" means Municipal Corporation, Municipality, Nagar
Palika, Nagar Nigam, Nagar Panchayat, Municipal Council including Notified Area
Committee (NAC) or any other local body constituted under the relevant statutes and,
where the management and handling of municipal solid waste is entrusted to such
agency;
(f) "prescribed " means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(g) "re-cycler " means any person or establishment engaged in recycling or
reprocessing of used electronic equipment or assembly of their component.
3. The Central Government shall, in consultation with Central Pollution Control Board,
prescribe the compliance criteria and procedure for handling and disposal of electronic
waste.
4. The appropriate Government shall monitor the implementation of the compliance
criteria and procedure prescribed under section 3.
5. It shall be the duty of every manufacturer,—
(i) to ensure that every electronic product offered for sale in the market contains—
(a) the procedure for its handling and disposal; and
(b) the information about the parts which can be recycled and which
cannot be recycled;
(ii) to collect the electronic waste generated during the manufacture of electric
and electronic waste; and
(iii) to create public awareness through advertisements, publications and other
electronic media about the hazardous substances in their products which may cause ill
effects on human body.
6. It shall be the duty of every consumer to ensure that the electronic waste is segregated
into recyclable and non-recyclable waste and is not disposed of in any manner except in the
manner prescribed for the purpose.
7. The municipal authority shall—
(i) ensure collection of segregated electronic waste from households and for
further disposal; and
(ii) notify sites demarcated as collection points.
Compliance
criteria and
procedure for
disposal of
electronic
waste.
Appropriate
Government
to ensure
disposal of
electronic
waste.
Duty of
Manufacturer.
Duty of
consumer.
Responsibili-
ties of the
municipal
authorities.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
8. (1) Every re-cycler of the electronic product shall be registered with the appropriate
Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) Every re-cycler shall re-cycle only those parts of an electronic product which have
been marked as recyclable by the manufacturer.
9. Whoever violates the provisions of this Act shall be punished with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to six months and fine which may extend to fifty thousand
rupees.
10. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, provide requisite sums to the State Governments for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
11. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of three years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
12. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force relating to maintenance of
public cleanliness and waste management or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any
law other than this Act.
13. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law, for the time being in force.
14. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Gazette of India, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Registration
and
responsibility
of re-cycler.
Penalty.
Central
Government
to provide
requisite sums.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The volume of electronic waste is increasing at an alarming rate in India and its handling
and disposal has become a major challenge. Many of these electronic goods contain toxic
substances which can cause serious health problems to the persons handling electronic
waste and also damage to the environment. There is a huge gap between e-waste generated
in India and its capacity to deal with it. Currently, it is the extended responsibility of the
producer regarding disposal and recycling once the consumer discards the product.
Rare earth minerals are highly used in manufacture of electronic goods. Failure in
recycling of electronic waste will also lead to shortage of such rare earth minerals. Therefore,
it is important that this issue is tackled collectively by manufacturers, consumers and the
Government.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI
November 17, 2015.
4

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 7 of the Bill provides for responsibilities of the Municipal Authorities. Clause 8
provides that the Central Government shall provide requisite funds to the State Governments
for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The expenditure relating to States shall be borne out
of the Consolidated Funds of the respective States. However, the Central Government may
also have to provide some financial assistance to the States for this purpose. Also, the
expenditure in respect of Union territories shall be borne out of the Consolidated Fund of
India. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees five hundred crore will be involved as recurring
expenditure per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees two hundred crore is also likely to be involved.

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

GMGIPMRND—2950LS(S3)—03.12.2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for proper handling and disposal of electronic waste by prescribing norms and
fixing duties on manufacturers, re-cyclers and consumers with regard to disposal of
electronic waste and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki, M.P.)