THE NATIONAL MEDICAL COMMISSION BILL, 2017
——————
 ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
——————
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
T
HE NATIONAL MEDICAL COMMISSION
3. Constitution of National Medical Commission.
4. Composition of Commission.
5. Search Committee for appointment of Chairperson and Members.
6. Term of office and conditions of service of Chairperson and Members.
7. Removal of Chairperson and Member of Commission.
8. Appointment of Secretary, experts, professionals, officers and other employees of
Commission.
9. Meetings, etc., of Commission.
10. Powers and functions of Commission.
CHAPTER III
T
HE MEDICAL ADVISORY COUNCIL
11. Constitution and composition of Medical Advisory Council.
12. Functions of Medical Advisory Council.
13. Meetings of Medical Advisory Council.
CHAPTER IV
N
ATIONAL ELIGIBILITY-CUM-ENTRANCE TEST AND EXAMINA TION
14. National Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test.
15. National Licentiate Examination.
CHAPTER V
AUTONOMOUS BOARDS
16. Constitution of Autonomous Boards.
17. Composition of Autonomous Boards.
18. Search Committee for appointment of President and Members.
19. Term of office and conditions of service of President and Members.
20. Advisory Committees of Experts.
21. Staff of Autonomous Boards.
22. Meetings, etc., of Autonomous Boards.
A
S INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No.  279 of  2017

CLAUSES
23. Powers of Autonomous Boards and delegation of powers.
24. Functions of  Under-Graduate Medical Education Board.
25. Functions of  Post-Graduate Medical Education Board.
26. Functions of  Medical Assessment and Rating Board.
27. Powers and functions of  Ethics and Medical Registration  Board.
28. Permission for establishment of new medical college.
29. Criteria for approving or disapproving scheme.
30. State Medical Councils.
31. National Register and State Register.
32. Rights of persons to have licence to practice and to be enrolled in National Register
or State Register and their obligations thereto.
33. Bar to practice.
CHAPTER VI
R
ECOGNITION OF MEDICAL QUALIFICATIONS
34. Recognition of medical qualifications granted by Universities or medical institutions
in India.
35. Recognition of medical qualifications granted by medical institutions outside India.
36. Recognition of medical qualifications granted by statutory or other body in India.
37. Withdrawal of recognition granted to medical qualification granted by medical
institutions in India.
38. Derecognition of medical qualifications granted by medical institutions outside India.
39. Special provision in certain cases for recognition of medical qualifications.
CHAPTER VII
GRANTS, AUDIT AND ACCOUNTS
40. Grants by Central Government.
41. National Medical Commission Fund.
42. Audit and accounts.
43. Furnishing of returns and reports to Central Government.
CHAPTER VIII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
44. Power of Central Government to give directions to Commission and Autonomous
Boards.
45. Power of Central Government to give directions to State Governments.
46. Information to be furnished by Commission and publication thereof.
47. Obligation of Universities and medical institutions.
48. Completion of courses of studies in medical institutions.
49. Joint sittings of Commission, Central Councils of  Homoeopathy and Indian medicine
to enhance interface between their respective systems of medicine.
50. Chairperson, Members, officers of Commission and of Autonomous Boards to be
public servants.
(ii)

CLAUSES
51. Protection of action taken in good faith.
52. Cognizance of offences.
53. Power of Central Government to supersede Commission.
54. Power to make rules.
55. Power to make regulations.
56. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.
57. Power to remove difficulties.
58. Repeal and saving.
59. Transitory provisions.
THE  SCHEDULE.
(iii)

Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE NATIONAL MEDICAL COMMISSION BILL, 2017
A
BILL
to provide for a medical education system that ensures availability of adequate and high
quality medical professionals; that encourages medical professionals to adopt latest
medical research in their work and to contribute to research; that has an objective
periodic assessment of medical institutions and facilitates maintenance of a medical
register for India and enforces high ethical standards in all aspects of medical
services; that is flexible to adapt to changing needs and has an effective grievance
redressal mechanism and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Medical Commission Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different provisions
of this Act and any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be
construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No.  279 of  2017
5
10

2
(a) "Autonomous Board" means any of the Autonomous Boards constituted
under section 16;
(b) "Chairperson" means the Chairperson of the  National Medical Commission
appointed under section 5;
(c) "Commission" means the National Medical Commission constituted under
section 3;
(d) "Council" means the Medical Advisory Council constituted under section 11;
(e) "Ethics and Medical Registration  Board" means the Board constituted under
section 16;
(f) "health University" means a University specialised in affiliating institutions
engaged in teaching medicine, medical and health sciences and includes a medical
University and University of health sciences;
(g) "licence" means a licence to practice medicine granted under sub-section (1)
of section 32;
(h) "Medical Assessment and Rating Board" means the Board constituted under
section 16;
(i) "medical institution" means any institution, within or outside India, which
grants degrees, diplomas or licences in medicine;
(j) "medicine" means modern scientific medicine in all its branches and includes
surgery and obstetrics, but does not include veterinary medicine and surgery;
(k) "Member" means a Member of the Commission appointed under section 5
and  includes the Chairperson thereof;
(l) "National Board of Examination" means the body registered as such under
the Societies Registration Act, 1860 which grants Broad Specialty and Super-Specialty
qualifications referred to in the Schedule;
(m) "National Register" means a National Medical Register maintained by the
Ethics and Medical Registration Board under section 31;
(n) "notification" means notification published in the Official Gazette and the
expression "notify" shall be construed accordingly;
(o) "Post-Graduate Medical Education Board" means the Board constituted
under section 16;
(p) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(q) "President" means the President of an Autonomous Board appointed under
section 18;
(r) "recognised medical qualification" means a medical qualification recognised
under section 34 or section 35 or section 36 or section 39, as the case may be;
(s) "regulations" means the regulations made by the Commission under this Act;
(t) "Schedule" means the Schedule to this Act;
(u) "State Medical Council" means a Medical Council constituted under any law
for the time being in force in any State or Union territory for regulating the practice and
registration of practitioners of medicine in that State or Union territory;
(v) "State Register" means a Register maintained under any law for the time
being in force in any State or Union territory for registration of  practitioners of
medicine;
21 of 1860.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(w) "Under-Graduate Medical Education Board" means the Board constituted
under section 16;
(x) "University" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( f) of
section 2 of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956 and includes a health
University.
CHAPTER II
T
HE NATIONAL MEDICAL COMMISSION
3. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Commission, to be known as the
National Medical Commission, to exercise the powers conferred upon, and to perform the
functions assigned to it, under this Act.
(2) The Commission shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and a common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire,
hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by
the said name, sue or be sued.
(3) The head office of the Commission shall be at Delhi.
4. (1) The Commission shall consist of the following persons to be appointed by the
Central Government, namely:—
(a) a Chairperson;
(b) twelve ex officio Members;
(c) eleven part-time Members; and
(d) an ex officio Member Secretary.
(2) The Chairperson shall be a person of outstanding ability, proven administrative
capacity and integrity, possessing a post graduate degree in any discipline of medical sciences
from any University and having experience of not less than twenty years in the field of
medical sciences, out of which at least ten years shall be as a leader in the area of  healthcare
delivery, growth and development of modern medicine or medical education.
(3) The following persons shall be the ex officio  Members of the Commission,
namely:—
(a) the President of the Under-Graduate Medical Education Board;
(b) the President of the Post-Graduate Medical Education Board;
(c) the President of the Medical Assessment and Rating Board;
(d) the President of the Ethics and Medical Registration  Board;
(e) the Director General of  Health Services, Directorate General of Health Services,
New Delhi;
(f) the Director General, Indian Council of Medical Research;
(g) the Director, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Delhi or his nominee;
(h) the Director, Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research,
Chandigarh or his nominee;
(i) the Director, Jawaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate Medical Education and
Research, Puducherry or his nominee;
(j) the Director, Tata Memorial Hospital, Mumbai or his nominee;
(k) the Director, North Eastern Indira Gandhi Regional Institute of  Health and
Medical Sciences, Shillong or his nominee; and
3 of 1956.
Constitution
of National
Medical
Commission.
Composition of
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
(l) one person to represent the Ministry of  the Central Government dealing with
Health and Family Welfare, not below the rank of Additional Secretary to the Government
of India, to be nominated by that Ministry.
(4) The following persons shall be appointed as part-time Members of the Commission,
namely:—
(a) three Members to be appointed from amongst persons of ability, integrity
and standing, who have special knowledge and professional experience in such areas
including management, law, medical ethics, health research, consumer or patient rights
advocacy, science and technology and economics;
(b) three Members to be appointed on rotational basis from amongst the nominees
of the States and Union territories in the Medical Advisory Council for a term of two
years in such manner as may be prescribed;
(c) five Members to be elected by the registered medical practitioners from
amongst themselves from such regional constituencies, and in such manner, as may be
prescribed.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section and section 17, the term "leader"
means the Head of a Department or the Head of an organisation.
5. (1) The Central Government shall appoint the Chairperson, part-time Members
referred to in clause ( a) of sub-section ( 4) of section 4 and the Secretary referred to in
section 8 on the recommendation of a Search Committee consisting of—
(a) the Cabinet Secretary—Chairperson;
(b) Chief  Executive Officer, National Institution for Transforming India Aayog
under the Government of India— Member;
(c) two experts, possessing outstanding qualifications and experience of not
less than twenty-five years in the field of medical sciences or public health, to be
nominated by the Central Government — Members;
(d) one expert,  from amongst the part-time Members referred to in clause (c) of
sub-section (4) of section 4, to be nominated by the Central Government in such
manner as may be prescribed — Member;
(e) one person, possessing outstanding qualifications and experience of not
less than twenty-five years in the field of management or law or economics or science
and technology, to be nominated by  the Central Government — Member;
(f) the Secretary to the Government of India in charge of the Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare, to be the Convenor — Member.
(2) The Central Government shall, within one month from the date of occurrence of any
vacancy, including by reason of death, resignation or removal of the Chairperson or a Member,
or within three months before the end of tenure of the Chairperson or Member, make a
reference to the Search Committee for filling up of the vacancy.
(3) The Search Committee shall recommend a panel of at least three names for every
vacancy referred to it.
(4) The Search Committee shall, before recommending any person for appointment as
the Chairperson or a Member of the Commission, satisfy itself that such person does not
have any financial or other interest which is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as such
Chairperson or Member.
(5) No appointment of the Chairperson or Member shall be invalid merely by reason of
any vacancy or absence of a Member in the Search Committee.
(6) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections ( 2) to ( 5), the Search Committee may
regulate its own procedure.
Search
Committee for
appointment
of Chairperson
and Members.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
6. (1) The Chairperson and the part-time Members, other than the part-time Members
appointed under clause (b) of sub-section (4) of section 4, shall hold office for a term not
exceeding four years and shall not be eligible for any extension or reappointment:
Provided that such person shall cease to hold office after attaining the age of seventy
years.
(2) The term of office of an ex officio Member shall continue as long as he holds the
office by virtue of which he is such Member.
(3) Where a Member  ‘other than an ex officio Member’  is absent from three consecutive
ordinary meetings of the Commission and the cause of such absence is not attributable to
any valid reason in the opinion of the Commission, such Member shall be deemed to have
vacated the seat.
 (4) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of
the Chairperson and Member ‘other than an ex officio Member’ shall be such as may be
prescribed.
(5) The Chairperson or a Member may,—
(a) relinquish his office by giving in writing to the Central Government a notice
of not less than three months; or
(b) be removed from his office in accordance with the provisions of section 7:
 Provided that such person may be relieved from duties earlier than three months or be
allowed to continue beyond three months until a successor is appointed, if  the Central
Government so decides.
(6) The Chairperson or a Member, ceasing to hold office as such, shall not accept, for
a period of one year from the date of demitting such office, any employment, in any capacity,
including as a consultant or an expert, in any private medical institution, whose matter has
been dealt with by such Chairperson or Member, directly or indirectly:
Provided that nothing herein shall be construed as preventing such person from
accepting an employment in a body or institution, including medical institution, controlled or
maintained by the Central Government or a State Government:
Provided further that nothing herein shall prevent the Central Government from
permitting the Chairperson or a Member to accept any employment in any capacity, including
as a consultant or expert in any private medical institution whose matter has been dealt with
by such Chairperson or Member.
7. (1) The Central Government may, by order, remove from office the Chairperson or
any Member, who—
(a)  has been adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central
Government, involves moral turpitude; or
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a Member; or
(d) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court;  or
(e) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially
his functions as a Member; or
(f) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial to
public interest.
(2) No Member shall be removed under clauses (e) and (f) of sub-section (1) unless he
has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.
Term of
office and
conditions of
service of
Chairperson
and Members.
Removal of
Chairperson
and Member of
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
8. (1) There shall be a Secretariat for the Commission to be headed by a Secretary,
who shall be the ex officio Member-Secretary to the Commission, to be appointed by the
Central Government in accordance with the provisions of section 5.
(2) The Secretary of the Commission shall be a person of outstanding ability and
integrity possessing a postgraduate qualification and experience in such areas as may be
prescribed.
(3) The Secretary shall be appointed by the Central Government for a term of four years
and shall not be eligible for any extension or reappointment.
(4) The Secretary shall discharge such functions of the Commission as are assigned to
him by the Commission and as may be specified by regulations made under this Act.
(5) The Commission may, for the efficient discharge of its functions under this Act,
appoint such officers and other employees, as it considers necessary, against the posts
created by the Central Government.
(6) The salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service
of the Secretary, officers and other employees of the Commission shall be such as may be
prescribed.
(7) The Commission may engage, in accordance with the procedure specified by
regulations, such number of experts and professionals of integrity and outstanding ability,
who have special knowledge of, and experience in such fields, including medical education,
public health, management, health economics, quality assurance, patient advocacy, health
research, science and technology, administration, finance, accounts and law, as it deems
necessary, to assist the Commission in the discharge of its functions under this Act.
9. (1) The Commission shall meet at least once every quarter at such time and place as
may be appointed by the Chairperson.
(2) The Chairperson shall preside at the meeting of the Commission and if for any
reason the Chairperson is unable to attend a meeting of the Commission, any other Member,
being the President of an Autonomous Board, nominated by the Chairperson, shall preside
at the meeting.
(3) Unless the procedure to be followed at the meetings of the Commission is otherwise
provided by regulations, one-half of the total number of Members of the Commission including
the Chairperson shall constitute the quorum and all the acts of the Commission shall be
decided by a majority of the Members, present and voting and in the event of equality of
votes, the Chairperson, or in his absence, the President of the Autonomous Board nominated
under sub-section (2), shall have the casting vote.
(4) The general superintendence, direction and control of the administration of the
Commission shall vest in the Chairperson.
(5) No act done by the Commission shall be questioned on the ground of the existence
of a vacancy in, or a defect in the constitution of, the Commission.
(6) A person who is aggrieved by any decision of the Commission may prefer an appeal
to the Central Government against such decision within thirty days of the communication of
such decision.
10. (1) The Commission shall perform the following functions, namely:—
(a) lay down policies for maintaining a high quality and high standards in medical
education and make necessary regulations in this behalf;
(b) lay down policies for regulating medical institutions, medical researches and
medical professionals and make necessary regulations in this behalf;
(c) assess the requirements in healthcare, including human resources for health
and healthcare infrastructure and develop a road map for  meeting such requirements;
Appointment
of Secretary,
experts,
professionals,
officers and
other
employees of
Commission.
Meetings, etc.,
of Commission.
Powers and
functions of
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
(d) promote, coordinate and frame guidelines and lay down policies by making
necessary regulations for the proper functioning of the Commission, the Autonomous
Boards and the State Medical Councils;
(e) ensure coordination among the Autonomous Boards;
(f) take such measures, as may be necessary, to ensure compliance by the State
Medical Councils of the guidelines framed and regulations made under this Act for
their effective functioning under this Act;
(g) exercise appellate jurisdiction with respect to the decisions of the  Autonomous
Boards, except that of the Ethics and Medical Registration Board;
(h) lay down policies and codes to ensure observance of professional ethics in
medical profession and to promote ethical conduct during the provision of care by
medical practitioners;
(i) frame guidelines for determination of fees in respect of such proportion of
seats, not exceeding forty per cent., in the private medical institutions and deemed
Universities which are governed by the provisions of this Act;
(j) exercise such other powers and perform such other functions as may be
prescribed.
(2) All orders and decisions of the Commission shall be authenticated by the signature
of the Secretary.
(3) The Commission may delegate such of its powers of administrative and financial
matters, as it deems fit, to the Secretary.
(4) The Commission may constitute sub-committees and delegate such of its powers
to such sub-committees as may be necessary to enable them to accomplish specific tasks.
CHAPTER III
T
HE MEDICAL ADVISORY COUNCIL
11. (1) The Central Government shall constitute an advisory body to be known as the
Medical Advisory Council.
(2) The Council shall consist of a Chairperson and the following Members, namely :—
(a) the Chairperson of the Commission shall be the ex officio Chairperson of the
Council;
(b) every Member of the Commission shall be the ex officio Members of the
Council;
(c) one Member to represent each State, who is the Vice-Chancellor of a health
University in that State, to be nominated by that State Government;
(d) one Member to represent each Union territory, who is the Vice-Chancellor of
a health University in that Union territory, to be nominated by the Ministry of Home
Affairs in the Government of India;
(e) the Chairman, University Grants Commission;
(f) the Director, National Assessment and Accreditation Council;
(g) four Members to be nominated by the Central Government from amongst
persons holding the post of Director in the Indian Institutes of Technology, Indian
Institutes of Management and the Indian Institute of Science:
Provided that if there is no health University in any State or Union territory,  the
Vice-Chancellor of a University within that State or Union territory having the largest
number of medical colleges affiliated to it shall be nominated by the State Government
or by the Ministry of Home Affairs in the Government of India:
Provided further that if there is no University in any Union territory, the Ministry
of Home Affairs shall nominate a Member who possesses such medical qualification
and experience as may be prescribed.
Constitution
and
composition
of Medical
Advisory
Council.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

8
12. (1)  The Council shall be the primary platform through which the States and Union
territories may put forth their views and concerns before the Commission and help in shaping
the overall agenda, policy and action relating to medical education and training.
(2) The Council shall advise the Commission on measures to determine and maintain,
and to coordinate maintenance of, the minimum standards in all matters relating to medical
education, training and research.
(3) The Council shall advise the Commission on measures to enhance equitable access
to medical education.
13. (1) The Council shall meet at least once a year at such time and place as may be
decided by the Chairperson.
(2) The Chairperson shall preside at the meeting of the Council and if for any reason
the Chairperson is unable to attend a meeting of the Council, such other Member as nominated
by the Chairperson shall preside over the meeting.
(3) Unless the procedure is otherwise provided by regulations, fifteen Members
including the Chairperson of the Council shall form the quorum and all acts of the Council
shall be decided by a majority of the Members present and voting.
CHAPTER IV
N
ATIONAL ELIGIBILITY-CUM-ENTRANCE TEST AND EXAMINA TION
14. (1) There shall be a uniform National Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test for admission to
the undergraduate medical education in all medical institutions which are governed by the
provisions of this Act.
(2) The Commission shall conduct the National Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test in English
and in such other languages, through such designated authority and in such manner, as may
be specified by regulations.
(3) The Commission shall specify by regulations the manner of conducting common
counselling by the designated authority for admission in all the medical institutions which
are governed by the provisions of this Act:
Provided that the designated authority of the Central Government  shall conduct the
common counselling for All-India seats and the designated authority of the State Government
shall conduct the common counselling for the seats at the State level.
15. (1) The Commission shall conduct a uniform National Licentiate Examination for
students graduating from the medical institutions which are governed by the provisions of
this Act for granting licence to practice medicine as medical practitioners and for enrolment
in the State Register or the National Register, as the case may be.
(2) The Commission shall conduct the National Licentiate Examination through such
designated authority and in such manner as may be specified by regulations.
(3) The National Licentiate Examination shall become operational on such date, within
three years from the date of commencement of this Act, as may be appointed by the Central
Government, by notification.
(4) The National Licentiate Examination shall be the basis for admission to postgraduate
courses in medical institutions which are governed by the provisions of this Act.
(5) The Commission shall specify by regulations the manner of conducting common
counselling by the designated authority for admission to the postgraduate courses in the
medical institutions governed under this Act:
Provided that the designated authority of the Central Government shall conduct the
common counselling for All India seats and by the designated authority of the State
Government shall conduct the common counselling for the seats at the State level.
Functions of
Medical
Advisory
Council.
Meetings of
Medical
Advisory
Council.
National
Eligibility-
cum-Entrance
Test.
National
Licentiate
Examination.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

9
CHAPTER V
AUTONOMOUS BOARDS
16. ( 1) The Central Government shall, by notification, constitute the following
Autonomous Boards, under the overall supervision of the Commission, to perform the
functions assigned to such Boards under this Act, namely:—
(a) the Under-Graduate Medical Education Board (Under-Graduate Medical
Education Board);
(b) the Post-Graduate Medical Education Board (Post-Graduate Medical
Education Board);
(c) the Medical Assessment and Rating Board (Medical Assessment and Rating
Board); and
(d) the Ethics and Medical Registration Board (Ethics and Medical Registration
Board).
(2) Each Board referred to in sub-section (1) shall be an autonomous body which shall
carry out its functions under this Act subject to the regulations made by the Commission.
17. (1) Each Autonomous Board shall consist of a President and two Members.
(2) The President of the each Autonomous Board, both Members of the Under-Graduate
Medical Education Board and the Post-Graduate Medical Education Board and one Member
each of the Medical Assessment and Rating Board and the Ethics and Medical Registration
Board shall be persons of outstanding ability, proven administrative capacity and integrity,
possessing a postgraduate degree in any discipline of medical sciences from any University
and having experience of not less than fifteen years in such field, out of which at least seven
years shall be as a leader in the area of medical education, public health, community medicine
or health research.
(3) The second Member of the Medical Assessment and Rating Board shall be a
person of outstanding ability and integrity, possessing a postgraduate degree in any of the
disciplines of management, quality assurance, law or science and technology from any
University, having not less than fifteen years' experience in such field, out of which at least
seven years shall be as a leader.
(4) The second Member of the Ethics and Medical Registration Board shall be a
person of outstanding ability who has demonstrated public record of work on medical ethics
or a person of outstanding ability possessing a postgraduate degree in any of the disciplines
of quality assurance, public health, law or patient advocacy from any University and having
not less than fifteen years' experience in such field, out of which at least seven years shall be
as a leader.
18. The  Central Government shall appoint the President and Members of the
Autonomous Boards on the  recommendations made by the Search Committee constituted
under section 5 in accordance with the procedure specified in that section.
19. ( 1) The President and Members of each Autonomous Board shall hold the
office for a term not exceeding four years and shall not be eligible for any extension or
reappointment:
Provided that such person shall cease to hold office after attaining the age of seventy
years.
(2) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of
the President and Members of an Autonomous Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
(3) The provisions of sub-sections (3), (5) and (6) of section 6 relating to other terms
and conditions of service of, and in section 7 relating to removal from the office of, the
Chairperson and Members of the Commission shall also apply to the President and Members
of the Autonomous Boards.
Constitution of
Autonomous
Boards.
Composition
of
Autonomous
Boards.
Search
Committee
for
appointment
of President
and Members.
Term of office
and conditions
of service of
President and
Members.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

10
20. (1) Each Autonomous Board, except the Ethics and Medical Registration  Board,
shall be assisted by such Advisory Committees of Experts as may be constituted by the
Commission for the efficient discharge of the functions of such Boards under this Act.
(2) The Ethics and Medical Registration Board shall be assisted by such ethics
committees of experts as may be constituted by the Commission for the efficient discharge of
the functions of that Board under this Act.
21. The experts, professionals, officers and other employees appointed under section 8
shall be made available to the Autonomous Boards in such number, and in such manner, as
may be specified by regulations by the Commission.
22. (1) Every Autonomous Board shall meet at least once a month at such time and
place as it may appoint.
(2) All decisions of the Autonomous Boards shall be made by majority of votes of the
President and Members.
(3) A person who is aggrieved by any decision of an Autonomous Board may prefer an
appeal to the Commission against such decision within sixty days of the communication of
such decision.
23. (1) The President of each Autonomous Board shall have such  administrative and
financial powers as may be delegated to it by the Commission to enable such Board to
function efficiently.
(2) The President of an Autonomous Board may further delegate any of his powers to
a Member or an officer of that Board.
24. (1) The Under-Graduate Medical Education Board shall perform the following
functions, namely:—
(a) determine standards of medical education at undergraduate level and oversee
all aspects relating thereto;
(b) develop competency based dynamic curriculum at undergraduate level in
accordance with provisions of the regulations  made under this Act;
(c) develop competency based dynamic curriculum for primary medicine,
community medicine and family medicine to ensure healthcare in such areas, in
accordance with provisions of  the regulations made under this Act;
(d) frame guidelines for setting up of medical institutions for imparting
undergraduate courses, having regard to the needs of the country and the global
norms, in accordance with provisions of  the regulations made under this Act;
(e) determine the minimum requirements and standards for conducting courses
and examinations for undergraduates in medical institutions,  having regard to the
needs of creativity at local levels, including designing of some courses by individual
institutions, in accordance with provisions of  the regulations made under this Act;
(f) determine standards and norms for infrastructure, faculty and quality of
education in medical institutions providing undergraduate medical education in
accordance with provisions of  the regulations made under this Act;
(g) facilitate development and training of faculty Members teaching
undergraduate courses;
(h) facilitate research and the international student and faculty exchange
programmes relating to undergraduate medical education;
(i) specify norms for compulsory annual disclosures,  electronically or otherwise,
by medical institutions, in respect of their functions that has a bearing on the interest
of all stakeholders including students, faculty, the Commission and the Central
Government;
(j) grant recognition to a medical qualification at the undergraduate level.
Staff of
Autonomous
Boards.
Meetings,
etc., of
Autonomous
Boards.
Powers  of
Autonomous
Boards and
delegation of
powers.
Functions of
Under-
Graduate
Medical
Education
Board.
Advisory
Committees
of Experts.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

11
(2) The Under-Graduate Medical Education Board may, in the discharge of its duties,
make such recommendations to, and seek such directions from, the Commission, as it deems
necessary.
25. ( 1) The Post-Graduate Medical Education Board shall perform the following
functions, namely:—
(a) determine the standards of medical education at the postgraduate level and
super-speciality level in accordance with the regulations  made under this Act and
oversee all aspects relating thereto;
(b) develop competency based dynamic curriculum at postgraduate level and
super-speciality level in accordance with the regulations made under this Act, with a
view to develop appropriate skill, knowledge, attitude, values and ethics among
postgraduates and super-specialists to provide healthcare, impart medical education
and conduct medical research;
(c) frame guidelines for setting up of medical institutions for imparting
postgraduate and super-speciality courses, having regard to the needs of the country
and global norms, in accordance with the regulations  made under this Act;
(d) determine the minimum requirements and standards for conducting
postgraduate and super-specialty courses and examinations in medical institution, in
accordance with the regulations made under this Act;
(e) determine standards and norms for infrastructure, faculty and quality of
education in medical institutions conducting postgraduate and super-speciality medical
education, in accordance with the regulations made under this Act;
(f) facilitate development and training of the faculty members teaching
postgraduate and super-speciality courses;
(g) facilitate research and the international student and faculty exchange
programmes relating to postgraduate and super-speciality medical education;
(h) specify norms for compulsory annual disclosure, electronically or otherwise,
by medical institutions in respect of their functions that has a bearing on the interest
of all stakeholders including students, faculty, the Commission and the Central
Government;
(i) grant recognition to the medical qualifications at the postgraduate level and
super-speciality level.
(2) The Post-Graduate Medical Education Board may, in the discharge of its functions,
make such recommendations to, and seek such directions from, the Commission, as it deems
necessary.
26. (1) The Medical Assessment and Rating Board shall perform the following functions,
namely:—
(a) determine the procedure for assessing and rating the medical institutions for
their compliance with the standards laid down by the Under-Graduate Medical
Education Board or the Post-Graduate Medical Education Board, as the case may be,
in accordance with the regulations made under this Act;
(b) grant permission for establishment of a new medical institution in accordance
with the provisions of section 28;
(c) carry out inspections of medical institutions for assessing and rating such
institutions in accordance with the regulations made under this Act:
Provided that the Medical Assessment and Rating Board may, if it deems necessary,
hire and authorise any other third party agency or persons for carrying out inspections of
medical institutions for assessing and rating such institutions:
Provided further that where inspection of medical institutions is carried out by such
third party agency or persons authorised by the Medical Assessment and Rating Board, it
shall be obligatory on such institutions to provide access to such agency or person;
Functions of
Post-Graduate
Medical
Education
Board.
Functions of
Medical
Assessment
and Rating
Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

12
(d) conduct, or where it deems necessary, empanel independent rating agencies to
conduct, assess and rate all medical institutions, within such period of their opening, and
every year thereafter, at such time, and in such manner, as may be specified by regulations;
(e)  make available on its website or in public domain the assessment and ratings
of medical institutions at regular intervals in accordance with the regulations made
under this Act;
(f) take such measure, including  imposition of monetary penalty, against a medical
institution for failure to maintain the minimum essential standards specified by the
Under-Graduate Medical Education Board or the Post-Graduate Medical Education
Board, as the case may be, in accordance with the regulations  made under this Act:
Provided that the medical institution which has been imposed a first-time monetary
penalty fails to take any corrective action, the Medical Assessment and Rating Board may
impose a second-time monetary penalty for continued failure which shall be higher than the
first-time penalty and on continued failure, impose a third-time monetary penalty which shall
be higher than the second-time penalty:
Provided further that all the three monetary penalties imposed under the first proviso
shall not be less than one-half, and not more than ten-times, the total amount charged, by
whatever name called, by such institution for one full batch of students of undergraduate
course or postgraduate course, as the case may be:
Provided also that evenafter the imposition of third-time penalty, if the failure continues,
the Medical Assessment and Rating Board shall forward its report to the Commission
recommending to withdraw the recognition granted to the medical qualification awarded by
that medical institution.
(2) The Medical Assessment and Rating Board may, in the discharge of its functions,
make such recommendations to, and seek such directions from, the Commission, as it deems
necessary.
27. (1) The Ethics and Medical Registration Board shall perform the following functions,
namely:—
(a) maintain a National Register of all licensed medical practitioners in accordance
with the provisions of section 31;
(b) regulate professional conduct and promote medical ethics in accordance
with the regulations made under this Act:
Provided that the Ethics and Medical Registration Board shall ensure compliance of
the code of professional and ethical conduct through the State Medical Council in a case
where such State Medical Council has been conferred power to take disciplinary actions in
respect of professional or ethical misconduct by medical practitioners under respective State
Acts;
(c) develop mechanisms to have continuous interaction with State Medical
Councils to effectively promote and regulate the conduct of medical practitioners and
professionals;
(d) exercise appellate jurisdiction with respect to the actions taken by a State
Medical Council under section 30.
(2) The Ethics and Medical Registration Board may, in the discharge of its duties, make
such recommendations to, and seek such directions from, the Commission, as it deems necessary.
28. ( 1) No person shall establish a new medical college without obtaining prior
permission of the Medical Assessment and Rating Board.
(2) For the purposes of obtaining permission under sub-section ( 1), a person may
submit a scheme to the Medical Assessment and Rating Board in such form, containing such
particulars, accompanied by such fee, and in such manner, as may be specified by regulations.
(3) The Medical Assessment and Rating Board shall, having due regard to the criteria
specified in section 29, consider the scheme received under sub-section (2) and  either approve
or disapprove such scheme within a period of six months from the date of such receipt:
Provided that before disapproving such scheme, an opportunity to rectify the defects,
if any, shall be given to the person concerned.
Powers and
functions of
Ethics and
Medical
Registration
Board.
Permission for
establishment
of new medical
college.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
5
50

13
(4) Where a scheme is approved under sub-section ( 3), such approval shall be the
permission under sub-section (1) to establish new medical college.
(5) Where a scheme is disapproved under sub-section ( 3), or where no decision is
taken within six months of submitting a scheme under sub-section (1), the person concerned
may prefer an appeal to the Commission for approval of the scheme within fifteen days of
such disapproval or, as the case may be, lapse of six months, in such manner as may be
specified by regulations.
(6)  The Commission shall decide the appeal received under sub-section (5) within a
period of forty-five days from the date of receipt of the appeal and in case the Commission
approves the scheme, such approval shall be the permission under sub-section (1) to establish
a new medical college and in case the Commission disapproves the scheme, or fails to give its
decision within the specified period, the person concerned may prefer a second  appeal to
the Central Government within thirty days of communication of such disapproval or, as the
case may be, lapse of specified period.
(7) The Medical Assessment and Rating Board may conduct evaluation and assessment
of any University or medical institution at any time, either directly or through any other
expert and without any prior notice and assess and evaluate the performance, standards and
benchmarks of such University or medical institution.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the term "person" includes a University,
trust or any other association of persons or body of individuals, but does not include the
Central Government.
29. While approving or disapproving a scheme under section 28, the Medical
Assessment and Rating Board, or the Commission, as the case may be, shall take into
consideration the following criteria, namely:—
(a) adequacy of financial resources;
(b) whether adequate academic faculty and other necessary facilities  have been
provided to ensure proper functioning of medical college or would be provided within
the time-limit specified in the scheme;
(c) whether adequate hospital facilities have been provided or would be provided
within the time-limit specified in the scheme;
(d) such other factors as may be prescribed:
Provided that, subject to the previous approval of the Central Government, the criteria
may be relaxed for the medical colleges which are set-up in such areas as may be specified by
regulations.
30. (1) The State Government shall, within three years of the commencement of this
Act, take necessary steps to establish a State Medical Council  if no such Council exists in
that State.
(2) Where a State Act confers power upon the State Medical Council to take disciplinary
actions in respect of any professional or ethical misconduct by a registered medical practitioner
or professional, the State Medical Council shall act in accordance with the regulations made,
and the guidelines framed, under this Act:
Provided that till such time as a State Medical Council is established in a State, the
Ethics and Medical Registration Board shall receive the complaints and grievances relating
to any professional or ethical misconduct against a registered medical practitioner or
professional in that State in accordance with such procedure as may be specified by
regulations:
Provided further that the Ethics and Medical Registration Board or, as the case may be,
the State Medical Council shall give an opportunity of hearing to the medical practitioner or
professional  concerned before taking any action, including imposition of any monetary
penalty against such person.
Criteria for
approving or
disapproving
scheme.
State Medical
Councils.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

14
(3) A medical practitioner or professional who is aggrieved by any action taken by a
State Medical Council under sub-section (2) may prefer an appeal to the Ethics and Medical
Registration Board against such action, and the decision, if any, of the Ethics and Medical
Registration Board thereupon shall be binding on the State Medical Council, unless an
appeal is preferred under sub-section (4).
(4) A medical practitioner or professional who is aggrieved by the decision of the
Ethics and Medical Registration Board may prefer an appeal to the Commission within sixty
days of communication of such decision.
(5) A medical practitioner or professional who is aggrieved by the decision of the
Commission may perfer an appeal to the Central Government within thirty days of
communication of such decision.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this Act,—
(a) "State" includes Union territory and the expressions "State Government"
and "State Medical Council", in relation to a Union territory, shall respectively mean
the "Central Government" and "Union Territory Medical Council";
(b) the expression "professional or ethical misconduct" includes any act of
commission or omission as may be specified by regulations.
31. (1) The Ethics and Medical Registration Board shall maintain a National Register
containing the name, address, all recognised qualifications possessed by a licensed medical
practitioner and such other particulars as may be specified by regulations.
(2) The National Register shall be maintained in such form, including electronic form,
in such manner, as may be specified by regulations.
(3) The manner in which a name or qualification may be added to, or removed from, the
National Register and the grounds for removal thereof, shall be such as may be specified by
regulations.
(4) The National Register shall be a public document within the meaning of section 74
of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872.
(5) The National Register shall be made available to the public by placing it on the
website of the Ethics and Medical Registration Board.
(6) Every State Medical Council shall maintain and regularly update the State Register
in the specified electronic format and supply a physical copy of the same to the Ethics and
Medical Registration Board within three months of the commencement of this Act.
(7) The Ethics and Medical Registration Board shall ensure electronic synchronisation
of the National Register and the State Register in such a manner that any change in one
register is automatically reflected in the other register.
(8)  The Ethics and Medical Registration Board shall maintain a separate National
Register in such form, containing such particulars, including the name, address and all
recognised qualifications possessed by a licensed AYUSH practitioner who qualifies the
bridge course referred to in sub-section (4) of section 49, in such manner as may be specified
by regulations.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the expression "AYUSH Practitioner"
means a person who is a practitioner of Homoeopathy or a practitioner of Indian medicine as
defined in clause (e) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Indian Medicine Central Council
Act, 1970.
32. (1) Any person who qualifies the National Licentiate Examination held under section 15
shall be granted a licence to practice medicine and shall have his name and qualifications
enrolled in the National Register or a State Register, as the case may be:
Provided that a person who has been registered in the Indian Medical Register
maintained under the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 prior to the coming into force of this
Act and before the National Licentiate Examination becomes operational under sub-section (3)
of section 15, shall be deemed to have been registered under this Act and be enrolled in the
National Register maintained under this Act.
National
Register and
State Register.
1 of 1872.
48 of 1970.
Rights of
persons to
have licence to
practice and to
be enrolled in
National
Register or
State Register
and their
obligations
thereto.
102 of 1956.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

15
(2) No person who has obtained medical qualification from a medical institution
established in any country outside India and is recognised as a medical practitioner in that
country, shall, after the commencement of this Act and the National Licentiate Examination
becomes operational under sub-section (3) of section 15, be enrolled in the National Register
unless he qualifies the National Licentiate Examination.
(3) When a person whose name is entered in the State Register or the National Register,
as the case may be, obtains any title, diploma or other qualification for proficiency in sciences
or public health or medicine which is a recognised medical qualification under section 34 or
section 35, as the case may be, he shall be entitled to have such title, diploma or qualification
entered against his name in the State Register or the National Register, as the case may be, in
such manner as may be specified by regulations.
33. (1) No person other than a person who is enrolled in the State Register or the
National Register, as the case may be, shall—
(a) be allowed to practice medicine as a qualified medical practitioner;
(b) hold office as a physician or surgeon or any other office, by whatever name
called, which is meant to be held by a physician or surgeon;
(c) be entitled to sign or authenticate a medical or fitness certificate or any other
certificate required by any law to be signed or authenticated by a duly qualified medical
practitioner;
(d) be entitled to give evidence at any inquest or in any court of law as an
expert under section 45 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 on any matter relating to
medicine:
Provided that the Commission may permit a medical professional to perform surgery or
practice medicine without qualifying the National Licentiate Examination, in such
circumstances and for such period as may be specified by regulations:
Provided further that the Commission shall submit a list of such medical professionals
to the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided also that a foreign citizen who is enrolled in his country as a medical practitioner
in accordance with the law regulating the registration of medical practitioners in that country
may be permitted temporary registration in India for such period and in such manner as may
be specified by regulations.
(2) Any person who contravenes any of the provisions of this section shall be punished
with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees, but which may extend to five lakh
rupees.
CHAPTER VI
R
ECOGNITION OF MEDICAL QUALIFICATIONS
34. (1) The medical qualification granted by any University or medical institution in
India shall be listed and maintained by the Under-Graduate Medical Education Board or the
Post-Graduate Medical Education Board, as the case may be, in such manner as may be
specified by regulations and such medical qualification shall be a recognised medical
qualification for the purposes of this Act.
(2) Any University or medical institution in India which grants an undergraduate or
postgraduate or super-speciality medical qualification not included in the list maintained by
the Under-Graduate Medical Education Board or the Post-Graduate Medical Education Board,
as the case may be, may apply to that Board for granting recognition to such qualification.
(3) The Under-Graduate Medical Education Board or the Post-Graduate Medical
Education Board, as the case may be, shall examine the application for grant of recognition to
a medical qualification within a period of six months in such manner as may be specified by
regulations.
Bar to
practice.
1 of 1872.
Recognition
of medical
qualifications
granted by
Universities
or medical
institutions in
India.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

16
(4) Where the Under-Graduate Medical Education Board or the Post-Graduate Medical
Education Board, as the case may be, decides to grant recognition to a medical qualification,
it shall include such medical qualification in the list maintained by it and also specify the date
of effect of such recognition.
(5) Where the Under-Graduate Medical Education Board or Post-Graduate Medical
Education Board, as the case may be, decides not to grant recognition to a medical
qualification, the University or the medical institution concerned may prefer an appeal to the
Commission for grant of recognition within sixty days of the communication of such decision,
in such manner as may be specified by regulations.
(6) The Commission shall examine the appeal received under sub-section (5) within a
period of two months and if it decides that recognition may be granted to such medical
qualification, it may direct the Under-Graduate Medical Education Board or the Post-Graduate
Medical Education Board, as the case may be, to include such medical qualification in the list
maintained by that Board, in such manner as may be specified by regulations.
(7) Where the Commission decides not to grant recognition to the medical qualification,
or fails to take a decision within the specified period, the University or the medical institution
concerned may prefer a second appeal to the Central Government within thirty days of the
communication of such decision or lapse of specified period, as the case may be.
(8) All medical qualifications which have been recognised before the date of
commencement of this Act and are included in the First Schedule and Part I of the Third
Schedule to the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956, shall also be recognised medical
qualifications for the purposes of this Act, and shall be listed and maintained by the
Under-Graduate Medical Education Board or the Post-Graduate Medical Education Board,
as the case may be, in such manner as may be specified by regulations.
35. (1) Where an authority in any country outside India, which by the law of that
country is entrusted with the recognition of medical qualifications in that country, makes an
application to the Commission for granting recognition to such medical qualification in India,
the Commission may, subject to such verification as it may deem necessary, either grant or
refuse to grant recognition to that medical qualification:
Provided that the Commission shall give a reasonable opportunity of being heard to
such authority before refusing to grant such recognition.
(2) A medical qualification which is granted recognition by the Commission under
sub-section (1) shall be a recognised medical qualification for the purposes of this Act, and
such qualification shall be listed and maintained by the Commission in such manner as may
be specified by regulations.
(3) Where the Commission refuses to grant recognition to the medical qualification
under sub-section (1), the authority concerned may prefer an appeal to the Central Government
against such decision within thirty days of communication thereof.
(4) All medical qualifications which have been recognised before the date of
commencement of this Act and are included in the Second Schedule and Part II of the Third
Schedule to the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956, shall also be recognised medical
qualifications for the purposes of this Act, and shall be listed and maintained by the Commission
in such manner as may be specified by regulations.
36. (1) The medical qualifications granted by any statutory or other body in India
which are covered by the categories listed in the Schedule shall be recognised medical
qualifications for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Diplomate of National Board granted by the National Board of Examination in
broad speciality course and super-speciality course shall be equal in all respects to the post-
graduate qualification and the super-speciality qualification, respectively, granted under
this Act.
(3) The Central Government may, on the recommendation of the Commission, and
having regard to the objects of this Act, by notification, add to, or, as the case may be, omit
from, the Schedule any categories of medical qualifications granted by a statutory or other
body in India and on such addition, or as the case may be, omission, the medical qualifications
granted by such statutory or other body in India shall be, or shall cease to be, recognised
medical qualifications for the purposes of this Act.
102 of 1956.
Recognition
of medical
qualifications
granted by
medical
institutions
outside India.
102 of 1956.
Recognition
of medical
qualifications
granted by
statutory or
other body in
India.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55

17
37. (1) Where, upon receiving a report from the Medical Assessment and Rating Board
under section 26, or otherwise, if the Commission is of the opinion that—
(a) the courses of study and examination to be undergone in, or the proficiency
required from candidates at any examination held by, a University or medical institution
do not conform to the standards specified by the Under-Graduate Medical Education
Board or the Post-Graduate Medical Education Board, as the case may be; or
(b) the standards and norms for infrastructure, faculty and quality of education
in medical institution as determined by the Under-Graduate Medical Education Board
or the Post-Graduate Medical Education Board, as the case may be, are not adhered to
by any University or medical institution,
and such University or medical institution has failed to take necessary corrective action to
maintain specified minimum standards, the Commission may initiate action in accordance
with the provisions of sub-section (2):
Provided that the Commission shall, before taking any action for suo motu withdrawal
of recognition granted to the medical qualification awarded by a University or medical
institution, impose monetary penalty in accordance with the provisions of clause ( f ) of
sub-section (1) of section 26.
(2) The Commission shall, after making such further inquiry as it deems fit, and after
holding consultations with the  concerned State Government and the authority of the
concerned University or medical institution, comes to the conclusion that the recognition
granted to a medical qualification ought to be withdrawn,  it may, by order, withdraw recognition
granted to such medical qualification and direct the Under-Graduate Medical Education
Board or the Post-Graduate Medical Education Board, as the case may be, to amend the
entries against the University or medical institution concerned in the list maintained by that
Board to the effect that the recognition granted to such medical qualification is withdrawn
with effect from the date specified in that order.
38. Where, after verification with the authority in any country outside India, the
Commission is of the opinion that a recognised medical qualification which is included in the
list maintained by it is to be derecognised, it may, by order, derecognise such medical
qualification and remove it from the list maintained by the Commission with effect from the
date of such order.
39. Where the Commission deems it necessary, it may, by an order published in the
Official Gazette, direct that any medical qualification granted  by a medical institution in a
country outside India, after such date as may be specified in that notification, shall be a
recognised medical qualification for the purposes of this Act:
Provided that medical practice by a person possessing such qualification shall be permitted
only if such person has been enrolled as a medical practitioner in accordance with the law
regulating the registration of medical practitioner for the time being in force in that country:
Provided further that medical practice by a person possessing such qualification shall
be limited to such period as may be specified in that order.
CHAPTER VII
G
RANTS, AUDIT AND ACCOUNTS
40. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in
this behalf, make to the Commission grants of such sums of money as the Central Government
may think fit.
41. (1) There shall be constituted a fund to be called "the National Medical Commission
Fund" which shall form part of the public account of India and there shall be credited
thereto—
(a) all Government grants, fees, penalties and charges received by the Commission
and the Autonomous Boards;
Withdrawal of
recognition
granted to
medical
qualification
granted by
medical
institutions in
India.
Derecognition
of medical
qualifications
granted by
medical
institutions
outside India.
Special
provision in
certain cases
for
recognition of
medical
qualifications.
Grants by
Central
Government.
National
Medical
Commission
Fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

18
(b) all sums received by the Commission from such other sources as may be
decided by it.
(2) The Fund shall be applied for making payment towards—
(a) the salaries and allowances payable to the Chairperson and Members of the
Commission, the Presidents and Members of the Autonomous Boards and the
administrative expenses including the salaries and allowances payable to the officers
and other employees of the Commission and Autonomous Boards;
(b) the expenses incurred in carrying out  the provisions of this Act, including in
connection with the discharge of the functions of the Commission and the Autonomous
Boards.
42. (1) The Commission shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and
prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed, in consultation
with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The accounts of the Commission shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in
connection with such audit shall be payable by the Commission to the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any other persons appointed by
him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the Commission shall have the same
rights and privileges and authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and
Auditor-General generally has in connection with the audit of Government accounts and in
particular, shall have the right to demand the production of, and complete access to, records,
books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect the
office of the Commission.
(4) The accounts of the Commission as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit
report thereon, shall be forwarded annually by the Commission to the Central Government
which shall cause the same to be laid, as soon as may be after it is received, before each
House of Parliament.
43. (1)  The Commission shall furnish to the Central Government, at such time, in such
form and  in such manner, as may be prescribed or as the Central Government may direct,
such reports and statements, containing such particulars in regard to any matter under the
jurisdiction of the Commission, as the Central Government may, from time to time, require.
(2) The Commission shall prepare, once every year, in such form and at such time as
may be prescribed, an annual report, giving a summary of its activities during the previous
year and copies of the report shall be forwarded to the Central Government.
(3) A copy of the report received under sub-section ( 2) shall be laid by the Central
Government, as soon as may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament.
CHAPTER  VIII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
44. (1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act, the Commission and
the Autonomous Boards shall, in exercise of their powers and discharge of their functions
under this Act, be bound by such directions on questions of policy as the Central Government
may give in writing to them from time to time:
Provided that the Commission and the Autonomous Boards shall, as far as practicable,
be given an opportunity to express their views before any direction is given under this
sub-section.
Audit and
accounts.
Furnishing of
returns and
reports to
Central
Government.
Power of
Central
Government to
give directions
to Commission
and
Autonomous
Boards.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

19
(2) The decision of the Central Government whether a question is one of policy or not
shall be final.
45. The Central Government may give such directions, as it may deem necessary, to a
State Government for carrying out all or any of the provisions of this Act and the State
Government shall comply with such directions.
46. (1) The Commission shall furnish such reports, copies of its minutes, abstracts of
its accounts, and other information to the Central Government as that Government may
require.
(2) The Central Government may publish, in such manner as it may think fit, the
reports, minutes, abstracts of accounts and other information furnished to it under
sub-section (1).
47. Every University and medical institution governed under this Act shall maintain a
website at all times and display on its website all such information as may be required by the
Commission or an Autonomous Board, as the case may be.
48. ( 1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, any student who was
studying for a degree, diploma or certificate in any medical institution immediately before
the commencement of this Act shall continue to so study and complete his course for such
degree, diploma or certificate, and such institution shall continue to provide instructions
and examination for such student in accordance with the syllabus and studies as existed
before such commencement, and such student shall be deemed to have completed his
course of study  under this Act and shall be awarded degree, diploma or certificate under
this Act.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, where recognition granted to a
medical institution has lapsed, whether by efflux of time or by its voluntary surrender or for
any other reason whatsoever, such medical institution shall continue to maintain and provide
the minimum standards required to be provided under this Act till such time as all candidates
who are admitted in that medical institution complete their study.
49. ( 1) There shall be a joint sitting of the Commission, the Central Council of
Homoeopathy and the Central Council of Indian Medicine at least once a year, at such time
and place as they mutually appoint, to enhance the interface between Homoeopathy, Indian
Systems of Medicine and modern systems of medicine.
(2) The agenda for the joint sitting may be prepared with mutual agreement between
the Chairpersons of the Commission,  the Central Council of Homoeopathy and the Central
Council of Indian Medicine or be  prepared separately by each of them.
(3) The joint sitting referred to in sub-section ( 1) may, by an affirmative vote of all
members present and voting, decide on approving specific educational modules or
programmes that may be introduced in the undergraduate course and the postgraduate
course across medical systems and to develop bridges across the various systems of medicine
and promote medical pluralism.
(4) The joint sitting referred to in sub-section ( 1) may, by an affirmative vote of all
members present and voting, decide on approving specific bridge course that may be
introduced for the practitioners of Homoeopathy and of Indian systems of Medicine to
enable them to prescribe such modern medicines at such level as may be prescribed.
50. The Chairperson, Members, officers and other employees of the Commission and
the President, Members and officers and other employees of the Autonomous Boards shall
be deemed, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this
Act, to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
Power of
Central
Government to
give directions
to State
Governments.
Information
to be furnished
by
Commission
and
publication
thereof.
Obligation of
Universities
and medical
institutions.
Completion
of courses of
studies in
medical
institutions.
Joint sittings of
Commission,
Central
Councils of
Homoeopathy
and Indian
medicine to
enhance
interface
between their
respective
systems of
medicine.
Chairperson,
Members,
officers of
Commission
and of
Autonomous
Boards to be
public servants.
45 of 1860.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

20
51. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Government, the
Commission or any Autonomous Board or a State Medical Council or any Committee thereof,
or any officer or other employee of the Government or of the Commission acting under this
Act for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the
rules or regulations made thereunder.
52. No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under this Act except
upon a complaint in writing made in this behalf by an officer authorised by the Commission
or the Ethics Medical and Registration Board or a State Medical Council, as the case may be.
53. (1) If, at any time, the Central Government is of opinion that—
(a) the Commission is unable to discharge its functions under the provisions of
this Act; or
(b) the Commission has persistently made default in complying with any direction
issued by the Central Government under this Act or in the discharge its functions
under the provisions of this Act,
the Central Government may, by notification, supersede the Commission for such period, not
exceeding six months, as may be specified in the notification:
Provided that before issuing a notification under this sub-section, the Central
Government shall give a reasonable opportunity to the Commission to show cause as to why
it should not be superseded and shall consider the explanations and objections, if any, of the
Commission.
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-section ( 1) superseding the
Commission,—
(a) all the Members shall, as from the date of supersession, vacate their offices
as such;
(b) all the powers and functions which may, by or under the provisions of this
Act, be exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the Commission, shall, until the
Commission is reconstituted under sub-section ( 3), be exercised and discharged by
such person or persons as the Central Government may direct;
(c) all property owned or controlled by the Commission shall, until the Commission
is reconstituted under sub-section (3), vest in the Central Government.
(3) On the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the notification issued
under sub-section (1), the Central Government may,—
(a) extend the period of supersession for such further term not exceeding six
months, as it may consider necessary; or
(b) reconstitute the Commission by fresh appointment and in such case the
Members who vacated their offices under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 2) shall not be
deemed disqualified for appointment:
Provided that the Central Government may, at any time before the expiration of the
period of supersession, whether as originally specified under sub-section (1) or as extended
under this sub-section, take action under clause ( b) of this sub-section.
(4) The Central Government shall cause a notification issued under sub-section ( 1)
and a full report of any action taken under this section and the circumstances leading to such
action to be laid before both Houses of Parliament at the earliest opportunity.
54. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry out the
purposes of this Act.
Protection of
action taken in
good faith.
Cognizance of
offences.
Power of
Central
Government
to supersede
Commission.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

21
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of  the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the manner of appointing three Members of the Commission on rotational
basis from amongst the nominees of the States and the Union territories in the Medical
Advisory Council under clause (b) of sub-section (4) of section 4;
(b) the manner of electing five Members of the Commission by the registered
medical practitioners from amongst themselves and the regional constituencies
from which such Members are to be elected under clause ( c) of  sub-section ( 4) of
section 4;
(c) the manner of nominating one expert by the Central Government under
clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 5;
(d) the salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson and Members under sub-section (4) of section 6;
(e) the areas in which postgraduate qualification and experience  shall be
possessed by the Secretary of the Commission under  sub-section (2) of section 8;
(f) the salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of
service of the Secretary, officers and other employees of the Commission  under
sub-section (6) of section 8;
(g) the other powers and functions of the Commission under clause ( j) of
sub-section (1) of section 10;
(h) the medical qualification and experience to be possessed by a Member under
the second proviso to section 11;
(i) the salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of
service of the President and Members of an Autonomous Board under sub-section (2)
of  section 19;
(j) the other factors  under clause (d) of section 29;
(k) the manner of submitting a list of medical professionals under  the second
proviso to sub-section (1) of section 33;
(l) the form for preparing annual statement of accounts under sub-section (1) of
section 42;
(m) the time within which, and the form and the manner in which, the reports and
statements shall be furnished by the Commission and the particulars with regard to
any matter as may be required by the Central Government under sub-section ( 1) of
section 43;
(n) the form and the time for preparing annual report under sub-section ( 2) of
section 43;
(o) the modern medicines that the practitioners of Homoeopathy and of Indian
Systems of Medicine may prescribe and the level at which they may so prescribe
modern medicine, under sub-section (4) of section 49;
(p) any other matter in respect of which provision is to be made by rules.
55. ( 1) The Commission may, after previous publication, by notification, make
regulations consistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder to carry out the provisions
of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the functions to be discharged by the Secretary of the Commission under
sub-section (4) of section 8;
Power to make
regulations.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

22
(b) the procedure  in accordance with which experts and professionals may be
engaged and the number of such  experts and professionals under sub-section ( 7) of
section 8;
(c) the procedure to be followed at the meetings of Commission, including the
quorum at its meetings under sub-section (3) of section 9;
(d) the quality and standards to be maintained in medical education under
clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 10;
(e) the manner of regulating medical institutions, medical researches and medical
professionals  under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 10;
(f) the manner of functioning of the Commission, the Autonomous Boards and
the State Medical Councils under clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 10;
(g)  the procedure to be followed at the meetings of the Medical Advisory
Council, including the quorum at its meetings under sub-section (3) of section 13;
(h) the other languages in which and the manner in which the National Eligibility-
cum-Entrance Test shall be conducted under sub-section (2) of section 14;
(i) the manner of conducting common counselling by the designated authority
for admission to the undergraduate medical education under sub-section ( 3) of
section 14;
(j) the designated authority, and the manner for  conducting the National
Licentiate Examination, under sub-section (2) of section 15;
(k) the manner of conducting common counselling by the designated authority
for admission to the postgraduate courses under sub-section ( 5) of section 15;
(l) the number of, and the manner in which, the experts, professionals, officers
and other employees shall be made available by the Commission to the Autonomous
Boards under section 21;
(m) the curriculum at undergraduate level under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of
section 24;
(n) the curriculum for primary medicine, community  medicine and family medicine
under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 24;
(o) the manner of imparting undergraduate courses by medical institutions under
clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 24;
(p) the minimum requirements and standards for conducting courses and
examinations for undergraduates in medical institutions under clause ( e) of
sub-section (1) of section 24;
(q) the standards and norms for infrastructure, faculty and quality of education
at undergraduate level in medical institutions under clause ( f) of sub-section ( 1) of
section 24;
(r) the standards of medical education at the postgraduate level and
super-speciality level under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 25;
(s) the curriculum at postgraduate level and super-speciality level under
clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 25;
(t) the manner of imparting postgraduate and super-speciality courses by medical
institutions under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 25;
(u) the minimum requirements and standards for conducting postgraduate and
super-speciality courses and examinations in medical institutions under clause ( d)
of sub-section (1) of section 25;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

23
(v) the standards and norms for infrastructure, faculty and quality of education
in medical institutions conducting postgraduate and super-speciality medical education
under clause (e) of sub-section (1) of section 25;
(w) the procedure for assessing and rating the medical institutions under
clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 26;
(x) the manner of carrying out inspections of medical institutions for assessing
and rating such institutions under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 26;
(y) the manner of conducting, and the manner of empanelling independent rating
agencies to conduct, assessment and rating of medical institutions under clause (d) of
sub-section (1) of section 26;
(z)  the manner of making available on website or in public domain the assessment
and ratings of  medical institutions under clause (e) of sub-section (1) of section 26;
(za) the measures to be taken against a medical institution for failure to maintain
the minimum essential standards under clause (f) of sub-section (1) of section 26;
(zb) the manner of regulating professional conduct and promoting medical ethics
under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 27;
(zc) the form of scheme, the particulars thereof, the fee to be accompanied and
the manner of submitting scheme for establishing new medical college under
sub-section (2) of section 28;
(zd) the manner of making an application to the Commission for approval of the
scheme under sub-section (5) of section 28;
(ze) the areas in respect of which criteria may be relaxed under the proviso to
section 29;
(zf) the manner of taking disciplinary action by a State Medical Council for
professional or ethical misconduct of registered medical practitioner or professional
and the procedure for receiving complaints and grievances by Ethics and Medical
Registration Board,  under sub-section (2) of section 30;
(zg) the act of commission or omission  which amounts to professional or ethical
misconduct under clause (b) of the Explanation to section 30;
(zh) other particulars to be contained in a National Register  under sub-section (1)
of section 31;
(zi) the form, including the electronic form and the manner of  maintaining the
National Register under sub-section (2) of section 31;
(
zj)  the manner in which any name or qualification may be added to, or removed
from, the National Register and the grounds for removal thereof, under sub-section (3)
of section 31;
(zk) the form, the particulars to be contained in and the manner of  maintaining a
separate National Register for licensed AYUSH practitioners who qualify the bridge
course, under sub-section (8) of section 31;
(zl) the manner in which the title, diploma or qualification may be entered in the
State Register or the National Register under sub-section (3) of section 32;
(zm) the circumstances in which, and the period for which, the Commission
may permit a medical professional to perform surgery or practice medicine
without qualifying the National Licentiate Examination under the first proviso to
sub-section (1) of section 33;
(zn) the manner in which, and the period for which temporary registration  may
be permitted to a foreign citizen  under the third proviso to sub-section (1) of section 33;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

24
Rules and
regulations to
be laid before
Parliament.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Repeal and
saving. 102 of 1956.
(zo) the manner of listing and maintaining medical qualifications granted by a
University or medical institution in India under sub-section (1) of section 34;
(zp)  the manner of examining the application for grant of recognition under
sub-section (3) of section 34;
(zq)  the manner of preferring an appeal to the Commission for grant of recognition
under  sub-section (5) of section 34;
(zr) the manner of including a  medical qualification in the list maintained by the
Board  under sub-section (6) of section 34;
(zs) the manner of listing and maintaining medical qualifications  which have
been granted recognition before the date of commencement of this Act under
sub-section (8) of section 34.
56. Every rule and every regulation made, and every notification issued, under this Act
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is
in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two
or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any
modification in the rule or regulation or notification both Houses agree that the rule or
regulation or notification should not be made, the rule or regulation or notification shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity
of anything previously done under that rule or regulation or notification.
57. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act,  the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it be necessary, for the
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a period of
two years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament.
58. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may appoint in this
behalf, the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 shall stand repealed and the Medical Council of
India constituted under sub-section (1) of section 3 of the said Act shall stand dissolved.
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Act referred to in sub-section (1), it shall not affect,—
(a) the previous operation of the Act so repealed or anything duly done or
suffered thereunder; or
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under
the Act so repealed; or
(c) any penalty incurred in respect of any contravention under the Act so
repealed; or
(d) any proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege, obligation,
liability, penalty as aforesaid, and any such proceeding or remedy may be instituted,
continued or enforced, and any such penalty may be imposed as if that Act had not
been repealed.
(3) On the dissolution of the  Medical Council of India, the person appointed as the
Chairman of the  Medical Council of India and every other person appointed as the Member
and any officer and other employee of that Council and holding office as such immediately
before such dissolution shall vacate their respective offices and such Chairman and other
Members shall be entitled to claim compensation not exceeding three months' pay and
allowances for the premature termination of term of their office or of any contract of service:
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

25
102 of 1956.
Transitory
provisions.
102 of 1956.
Provided that any officer or other employee who has been, immediately before the
dissolution of the Medical Council of India appointed on deputation basis to the  Medical
Council of India, shall, on such dissolution, stand reverted to his parent cadre, Ministry or
Department, as the case may be:
Provided further that any officer or other employee who has been, immediately before
the dissolution of the Medical Council of India, employed on regular or contractual basis by
the Medical Council of India, shall, on and from such dissolution, cease to be the officer or
employee of the Medical Council of India and his employment in the Medical Council of
India stand terminated with immediate effect:
Provided also that such officer or employee of the Medical Council of India shall be
entitled to such compensation for the premature termination of his employment, which shall
not less than three months' pay and allowances, as may be prescribed.
(4) Notwithstanding the repeal of the aforesaid enactment, any order made, any licence
to practice issued, any registration made, any permission to start new medical college or to
start higher course of studies or for increase in the admission capacity granted, any recognition
of medical qualifications granted, under the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956, which are in
force as on the date of commencement of this Act, shall continue to be in force till the date of
their expiry for all purposes, as if they had been issued or granted under the provisions of
this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder.
59. (1) The Commission shall be the successor in interest to the  Medical Council of
India including its subsidiaries or owned trusts and all the assets and liabilities of the
Medical Council of India shall be deemed to have been transferred to the Commission.
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956, the educational
standards, requirements and other provisions of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 and
the rules and regulations made thereunder shall continue to be in force and operate till new
standards or requirements are specified under this Act or the rules and regulations made
thereunder:
Provided that anything done or any action taken as regards the educational standards
and requirements under the enactment under repeal and the rules and regulations made
thereunder shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions
of this Act and shall continue in force accordingly unless and until superseded by anything
done or by any action taken under this Act.
5
10
15
20
25
30

THE SCHEDULE
(See section 36)
LIST OF CATEGORIES OF MEDICAL QUALIFICATIONS GRANTED BY STATUTORY
BODY OR OTHER BODY IN INDIA
Sl. No. Categories of medical qualifications
1. All medical qualifications granted by the Jawaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate
Medical Education and Research, Puducherry.
2. All medical qualifications granted by All India Institutes of Medical Sciences.
3. All medical qualifications granted by the Post-Graduate Institute of Medical
Education and Research, Chandigarh.
4. All medical qualifications granted by the National Institute of Mental Health and
Neuro-Sciences, Bangalore.
5. All medical qualifications granted by the National Board of Examination.
26

27
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Medical education is at the core of the access to quality healthcare in any country. A
flexible and well-functioning legislative framework underlying medical education is essential
for the well-being of a nation. The Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 which was enacted to
provide a solid foundation for the growth of medical education in the early decades, has not
kept pace with time. Various bottlenecks have crept into the system with serious detrimental
effects on medical education and, by implication, on delivery of quality health services.
2. The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family
Welfare in its Ninety-second Report has offered a critical assessment of medical education in
India. The Standing Committee has recommended for a decisive and exemplary action to
restructure and revamp the regulatory system of medical education and medical practice and
to reform the Medical Council of India in accordance with the regulatory structure suggested
by the Group of Experts, chaired by Dr. Ranjit Rai Choudhary, which was constituted by the
Central Government. The Standing Committee endorsed separation of functions by forming
four autonomous boards and recommended appointment of regulators through selection
rather than election and to bring a new comprehensive Bill in Parliament for this purpose, as
the existing provisions of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 are outdated.
3. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in its judgment dated 2nd May, 2016 in the Civil Appeal
No. 4060 of 2009 titled Modern Dental College and Research Centre and Others versus
State of Madhya Pradesh and Others has directed the Central Government to consider and
take appropriate action on the recommendations of the Rai Choudhary Committee.
4. Accordingly, it is proposed to introduce the National Medical Commission Bill, 2017
which, inter alia, seeks to provide for—
 (a) constitution of a National Medical Commission for development and
regulation of all aspects relating to medical education, medical profession and medical
institutions and a Medical Advisory Council to advise and make recommendations to
the Commission;
 (b) constitution of four Autonomous Boards, namely:—
 (i) the Under-Graduate Medical Education Board to regulate medical
education at undergraduate level and to determine standards thereof;
 (ii) the Post-Graduate Medical Education Board to regulate medical
education at postgraduate level and to determine standards thereof;
 (iii) the Medical Assessment and Rating Board to carry out inspections
and to assess and rate the medical institutions; and
 (iv) the Ethics and Medical Registration Board to regulate professional
conduct and promote medical ethics amongst medical practitioners and medical
professionals and to maintain a national register of all licensed medical
practitioners and a national register of AYUSH practitioners who have qualified
the bridge course;
 (c) recognition of medical qualifications granted by universities and medical
institutions in India and outside India and also for recognition of medical qualifications
granted by statutory and other bodies in India as listed in the Schedule;
 (d) holding of a uniform National Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test for admission to
undergraduate medical education and the National Licentiate Examination for admission
to postgraduate medical education and for enrolment to the National Medical Register;

28
 (e) holding of joint sitting of the Commission, the Central Council of
Homoeopathy and the Central Council of Indian Medicine to enhance the interface
between Homoeopathy, Indian Systems of Medicine and modern systems of medicine;
 (f) the repeal of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 and for dissolution of the
Medical Council of India by providing that on such dissolution,—
 (i) the chairman and other members of the said Council shall be deemed to
have vacated their respective offices and will be entitled to compensation not
exceeding three months' pay and allowances;
 (ii) the officers and employees appointed on deputation shall stand
reverted to their parent cadre;
 (iii) the officers and other employees employed on regular or contractual
basis by the said Council shall cease to be the officers and employees of said
Council and shall be entitled to such compensation not less than three months'
pay and allowances for the premature termination of employment as may be
provided by rules;
 (g) the manner of seeking permission to establish a new medical college.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; JAGAT PRAKASH NADDA
The 22nd December, 2017.
————
PRESIDENT' RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE CONSTITUTION
OF INDIA
————
[Copy of letter No. H.11011/01/2016-MEP, dated 22nd December, 2017 from
Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda, Minister of Health & Family Welfare to the Secretary General,
Lok Sabha]
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the proposed "National
Medical Commission Bill, 2017", recommends to the House the introduction of the Bill under
article 117(1) of the Constitution.

29
Notes on Clauses
Clause 1 provides for short title, extent and commencement of the proposed Act.
Clause 2 defines various terms and expressions used in the proposed Act.
Clause 3 provides for constitution of the National Medical Commission in the proposed
Act.
Clause 4 provides for composition of the National Medical Commission and appointment
and qualifications of its constituent Members. The Commission shall be a twenty-five Member
body comprising of chairperson, member-secretary, twelve ex officio Members and eleven
part-time Members. Of the part-time Members, three shall be from non-medical background
and five shall be elected Members from among registered medical practitioners.
Clause 5 provides for composition of Search Committee for appointment of the
Chairperson and Members and Secretary of the Commission under proposed Act. The
Committee shall be chaired by Cabinet Secretary and include three experts nominated by the
Central Government of which two shall be with experience in medical field and one from
non-medical. One of the elected medical Member in National Medical Commission shall also
be a Member of this Committee. Chief Executive Officer, National Institution for Transforming
India and Secretary to the Government of India in charge of the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare are the other Members.
Clause 6 provides duration of office, salary and allowances and other terms and
conditions of service of the Chairperson and Members of the Commission. They shall hold
office for a term not exceeding four years and will not be eligible for extension or reappointment.
Clause 7 provides for removal of the Chairperson and Members of the Commission.
Clause 8 provides for appointments of Secretary, experts, professionals, officers and
other employees of the Commission.
Clause 9 provides for meetings, its Chairperson, quorum and other ancillary matters
connected to meetings. The Commission shall meet at least once every quarter.
Clause 10 provides for powers and functions of the Commission including:—
 (a) formulation of policies and framing of guidelines for ensuring high quality
and standards in medical education and research;
 (b) Coordination of functioning of the Commission, Autonomous Boards and
State Medical Councils;
 (c) formulation of policy for regulation of medical profession;
 (d) power to delegate and form sub-committees.
Clause 11 provides for constitution and composition of Medical Advisory Council. It
shall consist of one nominee from every State who shall be the Vice-Chancellor of State
Health University or the University with maximum medical colleges under it. Ministry of
Home Affairs shall nominate one Member to represent each Union territory. Every Member
of National Medical Commission shall be ex officio Members of the Advisory Council.
Chairman, University Grants Commission, Director, National Assessment and Accreditation
Council, and four Members from among Directors of Indian Institutes of Technology, Indian
Institutes of Management and the Indian Institute of Science shall also be its Members.
Clause 12 provides for functions of Medical Advisory Council to advise the
Commission on minimum standards in medical education, training and research.
Clause 13 provides for meetings and quorum of Medical Advisory Council.

30
Clause 14 provides for uniform National Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test and counselling
for admission in undergraduate course in medical institutions.
Clause 15 provides that National Licentiate Examination for students graduating from
the medical institutions for granting licence to medical practice, enrolment and admission to
postgraduate medical courses.
Clause 16 provides for constitution of four Autonomous Boards under the overall
supervision of the Commission. The four Autonomous Boards are Under-Graduate Medical
Education Board, Post-Graduate Medical Education Board, Medical Assessment and Rating
Board and Ethics and Medical Registration Board.
Clause 17 provides for composition of Autonomous Boards consisting of the President
and two Members. The second Member of Medical Assessment and Rating Board and
Ethics and Medical Registration Board shall be from non-medical background.
Clause 18 provides for Search Committee for appointment of the President and Members
of the Autonomous Boards.
Clause 19 provides for duration of office, salary and allowances and other terms and
conditions of service of the President and Members of the Autonomous Boards.
Clause 20 provides for Advisory Committees of experts constituted by the Commission
to render assistance to all Autonomous Boards for discharging of functions assigned under
the Act.
Clause 21 provides for staff of Autonomous Boards.
Clause 22 provides for meetings of Autonomous Boards. Every Board shall meet
at least once a month.
Clause 23 provides for powers of Autonomous Boards and delegation of powers.
Clause 24 provides for powers and functions of Under-Graduate Medical Education
Board including determination of standards of medical education at undergraduate level,
framing of guidelines for establishment of medical institutions for imparting undergraduate
medical courses, granting of recognition to medical institutions at undergraduate level.
Clause 25 provides for powers and functions of Post-Graduate Medical Education
Board including determination of standards of medical education at postgraduate and
super-specialty level, framing of guidelines for establishment of medical institutions for
imparting postgraduate and super-specialty medical courses, granting of recognition to
medical institutions at postgraduate and super-specialty level.
Clause 26 provides for powers and functions of Medical Assessment and Rating
Board including determine the procedure for assessing and rating of medical institutions for
compliance with prescribed standards, granting of permission for establishment of new
medical institutions and carrying out of inspection for this purpose, imposing of monetary
penalty on medical institution for failure to maintain minimum essential standards prescribed.
Clause 27 provides for powers and functions of Ethics and Medical Registration
Board including maintain a National Register for all licensed medical practitioners and regulate
professional conduct, to develop mechanism for continuous interaction with State Medical
Councils.
Clause 28 provides for permission for establishment of new medical college.
Clause 29 provides for criteria for approval or disapproval of the scheme for
establishment of new medical college.
Clause 30 provides for State Medical Council and other provisions relating thereto.
Clause 31 provides for the maintenance of a National Register by Ethics and Medical
Registration Board which shall contain the name, address and all recognised qualifications
possessed by licensed medical practitioner. Every State Medical Council shall maintain a

31
State Register. The registers will be maintained in such forms including electronic form as
may be specified. A separate National Register shall be maintained for AYUSH practitioners
who qualifies bridge course in modern medicine.
Clause 32 provides for rights of persons to have licence to practice and to be enrolled
in National Register or State Register. A person who qualifies National Licentiate
Examination shall be enrolled in the National Register or State Register.
Clause 33 provides for bar to practice. A person who is not enrolled in the State or
National Register shall not be allowed to practice medicine or perform any of the function
enrolled upon a qualifies medical practitioner such as holding an office of physician or
surgeon, signing a medical certificate or giving evidence in matters related to medicine. Any
violation shall be punishable with fine between one to five lakhs. The Commission may
permit exceptions from qualifying National Licentiate Examination in certain cases. Foreign
medical practitioners shall be permitted temporary registration in India in such manner as
may be prescribed.
Clause 34 provides for recognition of medical qualifications granted by Universities
or medical institutions in India. The institutions shall apply Under-Graduate Medical Education
Board or Post-Graduate Medical Education Board which shall examine the application and
decide on grant of recognition. First appeal shall lie to the Commission and second appeal to
the Central Government.
Clause 35 provides for recognition of medical qualifications granted by medical
institutions outside India.
Clause 36 provides for recognition of medical qualifications granted by statutory or
other bodies in India which are covered by the categories listed in the Schedule.
Clause 37 provides for withdrawal of recognition granted to medical qualification
granted by medical institutions in India. The Medical Assessment and Rating Board shall
make a report to the Commission which shall decide the matter.
Clause 38 provides for de-recognition of medical qualifications granted by medical
institutions outside India.
Clause 39 provides for special provisions in certain cases for recognition of medical
qualifications. This relates to medical institutions outside India.
Clause 40 provides for grants by the Central Government.
Clause 41 provides for National Medical Commission Fund which shall form part of
the public account of India. All Government grants, fee, penalties and all sums received by
the Commission shall form part of it. The fund shall be applied for making payments towards
all expenses in the discharge of the functions of the Commission.
Clause 42 provides for audit and accounts. The accounts of the Commission shall be
audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
Clause 43 provides for furnishing of returns and reports to the Central Government.
Clause 44 provides for power of the Central Government to give directions to
Commission and Autonomous Boards on questions of policy.
Clause 45 provides for power of the Central Government to give directions to State
Governments.
Clause 46 provides for information to be furnished by the Commissioner and publication
thereof.
Clause 47 provides for obligations of Universities and medical institutions. They shall
maintain a website at all times and display all such information as may be required by the
Commission.

32
Clause 48 provides for completion of courses of studies in medical institutions. Students
who were studying in any medical institution before the commencement of this Act shall
continue to study and complete in accordance with syllabus and studies as existed before
such commencement. Such student shall be deemed to have completed course of study
under this Act.
Clause 49 provides for joint sittings of the Commission, Central Councils of
Homoeopathy and Indian Medicine to enhance interface between their respective systems
of medicine. Such meeting shall be held at least once a year. The joint sitting may reside on
approving educational modules to develop bridges across the various systems of medicine
and promote medical pluralism.
Clause 50 provides for the Chairperson, Members, Officers of the Commission and of
Autonomous Boards to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian
Penal Code.
Clause 51 provides for protection of action taken in good faith.
Clause 52 provides for cognizance of offences by courts only upon a complaint in
writing by an authorised officer of the Committee or Ethics and Medical Registration Board
or State Medical Council.
Clause 53 provides for power of the Central Government to supersede Commission if
it is unable to discharge the functions and duties imposed upon it or persistently defaults in
complying with any direction issued by the Central Government. The Central Government
may issue notifications of supersession not exceeding 6 months at a time.
Clause 54 provides for power to make rules. The Central Government may be notification
make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.
Clause 55 provides for power to make regulations. The Commission may after previous
publication by notification make regulations consistent with this Act.
Clause 56 provides for rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.
Clause 57 provides for power to remove difficulties. The Central Government may be
order published in Official Gazette make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act for removing the difficulty.
Clause 58 provides for repeal and saving. The Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 shall
stand repealed and the Medical Council of India shall stand dissolved from the date as may
be prescribed by the Central Government. The Chairman and other Members and employees
of Medical Council of India shall vacate their respective offices and be entitled to the
compensation.
Clause 59  provides for transitory provisions. Evenafter the repeal of the Indian Medical
Council Act, 1956, the rules and regulations made thereunder shall continue to be in force till
new rules and regulations are framed by National Medical Council.

33
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Sub-clause ( 1) of clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of the National
Medical Commission to exercise the powers and to perform the functions assigned to it.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 4 provides for the appointment of Chairperson and Members of the
Commission. Sub-clause (4) of clause 6 provides for payment of salary and allowances to the
Chairpersons and Members, other than ex officio  Members. Sub-clause ( 1) of clause 8
provides for appointment of Secretary of the Commission and sub-clause (5) thereof provides
for appointment of officers and other employees of the Commission. Sub-clause (6) of said
clause provides for payment of salary and allowances to Secretary, officers and other
employees of the Commission.
2. Sub-clause ( 1) of clause 16 provides for constitution of four Autonomous Boards
consisting of a President and two Members each. Clause 18 provides for appointment of
President and Members of the Autonomous Boards and sub-clause (2) of clause 19 provides
for salary and allowances of the President and Members of the Autonomous Boards.
3. Clause 40 provides for payment of grants to the Commission, after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, as the Central Government may think fit.
4. Sub-clause ( 1) of clause 41 provides for the constitution of Fund to be called the
National Medical Commission Fund which shall form part of the public account of India and
setting up of the Commission would entail some expenditure from the consolidated Fund of
India. All Government grants, fees and charges received by the Commission and its constituent
bodies and all sums received by the Commission from such other source as may be decided
upon by the Central Government shall be credited to the fund and shall be applied for
payment of salaries and allowances and the expenses incurred in carrying out the provisions
of the Bill.
5. Sub-clause (3) of clause 58 provides that on the dissolution of the Medical Council
of India, persons appointed as Chairman, Members, Officers and other employees of that
Council shall vacate their respective offices and that such Chairman and Members shall,
for such premature termination, be entitled to claim compensation not exceeding three months'
pay and allowances and the officers and employees who are employed on regular and
contractual basis by the Medical Council of India shall be entitled to such compensation,
which shall not be less than three months' pay and allowances, as may be provided by rules.
6. The expenditure would be largely met from corpus of the existing Medical Council
of India and the funds generated by the National Medical Commission. The budgetary
support by the Government to the Commission and its constituent bodies is estimated not to
exceed the level of the current budgetary support given to the Council. Further, as expenditure
would depend on the number of meetings of the Commission, recurring or non-recurring
expenditure cannot be anticipated at this stage.

34
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 54 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules by notification in
the Official Gazette, inter alia, in respect of  matters relating to—
(a) the manner of appointing three Members of the Commission on rotational
basis from amongst the nominees of the States and Union territories in the Medical
Advisory Council;
(b) the manner of electing five Members of the Commission by the registered
medical practitioners from amongst themselves and the regional constituencies from
which such Members are to be elected;
(c) the manner of nominating one expert by the Central Government;
(d) the salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson and Members;
(e) the areas in which post graduate qualification and experience shall be
possessed by the Secretary of the Commission;
(f) the salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of
service of the Secretary, officers and other employees of the Commission;
(g) the other powers and duties of the Commission;
(h) the medical qualification and experience to be possessed by a Member;
(i) the salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of
service of the President and Members of an Autonomous Board;
 (j) the other factors;
(k) the manner of submitting a list of medical;
(l) the form for preparing annual statement of accounts;
(m) the time within which, and the form and the manner in which, the reports and
statements shall be furnished by the Commission and the particulars with regard to
any matter as may be required by the Central Government;
(n) the form and the time for preparing annual report;
(o) the modern medicines that the practitioners of Homoeopathy and of Indian
Systems of Medicine may prescribe and the level at which they may so prescribe
modern medicine;
(p) any other matter in respect of which provision is to be made by rules.
2. Sub-clause (3) of clause 15 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make the
National Licentiate Examination operational from such date, within three years from the date
of commencement of this Act, as may be appointed by notification.
3. Sub-clause ( 1) of clause 16 of the Bill empowers the Central Government, by
notification, to constitute the autonomous Boards under the overall supervision of the
Commission, to perform the functions assigned to such Boards under this Act.
4. Sub-clause (3) of clause 36 of the Bill empowers the Central Government, on the
recommendations of the Commission, and having regard to the objects of this Act, by
notifcation, to add to, or, as the case may be, omit from, the Schedule any categories of
medical qualifications granted by a statutory or other body in India.

35
5. Clause 39 of the Bill empowers the Commission to issue an order to direct that any
medical qualification granted by a medical institution in a country outside India, after such
date as may be specified in that notification, shall be a recognised medical qualification for
the purposes of this Act.
Clause 55 of the Bill empowers the Commission to make regulations after previous
publications and by notification in the Official Gazette, inter alia, in respect of  matters
relating to—
(a) the functions to be discharged by the Secretary of the Commission;
(b) the procedure in accordance with which experts and professionals may be
engaged and the number of such experts and professionals;
(c) the procedure to be followed at the meetings of Commission, including the
quorum at its meetings;
(d) the quality and standards to be maintained in medical education;
(e) the manner of regulating medical institutions, medical researches and medical
professionals;
(f) the manner of functioning of the Commission, the Autonomous Boards and
the State Medical Councils;
(g) the procedure to be followed at the meetings of the Medical Advisory Council,
including the quorum at its meetings;
(h) the other languages in which and the manner in which the National Eligibility-
cum-Entrance Test shall be conducted;
(i) the manner of conducting common counselling by the designated authority
for admission to the under graduate medical education;
(j) the designated authority, and the manner for conducting the National Licentiate
Examination;
(k) the manner of conducting common counselling by the designated authority
for admission to the postgraduate courses;
(l) the number of, and the manner in which, the experts, professionals, officers
and other employees shall be made available by the Commission to the Autonomous
Boards;
(m) the procedure to be followed at the meetings of the Autonomous Boards;
(n) the curriculum at undergraduate level;
(o) the curriculum for primary medicine, community medicine and family medicine;
(p) the manner of imparting undergraduate courses by medical institutions;
(q) the minimum requirements and standards for conducting courses and
examinations for undergraduates in medical institutions;
(r) the standards and norms for infrastructure, faculty and quality of education
at undergraduate level in medical institutions;
(s) the standards of medical education at the postgraduate level and super-
speciality level;
(t) the curriculum at postgraduate level and super-speciality level;
(u) the manner of imparting postgraduate and super-speciality courses by medical
institutions;
(v) the minimum requirements and standards for conducting postgraduate and
super-specialty courses and examinations in medical institutions;
(w) the standards and norms for infrastructure, faculty and quality of education
in medical institutions conducting postgraduate and super-speciality medical
education;

36
(x) the procedure for assessing and rating the medical institutions;
(y) the manner of carrying out inspections of medical institutions for assessing
and rating such institutions;
(z) the manner of conducting, and the manner of empanelling independent rating
agencies to conduct, assessment and rating of medical institutions;
(za) the manner of making available on website or in public domain the
assessment and ratings of medical institutions;
(zb) the measures to be taken against a medical institution for failure to maintain
the minimum essential standards;
(zc) the manner of regulating professional conduct and promoting medical ethics;
(zd) the form of scheme, the particulars thereof, the fee to be accompanied and
the manner of submitting scheme for establishing new medical college;
(ze) the manner of making an application to the Commission for approval of the
scheme;
(zf) the areas in respect of which criteria may be relaxed;
(zg) the manner of taking disciplinary action by a State Medical Council for
professional or ethical misconduct of registered medical practitioner or professional
and the procedure for receiving complaints and grievances by Ethics and Medical
Registration Board;
(zh) the act of commission or omission which amounts to professional or ethical
misconduct;
(zi) other particulars to be contained in a National Register;
(zj) the form, including the electronic form and the manner of maintaining the
National Register;
(zk) the manner in which any name or qualification may be added to, or removed
from, the National Register and the grounds for removal thereof;
(zl) the form, the particulars to be contained in and the manner of maintaining a
separate National Register for licensed AYUSH practitioners who qualify the bridge
course;
(zm) the manner in which the title, diploma or qualification may be entered in the
State Register or the National Register;
(zn) the circumstances in which, and the period for which, the Commission may
permit a medical professional to perform surgery or practice medicine without qualifying
the National Licentiate Examination;
(zo) the manner in which, and the period for which temporary registration may be
permitted to a foreign citizen;
(zp) the manner of listing and maintaining medical qualifications granted by a
University or medical institution in India;
(zq) the manner of examining the application for grant of recognition;
(zr) the manner of preferring an appeal to the Commission for grant of recognition;
(zs) the manner of including a medical qualification in the list maintained by the
Board;
(zt) the manner of listing and maintaining medical qualifications which have
been granted recognition before the date of commencement of this Act.
7. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters of procedure and
administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The
delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for a medical education system that ensures availability of adequate and high
quality medical professionals; that encourages medical professionals to adopt latest
medical research in their work and to contribute to research; that has an objective
periodic assessment of medical institutions and facilitates maintenance of a medical
register for India and enforces high ethical standards in all aspects of medical services;
that is flexible to adapt to changing needs and has an effective grievance redressal
mechanism and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda, Minister of Health and Family Welfare)
GMGIPMRND—3202LS(S3)—27-12-2017.