1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 279 of  2019
THE YOUTH (DEVELOPMENT AND WELFARE) BILL, 2019
By
DR. NISHIKANT DUBEY, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for a comprehensive policy for the overall development of youth in the
country and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows :—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Youth (Development and Welfare) Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "youth" means all persons aged between eighteen to thirty-five years;
(c) "youth organisation" means an organisation of youth that provides for
universal membership to youths without any discrimination on the basis of race, caste,
religion, language, creed or sex and its constitution provides for a democratic
functioning in the concerned States or Union territories, as the case may be; and
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The appropriate Government shall formulate comprehensive policy for the
development and welfare of youth, which shall inter-alia provide for:—
(a) compulsory and free education including technical education;
(b) books, stationery and uniform, free of cost;
(c) free hostel facilities;
(d) scholarship to meritorious students;
(e) free transport facilities;
(f) such pocket allowance, as may be prescribed;
(g) recreation facilities free of cost;
(h) free access to all libraries;
(i) training in sports to every eligible youth and facilities to participate in
sports activities;
(j) representation of youth organisations in sports associations; and
(k) such other facilities, as may be prescribed, for overall welfare of youth, who
have represented the country in sports.
4. The appropriate Government shall provide to all youth,—
(i) free nutritious meals in schools, colleges, universities, hostels and technical
institutions; and
(ii) free medical and health care facilities.
5. (1) The appropriate Government shall appoint in every district an Expert Committee
consisting of eminent educationists, psychologists and such other members as may be
prescribed.
(2) The Expert Committee shall recommend to the appropriate Government the
measures required to be taken to ensure imparting of higher education or vocational
training to all youth in the district after class tenth, who desire to pursue higher education
or undertake such training.
6. The appropriate Government shall provide,—
(a) employment to the youth after completion of their education or vocational
training; or
(b) unemployment allowance at such rate, as may be prescribed, till they are
provided with gainful employment.
Definitions.
Formulation of
comprehensive
policies for
youths.
Free nutritious
meals, medical
and health care
facilities.
Appointment
of Expert
Committee.
Appropriate
Government
to provide
employment
or
unemployment
allowance to
youths.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of  Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to make
rules.
5
10

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Even after more than seven decades of Independence, the country has yet to evolve a
clear-cut policy for the overall welfare of youth of the country. The education should be the
right of every youth and not a privilege of a few and employment should be guaranteed to
them. The youth should be directly linked to production process. The disparities between
the rural and urban youth should be eliminated gradually. The youth today is facing serious
health problems, absolute inadequacy of sports and cultural facilities, etc. A considerable
chunk of youth population is still reeling under poverty. A proper policy is required to be put
in place for comprehensive and overall development of the youth and proper utilization of
their energies. A comprehensive youth policy for all-round development is, therefore,
absolutely necessary.
Hence, this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; NISHIKANT DUBEY
October 25, 2019.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that appropriate Government shall provide compulsory
and free education and supply materials like books, stationery and uniform free of cost and
pocket allowance to all the youth. It also provides for free hostel and transport facilities and
scholarships to youth. Clause 4 provides for nutritious diet free of cost to all the students in
schools, colleges, universities and hostels and medical and healthcare facilities to all the
youth. Clause 5 provides for appointment of an Expert Committee to recommend the type of
education and vocational training that is to be imparted to the youth. Clause 6 provides for
employment or unemployment allowance to the youth. The expenditure relating to State
shall be borne out of the Consolidated Fund of the respective State. However, the expenditure
relating to Union Territories shall be borne out of the Consolidated Fund of India from their
respective consolidated fund. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of  India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about
rupees five hundred crore is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees seven hundred crore is also likely to be incurred.
5

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purpose of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for a comprehensive policy for the overall development of the youth in the
country and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Nishikant Dubey, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—2999LS(S3)—15.11.2019.