/~ 
tv 
THE llL , ... JD NATUR.l (~.",S Cv;,·ISSILi: (":,-E:"U;' £::':T) 
111 LL, 1981 ' 
(IE-.l?c[,~.s int_r~duced in -L2.!<_?J.~!\.a) 
1. P ilge 2, line 16,-
.'to£ "principle" 
2. F tlge 2, line 41,-
ill " anulment" 
NEW 0ELHI; 
Februa~ 2~9~1 
ph~lgun~-', 1902(S:~krl) 
re.ad "principal" 
~ ,. rlnnulment" 
;' 

• 
BiB No. Z'f ef 1981 
.• ud 
THE OIL AND NATURAL GAS COMMISSION (AMEtmMENT) 
BILL, 1981 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Oil and Natural Gas Commission Act, 1959. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-second Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:- 1: 
1. This Act may be called the Oil and Natural Gas Commission Short 
(Amendment) Act, 1981. tlUe. 
43 of 1959. 5 2. In section 5 of the Oil and Natural Gas CM!UIlilsillll Ad, 1959 A.meIld-
10 
15 
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),- ment ot 
section G. 
(i) in sub-section (1), for the proviso, the following proviso 
shall be substituted, namely:-
"Provide4 that t1te CeDtNl GovBD..- ...,.-
(a) terminate the appOinbnent of any whole-time mem-
ber. wh. is not a ser\>aIlt of the GoverniDent, .r&er elvin, 
him notice fOT a period of not less than three IIIOIltAs or in 
lieu thereof On payment of an ablOUDt equal to his salary 
and allowances, if any, for a period· of thr.ee montlas; 
(b) terMinate the appolDt-.. of ~ part tbIte mem-
.. ber who is not a servant of the Government after givin, him 
notice for such period as may be prescribed,1 and 
(c) terminate at any time the appointment of any mem-
o her who is a servant of the Government."; 

Amend-
ment of 
section 
15. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 32. 
r(rO 
'jIr,- 1,11"~t, • '.~,'. , ,'1 ; •. Il I 2 
(ii) in sub-section (2), after the words "notice in writing", the 
words, "for such period as may be prescribed," shall be inserted. 
3. In the proviso to section 15 of the principal Act,-
(i) in clause (a), for the words "any person", the words "any 
5 person other than the person referred to in clause (aa)" shall be substi-
tuted; 
10 
15 
20 
30 
35 
40 
(ii) after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(aa) the employment, whether by fresh appointment, re-
employment, extension of service or otherwise, of any person 
who has attained the age of fifty-eight years to a post, where the 
pay (including pension and pensionary equivalent of retirement 
benefits) of the post exceeds 2,500 rupees per mensem or where 
the minimum of the pay scale of the post, proposed to be given 
to such person is 2,500 rupees or more per mensem;". 
4. In section 32 of the principle Act,-
(i) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be in-
i. ·serted,· namely:-
I. ~ ",-, -,'~'") TJte,}tOAnr to makeregulatiolllS ~onferred by thIa .ee-
tion with re8~t to term'S and ~onditions of appointment and 
service and the scales of pay of employees of the Commiasilon 
shall include power to give retrospective effect from a date not 
earlier than the comm.e~ement of the' Act, to such regulations 
()r.any of them but no retrospective '8ftect shall be given to any 
.. such regUlation so as to prejudicially affect' the interests of any 
~r~ to whom such regulations may be applicable."; 
(ii) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be in-
serted, namely:-
" (4) Every regulation made under this section and every 
notification issued under sub-section (3) of this section shall 
be laid, as soon as may be after it Is made or issued, before 
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period 
, of thirty days. which may be comprised in one session or in two 
. ,- i. " br more successive sessions; and ii, before the expiry of the 
sessAon immediately !ollownig the session dr 'the aucc~ve 
sessions aforesaid, ,both·Houses agree in making any modification 
in the, regulation or,notH.kation or both Houses agree that the 
regulation' or notification should not be made or issued, the re-
~latlori: or notific8tio~ J~haU' tnereafter have ~ect only in such 
mQ~t1ed form or be of no effect, as the case may be; 80, however, 
that any'sucb modification or anulment shall be, without pre-
judicetb 'th~' validity of anything previously done under that 
r~iW4t~on OJ', by virtue of that notift.catiOl1. ... 

16 1 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
According to section 5 of the Oil and Natural Gas Commission Act, 
1959, the Central Government can terminate the appointment of any 
member before the expiry of 'histerlJl. Qfo1ftQe.~y after giving him 
a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the same. The busi-
ness of oil has intemational repercussions and ·deals: with matteftfwliich 
are very vital to the interests of the' oountry.The \vGrJdngo~' ~ 
Commiuton has shown that it may be necessary in public' interest· to' 
terminate the appointment of a mp.mberWithdUt' giving show'~' 
notice. It is, therefore, proposed to amend the section to enable:~ 
Central Government to terminate; the appoinbJlent ~f any :~vhole-~e 
member who is not a servant of the Govemmehtatter giving )lim' a 
notice of not less than three months or in lieu thereof after making' to ' 
him a payment of an amount equal to his ~alary and' allowances ,for, . a' 
period of three months. It is also proposed to provide that the appaint-' 
ment ot any part-time member who is nota servant of the Govern~t 
may be terminated after giving him notice, for such period as' may be, 
prescribed by rules, and that the appOintment of any member who is a 
servant of the Government may be terminated at any time. 
2. It is proposed to avail of the present opportunity ~o amend section 
15 ot the Act so as to provide for ~ requirement as to prior saric~aJ;l of 
Central Government with respect to employment of a person who has 
attained the age of 58 years to a r;ost where' the pay' (including pension 
and pensionary eqUivalent of retirement benefits) exceeds 'Rs,', 2,jOO 
per mensem or where the minimum of the pay scale P1'9posed to.-be 
given to such person is Rs. 2,500 or more. This is for bringing' ·tJae~ 
provision into conformity with the Government of India -rules pnU1e t 
subject. ',' :, "'f 
3. It is also proposed to amend section 32 of th~ Act lrelat~:to 'Ute 
power to make regulations So ~s to enable retrospective effect being 
given to the regulations. The practice has been to make the same terms 
e.nd conditions, pay scales, etc., which are applicable to employees of the 
Government applicable to the emp10yees of the Commission. For the 
purpose of extending the benefit (If ~ny revision in the pay scales or in 
the allowances payable to employp.es of Government to employees o'f 
the Commission from the same dat~ from which those benefits have 
been given to employees of the Government, it becomes necessary to 
make !he regulations on the subject with retrospective effect. In 
accordance with the recommendations of the Committee on Subordinate 
Legislation, provision is being made for the laying of regulations 
and it is also proposed to make it clear in the proposed amend-
ment to section 32 that the power to make regulations with retrospec-
tive effect will not be exercised so as to prejudicially affect the 
interests of any person. 
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW DI:r..m; 
The 11th Feb",tlry, 1981. 
s 
P. C. SETHI. 

ICleUfte 2 ot ~he Bill aeeka to amemi section 5 of the Oil and Natural 
ca. CouuWsQm Ac\ 1959 to. empower the Central Government to termi-
_e ~ . .qpQiatment 0'1. a. mem~even befor-e the expiry of his term 
at .eIlce. ·atWr ji~ lam aBO~e of thPee months or the salary in lieu 
~ 
2. Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to ameRd section 32 of the Act to em-
power the Commission to mak.e regulations with respect to the terms 
and conditions of appointment and service and scales of pay of its em-
ployees ... with retrospective eftect. 
3-. '.!'hese provisions may entail some additional financial liability on 
the Ftmd of the Commission-
(i) for payment of three months' salary to a member of the 
Commission in lieu of three months' notice; and 
(ii) for payment, if any, of the additional amounts payable to 
the employees under any regulation with respect to their terms and 
conditions ot service made with retrospective effect. 
, AJJ '!he quantum of expenditure on the above account would 
dllpend upon fhe decisions taken and the number of persons affected 
fNlll Ume to time, it is not possiHe at this stage to estimate the addi-
UDrJal ftnancf.al liability on the Fund of the Commission, if the Bill is 
passed into law. 
,. ·Th~re wtll be no other r,ecurriog or non-recurring expenditure . 
. 4 

MEMORANDUM REGA.B.mIrfG lJ)BLEGATED LEGISLATION 
,Clause 4 Of 'the Btll seeks to amend section 32 elf the Oil and Natural 
Gas Commission Act, 1959 to empower the Commission to make regulations 
thereunder with respect to the terms and conditions of appointment 
and service and scales of pay of its employees with retrospeetive effect 
also. Such a power is necessary to give effect to decisions for extending 
'vtrth retrospective effect benefits to the employees of the Commission. 
Further it has been made clear that no such regulation can be made so 
Its to take effect from a date earlier than tbe commencement of the said 
Act and so as to prejudicially affect the interest of any person governed 
by any such regulation. This latter safeguard is in accordance with 
the directions of the Committee on Subordinate LegislatiOn in regard 
to the service matters of the employees of the Central Government. 
Besides, no such. regulation can be made withO'llt the previous approval 
of the Central Government. Further, in accordance with the rec~­
mendations of the Committee on Subordin<lte Legislation, prc>v.isiOll is 
also being made for the laying of regulations before both Houses of 
Parliament. 
2. In these circumstances the de)(·gation of the legislative power is 
of normal character. 

Term of 
ofBee and 
conditioDl 
of service 
Of mem-
bers. 
Powers of 
the Com-
miIeion. 
J!:rrRAcrs FROM THE OIL AND NATURAL GAS COMMISSION ACT, 1_ 
(43 OF 1959) 
• • • • • 
5. (1) The term of office and ('onditions of service of the chairman 
and other members shall be such as may be prescribed: 
Provided that the Central Government may, if it thinks fit, terminate 
the appointment of any member before the expiry of his term of office, 
after giving him a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the 
same. 
(2) Any member may resign hi~ office by giving notice in writtn~ to 
the Central Government, and on ~uch resignation being notified in the 
Official Gazette by that Government, shall be deemed to have vacated 
his office . 
• • • • • 
15. The Commission may exercise all such powers as may be necessary 
or expedient for the purpose of carrying out ite functions under this 
Act: 
Provided that before exercising its powers in respect of the following 
matters, it shall obtain the previous approval of the Central Government, 
namely:-
(a) the creation of any post, the salary or honorarium of which 
would either be more than such amount as may be prescribed, or 
where no such amount has been prescribed, more than rupees two 
thousand seven hundred and fifty or be on a scale the maximum of 
which exceeds such amount as may be prescribed or where no such 
amount has been prescribed, exceeds rupees two thousand seven 
hundred and fifty, and the appointment of any person to any such 
post; 
(b) the implementation of any scheme or proposal which wUl 
involve a capital expenditure exceeding such amount as may be 
preSCribed, or where no such nmount has been prescribed, excee<\ing 
fifty lakhs of rupees; 
(c) the disposal of any property, right or privilege the original 
or book value of which exceeds such amount as may be prescribed, 
or where no such amount has been prescribed, exceeds ten lalths of 
rupees . 
• • • • • 

I (,tt) LOK SABHA 
It. 
Bll..L 
'further to amend the Oil and Natural Gas Commission Act, 1959. 
(Shri P. C. Sethi, Ministe7' of PetTole-uml Chemioo18 and Fertilizer,) 