THE INDIAN COINAGE (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1955 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA) 
.. 

Bm No. 27 of 1955' 
mE INDIAN COINAGE (AMENDMENT) BILL, I9SS 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoIC SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Indian Coinage Act, 1906. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:-
1; ,(1) This Act may be called the Indian Coinage (Amendment) Act, Short title 
1955 . and com-. mcnccmcnt. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. After section 13 of the Indian Coinage Act, 1906, the following Insertion of 
t ' h 11 b' t d 1 . new section sec Ion s a e lOser e , name y. - . 14 in Act III 
of 1906. 
"14. (1) The rupee, half-rupee and quarter-rupee shall be res- Decimalsys-
'I 'I h d d fif d tem of COUl-pectIve y equlva ent to one un re cents, ty cents an twenty- age. 
five cents and shall, subject to the provisions of sub-section (1) 
and sub-section (2) of section 13 and to the extent specified there-
in, be a legal tender in payment or on account accordingly, 
(2) All coins issued under the authority of this Act in any 
denominations of annas, pice and pies shall, to the extent specified 
in section 13, be a legal tender in payment or on account ,at the 
rate of sixteen annas, sixty-four pice, or one hundred and ninety-
two pies to on~ hundred cents, calculated in respect of any such 
single coin, or number of such coins, tendered at one transaction, 
to the nearest cent, or where the cent above and the cent below 
are equally near, to the cent below. 
(3) All references in any enactment or in any notification, 
rule or order under any enactment or in any contract, deed or 
other instrument to any value expressed in annas, pice and pies 
shall be construed as references to that value expressed in cents 
converted thereto at the rate specified in sub-section (2)." 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
It is proposed to introduce a decimal system of subsidiary coinage 
in place of the existing one. Modem trade and cominerce demand 
speed and simplicity in the method of computation and the decimal 
system is admirably suited for the purpose. The decimal system 
has already displaced all other systems in the most advanced coun-
tries of the world. Public opinion in India also has all along express-
ed itself in favour of a decimal system. 
2. A Bill on the subject was introduced in 1946 but owing to the-
unsettled financial and political conditions after the partition, the· 
Bill was not proceeded with. The question has, however, been re-
ceiving the consideration of the Government and it is felt that the 
present is the opportune time for the changeover. 
3. The rupee would continue to be the standard coin and would 
remain unaltered. At present the rupee is divided into 16 annas. 
and each anna into 12 pies. It is proposed to divide the rupee into. 
one hundred cents and issue coins in denominations of cents. For 
some time the' existing coins would also continue to circulate and. 
provision has accordingly been made for conversion of the existing. 
coins into cents. 
4. The present Bill seeks to achieve the object by amending the:. 
Indian Coinage Act, 1906. 
A. C. GUHA. 
Nsw Dam; 
The 30th April, 1955. 
2 

LOK SABHA 
..... j I!!& 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Indian Coinage Act, 1906 
(Shri Arun Chandra Guha, 
Minister for Revenue and 
Defence Expenditure.) 