BW No. z7 of 1954 
THE ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1954 
(As INTRODUCE[) IN THE LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to abrogate the evacuee property law in respect of persons who have 
done or do any act on or after the 7th day of May, 1954 which if 
done before that date would have rendered them subject to that 
law and to amend the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 
. 1950 for that -purpose and certain other -purposes. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. Shott tltle.-This Act may be called the Administration of 
Evacuee Property (Amendment) Act, 1954. 
2. Amendinent of section 4, Act XXXI of 1950.-Section 4 of the 5 
Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1950 (hereinafter referred 
to as the principal Act) shall be renumbered as sub-section (1) there-
of, and after the sub-section as so re-numbered, the following sub-
section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that 10 
nothing in any other law controlling the rents of, or evictions 
from, any property shall apply, or be deemed ever to have 
applied, to evacUee property." 
3. Insertion of new section 7 A in Act XXXI of 1950.-After section 
·7 'of the principal Act, the· follOWing section shall be inserted, IS 
namely:-
"7 A. Property not to be declared evacuee property on or after 
7th May, 1954.-Notwithstanding anything contained in this 
Act, no property shall be declared to be evacuee property on or 
after the 7th day of May, 1954: 20 
Provided that· nothing contained in this section shall apply 
to-
. (a) any property in respect of which p~ceedings are 
pending on the 7th day of May. 1954 for declanng such pro-
perty to be evacuee property; and 25 

5 
10 
15 
2 
(b) the property of any person who has done any of the 
acts specified in sub-clauses (i), (iii), (iv) and (v) of clause 
(d) of section 2 before the 7th day of May, 1954.". 
" Amendment of section 12, Act XXXI of 1950.-In section 12 of 
the principal Act, in sub-section (1),-
(a) in clause (b) of the proviso, the word cor' shall be added 
at the end and after that clause, the following clause shall be 
inserted, namely:-
U(e) has failed to pay rent in accord~ce with the terms 
of the lease."; 
(b) .fter the proviso as" so amended, the following Explan.a.-
tion shall be inserted and shall be deemed always to have been 
inserted, namely:-
UExplanation.-In this $ub-section, 'lease' includes a 
lease granted by the Custodian and 'agte~ent' includes an 
agreement entered into by the Custodian." 
5. Amendment of section 16, Att XXXI of 1950.-In section 16 of 
the ,principal Act,-
(4) aiter sub-sectidn (1), the followj.n.g sub-section shall be 
20 inserted, namely:-
25 
3S 
U(lA) No application made under sub-section (1) shall 
be entertained uhless-
, ' . (a) before making the applicatiOA,. the applicant has 
JUeda~l appeals and revision appUcationspennissible 
under this Act against the order deelaringthe pro~'tty 
of the evacuee' to ~ evacuee property and 1fle CUt04ian 
Genet81 h_s made a final order in the casej lind 
(b) the applicaticmis made within sixty days :Of 
the final order of the Custociian General: 
Provided that any su~h applicat1(m, by an evacuee who 
migrated to West Pakistan from the State of Uttar ~tadesh 
during the period between the 1st day of February, 1950 and 
the 31st day of May, 1950 and who is pe'tmittM to 
l"etum 'to India for permanent re-gettleh'lent may ·~eriter­
tained if it is made within 'sixty days of the return of ,the 
evacuee to India: 
Provided further that nothing contained in this sub-
seetioBshall apply to an application under sub-section (1) 
which is pending on the commencement of the Adm.iaistra-
tion of. Evacuee Property (Amendment) Act, 1954. 
Explanation.-In this sub-section, the eXpte'ssion 
CCustM'ian General' shaU include _ Deplllt, Custodian 
~ral and 81\ Assistant Custodian Gelleral. 

1 
(b) to sub-section (3), the following Explanation shall be 
added at't'lte tMd, :ftirnely:-
"ExpUmation.-For the J>UI'P(*e of tile p'ro\riso to -this'i'Ub-
sectl011, an allotment shan be deemed to be a leae _ :slulH 
have -effect against the person to whom restoratioll is msde , 
to the ~ extent and in the same manrteras if it were • 
lease." 
.. ~ent of SectiOD 17, Act ~ 01 t9~O.-In section 27 of 
t'he principal Act, after sub-sectiob (1), the following sub-seCtion 
shan be inserted, namely:- 10 
"( lA,) The Ctmtordian General, a Deputy Ct.ISt()cU.b <U!'JIlelill 
or ah Assistant Custodian Gettetal may after giving lio'tice to tJ\e 
'l*'ties concerned review his OWft «cier." 
'1. A.meHm~ of seCtion 10, Act .XXXI ot 1950.~In ~eCtiO'h 4'0 
of the prinCipal Act, in sub-seCtion (l), after the words anaflgtlrell I, 
'l'4thday Of August, 1&47', the wOrds and figures 'but befotoe the 7th 
day of May, 1954' shall be imerted. 
8. Amendment of section 43, Ad XXX] tif 115O.--Section ~3 01 the 
principal Act shall be renumbered as sub-section (2) of that section 
ani Wore the sub-seetion as so renumbered, the following sub- zo 
section shall be inserted and shall be deemed always to have been 
inserted, namely:-
"(1) Where during the pendency of anyprC1C1!eding nnc1el' 
this Act any party to the proceeding dies, the proceeding sball not 
abate by reason of the death and any order made in any such z, 
proceeding shall have the same force and effect as if it had been 
made before the death took place." 
9. Amendment of section 48, Act XXXI of 1950.-Section 48 of the 
principal Act shall be renumbered as sub-section (l) thereof and 
after the sub-section as so renumbered, the following sub-section JO 
shall be inserted, namely:-
"(2) For the purpose of sub-section (1), the decision of the 
Custodian as to the sum due to the State Government or to the 
Custodian shall be final." 
10. Retrospective operation of certain amendments.-The amend- i' 
ments made in the principal Act by section 3 and section 7 of this 
Act shall be deemed to have come into -force on the 7th day of 
May, 1954. 

4 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Evacuee Property Law was enacted to meet an extraordinary 
situation. With Government's decision to acquire the right, title and 
interest of evacuee owners in their properties ·in India and utilise 
such .properties for payment of part compensation to displaced per-
sons, the raison d' etre for continuance of the evacuee property 
law in its present form has lost much df. its force. Government 
~ave accordingly decided that the evacuee property law should 
cease to operate except in cases where the cause of action arose be-
fore 7th May, 1954. That is to say, clauses (d) (i), (d) (ii), (d) (iii), 
(d) (iv) and (d) (v) of section 2 of the Administration of Evacuee 
Property Act, 1950 will be rendered inoperative for the future. , 
2. As a corollary to the decision referred to above, section 40 of 
the Act has also been made inoperative in so far as it relates to 
transfers of property made on or after the 7th May, 1954 . 
. 3. Opportunity has also been taken to make certain clarificatory 
amendments which are considered necessary in the light of ~he 
experience of the working of the Act. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 19th May, 1954. 
AJIT PRASAD JAIN .. 

$ 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTI' 
ACT, 1950 (XXXI OF 1950) 
• ... ... ... • ... ... ... 
40. Validity of transfers respecting property subsequently declar-
ed to be evacuee property.-(l) No transfer made after the 14th day 
of August, 1947, by or on behalf of any person in any manner what-
soever of any property belonging to him shall be effective so as to 
confer any rights or remedies in respect of the transfer on the 
parties thereto or any person claiming under them or either of them, 
if, at any time after the transfer, the transferor becomes an evacuee 
within the meaning of section 2 or the property of the transferor is 
'declared or notified to be evacuee property within the meaning of 
this Act, unless the transfer is confirmed by the Custodian in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act. 
• • • • • 

• 
LO~ SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to abrogate the evaouee property law in respect of persons who 
have done or do any act on or after the 7th day of May, 
1954 which if done before that date would have rendered 
them subject to that law and to amend the Administration 
of Evacuee Property Act, 1950 for that purpose and certain 
other purposes. . 
(Shri Ajit Prasad Jaill, 
Minister for Rehabilitation.) 