THE MOTOR TRANSPORT 
WORKERS BILL, 1960 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
ON 29TH APRIL 1960) 

"THE MOTOR TRANSPORT WORKERS BILL, 1980 
CLAUSES 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title, exte,nt, commencement and application. 
2. Definitions. 
,CHAFFER II 
R.EcIS'1'8NI2011' ! or', MMoR I 'Ful.uPoRT ,UtmERTAlWfGS 
3. Classification.' of> 'motor \ttT8DIp01't'. semces. 
4 .. ..ftegistration: of 'motor irabBpOl";1IIIde1UidDg. 
CHAPTER III 
INsPECTING STAFF 
5. Chief inspector and inspectors. 
6. Powers of the inspectors. 
7. Facilities to :'be:·raftordec:t"to 'inspectors . 
. 8. '. Cenifying .. SUlrgeGns. 
CHAPTER' 'tv 
WELFARE AND HEALTH 
9. Canteecs. 
10. Rest rooms. 
11. Uniforms. 
12. Medical fadlities. 
13· First-aid facilities. 
• ,CHAPTER' V 
Hot1BS :AND LIMlTATION OF EMPLOYM!:NT 
14. Hours of work and spread-over for motor transport work-
ers engaged in city services. 
(1) 
302 LS-l 

(Ii) 
CLAUSES 
15. Hours of work and spread-over for motor transport work-
ers engaged in long distance passenger services. 
16. Hours of work and spread-over for motor transport work-
ers engaged in long distance freight services. 
17. HoUlI'S of work for adolescents employed as motor tra~ 
port workers. 
18. Daily intervals for rest. 
19. Split duty. 
20. Notice. of hours of work. 
21. Weekly rest. 
22. Compensatory day of rest. 
CHAPTER VI 
EMPLOYMENT OF YOUNG PERSONS 
23. Prohibition of employment of children. 
24. Adolescents employed as motor transport workers to carry 
tokens. 
25. Certificate of fitness. 
26. Power to require medical examination. 
CHAPTER VII 
WAGES AND LEAVE 
27. Act 4 of 1936 to apply to payment of wages to motor 
transport workers. 
28. Extra wages for overtime. 
29. Annual leave with wages. 
30. Wages during leave period. 
CHAPTER VIII 
PENALTIES AND PRocmuu 
31. Obstructions. 
32. Use of false certificate of fitness. 
33. Contravention of provisions regarding employment of 
motor transport workers. 
34. Other offences. 
35. Enhanced penalty after previous conviction. 

(iii) 
CLAUSES 
36. Offe.nces by companies. 
37. Cognizance of offences. 
38. Limitation of prosecutions. 
CHAPTER IX 
MISCELLANEOUS 
39. Effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with this Act. 
40. Exemptions. 
41. Powers to give directions. 
42. Power to make rules. 

Bill No. 27 of 1"0. 
THE MOTOR TRANSPORT WORKERS BILL, 1960 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOIC SABRA) 
A I 
BILL 
TO provide for the welfare of motor transport workers and to 
regulate the conditions oj their work. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eleventh Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
• 1. (1) This Act may be called the Motor Transport Workers Short title, 
A t 1960 extent, com-
C , • menccment 
(2) It -extends' to the whole of India except the State of Jammu :!.apPlica. 
and Kashmir. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Gov-
10 ernment may, by notification in the' Official Gazette, appoint and 
different dates may be appointed for different States. 
(4) It applies to every motor transport undertaking employing 
ten or more motor transport worke,rs; 
Provided that the State Government may, after giving not less 
15 than two months' notice of its intention so to do, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, apply all or any of the provisions of this Act 
to any motor transport unde,rtaking employing less than ten but 
not less than five motor transport workers. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- Definitions. 
20 . (a) "adolescent" means a person who has completed his 
fifteenth year but has not completed his eighteenth year; 
(b) "adult" means a person who has completed his eigh. 
teenth year; 

~ 
(c) "child" means a person who has not completed his 
fifteenth year; 
(d) "city service." means a motor transport service classi-
fied as city service under section 3; 
(e) "day" means a period of twenty-four hours beginning S 
at midnight; 
(1) "employer" means in relation to any motor transport 
undertaking, the person who, or the authority which, has thE' 
ultimate, control over the affairs of the motor transport under-
taking, and where the said affairs are entrusted to any othellO 
person whether called a manager, managing director, managing 
agent or by any other name, such other person; 
(g) "hours of work" means the time during which a motor 
transport worker is at the disposal of the e,mployea.- or of any 
other person entitled to claim his services and includes- IS 
(i) the time spent in work done during the running 
time of the transport vehicle; 
(ii) the time spent in subsidiary wcxrk; and 
(iii) periods of mere attendance at terminals of 
than ftftee,n minutes; 
less 
(h) "long distance freight service" means a motor trans-
port service classified as long distance freight service under 
section 3; 
20 
(i) "long distance passenger service" means a motor trans-
port service classified as long distance passenger service under 25 
section 3; 
(j) "motor transport undertaking" means a motor trans-
part undertaking engaged in carrying passengers or goods or 
both by road for hire or reward, and includes a private carrier; 
(k) "motor transport worker" means a person who is Ire- 30 
quired to work or is e,ngaged in a professional capacity on a 
transport vehicle or who attends to duties in connection with 
the arrival, departure, loading or unloading of such transport 
vehicle and includes a driver, cleaner, station staff, line check-
ing staff, booking clerk, cash clerk, depot cle,rk or attender, but 3S 
does not include-
(i) any such person who is employed in a factory 8S 
defined in the Factories Act, 1948; 

s 
10 
7 of 1916. 
loaofl956. IS 
20 
2S 
•• 30 
3 
(ii) any such person to whom the prOVISions of any 
law far the time being in force regulating the conditions 
of se·rvice of persons employed in shops or commercial 
establishments apply; 
(l) "period of mere attendance" means the period during 
which a person remains at his post solely in order to reply to 
possible calls or to resume action at the time fixed in the time-
table; 
(m) ''prescribed'' means prescribed by rules made under 
this Act; 
(n) "qualified medical practitioner" means a person having 
a certificate. granted by an authority specified in the Schedule 
to the Indian Medical Degrees Act, 1916, or notified under sec-
tion 3 of that Act or specified in the Schedules to the Indian 
Medical Council Act, 1956, and includes any person having a 
certificate, granted under any Provincial or State Medical Coun-
cil Act; 
(0) "running time" in relation to a working day means the 
time from the moment a transport vehicle starts functioning as 
such at the beginning of the working day until the moment 
when the transport vehicle ceases to function as such at the 
end of the working day, excluding any time during which the 
running of the transport vehicle is interrupted for a period ex-
ceeding such duration as may be preoScribed during which 
period the persons who drive, or perform any other work in 
connection with the transport vehicle are free to dispose of 
their time as they please or are engaged in subsidiary work; 
(p) "spread-over" means the period betwelm the commence-
ment of duty on any day and the termination of duty on that 
day; 
(q) "subsidiary work" means work in connection with a 
transport vehicle., its passengers or its load which is done out-
side the running time of the transport vehicle, including in 
particular-
35 (i) work in connection with accounts, the paying in of 
cash, the signing of registers, the handing in of service 
sheets, the checking of tickets and othe·r similar work; 

4 
(ii) the taking over and garaging of the transport 
vehicle; 
(iii) travelling from the place. where a person signs on 
to the place where he takes over the transport vehicle and 
from the place where he leaves the transport vehicle to, 
the place where he signs off; 
(iv) wcxrk in connection with the upkeep and repair of 
the transport vehicle.; and 
(v) the loading and unloading of the transport vehicle; 
(r) "wages" has the meaning assigned to it in clause (vi) 10 
of section 2 of the Payment of Wages Act, 1936; 4 of 1936. 
(8) "week" means the period be.tween midnight on Satur-
day night and midnight on the succeeding Saturday night; 
(t) all other words and expressions used but not defined in 
this Act and defined in the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939,shall have IS 40f 1939. 
the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act 
CHAPTER II 
REGISTRATION OF MOTOR TRANSPORT UNDERTAKINGS 
Classification 3· For the purposes of this Act, the State Government shall 
~:'ns~ttor classify the services run by every motor transpcxrt undertaking 20 
lervice.. operating in the State into the following categories, namely:-
(a) city service, 
(b) long distance· passenger service, 
(c) long distance freight service. 
Regi8tration 4. (1) Every employer of a motor transpcxrt undertaking to which 2S 
~.po~otor this Act applies shall have the undertaking registered under" this 
undertaking. Act. 
(2) An application for the registration of a motor transport under-
taking shall be made. by the employer to the prescribed authority 
in such form and within such time as may be prescribed. 30 
(3) Where a motor transport undertaking is registered under 
this Act, there shall be issued to the e.mployer a certificate of regi~ .. 
tTaUon containing such particulars as may be prescribed, 

4S or 1860. 
CHAPTER III 
INSPECTING STAFF 
5. (1) The State Government may, by notiftcation in the Ofticial Chief ins-
Gazette, appoint for the State a duly qualified person to be the chief fn~~~~tor:~d 
5 inspector and as many duly qualified persons to be inspectors sub-
ordinate to the chief inspector as it thinks ftt. 
(2) The chief inspector may declare· the local limits within 
which inspectors shall exercise their powers under this Act, and 
may himself exe.rcise the powers of an inspector within such local 
10 limits as may be assigned to him by the State Government. 
(3) The chief inspector and all inspectors shall be deemed to be 
public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian 
Penal Code. 
6. Subject to such conditions and restrictions as the State Gov- Powers of 
IS ernment may by general or special order impose, the chief inspector ~~~IPec­
. or an inspector may-
20 
30 
(a) make· such examination and inquiry as he thinks fit in 
order to ascertain whether the provisions of this Act and of 
the rules made thereunder are being observed in the case of 
any motor transport undertaking; 
(b) with such assistance, if any, as he thinks fit, e·nter and 
inspect any premises under use or occupation of any motor 
transport undertaking at any reasonable time for the purpose 
of carrying out the objects of this Act; 
(c) examine any motor transport wcrker employed in a 
motor transport unde.rtaking or require the production of any 
register or other document maintained in pursuance of this Act, 
and take on the spot or otherwise statements of any person 
which he may consider necessary for carrying out the purposes 
of this Act; and 
(d) exe·rcise such other powers as may be prescribed: 
Provided that no person shall be compelled under this section 
to answer any question cr make any statement tending to incri-
minate himself. .' 
35 '7, Every employer'shall afford the· chief inspeCtor and an inspec- Facilities to 
tor' all reasonable ~acilities for making any entu::y, inspection, exa- be.afforded 
.' ,. d th' Act to mspectorl; mmatlon or mqulry un er 15 , 
302 LS-2 

Certifying 
uraeOIll. 
Clnt«nl. 
6 
8. (1) The State Government may appoint qualified medical 
practitioners to be certifying surgeons for the purposes of this Act 
within such loeal limits or for such motor transport undertakings 
or class of motor transport undertakings as it may assign to them 
respectively. S 
(2) The certifying surgeon shall perform such duties as may be 
prescribed in connection with-
(a) the examination and ce·rtification of motcxr transport 
workers; 
(b) the exercise of such medical supervIsIOn as may be l(l 
prescribed where adolescents are, or are to be, employed as 
motor transport workers in any work in any motor transport 
undertaking which is likely to cause injury to their health. 
CHAPTER IV 
WELFARE AND HEALTH I, 
9. (1) The State Government may make rules requiring that in 
every place wherein one hundred motor transport workers or more 
employed in a motor transport undertaking ordinarily call on duty 
during every day, one or more canteens shall be provided and 
maintained by the employer for the use of the motor transport 20 
workers. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, 
such rule.s may provide for-
(a) the date by which the canteens shall be provided; 
(b) the number of canteens that shall be provided and the 25 
standards in respect of construction, accommodation, furniture 
and other equipment of the. canteens; 
(e) the foodstuffs which may be served therein and the 
charges which may be made therefor; 
(d) the constitution of a managing committee for a can- 30 
teen and the. representation of the motor transport workers in 
the management of the canteen; 
(3) The State Government may, subject to such conditions as 
it may Impose, delegate to the chief inspector the· power to make 
rules with reference to clau~e (e) of sub-section (2). 

7 
10, (1) In every place wherein motor transport workers employ- Rdt room. 
ed in a motor transport undertaking are required to stay on duty 
at night, there shall be provided and maintained by the employer 
for the use of the motor transport workers such number of rest 
S rooms or such other altemative accommodatioD, as may be pres-
cribed. 
(2) The rest rooms or the alternative accommodation to be pro-
vided under sub-section (1) shall be sufficiently lighted and venti-
lated and shall be maintained in a cool and clean condition. 
10 (3) The State Government may prescribe the standards in res-
pect of construction, accommodation, furniture and other equip-
ment of rest rooms Or the alternative accommodation to be pro.vided 
under this section. 
11. (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Uniforms. 
IS Gazette, make rules requiring an employer of a motor transport 
undertaking to provide for such of the motor transport workers 
employed in that undertaking such number and type of uniforms, 
rain-coats or other like amenities for their protection from rain or 
cold as may be specified in the rules. 
~ (2) There shall be paid to the motor transport workers by the 
employer an allowance for the washing of uniforms provided under 
sub-section (1) at such rates as may be preseribed. 
12. There shall be provided and maintained by the employer so tte8tt1 
as to be readily available such medical facilities for the motor Ie ct. 
25 transport workers at such operating centres and halting stations as 
may be prescribed by the State Government. 
13. (1) There shall be provided and maintained by the employer Pi~~-.Iid 
b d'i 'bl d' all k' h first 'd faahtlct. so as to e rea 1 y accesSl e unog wor IIlg ours a -81 
box equipped with the prescribed contents in every transport vehicle. 
30 (2) Nothing except the prescribed contents shall be, kept in 8 
first-aid box. 
(3) The first-aid box shall be kept in the charge of the driver 
or the conductor of the transport vehicle who shall be trained in 
the use, thereof. 

Hours of 
work and 
Iprcad-over 
for motor 
transport 
8 
CHAPTER V 
Hotms AND LIMITATIONS OF EMPLOYMENT 
14, (1) No adult motor transport worker engaged in any city o~r~ 
vice shall be required or allowed to work for more than eight hours 
in any day and forty-eight hours in any week, , 
::::d in (2) The hours of work of such motor transport workers l.ha II 
citY ICrvices. be so arranged that inclusive of inte,rval for rest under section) H 
Hour. of 
work and 
tpread-ovet 
(or motor 
transport 
workers 
they shall not spread-over more than ten-and-a-half hours in any 
day, 
(3) In the case of motor transport workers engaged in the run 10 
ning of extra services on such festive and other occasions or during 
such peak hours as may be notified by the prescribed authority. 
the hours of wcrk under sub-section (1) or the spread-over of such 
hours of work under sub-section (2) may. with the approval of that 
authority, be increased to such limit as may be prescribed, 15 
15, (1) No adult motor transport worker engaged in any long 
distance passengelf service shall be required or allowed to work for. 
more than nine hours in any day and forty-eight hours in any 
week: 
i::~~~ce Provided that the aforesaid period of forty-eight hours may, 20 
paSl~nger with the approval of the prescribed authority, be increased to fLfty-elrVlcel. 
four hours, 
Howl of 
work aDd 
spread-over 
for motor 
transport 
(2) The hours of work of such motor transport workers shall 
be so a:rranged that inclusive of interval for rest under section 18 
they shall not spread-over more than twelve hours in any day and " 
sixty-three hours in any week: 
Provided that the afore6aid period of sixty-three hours may, 
with the approval of the prescribed authority, be inCll"eased to 
seventy-two hours. 
16. (1) No adult motor transport worker engaged in any long 30 
distance freight service shall be required or allowed to work far, 
mof€. than nine hours in any day or forty-eight hours in any week: 
worken . Provided that the aforesaid period of nine hours may, with the engaged ID 
long distance approval of the prescribed authority, be increased tc ten hour!!. 
freight 
services. (2) The hours of work of such motor transport workers shall be 55 
so arranged that inclusive of interval for rest undeor section 18 they 
shall not spread over mare than twelve hours in any day and twc 
hundred and fifty-two hours in a period of four weeks: 

Provided that the aforesaid period of twelve hours maYi W;ith 
the approval of the. prescribed authority, be increased to fourteen 
hours. 
17. No adolescent shall be employed or required to WQfk as a Hours of 
, motor transport worker in any motor transport undertaking- ::~~~:ta 
'. employed el 
(a) for more than six hours a day including rest mterval motor trana. 
of half-an-hour; port worken. 
(b) between the hours of 10 P.M. and 5 A.M. 
18. (1) The hours of work in relation to adult motor transport D81ilY inter~ 
• V8 • for reat. 
10 workers On each day shall be so fixed that no perIod of work shall 
exceed five hours and that no such motor transport worker shall 
work far more than five hours before he has had an interval for 
rest for at least half-an-hour: 
Provided that the provisions of this sUlb-section in so far as they 
IS relate to interval for rest shall not apply to a motor transport work-
er who is not required to work for more than six hours. 
(2) The hours of work on each day shall be so fixed that a motor 
transport worker is allowed a period of rest of at least nine consecu-
tive hours between the termination of duty on anyone day and the 
30 commencement of duty on the next following day. 
19. (1) Subject to the provisions contained in section 14 the hours Split duty. 
of work of an adult motor transport worker engaged in a city service 
shall not be split into more than three spells on any day. 
(2) Each spell of work referred to in sub-section (1) shall be 
15 followed by an interval of rest of not less than two hours. 
20. (1) There shall be displayed and correctly maintained by Notice of . 
every employer a notice' of hours of work in such form and manner hOu~ of 
as may be prescribed showing clearly for every day the hours during war 
which each adult motor transport worker may be required to work. 
(2) Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, no such 
30 motor transport worker shall be required or allowed to work other-
wise than in accordance with the notice of hours of work so display-
ed. 
21. (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Weekly reat. 
Gazette, make rules providing for a day of rest in every period of 
35 seven days, which shall be allowed to all motor transport workers: 

Compensa-
tOry day of 
reat. 
ProhibitiOD 
of employ-
ment of 
children. 
10 
Provided that in the case of a motor transport worker whose duty 
ends after mid-night but before 9 A.M., such day of rest shall be 
reckoned as twenty-four consecutive hours beginning when his duty 
so ends and the hours he has worked after mid-night shall be counted 
in the previous day. 
(2) Nothing contained in this section-
.s 
(a) shall be deemed to prevent a motor transport worker 
from voluntarily working on any day of rest which is not a 
closed holiday so, however, that the motor transport worker 
does not work for more than ten days consecutively without a 10 
holiday for a whole day intervening; 
(b) shall apply to any motor transport worker whose total 
period of employment including any day spent on leave is less 
than six days. 
22. Where, as a result of any exemption granted. to an employer IS 
under the provisions of this Act from the operation of section 21, a 
motor transport worker is deprived of any of the days of rest 
to which he is entitled under that section, the motor transport work-
er shall be allowed within the month in which the days of rest are 
due to him or within one month immediately following that month, 30 
compensatory holidays of equal number to the days of rest so lost. 
CHAPTER VI 
EMPLOYMENT OF YOUNG PERsONS 
%3. No child shall be required or allowed to work in any capacity 
in any motor transport undertaking. zs 
Adolescents 24. No adolescent shall be required or allowed to work as a motor 
emPt IOYterad II transport worker in any motor transport undertaking unless-mo or nI-
port workers (a) a certificate of fitness granted with reference to him to carry .. . tokens. under sectlon 25 IS In the custody of the employer; and 
(0) such adolescent carries with him while he is at work 30 
a token giving a reference to such certificate. 
Certificato 25. (1) A certifying surgeon shall, on the application of any adole-
of fltnes.. scent or his parent or guardian accompanied by a document signed 
by the employer or any other person on his behalf that such person 
will be employed as a motor transport worker in a motor transport 35 
undertaking if certified to be fit for that work, or on the application 
of the employer or any other person on his behalf with reference to 
any adolescent intending to work. examine such person and aScer-
tain his fitness for work as a motor transport worker. 

II 
(2) A certificate of fitness granted under this section shall be 
valid for a period of twelve months from the date thereof, but may 
be renewed. 
(3) Any fee payable for a certificate under this section shall be 
S paid by the employer and shall not be recoverable from the adole-
scent, his parent or guardian. 
10 
26. An inspector may, if he thinks necessary so to do, cause any Pow~r to 
adolescent employed as a motor transport worker in any motor req~i e1 . mea ca 
transport undertaking to be examined by a certifying surgeon. examiJlatioD. 
CHAPTER VII 
WAGES AND LEAVE 
27. The Payment of Wages Act, 1936, as in force for the time kq of 1936 
being, shall apply to motor transport workers engaged in a motor ~=~t ~f 
transport undertaking as it applies to wages payable in an industrial wages to 
IS establishment as if the said Act had been extended to the payment ~~o~:::;. 
of wages of such motor transport workers by a notification of the 
State Government under sub-section (5) of section 1 thereof, and 
as if a motor transport undertaking were an industrial establish-
ment within the meaning of the said Act. 
20 28. (1) Where an adult motor transport worker works for longer Extra \\'.~. 
hours than those fixed in respect of him under Chapter V or where for overtime. 
the sperad-over of the hours of work of any such worker exceeds 
the limits fixed under that Chapter, he shall be entitled to wages at 
th~ rate of twice his ordinary rate of wages in respect of the, over-
2S time work or the· excess ·hours of the spread-over, as the case may 
be. 
Explanation.-Where both the hours of work and the spread-
over exceed the limits fixed under Chapter V. the extra wages pay-
able to an adult motor transport worlter under this sub-section shall 
go be calculated with reference to the overtime work or the excess 
hours of spread-over, whichever is more advantageous to him. 
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1),-
(a) "ordinary rate of wages" in relation to a motor transport 
worker means the basic wages plus such allowances to which 
35 he is for the time being entitled to, but does not include a bonus; 

(b) the hours of work or the limits of the spread-over of 
the hours of work fixed under Chapter V shall not include any 
increase of such hours of work or the limits of sperad-over per-
missible under that Chapter. 
=:w with 29. (1) Without prejudice to such holidays as may be prescribed, , 
waael. every motor transport worker who has worked for a period of two 
hundred and forty days or more in a motor transport undertaking 
during a calendar year shall be allowed during the subsequent calen-
dar year leave with wages for a number of days calculated at the 
rate of-
(a) if an adult, one day for every twenty days of work per-
formed by him during the previous calendar year; and 
(b) if an adolescent, one day for every fifteen days of work 
performed by him during the previous calendar year. 
10 
(2) A motor transport worker whose service commences other- IS 
wise than on the first day of January s_hall be entitled to leave with 
wages at the rate laid down in clause (a) or, as the case may be, 
clause (b) of sub-section (1) if he has worked for two-thirds of the 
total number of days in the remainder of the calendar year. 
(3) If a motor transport worker is discharged or dismissed from 20 
service during the course of the year, he shall be entitled to leave 
with wages at the rate laid down in sub-section (1), even if he has 
not worked for the entire period specified in sub~ection (1) or sub-
section (2) entitling him to earned leave. 
(4) In calculating leave under this section, fraction of leave of 25 
half a day or more shall be treated as one full day's leave, and 
fraction of less than half a day shall be omitted. 
(5) If a motor transport worker does not in anyone calendar 
year take the whole of the leave allowed to him under sub-section 
(l)or sub-section (2), as the case may be, any leave not taken by 30 
him shall be added to the leave to be allowed to him in the succeed-
ing calendar year: 
Provided that the total number of days of leave that may be 
carried forward to a succeeding year shall not exceed thirty in the 
case of an adult or forty in the case of an adolescent. 3' 
(6) In this section, "calendar year" means the ye·ax commencing 
on the first day of January. 
Ezpl4na.ilon.-For the purposes of ,this section, leave shall not 
include weekly holidays or holidays for festival or other similar 

13 
occasions whether occurring during or at either end of the period 
of leave. 
30. (1) For the leave allowed to a motor transport worker under :sel IdUZ• 
section 29, he shall be paid at the rate equal to the daily average of peiiod. eave 
5 his total full time wages, exclusive of any overtime earnings and 
bonus, if any, but inclusive of dearness allowance and the cash 
equivalent of the advantage, if any, accruing by the concessional 
supply by the employer of foodgrains for the day on which he work· 
ed. 
10 (2) A motor transport worker who has been allowed leave for 
not less than four days under section 29 shall, before his leave be--
gins, be· paid his wages for the period of the leave allowed. 
CHAPTER VIII 
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE 
15 31. (1) Whoever obstructs an inspector in the discharge of his Obatruc:tfonl. 
duties unde·r this Act or refuses or wilfully neglects to afford the 
inspector any reasonable facility for making any inspection, exa-
mination or inquiry authorised by or under this Act in relation t.o 
any motor transport undertaking shall be punishable with imprison-
20 ment for a tenn which may extend to three months, or with tine 
which may exte.nd to five hundred rupees, or with both. 
(2) Whoever wilfully refuses to prcduce on the demand of an 
inspector any register or other document kept in pursuance of this 
Act, or prevents or attempts to prevent or does anything which 
25 he has reason to believe is likely to prevent any person from appear-
ing before or being examined by an inspector acting in pursuance 
of his duties under this Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment 
for a tenn which may extend to three months, or with fine which 
may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. 
30 32. Whoever knowingly uses or attempts to use as a certificate Ule of falle 
of fitness granted to himself under section 25 a certificate granted cfiertificate of 
h . h' b d tneta. to anot er pe·rson under that sectIon, or avmg een grante a 
certificate of fitness to himself, knowingly allows it to be used, or 
an attempt to use it to be made, by another person, shall be 
3J punishable with imprisonment which may extend to one month, or 
with fine which may extend to fifty rupees, or with both. 
33. Whoever, except as otherwise permitted by or under this ~oDtr·fven. . .. tlon 0 Act, contravenes any provIsion of thIS Act or of any rules made proviaiora 
thereunder, prohibiting, restricting or regulating the employment =~nt 
.." o( persons in a motor transport undertaking, shall be punishable of motor 
with imprisonment for a term yw'hich may extend to three months, :==.t 
302 L5-3 

Other 
oft'encee. 
1-4 
or With fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both, 
and in the case· of a continuing contravention with an additional fine 
whlch may extend to seventy-five rupees for every day during which 
such ~ontravention continues after conviction for the first such con-
ttlw"tfon. 5 
M, Whoe·ver contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or of 
any rules made thereunder for which no other penalty is elsewhere 
provided by or under this Act shall be punishable with imprison-
Dlent for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine 
which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. 10 
Bnhancedr 35. If l.ny person who has been convicted of any offence punishable 
penalty. tet d th' At· . 'It f ff . l' . previoDl un er IS c IS agam gul y 0 an 0 ence mvo vmg a contraventIon 
coavic:tlOll. of the sgme provision, he sh"n be punishable on a subsequent convic-
tion with imprisonment which may extend to six months or with 
fthe whicll mfiy p.x'tend to bne t.housand rupees, or with both: IS 
Provided that for thp. purposes of this section no cognizance shall 
be taken of any conviction made more than two years before the com-
mission of the offence which is being punished. 
Offencea by 36. (1) 1£ the person committing an offence under this Act is a 
companiea. company, the company as well as every person in charge of, and res- 2C 
ponsible to, the company for the conduct of its business at the time of 
the coMmiisicn of the offence shall be deemed to be guilty of the 
offeltce and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render 2S 
any such person liable to any punishment if he proves that the offence 
was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due 
diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub·section (1), where 
an offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is 30 
proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or con-
niv81'lce of, or that the .commission of the offence is attributable to any 
neglect on the part of any director, manager, managing agent or any 
other officer of the company, such director, manager, managing agent 
or such other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence 3S 
and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
Expmft.atiofl. ....... For the purposes of this section,-
(a) "company" means any body eorporate llnd inclUdes a 
ftrm or other asioeiation of tndiv\duals; and 

IS 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm. means a partner in the 
firm. 
37. No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act Copluncc 
except on complaint made by, or with the previous sanction in ofOfrenc:et. 
5 writing of, the chief inspector and no court inferior to that of a Pre-
sidency magistrate or a magistrate of the 'first class shall try 8,Ily 
offence punishable under this Act. 
38. No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under Umitation of 
this Act unless the complaint thereof is made within three mQllths prosecution'_ 
10 from the date on which the alleged commission of the offence ~uune 
to the knowledge of an inspector: 
Provided that where the offence consists of diSQbeying a wr,itten 
order made by an inspector, complaint thereof may be made, within 
six months of the date on which the offence is alleged to have beeQ 
15 committed. 
CHAPTER IX 
MISCELLANEOUS 
39. (1) The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstand- Effect or law 
ing anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law and linc:ogree-menta n-
20 or in the terms of any award, agreement or contract of service, whe- ,i'tent willa 
ther made before or after the commencement of this Act: tW" N:t. 
Provided that where under any such award, agreement, cOI\tract 
of service or otherwise a motor transport worker is entitled to };)ene-
fits in respect of any matter which are more favourable to him than 
a, those to which he would be entitled under this Aot, the motor trans-
port worker shall continue to be entitled to the more favourable 
benefiti in respect of that matter, notwithstanding that he receives 
benefits in respect of other matters under this Act. 
(2) Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed as precluding 
30 any motor transport worker from .entering into an agreEm\ent with 
an employer for granting him rights or privileges in respect of any 
matter which are more favourable to him than those to which he 
would be entitled under this Act. 
40. (1) Nothing contained in this Act shall apply to or in relation a-Ptto., •. 
lS to any transport vehicle-
(i) used for the transport of sick or injured pel'fOnt; 

16 
(ii) used for any purpose connected with the security of 
India, or the security of a State, or the maintenance of public 
order. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), the 
State Government may by order in writing exempt, subject to such J 
conditions and restrictions as it may think fit to impose, any class of 
employers from all .or any of the provisions of this Act or any rules 
made thereunder. 
Powen to 41. The Central Government may give directions to the Govern-
te:.. dircc- ment of any State as to the carrying into execution in the State of 10 
the provisions conta!ned in this Act. 
Power to 42. (1) The State Government may, subject to the condition of 
make rulCi. previous publication, make rules to carry out the purposes of this 
Act: 
Provided that the date to be specified under clause (3) of section I~ 
23 of the General Clauses Act, 1897, shall not be less than six weeks 10 of 18517. 
from the date on wh:ich the draft of the proposed rules was published. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, any such rules may provide for-
(a) the form of application for the registration of a motor 20 
transport undertaking, the time within which and the authority 
to which such application may be made; 
(b) the grant of a certificate of registration in respect of a 
motor transport undertaking and the fees payable for such 
registration; 25 
(c) the qualifications required in respect of the chief ins-
pector and inspector; 
(d) the powers which may be exerci~ed by inspectors and 
the areas in which and the manner in which such powers may 
·be ~xercised; 30 
(e) the medical supervision which may be exercised by 
certifying surge.ons; 
(f> appeals from any order of the chief inspector or inspector 
and the form in which, the time within which and the authori-
ties to which, such appeals may be preferred; 3S 
. (9) the time withi,n which facilities require~ by this Act 
to be provided and mliintaihed may be so provIdedj 

17 
(h) the medical facilities that should be provided for 
motor transport workers; 
(i) the form and manner in which notices of periods of work 
shall be displayed and maintained; and 
S (j) the registers which should be maintained by employers 
and the returns, whether occasional or periodical, as in the opinion 
of the State Government, may be required for the purpo&eB 
of this Act. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
There are at present certain enactments like the Motor Vehicles 
Act. 1939 and the Factories Act, 1948 which cover certain sections of 
motor transport workers and certain aspects of their conditions of 
employment. There is, however, no independent legislation appli-
cable to motor transport workers as a whole or for regulating the 
various ~spects of their conditions of employment, work and wages. 
It is considered desirable to have a separate legislative measure for 
motor transport workers which would cover matters like medical 
facilities, welfare facilities, hours of work, spread-over, rest periods, 
overtime, annual leave with pay, etc., on the analogy of similar en-
actments for workers in factories, mines and plantations. The pre-
sent Bill is intend~ to achieve this object. 
2. The notes on clauses explain the main provisions contained 
In the Bill. 
NEW DELHI, 
The 21st April, 1960. G. L. NANDA. 
18 

Notes on CZaUlu 
CZaus.e 1.-The prcposed enactment will apply to every motor 
transport undertaking employing ten or more motor transport 
workers. This limit has been considered necessary as it would be 
difficult to enforce the law in the case of undertakings employing a 
smaller number of workers. However, the State Government has 
been empowered to apply this measure to any motor transport 
undertaking employing less than ten but not less than five motor 
transport workers· 
Clause 3.-This clause empowers the State Government to 
classify the services run by every motor transport undertaking into 
three distinct classes. Such a classification has been considered 
necessary taking into account several factors such as public 
convenience, long distance travel on most routes, the intermit-
tent nature of work and the difficulty in making arrangements for 
change of crew at a number of places. 
Clause 4.-This clause requires every employer of a motor trans-
port undertaking to have the undertaking registered. 
Clauses 5 to 8.-These clauses deal with the setting up of adntinis-
trative machinery by the State Governments for enforcing the 
provisions of the Act. 
Clauses 9 to 13.-These clauses specify the minimum facilities for 
welfaxe and health that the employers will have to provide for motor 
transport workers. These facilities relate to provision of canteen3 
rest rooms, uniforms, medical facilities and first-aid facilities. 
Clauses 14 to 16.-These clauses prescribe the hours of work 
and spread-over for motor transport workers engaged in city 
services, long distance passenger services and long distance freight 
services respectively. A uniform provision in respect of all these 
services is not practicable due to the special peculiarities of each 
type of service. 
Clause 17.-This clause prescribes reduced hours of work for 
adolescents in view of their tender age. 
Clause 18.-This clause provides for rest interval of at least half 
an hour after continuous work of five hours. 

~o 
Clause 19.-This clause restricts the number of spells, in which 
an .adult m(Jtor transport worker engaged in a city service may be 
required to work to three and provides for an interval of rest of at 
least two hours between two spells. This prevision is necessary as 
a city service has generally to run extra services during peak hours 
necessitating engagement of workers in more than one spell. 
Clause 20.-This clause provides for the maintenance and display 
by every employer of a notice of hours of work during which each 
adult motor transport worker may be required to work. 
Clauses 21 and 22.-These clauses provide for the grant of a 
weekly day of rest to every motor transport worker. Similar pro-
visions exist in the Factories Act, 1948 and the Mines Act, 1952. 
Clauses 23 to 26.-These clauses contain special provisions regard-
ing employment of children and adolescents in view of their tender 
age. Employment of children (i.e. persons below 15 years of age) in 
any motor transport undertaking is prohibited while adolescents can 
be emplOYed subject to certain specified conditions. 
Clause 27.-This clause provides for the application of the Pay-
ment of Wages Act, 1936 to motor transport workers. This will 
ensure that the wages of the workers are paid in time without 
unauthorised deductions .. 
Clause 28.-This clause provides for payment of extra wages to a 
motor transport worker for overtime work. 
Clauses 29 and 30.-These clauses provide for the grant of annual 
leave with wages to motor transport workers on the lines provided 
for in the Factories Act, 1948. 
Clause 39.-This clause ensures that where a motor transport 
worker is entitled to benefits which are more favourable than those 
provided for in the Bill, he shall continue to enjoy those benefits. 
Clause 4O.-Thilll clause provides for exemptions from the 
provisions of the Bill in certain cases. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Under clauses 9 to 18, 21, and 27 to 30 of the Bill, certain benefits 
and facilities are proposed to be given to the motor transpJrt workers. 
The Central Government are concerned with nationalised motor 
transport services in the Union Territories. Of the six Union Terri-
tories, $uch services are operating in Delhi, Himachal Pradesh, 
Manipur and Andaman and Nicobar Islands. The expenditure in 
respect o~ the services run in Delhi is met out of the Mun.icipal 
Fund under the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957. It is esti-
mated that an annual expenditure of Rs. 3'02, '39, and '13 lakhs will 
be incurred from the Consolidated· Fund of India on the nationalised 
motor transport services in the Union Territories of Himachal 
Pradesh, Manipur and Andaman and Nicobar Islands, respectively, 
as a result of the grant of the benefits and facilities provided for 
in the Bill. 
21 
302 (D) LS---4. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clauses 9, 10, 11 and 12 of the Bill confer on the State Govern-
ment power to make rules for the provision of canteens, restrooms, 
uniforms and medical facilities for motor transport workers. Under 
clause 14(3) rules may be made prescribing the limits within which 
the hours of work or the spread-over of such hours of -work in 
respect of motor transport workers engaged in a city service may be 
increased in certain cases. Again, under clauses 15 and 16 rules may 
be made prescribing the authority which can increase such limits. 
The form of and the manner in which notice of hours of work is to 
be displayed and maintained by every employer under clause 20 (1) 
are also to be prescribed by rules. Under clause 21 (1), the State 
Government has been empowered to make rules providing for a 
day of rest in every period of seven days which shall be allowed to 
all motor transport workers. Similarly, under clause 29(1) the 
State Government may by rules prescribe holidays to which every 
motor transport worker shall be entitled in addition to the annual 
leave admissible to him. Clause 42 conft>rs general rule making 
power on the State Government 
2. Clause 3 o~ the Bill empowers the State Government to 
classify motor transport services into city services, long distance 
passenger services and long distance freight service. Under clause 
8 (2), rules can be made to prescribe the duties which may be 
performed by certifying surgeons in relation to motor transport 
workers. -
3. The aforesaid matters on which rules can be made are generally 
matters of procedure or detail. The delegation of legislative power 
is, therefore, of a normal character. 
22 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the welfare of mO'~or transport workers and to 
regulate the conditions of their work. 
(Shn' Gulzarilal Nanda, Mini.liter of 
Labour and Employment) 