As. INTIlODUCI:D IN Loc SABIL\ ox 
• ., 4"4"" I'; ~ .. lJ.I 
am No. rr of 1"0 
TIm INDIAN RAILWAYS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1970 
A 
BILL 
further to amend 'the Indian Railways Act, 1890. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-ftrst Year of the Republic 
of India 81 follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Indian Railway. (Amendment) Act, Short 
1970. title. 
'.U8DO. 5 Z. (J) In section 47 of the Indian Railways Act, 1890 (hereinafter Ameud-
referred to as the principal Act),- ment of 
section 
(a) in sub-section (1). after clause (b). the following clause 41. 
IhaD be inserted, namely:-
"(bb) for the cancellation of tickets (whether with reserva-
10 tion of accommodation or not), the circumstances under which, 
and the time-limit within which, such ca:nleellatton may be 
allowed and the charges payable therefor;"; 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words "ftfty rupees", the WO'l'ds 
"one hundred and ftfty rupees" shall be substituted. 
15 (2) All charges levied and coDected, or purported to have been levied 
and collected under the princlpal Act for caOCQllation of tickets (whether 
with reservation of accommodation or not) at any tiJne before the com-
mencement of this Act, shall be deemed to have been validly levied and 
collected in 'accordance with law and accordingly no suit or other pro-
30 eeeding &ban be main~ ~ .nr ~\U't for the refund of any IU~ 
cbarcea· 

Amend-
mental 
section 
82C. 
Amend-
mentot 
section 
821:. 
Insertion 
ot new 
section 
82HH. 
Interim 
reliet11y 
railway 
adm\hbr-
tratiOn. 
Amend-
ment ot 
actio 
UL 
2 
3. In section 82C of the principal Act,-
(a) after sub-5ection (2), the following sub.section shall be in-
serted, namely:-
"(2A) If an applicant desires to be paid interim relief under 
section 82HH, he may send to the railway administration a copy S 
of the application made under sub-section (1) with a request for 
payment of such i~terim relief."; 
(b) in the Explanation, after the words "In this section", the 
words, figures and letters "and section 82HH" shall be inserted. 
4:. In section 82E of the principal Act, in the proviso to sub-section 10 
(1),-
(a) in clause (ii), the word "and" shall be omitted; 
(b) for clause (iii), the following clauses shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"(iii) the payment by way of interim relief, if any, made to IS 
the applicant by the railway administration under section 82HB 
is not aQequate; and 
(iv) the amount of compensation directed to be paid UDder 
this setti01'l together With the payment by way of illterim relief, 
if any, made under section 82HH is not likely to exceed the 20 
actual amount of compensation that may ultimately become pay-
able.". 
5. After section 82H of the principal Act, the following section $hall 
be inserted, namely:-
"8ZBB. (1) Where on receipt of an application under sub-secftoD 2S 
(2A) of section 82C and after making such enquiry as it may deem 
fit, the railway Qdmlnistration is satisfted that cil'eumstances e~t 
which require relief to be afforded to an appUeantfor C'ompensatioll 
iwme4iMety. it may, pencliBc determination of the actual amount of 
compensation payable under section 82A, pay to aay penon wJao has 30 
sutained injury or suffered any loss, or where death has resulted 
&oat ttte 8'eclClent, to any dependant of the deceased, such flum as 
It cemdders reasonable for affording sudt relief, 'Sit, ho\\'evel', that the 
slIM paN l!IIball Bot exceed the amount of compmsation payable at 
the rates preScribea antler the rules made tmder sedloa8Zl. 3S 
(2) 'l'he railway atbllinistratioo shaU, as soon as mIlO' be, after 
making an or"nwwdbac pa,rlDeltt of interim relief UDder sub-
section (1), send a copy thereof to the Claims Commissioner. 
(3) AllY lum paid by the railway administration under sub-
sedien (1) shall be taken into account by the Claims Commili&loher 40 
while deteaniniDgthe amount of compensation payable.". 
t. In section 821 of the pri1'1eipal Act, fo.r thefigurea and lettet "8iH" t 
the figures and letters "82HH" shall be substituted. 

, 
I 
3 
t lA, .. ~n 1~ Qt tb9 prinaipal Act, the foUowiJlg l)I'OViJo shall be 
inserted at the end, na~ly:-
"Provided that in the absence of special and adequate reasons to 
the contrary to be mentioned in the judgmeJlt of the court. wbere 
5 a passenger, without reasonable and sufficient cause, makes use ot 
the alarm chain provided by a railway administration, he shall be 
punished-
10 
(a) in the cue of conviction for a fiNt ofteD.08, with ftne 
",bUlh !the!!: not be less than twenty-fiYe rupees; end 
(b) in the case of conviction for a second or subseq,uent 
offence, with imprisonment fer a term which shall not ~ less 
than one month.". 
8. In section 118 of the principal Act,-
«(I) in sub-section (1), for the words "with ftDe wAlch may 
extend to twenty rupees", the words "with imp~ent for a term 
whiah may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to 
fifty rupees, or with both" shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the worda "with fine which mayex-
tend to fifty rupees", the words "with Unpri&o.lunent for a teJ.1n which 
20 may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to one 
hundred and fifty rupees, or with both" shall be 8ubstitu~ 
30 
9. In section 12.2 of the principal Act,-
(!I) in sub-section (1), for the words "with ftne which may 
extend to twenty rupees", the wollds "with i~risQl1mel1t fo.r. term 
wb.i.ch may ~tend to one month or with fine which nut)' exWAd to 
fifty rupeea, OJ: with both" shall be subs.tituted; 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the worda "with 1me wb1cb may ex-
tMd. to fifty rupees", the warda "with Unp~~t far a temI. which 
may extend to three monthi. Of with tine which IX1Q' e~teQ.cl, to one 
hundred and fifty rupees, or with both" shall be substituted. 
Am.Del-
mentot 
aeetioD 
108. 
Amend. 
mentol 
sec:tlon 
118. 
Amend. 
mentol 
lection 
122. 
10. Section 126 of the principal Act shall be re-~umbe.re.d. .-s sub- ~ 
35 
section (1)· thereof, and- m_at 
aecttoa 
(a) in sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, for the words uU a 128. 
person unlawfully-", the wards, brackets and figure "Subject to the 
prOvisions of sub-section (2), if a person unlawfully-" shall be sub-
stituted; 
(b) after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the followlng sub-
section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(2) If a person unlawfully does any act or thing referred 
to in clause (a) or clause (b) or clause (c) or clause (d) or 
clause (e) of sub-section (1),-
(i) with intent to cause the death of any person and the 
doing of such act or thing causes the death of any person; or 
(ii) with knowledge that such act or thing is 80 immi-
nently dangerous that it must in all probability cause the 

lnsertion 
of new 
.ection 
126A. 
Damage 
to, or dea-
u.uction 
of certain 
railway 
propertiel. 
Amend-
mento! 
section 
111. 
4 
death of any perton or such bodily inju.ry to aR1 panoa .. 
is likely to cause the death of luch penon, 
he shall be punished with death.". 
11. After section 126 of the principal Act, the followini section ahall 
be inserted, namely:- S 
"126A. (1) Whoever, with intent to cause or knowing that he is 
likely to cause damage or destruction to any of the properties of a 
railway referred to in sub-section (2) causes by fire, explosive sub-
stance or otherwise, damage to such property to the amount of one 
hundred rupees or upwards, or destruction of such property, shall 10 
be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten 
years. 
(2) The properties of a railway referred to in sub-section (1) 
are railway track, bridges, station buildings and installations, car-
riages or wagons, locomotives, signalling, telecommunication, electric IS 
traction and block equipments and such other properties as the Cen-
tral Government, being of opinion that damage thereto or destruction 
thereof is likely to endanger the operation of a railway, may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, specify. 
(3) Every notification issued under sub-section (2) shall be 20 
laid before each House of Parliament immediately after it is made 
if it is in session .. and on the first day of the commencement of the 
next session of the House if it is not in session, and shall cease to 
operate at the expiration of forty days from the date of its being so 
laid or from the re-assembly of Parliament, as the case may be, unless 25 
before the expiration of that period a resolution approving the issue 
at the notification is passed by both Houses of Parliament. 
Explanatian.-Where the Houses of Parliament are summoned to 
re-assemble on diflerent dates, the period of forty days shall be 
reckoned from the later of those dates." 30. 
12. In section 131 of the principal' Act, in sub-section (1), after the 
figures "126,", the figures and letter "126A," shall be inserted. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
It has been found that the Indian Railways Act has no provision au. 
thorising recovery of cancellation charges when reservations made for rail 
journeys are cancelled or tickets are otherwise returned for cancellation 
without being used. Such a provision autho'rising recovery ot cancella-
tion charges is essential particularly to curb speculative reservations which 
cauae inconvenience to the general public. In fact, the recovery of such 
cancellation charges is already provided for in the rules tramed by the 
Railways, but in the absence of an enabling provision in this behalf in 
the Act, it is doubtful whether such rules could validly be made. Thia 
lacuna is proposed to be removed by a suitable amendment of section 
47 of the Act with a further provision for validating all past recoveriel of 
cancellation charges. 
2. It is also considered necessary to amend sections 82C, 82E, 82H and 
821 of the Act to secure prompt relief in the shape of interim payment of 
compensation in cases of accidents to trains carrying passeng.!rs. This 
interim payment will, of course, be taken into consideration by the ClaiJDI 
Commissioners in making the final setUement of compensation. 
3. It has further been noticed that the penal proviSions for offences 
covered under sections 47, 108, 118, 122 and 126 relating to carrying in-
flammable articles in trains, unjustified pulling of alarm chain, for en-
training or detraining in unauthorised places, for trespass and for tamper-
ing with railway track and wilful wrecking of trains, are not sufftciently 
deterrent. These types of offences being quite heavy on the RailwaYI, 
the penal provisions are sought to be made more stringent by suitably 
amending those sections. 
4. Lastly, it has been found that there is no provision in the Act to 
cover cases of wanton destruction of Railway property and installatioDl. 
A new section 12M is, therefore, proposed to be inserted to cover IUch 
cues. 
5. The Bill seeks to give eftect to the above objects. 
NIIW D&m:; G. L. NANDA. 
The lit Ma.rch, lQ~. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THB 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 67-TGIVII036120IPt., dated the 3rd March, lQ70 from 
Shri GuIzari La! Nanda, Minister of Railways to the Secretary, Lok: 
Sabha.] 
The President having been informed ot the subject matter of the Bill 
further to amend the Indian Railways Act, 1890, recommends the intro-
duction of the Bill under article 117 (1) and its consideration under 
article 117 (3) of the Constitution. 

rttfANCIAL MEM<ilBANDUM 
CJp,wlHl 5, Qf tM 2ill ~ to. msert a Witw $ecti.on a2HH ptQvid.t.ng for 
~~ of ~m fftlief 'QY the Raij.w~y Admipiatra,tiol).lf to the cWm-
.' tR1: CQmPlt~ijQn which would. b,e ~n bltoe~iclel'lltion 'by the 
~S,CQ~OMr4 in awarding the final CQJllP~on, The PfOJIUlon 
wijl ~t, t.Par-.efor.e,. involve any additioJl81 expenditure t.o GQv:enuneAt 
'Ph. expenditure involved in'the payment at interim relief in a parti-
cular year· win depend upon the number of accidcmts· to train. canwymg 
peaengers in that year and the l'lumber of passengers killed or .'.thcIee-sus-
taining'injuries. 'Fhe number of such' aeeidents 8fld ~e total amOUJ:l.t of 
eompensatiOl't pa1d on Indian Railways during the tbI'ee' years fro .. 1966-67 
to lte8-89 was as under:-
--------- ,,----~~~-"'"'"?'--
1~-67 
lil67- 68 
Ul68.69, 
~: 
Total amount 
Rs. 
22,7 2,936 
9m~~47 
a,s~.~8 
Total No. of 
aoci4enu 
736 
. .,.......,.,..,..,..,..,...---. -.-- -~--- ----,- --, ---_ .. -. -.- ---- , 
~'Ai ~~, o,f ~ various. W~ty me8i\U'eS which are being adop~d by 
~, ~'¥"', ~aver$gee.tU11lalexpenditure involved in pa~ent of'in-
terim relief to passengers in a year may not e~ceed the average yearly 
eom,P9nsation paid by the Claims Commissioners during the last three 
years. 
'l;IMI BiU .. ~ inv;olv.e any llOn-~iogE'xpendtture. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks toamendaection 47 of the Indian RaUwa)'l 
Act. 1890, inter aUa for empowering the Central Government to make 
rules for the cancellation of tickets (whether With reservation of accom-
modation or not), the circwnst.fmces under which and the time limit 
within which such cancellation may be allowed and the charges payable 
therefor. In fact, the recovery of such cancellation charges is already 
provided for in the rules framed by the Railways, but in the absence of 
enabling provision in that behalf in the Act, it is doubtful whether such 
rules could validly be made. The amendment proposed is intended to 
remove any doubt in that behalf. Mol'eover, the matters for which the 
Central Government is being empowered to make rules are matters of 
detail and the delegation of legislative power is of normal charat'ter. 
2. Clause 11 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 1261\ 1ft the Act 
for the purpose of punishing persons causing damage to or _~oil 
of certain Railway properties. The varioUs' Railway pl'O'pertielto w'hi~ 
the new section will apply are specified in sub-section (2) of the Baid 
section 126A. As it is not posSible to enumerate all sttCh propertift. 
power has been taken by the Central Governmetrt to speclf1, by nGttftea-
hon in the Official Gazette, other Railway properties the damage to 
whidlor dostruction whereof is, in the opinion of the Central Govern-
ment, liJDely to -endanger the operation of Railways. PrbvtatOft hn 'been 
made in sub-section (3) of the new section 126A for lay!ng before 'PlT. 
Uametrt e\feIl"yllloh "otitication iBlued by the Central Government In the 
lame way as rules made under enactment are laid before ParUament. 
3. Under die 'CirewnftlaC8l, 1be delojatian of. leSialative power is of 
normal character. 
7 

General 
ruI ... 
Applica-
tion for 
compen-
•• tlon. 
• 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS nOM THB INDIAN RAILWAYS ACT, 1890 
(9 01' 1890) 
• • 
CHAPTER VI 
WORKING OF RAILWAYS 
GeneTal 
• • 
4.7. (1) • • • • • 
(2) The rules may provide that any person committing a breach of any 
of them shall be punished with fine which may extend to any sum not 
exceeding fifty rupees, and that, in the case of a rule made under clause 
(e) of sub-section (1), the railway servant shall forfeit a sum not ex-
ceeding one month's pay, which sum may be deducted by the railway ad· 
ministration from his pay . 
• • • • • 
82C. (1) An application for compensation under section 82A ariu. 
out of any accident of the nature specified therein may be mad&-
(4) by the person who has sustained the injury or suftered any 
loss, or '. 
(b) by any agent duly authorised by such penon in this behalf, 
or 
(c) where such person is a minor, by his guardian, and 
(d) where death has resulted from the accident, by any depen. 
dant of the deceased. 
(2) No application for compensation under this section shall be enter· 
tained unless it is made within three months of the occurrence of the 
accident, but the Claims Commissioner may on good cause shown allow 
any application to be made at any time within one year of such occur-
rence. 
(3) If in an application for compensation under this section, any per-
son makes a statement which is false and which he knows or believes to 
be false Or does not believe to be true, he shall be punishable with im-
prisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or 
with both. 
ExplaMtion.-In this section, the woro "dependant" has the meaning 
Q~signed to it in clause (d) of section 2 of the Workmen's CompensaUon 
Act, 1923. 
• .. • • • 
• or rta! 

9 
8ZE. (1) Where, in the opinion of the Claims Conunisatoner. drQWIPst • 
.ancea exist which require relief to be afforded to an appllcant for com • 
...... t1ca _mec;liately., 118 JaIly ... dina ~j_ of tile actual 
.amount of compensation payable, direct the ".away .d.i .... u.n to 
deposit with him forthwith such sum as he considers reasonable for a1for-
dng faeh relief: 
PrOvided that the Claims Commiaioner is satisfied, that-
(i) no grounds exist far 4IoubUoc the col'C'eOCaela of tat. facta 
stated by the applicant; 
(Ii> on the facts 10 stated, If pi'eYed, the .WHclet wouW be 
entitled to compensation; and 
(Ui) the amount of compea .... diNeW to be Pllid ~ thJ8 
leCtion is not likely to exceed the actual amount of compenation 
u..* aq ultimately lMcaat. pay.We . 
• • • • • 
8ZI. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie 19aftult 
-aay .. rIGA for aaytAina in .,004 Wthdoae or tnt.lde41 to be .... in 
-punuaDQe of .eeti0DI 8IA to 82H iDelwive or of ~ nUe. made ·adIr 
:HCUGn W. 
• • • • • 
108. If a passenger, without reasonable and sufJ1cient cause, makes 
·use of or interferes with any means provided by a railway administration 
for GbmmunicatiOll betWeeB pasBEIIllM'I and the railway l8t'VM\ta in charge 
-of a train, he shall be punished with imprisonment for a teml Which may 
.extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to two hundred 
and fifty rupees, or with both. 
• • • • • 
liS. (1) If a pasenger enters or leaves, or attempts to enter or lewe, 
.an, cart:lage wMe the train 1& in motion, or elsewhere than at the Idtte 
·of the ea1'i1agt! adjoining the platform or otherplaee appoIltted by tilt· 
railway admiaistratibft for passen~rs to ehter or leave the carriage, M 
-opens the side-door of any carriage while the tram is in mottOl'l, he ttlftIH 
be punished with tine which may extend to twenty rupees. 
(2) If a passenger, after being warned by a railway servant to desist, 
persists in travelling on the roof, steps or foot-board of any carriage or on 
.an engine, or in any other part of a train not intended for the use of pas-
sengers, he shall be punished with fine which may extend to tifty rupees 
and may be removed from the railway by any railway servant. 
• • • • • 
uz. (1) If a person unlawfully enters upon a railway, he shall be 
punished with tine which may extend to twenty rupees. 
(2) If a person 80 entering refuses to leave the railway on bein, re-
quested to do 10 by any railway servant, or by any other penon on 
behalf of the railway admtntatration, he Iha11 be punt&hed with IDe which 
may exteDd to ftfty rupei8, and may be removed from the nUway by 
-.ch anmt 01' otber penaL • • 
I • • • ....'Ii 
. ':t.i ' '. • • 
Bar 01 
certain 
le,al 
proceed· 
inp . 
Needlessly 
interfer· 
i~with 
meanlof 
communi • 
cation in 
8 train. 
Enteru., 
card ... 
in mcKion. 
or ot.1Mr-
wile 
improper. 
ly travel· 
Union a 
railway. 

Ma.lic,k)1,1a-
lywreok. 
inlor 
attempt. 
inlto 
wreck. 
train. 
Arreatfor 
oftencel 
apJ.nlt 
certain 
sectlOftl. 
10 
ue. If a person unlawfully-
(a) puts or throws upon or aeross any railway any wood, staB .. 
or other matter or thing, or 
(b) takes up, removes, loosens or displaces any rail, sleeper ~­
other matter or thing belonging to any railway, or 
(c) turns, moves, unlocks or diverts any poiDts or other machi-
nery belonging to any railway, or 
(d) makes or shows, or hides or removes, any signal or Ught 
upon or near to any railway, or 
(e) does or ca~ to be done or attempts to do any other act or-
thing in relation to any railway, . 
with intent, or with knowledge that he is likely, to endanger the safety 
of any person travelling or being upon the railway, he shall be punished 
with imprisonment for life or with rigorous imprisonment for a term-
which may extend to ten years: 
Provided that in the absence of special and. adequate reaSODl to the-
contrary to be mentioned in the judgment of the court, where a perIOD'-
is punished with rigorous imprisonment, such rigorous imprisonment 
shall,-
(a) in the case of a first conviction, be not less than three years, 
or 
(b) in the case of a subsequent conviction, be not less thm. 
seven years . 
• • • • • 
Procedure 
131. (1) If a person commits any offence mentioned in section 100, 
100A, 100B, 101, 108, 112, 119, 120, 121, 126, 127, 128 or 129 Of in aectIon. 
130, sub-section (1), he may be arrested without warrant or other writ-
ten authority by any railway servant or police-omcer, or by any other 
person whom such servant or ofticer may call to his aid. 
• • • • 
.;' j 
'" 
"\". 
• z 
.. • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
funher to amend the Indian Railways Act, 1890. 