LOK SABRA. 
CORRIGENDA. 
to 
T HE CENTRAL S ILK BOARD (AMENDMSNT) BILL, 1 968 
(To be/As introduced in·Lok Sahha) 
1. Page 2, line 5,-
!2!: II principle" read .. principal" 
-
2. Page 5, line 6 from bottom,-
before "vide" insert " (II -
NEW DELHI; 
~gQ 23, 1~68 
~itra 3, 1890 (Saka) 

1 - 1968 
am No. 37 of I'" 
THE CENTRAL SILK BOARD (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1968 
A 
BILL 
tu:rthetr to amend the Cent.ral Silk Board Act, 1~4S. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Nineteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Central Silk Board (Amendment) Short title. 
Act, 1968. 
81 Of 1948., Z. In the Central Silk Board Act, INS (hereinafter referred to as Amend-
the principal Act), in section 1, in sub-section (2), the words "except ment of 
10 
the State of Jammu and Kashm.lr" shall be omitted. section 1. 
3. In section 8 of the principal Act- Amend-
mentot (a) in sub-section (2) ,- section 8. 
(i) in cJause (b), for the words "reeling of silkworm 
cocoons", the words "reeling or, as the case may be, spin-
ning of silkworm cocoons and silk waste" shall be substi-
tuted; . 

Amend-
ment 
of see-
tion 12. 
Insertion 
of new 
section 
12A. 
Annual 
~rt. 
bene!-
mentof 
section 13. 
« .rft __ ~·,._ 
(ti) clause (c) ahall be omitte(\, 
(b) in sub-section (3) ,-
(i) clause (b) shall be omitted; 
(ii) in clause (c), 1be word "ot.her" shall be omitted. 
4. In section 12 of the principle Act, for su~sections (2) and (3), 5 
the following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:-
"(2) The accounts of the Board shall be audited by the 
Comptroller and Auditor~neral of India at such intervals as 
may be specified by him and any expendi1W'e incurred in con-
nection with such audit shall be payable by the Board to the 10 
Comptroller and Auditor-General. 
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any 
person appointed by him in connection with the audit of the 
accounts of the Board shall have the same rights, privileges and 
authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller IS 
and Auditor-General of India has in connection with the audit 
o£ Govermnent accounts, and, in particular, shall have the 
right 1\;0 demand the production of books, accounts, connected 
vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any 
of th.e offices of the Board. 20 
(4) The accounts of the Board as certified by the Comptrol-
ler and Auditor-General of India or any person appointed by 
him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall 
be forWarded annually to the Central Government and that 
Govermnent shall cause a copy of the same to be laid before 2S 
each House of Parliament. 
(5) A copy of the accounts of the Board as so certified to-
gether with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded simul-
taneously to the Boarel". 
5. After section 12 of the principal Act, the following section 30 
shall be inserted, namely:-
"12A. The Board shall prepare for every financial year a 
report of its activities during that year and submit the report 
to the Central Government in such form and on or before such 
date as may be prescribed, and that Government shall cause a 3' 
copy of the report to be laid before each House of Parliament.". 
I. In section 13 of the principal Act-
(a) in sub-eection (2),-
(i) in clause (viii), 'the worda "and 'the audit of such 
accounts" shall be omitted; 

3 
(ii) after clause (viii), the following clause shall be 
inserted, namely:-
(viiia) the form of the annual report of the Board 
and the date on or before which it shall be submitted 
S to the Central Government;"; 
(b) for su~ection (3), the following sub-section shall be 
8UbatitUted, namely:-
"(3) Every nde made under this section shall be laid, 
U lOOn as may be after it is made, before each House of 
10 Parliament while it js in session for a total period of thirt1 
days whiic:h may be eompriaed in one __ on or in two 
successive seaions, and if, before the expiry of the sf)ssi~ 
in which it is so laid or the seslion immediately following. 
both HoUllel agree in making' 8l1y modification in the rule 
IS or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, 
the rule shall thereafter have effect :mly in such modified 
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, 
that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
20 that rule.". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Central Silk Board Act, 1948 (61 of 1948) provides for 
the development of the silk industry under the control of the 
Union and for that purpose has established a Central Silk Board. 
Under sub-section (2) at section 12 of that Act, the accounts of the 
Board are to be audited annually by auditors appointed by the Cen-
tral Govemmell'l; and at present the accounts are, by consent, be-
ing audited by the Deputy Accountant-General, Commerce, Works 
and Miscellaneous, Bombay. It is proposed to amend section 12 to ' 
make specific provision authorising the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India or any person authorised by him to audit the ac-
counts of the Board. It is also proposed to insert a provision re-
quiring the Board to prepare for every year a report of its activities 
during that year and submit it to the Central Government for being . 
laid before Parliament. 
2. Opportunity is being taken to amend-
(a) section 1 (2) of the Act to provide for its extension to the 
State of Jammu and Kashmir: 
(b) section 8 (2) (b) of the Act SOl as to cover also spinning 
of silkworm cocoons and silk waste which is a new line 
of production that has come into existence after the pass-
ing of the Act. 
NEW DELm; DINESH SINGH. 
The 27th November, 1967. 
PRESIDF..NT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 
OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 21/3/64-Tex- (F). dated the 22nd February, 
1968 from Shri Dinesh Singh, Minister of Commerce to the Secre-
tary. Lok Sabha.] 
• • • • 
The President having been informed of the subject matter of the 
Central Silk Board (Amendment) BUl, 1968, recOmmends under 
clause (3) of article 117 and clause (1) of article 117, read with sub-
clause <a) of clause (1) of article 110, of the Constitution of India, 
the introduction and consideration of the Bill . 
• • • • • 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Central Silk Board Act, 1948, provides for the development, 
under Central control. of the silk industry and for that purpose to 
establish a Central Silk Board. The function of the Board is to pro-
mote the development of silk industry by such measures as it thinb 
fit and to ensure co-ordinated development of the various sectors ot 
the silk industry. 
2. In terms of the functions assigned to the Board under the Ad, 
the Board is required to recommend grant of Central Assistance 
(Grants and Loans) to the State Governments for implementation of 
sericulture development programmes approved by it. Central as-
sistance is made available to the States for development of sericul~ 
ture industry in accordance with the pattern and procedure deter-
mined by the Central Government from time to time. 
3. The Board has under its direct control the responsibllity for 
organising programmes rela'1:in~ to research. training and basic seed 
production for the benefit of the sericultural industry in the country 
as a whole. Under this programme. the Board has set up Central 
Sericul1ural Research and Training InstItute, Mysore; Central 
Tasar Research Station. Ranchi: Central Silkworm Seed Station, 
Srinagar; Central Tasar Silkworm Seed Station, Lakha, and Silk-
wonn Seed Station. Coonoor. The Board has also set up pre-ship-
ment inspection Centres at various places in the country for quality 
certification of natural silk fabrics exported from India. The Board 
also maintains Liaison Offices in Bangalore, Calcutta, New Delhi and 
Srinagar for maintaining effective liaison with the State Govern-
ments. 
4. The expenditure for meeting the Board's administration and 
centrally sponsored schemes is met from out of the budg~t grants 
made available to the Board by the Central Government as provid-
ed under section 9 of the Act. 
5. The present Bill seeks. inter alia, to extend the Act to Jammu 
and Kashmir State vide clause 2). Central assistance by way of 
grants and loans is being given to the Government of Jammu and 
Kashmir for the development of Sericulture industry and ranges be-
tween Rs. 8 to Rs. 10 lakhs per annum. An amount of this order is 
estimated to be incurred per annum even aft""l' extending the Act to 
Jammu and Kashmir State. ' 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 6 of the Bill which seeks to amend section 13 of the Cen-
tral Silk Board Act, l~ empowers the Central Government to 
make rules to provide for the form of the annual report of the 
Soard and the date on or before which it shall be submitted to the 
Central Government. These are mattetB of detail and the delega-
tion of legislative power with respect to them is of a normal charac-
ter. 

£aucm nIOM 'l'III Camw. Su.E BoAIID Acr, 1NA 
(11 M 1M3) 
• • • • • 
• • • • L (1)· Short 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of JIUDIIUI title and 
and Kashmir. menL 
• • • • • 
• • • • 8. (I) • I'unctioDI 
(2) Without prejudice to the eenenllty of the fCJNgOing prari- ~ 
lion, the measures referred to therein may provide for-
• • • • • 
(b) devising meana for improved methods of mulberry 
cultivation rearing, developing and distributing healthy silk-
worm seeds, reeling of silkworm cocoons, improving the quali-
ty and production of raw aUk, if necelAl'Y, by making it com-
pulsory for all raw silk to be marketArd oaly after the same hu 
been tested and graded in properly equipped raw silk condi-
tioning houses; 
(c) the supply of technical advice to 1Uature and chArkhtJ 
reelers; 
• • • • • 
(3) It aha11 also be the duty of the Board-
• • • • • 
(b) to submit to 'Ilhe Central Government and such other 
authorities as may be prescribed half-yearly reports on ita acti-
~ties and the worldng of tb.iI Act; 
(c) to prepare and furnish such other reports relatin, to 
the silk: industry u may be required by the Central Goftm-
ment from time to time. 
• • • • • 
1 . ~ 
. , 

Accounts 
of the 
Board. 
Power 
of Cen-
tral Gov-
ernment 
to make 
rules. 
• 
12. (1) • • • • • 
(2) The Board shall cause the accoqnts to be audited annually 
by auditors appointed by the Central Government, and the auditors 
mall have the. Power to disallOlW any item of expenditure which in 
their opinion has not been properly incurred for the purposes of 
this Act. . 
. ~ 
(3) The Central Government may, on the application of the 
Board, allow ai\y item of expenditure disallowed by the auditol'l 
under sub-eection (2). 
• • • • • 
13. (1) • • • • • 
(2) In particular. and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power. rules made under this section may provide for all 
or any of the following matters, namely:-
• • • • • 
(tnii) the maintenance of the accounts of income and ex-
. penditure of the Board and the audit of such accounts; 
• • • • • 
(3) All rules made under this section shall be laid. as soon u 
may be, before Parliament. 
• • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Central Silk Board Act, 1948. 
(Shri Dinah Singh, 
Minister of Commerce.) 