Bill No. z7 of 19S9. 
THE BENGAL FINANCE (SALES TAX) 
(DELHI AMENDMENT) BILL, 1959 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA 
ON 30m MARCH 1959) 

Bill No. 37 of 1959. 
TIlE BENGAL FINANCE (SALES TAX) (DELHI 
AMENDMENT) BILL, 1959 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Bengal Finance (Sales Tax) Act, 1941, as in 
force in the Union territory of Delhi. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Tenth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Bengal Finance (Sales Tax) Short title 
(Delhi Amendment) Act, 1959. :e~cem~~-
S (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Chief Com-
missioner, Delhi, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
appoint. 
2. Throughout the Bengal Finance (Sales Tax) Act, 1941, as in Amendment 
force in the Union territory of Delhi (hereinafter referred to as the of references . . to State and 
10 prmcIpal Act), unless otherwise expressly stated,- State Gov-
. ernment. (a) for the word "State" except where it occurs m the 
expression "State Government", the words "Union territory" 
shall be substituted; 
(b) for the words "State Government", except in clause (b) 
IS of sub-section (3) of section 25, the words "Central Government" 
shall be substituted. 
3. In section 2 of the principal Act,-
(a) clause (b) shall be omitted; 
(b) in clause (d) ,-
20 (i) after the words "does not include", the word 
"newspapers" shall be inserted; 
(ii) the Explanation shall be omitted; 
Amelldmetlt 
of section 2 

(c) for clause (g), the following clause shall be substi-
tuted, namely:---
'(g) "sale", with its grammatical variations and cog-
nate expressions, means any transfer of property in goods 
by one person to another for cash or for deferred payment 5 
or for any other valuable consideration, and includes a 
transfer of goods on hire-purchase or other system of pay-
ment by instalments, but does not include a mortgage or 
hypothecation of or a charge or pledge on goods. 
Explanation.---A sale or purchase of goods shall be 10 
deemed to take place inside the Union territory of Delhi 
if the goods are within that territory---
(i) . in the case of specific or ascertained goods, at 
the time: the contract of sale is made; and 
(ii) in the case of unascertained or future goods, IS 
at the time of their appropriation to the contract of sale 
by the seller or by the buyer, whether assent of the 
other party is prior or subsequent to such appropria-
tion;'; 
(d) for clause (h), the following clause shall be substi- 20 
tuted, nannely:---
'(h) "sale price" means the amount payable to a dealer 
as consideration for the sale of any goods, less any sum 
~llowed as cash discount according to the practice normal-
ly prevailing in the trade, but inclusive of any sum charged 2S 
for anything done by the dealer in respect of the goods at 
the time of or before the delivery thereof other than the 
cost of freight or delivery or the cost of installation in 
cases where such cost is separately charged;'. 
4. In section 4 of the principal Act,---
(a) in sub-section (1) ,---
(i) the first proviso shall be omitted; 
(ii) in the second proviso, the word "further" shall be 
omitted and for the word "Schedule", the words "Second 
30 
Schedule" shall be substituted; 35 
(b) after sub-section (4A) ,the follOWing sub-section shall 
be inserted, namely:---
" (4B) Every dealer shall, notwithstanding that he is 
not liable to pay tax under any of the sub-sections (1) to 
(4A), be liable to pay tax under this Act so long as he is 40 
. registered under the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956, on all sales 74 of 19~6. 

3 
effected by him or on his behalf withip the Union territory 
of Delhi on or after the date of his liability or the date of 
his registration, whichever is earlier, under the Central 
Sales Tax Act aforesaid."; 
5 (c) for clause (a) of sub-section (5), the following clause 
shall be substituted, namely:-
"(a) in relation to any dealer who imports ,for sale 
any goods into the Union territory of Delhi or manufac-
tures or produces any goods for sale, regardless of the 
10 value of the goods imported, manufactured or produced, 
ten thousand rupees;". 
15 
20 
25 
5. In section 5 of the principal Act,- :r.:~~::~~ 
(a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall 
be substituted, namely:-
"(1) The tax payable by a dealer under this Act shall 
be levied,- . 
(a) in the case of ta~able turnover in respect of 
the goods specified in the First Schedule, at the rate of 
seven naye paise in the rupee; 
(b) in the case of taxable turnover in respect of 
the goods specified in the Third Schedule, at the rate 
of two naye paise in the rupee; 
(c) in the case of taxable turnover in respect of 
any other goods, at the rate of four naye paise in the 
rupee: 
Provided that the Chief Commissioner, with the pre-
vious approval of the Central Government, may, by notifica-
tion in the Official Gazette, add to, or omit from, or 
otherwise amend the First and the Third Schedules: 
30 Provided further that if in respect of any goods or 
class of goods the Chief Commissioner is of opinion that 
it is expedient in the interest of the general public so to 
do, the Chief Commissioner, :with the previous approval 
of the Central Government, may, by notification in the 
35 Official Gazette, direct that the tax in respect of the tax-
able turnover of such goods or class of goods shall, subject 
to such conditions as may be specified, be levied at such 
modified rate not exceeding the rate applicable under this 
sub-section as may be specified in the notification."; 
40 (b) in sub-section (2),-
(1) for sub-clause (ii) of clause (a), the following 

sub-clause shall be substituted, namely:-
Ie (ii) sales to a registered dealer·-
of goods of the class or classes specified in the 
certificate of registration of such dealer, as being 
intended for re-osale by !:tim, or for use by him 81 5 
r.aw materials in the manufacture of goods for 
sale; and 
of containers or other materials for the pack-
ing of goods of the class or classes so specified 
for sale: 10 
Provided that in the case of such sales a declara-
tion duly filled up and signed by the registered dealer 
to whom the goods are sold and containing the pres-
cribed particulars on a prescribed form obtainable 
from the prescribed authority is furnished in the pres- 15 
cribed manner by the dealer who sells the goods: 
Provided further that where any goods specified in 
the certificate of registration are purchased by a regis-
tered dealer as being intended for re-sale by him or 
for use by him as raw materials in the manufacture of 20 
goods for sale, but are utilised by him for any other 
purpose, the price of the goods so purchased shall be 
allowed to be deducted from the gross turnover of the 
selling dealer but shall be included in the taxable turn-
over of the purchasing dealer;"; 25 
(2) the word "and" at the end of clause (a), and 
clause (b) shall be omitted . 
. Insertion of 6. After section 5 of the principal Act, the following sections 
, new sections -hall be inserted namely·-SA andsB. .> ,. 
Power of 
Chief Com-
miasioner to 
prescribe 
points at 
which goods 
may be 
taxed. 
Burden of 
proof. 
"5A. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Act, 30 
the Chief Commissioner may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, specify the point in the series of sales by successive 
dealers at which any goods or class of goods may be taxed. 
SB. The burden of proving that in respect of any sale 
effected. by a dealer he is not liable to pay tax under this Act 35 
shall lie on him.'~. 
Amendment 7. In section 8 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the 
of section 8. word "Schedule", the words "Second Schedule" shall be substituted. 
Arnf endm~t 8. In section 8B of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), the o seciion . 
sB. brackets and letter" (a)" and the words, brackets and letter "or (b) '40 

5 
10 
5 
executing contracts the value of which is likely to exceed thirty 
thousand rupees per year," shall be omitted. 
9. After section 10 of the principal Act, the following 
shall be inserted, namely:-
section IDaemon of 
DeW aectioD 
loA. 
"lOA. No person who is not a registered dealer shall collect Collection of 
in respect of any sale by him of goods in the Union territory tax. onlYd by . reg.8tere of DelhI any amount bY' way of tax under this Act, and no dealers. 
registered dealer shall make any such collection except in 
accordance with this Act and the rules made thereunder .... 
10. In section 11 of the principal Act,-
(a) to sub-section (2a) , the following 
added, namely:-
Amendment 
of lCCtioo 
proviso shall be II. 
"Provided that where such assessment is made in conse· 
quence of or to give effect to any order of an appellate or 
IS revisional authority or of a court, the period of four yearl'l 
or six years, as the case may be, shall be reckoned from 
the date of such order."; 
(b) in sub-section (3), after the words "under any of the 
provisions of this section", the words, figures and letter "or 
20 section 22A" shall be inserted; 
(c) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(3A) When a dealer is in default in making a payment 
of the tax, the Commissioner or any person appointed to 
2S assist him under sub-section (1) of section 3, may in his 
discretion direct that, in addition to the amount of the 
arrears, a sum not exceeding that amount shall be 
recovered from the dealer by way of penalty .... 
11. In sub-section (1) of section 21 of the principal Act, for the Amendment 
30 words "such dealer may, by application in writing accompanied by Oflecti<lP2I. 
a fee of one hundred rupees,", the words "such dealer or the 
Commissioner may, by application in writing, and accompanied in 
the case of an application by a dealer by a fee of one hundred 
rupees," shall be substituted. 
35 12. Section 21A of the principal Act shall be re-numbered as sub- TendJJ:r 
section (1) thereof and after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the ~IA. Ie on 
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(2) Subject to any rules made in this behalf, any authority 
referred to in sub-section (1) may impound and retain in its 

Amendment 
of lCCtion 22. 
6 
custody for such period as it thinks fit, any books of account 
or other documents produced before it, in any proceedings 
under this Act: 
Provided that a person appointed to assist the Commis-
sioner under sub-section (1) of section 3 shall not- 5 
(a) impound any books of account or other documents 
without recording his reasons for so doing; or 
(b) retain in his custody any such books or documents 
for a period exceeding thirty days without obtaining the 
approval of the Commissioner therefor.". - 10 
13. In sub-section (1) of section 22 of the principal Act,-
(a) after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(dd) contravenes the provisions of section lOA; or"; 
(b) in the proviso, after the word and figures "section 11", IS 
the words, figures and letter "or section 22A" shall be inserted. 
Insertion of 14. After section 22 of the principal Act, the following section 
new section shall be inserted, namely:-22A 
Penalty for 
concealment 
of sales or 
furnishing 
inaccurate 
particulare 
or making 
false rcpre-
.ent lti0ll8. 
,"22A. (1) If the Commissioner or any person appointed 
under sub-section (1) of section 3 to assist him, in the course of 
any proceedings under this Act is satisfied that a dealer has 
concealed the particulars of his sales or has furnished inaccu-
rate particulars of his sales and has thereby returned figures 
below the real amount, he may, after giving the dealer a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard, direct that the dealer 
shall, in addition to the tax payable by him under this Act, 
pay, by way of penalty, a sum not exceeding one and a half 
times the amount of tax which would have been avoided if the 
figures returned by the dealer were accepted as correct. 
(2) If any person purchasing goods is guilty of an offence 
under clause (c) or clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 
22, the authority which granted to him or as the case may be, 
is competent to grant to him a certificate of registration under 
this Act may, after giving him a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard, by order in writing, impose upon him by way of 
penalty a sum not exceeding one and a half times the tax which 
would have been levied under this Act in respect of the sale 
to him of the goods, if the offence had not been committed.". 
20 
25 
35 

, 
15. After section· 23 of the principal Act, the following section IuertioD ~f 
shall be inserted, namely: _ ~. secttoa 
"23A. (1) The Chief Commissioner may, by notification in ~ettin~ ': 
the Official Gazette, set up check-posts or barriers at any place pcIIts ~ 
5 in the Union territory of Delhi with a view to preventin~ eva- barlen. 
alon of sales tax and other dues payable under this Act. 
(2) Every person transporting such goods as may be 
notified shall, at any check-post or barrier referred to in sub-
section (1), file before such officer as may be authorised by 
10 the Chief Commissioner in this behalf a declaration in such 
form and in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(3) The officer authorised by the Chief Commissioner 
under sub-section (2) or any other officer who may be authoris-
ed in this behalf may, for the purpose of satisfying himself 
15 that the provisions of sub-section (2) are not being contra-
vened, and subject to such restrictions as may be prescribed, 
intercept and search any vehicle which may be suspected of 
contravening the said provisions.". 
16. In section 26 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), clauses AmClldmcnt 
20 (a), (00) and (c) shall be omitted. ofaection 26. 
25 
30 
17. For section 27 of the principal Act, the following section Substitution of DCW ICC-shall be substituted, namely: - tiOQ for ICC-
tion 27. 
"27. Nothing :n this Act or the rules made thereunder shall Savings. 
be deemed to impose, or authorise the imposition of a tax on 
any sale or purchase of any goods when such sale or purchase 
takes place-
(i) in the course of inter-State trade or commerce; 
(ii) outside the Union territory of Delhi; or 
(iii) in the course of import of the goods into, or export 
of the goods out of, the territory of India. 
Explanation.-Sections 3, 4 and 5 of the Central Sales Tax 
Act, 1956, shall apply ~or determining whether or not a parti-
cular sale or purchase takes place in the manner indicated in 
clause (i), clause (ii) or clause (iii).". 
3'i 18. After the Second Schedule to the principal Act, the following IlIICrtiOil of 
. Schedule shall be inserted, namely:- ;:edaIe~ 
~ . J 
"THE THIRD SCHEDULE 
[See section 5(1) (b)] 
1. Coal including coke in all its forms. 

8 
2. Cotton as defined in section 14 of the Central Sales Tax 
Act, 1956. 74 of J9S6.~ 
3. Iron and steel as defined in section 14 of the Central Sales 
Tax Act, 1956. 74 of 1956. 
4. Jute as defined in section 14 of the Central Sales Tax 5 
Act, 1956. 74 of J9S6. 
5. Oil-seeds as defined in section 14 of the Central Sales 
Tax Act, 1956.". '7A of 1956. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The sales tax law in force in the Union territory of Delhi is the 
Bengal Finance (Sales Tax) Act, 1941 (Bengal Act VI of 1941), as 
extended to that territory in 1951 and as subsequently amended by 
the former Delhi State Legislative Assembly. This Bill seeks to 
amend that law to give effect to the following objects, namely:-
(a) to increase the general rate of tax of 2 pice to 4 naye 
paise in the rupee, i.e., from 31% to 4% as in the neighbouring 
State of Punjab; 
(b) to levy at the rate of 2 per cent., as in the State of 
Punjab, tax on coal, cotton, iron and steel, jute and oil-seeds 
which are amongst the goods declared by section 14 of the 
Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 (74 of 1956) to be of special import-
ance in inter-State trade or commerce; 
(c) to list the goods which are normally consumed by the 
affluent sections of the society and to levy tax thereon at the 
rate of 7%; 
(d) to remove 'newspapers' from the scope of the definition 
of 'goods' so that they will be excluded from the purview of 
taxation under the Act as in the States; 
(e) to refrain from levying tax on lump sum indivisible 
works contracts although the levy of such tax may be in order 
according to the decision of the S~preme Court in Mithan Lal 
and another v. State of Delhi and another; 
(f) to provide for the levy of tax at any point other than 
the point of last sale so that sales tax may be levied at the first 
point on certain items which are manufactured in factories. 
Opportunity has also been taken to make a few minor amend-
ments in the sales tax law, the need for which has been brought to 
light in the course of the administration of that law. 
The nates on clauses appended hereto explain the provisions of 
the Bill, wherever necessary. 
MORARJI DESAI. 
The 23rd February, 1959. 

Note, on clauaeB 
ClatLIe 2 seeks to modify references to "State" and "State Gov-
ernment" into references to "Union territory" and "Central Govern-
ment" respectively. This is consequential on the changed position as 
from the 1st November, 1956. 
Clause 3-sub-clause (a) omits the definition of "contract" in 
section 2 (b) consequent on the decision to remove dealers engaged 
in the execution of indivisible contracts from the scope of the Act. 
Sub-cla1L8e (b).-The amendment seeks to remove from the 
definition of "goods" newspapers in order that sales tax may not be 
levied on them in tbe Union territory of Delhi as in the case of 
States. 
Sub-clauses (c) and (d) .-The definitions of "sale" and "sale 
price" have been revised so as to be in conformity with the defini-
tions in the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956. 
Clause 4 -sub-clause (b) .-The amendment seeks to make the 
dealers registered under the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956, liable to 
compulsory registration under the Delhi Sales Tax law, in order 
to check evasion of tax. 
Sub-clause (c) makes it clear that the importers, manufactur-
ers and producers are liable to registration whenever their taxable 
turnover exceeds Rs. 10,000 regardless of the value of the goods 
imported, manufactured or produced by them. 
Clause 5-sub-clause (a) .-Some of the goods declared by sec-
tion 14 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956, to be of special importance 
in inter-State trade or commerce are being placed under a new 
Schedule and the levy of tax thereon will be at the rate of 2 naye 
pai,qe in the rupee. The general rate of tax has been raised to 4 
naye paise in the rupee in order to fall in line with that prevailing 
in the neighbouring State of Punjab; and a uniform rate of tax at 
7% will be levied on certain special goods consumed by the affluent 
sections of the society. 
Sub-clause (b) (l).-'l'he two changes made by the clause are 
(i) to omit the reference to wOl;'ks contract, and (ii) to add to the 
turnover of the purchasing dealers the value of goods, if any, cover-
ed by the false declarations made by them. 
10 

1-1 
Sub-clause (b) (2) is consequential on clause 9. 
Clause 6 empowers the Chief Commissioner to prescribe the 
point other than the last point in the series of sales by successive 
dealers at which any goods or classes of goods may be taxed. 
Clause 9 enables tax under the Act to be collected only by dea-
lers registered under the Act. 
Clause 11 would enable the Government to refer any case to the 
High Court for decision on points of law, in the same way as dealers. 
Clause 12 empowers the assessing authorities, subject to rules 
made for the purpose, to impound and retain any books of accounts 
or other documents produced before them. 
Clause 14 seeks to impose penalties for the concealment of 
turnover and the supply of inaccurate particulars during the course 
of proceedings under the Act and for making false representations. 
Clause 15 empowers the Chief Commissioner to set up check-
posts and barriers in the Union territory with a view to check the 
evasion of tax. 
Clause 16 omits certain provisions which have become unneces-
sary. 
Clause 17 seeks to bring the Act into conformity with the provi-
sions of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956, and also incorporates the 
relevant constitutional provisions in the Act. 
Clause 18 is consequential on clause 5. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The increase in the rates of tax and the levy of tax on some of 
the declared goods and the tightening up of the machinery for col-
lection of tax under the Act, are lilrely to yield an additional annual 
revenue of about Rs. 25 lakhs. Additional expenditure may have to 
be incurred on the appointment of subordinate officers who have 
to hoe posted at the check barriers if the Chief Commissioner thinks 
it necessary to have them. In the event of such check barriers 
being established the additional expenditure is not likely to 
exceed Rs. 25,000/- per annum. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
New sub-section (2) of section 21A, inserted by clause 12 of the 
Bill, seeks to empower the Government to frame rUles subject to 
which the Commissioner or any person authorised by him may 
impound and retain any books or documents produced in any pro-
ceedings under the Act. 
New section 23A (relating to setting up of check-posts and bar-
riers), inserted by clause 15 of the Bill, empowers the Government 
to make rules regarding the form of declaration to be filled by 
persons transporting goods and the restrictions subject to which any 
vehicle can be intercepted and searched at a check-post or barrier. 
These provisions relate to matters of procedure and detail and the 
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS nOM THE BENGAL FINANCE (SALES TAX) ACT, 1941 AS 
IN FORCE IN THE UNION TERRITORY OF DELHI 
(VI OJ' 1941) 
• • • • • 
Defiaitiolll. Z. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject 
or context,-
• • • • • 
(b) "contract" means any agreement for carrying out for 
money consideration:-
(i) the construction, fitting out, improvement or repair 
of any building, road, bridge or other immovable property, 
or 
(ii) the installation or repair of any machinery affixed 
to a building or other immovable property, or 
(iii) the overhaul or repair of any motor vehicle; 
• • • • • 
(d) "goods" includes all materials, commodities and articles 
but does not include actionable claims, stocks, shares, securities 
or money; 
Explanation.-Goods supplied in the execution of a contract 
shall be deemed to be goods for the purposes of this Act; 
• • • • • 
(g) "sale" means any transfer of property in goods for 
money consideration and includes a transfer of property in goods 
supplied in the execution of a contract but does not include 
a mortgage, hypothecation, charge or pledge; and any grammati-
cal variations of the expression 'sale' shall be construed 
accordingly. 
Explanation 1.-A transfer of goods on hire-purchase or 
other instalment system of payment shall, notwithstanding that 
the seller retains a title to any goods as security for payment of 
the price, be deemed to be a sale; 
Explanation 2.-A sale shall, be deemed to have taken ph.lCl' 
in the State of Delhi if the goods are actually deIiwred in the 
State of Delhi as a direct result of such sale for the purpose of 
14 

1/i 
consumption in the State of Delhi, notwithstaRtUng the faet that 
lIDUrthe general Jaw rcelating to t;he ~ of good. the ,property 
in the goods has by I"eason of such sale passed in anotiaer State; 
(h) "sale..price" me,a~ 
(i) in tb,e ~~se of a sale wA.ich ~.n~i~ts j~ tAe tr"n.fer 
of prop.erty in goods sup.plied in t4e execl,ltion ,of .a C:PJ?tI.~ 
(perei,nalt.er r.efer.red to as a~aJ~ inyolv.e9 ~n t~e ~~~Y.tJ.9P 
of a contract) -such portion of the amount of the money 
coDllcierati.oD for the conuaet as may beprescri:bed, repre-
leDtiag the price of the goods suppllid; 
(ii) ip other ~ PI. p~the amo~ ¢ ~ ~ 
c~s)d~ation f~ the .ale. " ~y " .. ~low.ed ~ _ 
.di$:ount iCCOJ"ding to ,OI"~ tr.t,4e pract~, bW ,iJw~ 
.ny swn ~rg,ed for ~,Dyt.biQi .d~ by tl;l,e ~~ ~ ~t 
of tl;J.e goodos.t the WneQ/, or .b.eWr.e. ~v~ ~~f! 
other than the cost of freight or delivery or .tQ.e cost of in-
stallation when such cost is separately charged; 
... ... .. ... 
4. (1) With eff@ct from such date as the Chief Commissioner may. =:.co of 
hy notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, 'being not earlier than 
thilty days :after the date 01. the aaid notificatiRn, ,eyery dealer 
whose gross turnover d~ t.l.le y~ i!;o~~y weceding the 
commencement of thic; Act exceeded the ta"able .quantum shall be 
liable to pay t~x under this Act on all sl;lles eftect~ a,fter the date 
so notified: 
Provided that the t~x shall not be PClyableoJ;l ~ales involved 
in the execution of a contract which is shown to the satisfaction 
of tAe Copu:r;lfissiQner to ha,~e ~ .enWed into Oll or before the 
date so notified: 
Provided fwrther that a dealer who deals excllolSiveJ.y in one or 
more ,clalSes of goods specified in the f·cliedule _n Dot 'be liable to 
pay any tax under this Act. 
... . . .. 
(5) In this Act, the expression 'taxable quantum' means-
(a) in relation to any deeier who imports for sale ,any goods 
into the State of Delhi or manufactures or proouces any goods 
for sale, ten ·thousand rupees: 
• • ... • 

.. ate of to:. 
.. 
16 
5. (1) The tax payable by.a dealer under this Act shall be levied-
(a) in case of taxable turnover in respect of the goods speci-
fied in the First Schedule. at the rate of one anna in the rupeej 
(b) in the case of taxable turnover in respect of any 
other goods, at the rate of one-half of an anna in the rupee: 
Provided that the Chief Commissioner with the previous approval 
of the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette. 
add to, or omit from, or otherwise amend the First Schedule: 
Provided further that if in respect of any goods or class of goods 
the Chief Commissioner is of opinion that it is expedient in the 
interests of the general public to reduce the rate of tax thereon, the 
Chief Commissioner with the previous approval of the State Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that the 
tax in respect of the taxable turnover of such goods or class of goods, 
shall, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, be levied at 
iUch reduced rate as may be specified in the notification . 
• • • • 
(2) In this Act the expression "taxable turnover" means that 
part of a dealer's gross turnover during any period which remains 
,fter deducting therefrom-
(a) his turnover during that period on-
(i) the sale of goods declared tax-free under section 6; 
(ii) sales to a registered dealer-
of goods of the class or classes specified in the certi-
ficate of registration of such dealer, as being intended 
for re-sale by him, or for use by him as raw materials 
in the manufacture of goods for sale or for use by him 
in the execution of any contract; and 
of containers or other materials for the packing of 
goods of the class or classes so specified: 
Provided that in the case of such sales a declaration duly 
filled up and signed by the registered dealer to whom the 
goods are sold and containing prescribed particulars on a 
prescribed form obtainable from the prescribed authority is 
furnished in the prescribed manner by the dealer who sells 
the goods; 
(iii) sales to a registered dealer engaged in the business 
of raising coal, of any goods which are shown to the satis-
faction of the Commissioner to be required directly for use 
in cOllllection with the raising of coal; 

(iv) sales to any undertaking supplying electrical energy 
to the public under a licence or sanction granted or deemed 
to have been granted under the Indian Electricity Act, 1910 
(IX of 1910) of goods for use by it in the generation or distri-
bution of such energy; 
(v) sales of goods which are shown to the satisfaction 
of the Commissioner to have been despatched by, or on 
behalf of the dealer to an address outside the State of Delhi; 
(vi) such other sales as may be prescribed; and 
(b) such per centum of the balance remaining after making 
the deductions allowed by sub-clauses (i) to (vi) as is equivalerit 
to the rate per centum of the tax leviable on the goods . 
• • • • 
8. (1) Any dealer other than a dealer who deals exclusively in Vol.unta~· 
one or more classes of goods specified in the Schedule, whose gross rCilltratlOD. 
turnover during a year exceeds 10,000 rupees may, notwithstanding 
that he may not be liable to pay tax under section 4, apply in the 
prescribed manner to the prescribed authority for registration under 
this Act. 
• • • • • • Pzoviliollll 
SB. (1) Any person who intends to establish a business in the rc,i.tI1ltiOD. 
State of Delhi for the purpose of-
(a) manufacturing or producing goods of a value exceeding 
ten thousand rupees per year, or 
(b) executing contracts the value of which is likely to 
exceed thirty thousand rupees per year, may, notwithstanding 
that he is not required to register himself under section 7 apply 
in the prescribed manner to the prescribed authority for provi-
sional registration under this Act. 
• • • • 
11. (1). 
• • • • 
(2a) No assessment under sub-section (1) shall be made after 
the expiry of four years and no assessment ynder sub-section (2) 
shall be made after the expiry of six years from the end of the year 
In respect of which or part of which the assessment is made. 
(3) The amount of tax-
(a) due where the returns are furnished without receipt 
shOWing full payment thereof, or 
(b) assessed under sub-section (l), less the sum, if any, 
already paid by the dealer in respect of the said period, or 
(e) assessed under sub-section (2), shall, together with anr 
AlMUmm\ 
of ~X • 

1 • 
. peuity ttwt ...,. be dlreeted to 1gepetttUfttier any of the provt-
.111 of tIUs 61CUon, be paid by the 4ealer iftte 8 Government 
'l"!IIesury Dr the lte8erve Bank of Iftdi. « iB any other manner as 
m.,. he ptW:eeribed by sueh elate as maybe speeifted in a notice 
issued by the Commissioner for tlUs pu!'p08e aftd the date to be 
5$ apeci.tied IhI.ll lte Got ., tbaa t.biI:tf dar- fl'OJIl the date of 
senlice Df IIoK'b Gotioe: 
Proricie4 dwt theC&mllliuioRer m.~, if! f'espect of any particular 
dealer.a.wl b- naSQl¥' fA be J'etIOnMd in 1trritiac. extead the date of 
such payment or allow such dealer iG pay the ~u .dua .a.nd the penalty 
if any by instjl.bn~ts . 
• • • • 
Statement 21. (1) Within sixty dayS fr~.m tbe 98MjAg };Iy ~ Ch,ief ~r:ami8-
~~. sionet' of any.order Mncier s\l~s.dio.n 0) Df ~QD 20 .a.ifw;til;\8I».Y 
liebtli~yof any deale.r to pay t.Q ~ .this Act, &Ud1. ,jeW -'Y, 
by application in writing .acc.o.rnpanied by a fse of .AJ}e b.~<i ~, 
require .the Chief Co.mmisaiWleJ" 10 rdf:I'to tb.e lIJjh ,(:gun -.y 
question of law arising out of such order . 
Offences 
and penal-
tie •. 
• • • • 
%2. (1) Whoever-
(a) carries on business as a dealer in cQlltravention of sub-
section (1, of section '; or 
, (b) fails, without sufficient cause, to s\lbmit any return as 
required by su'b-section (2) of section 1~ .or submijs a false 
rf!Iturn; or 
.(c) beiDg a rtWiste.red dealer, !alM.ly r~Dt.s when pur-
chasing any class of goods, that ;iaodsQf .such e.lau au . .covered 
by his certificate of registration; or 
(d) not being a registered dealer, falsely repreWlts when 
purchasing goods that he is a regjstered dealer.; or 
(e) £ail.s~ WMn required ,so to .do under .section 113,to .keep 
prescribed accounts o.r records 01 aales;ar 
(1) ~1UI8S .1;Q \CQII:I!Illw -w,iUb .." :re,\tireulllllt maGe ,of Dim 
undar .ub-aeoUQIl (J~ .()f ~ 14; -
(g) knowingly produces incorrect ~o\lDUi., lli'IistRS or 
documen~, Qr knowiniIy furnishes .lacQIl'ect illf~on; or 
(h) obstructs any offiQer WiWlJdilC Ul ~tiQll o.r .aeeaJ!ch or 
8 seizure under sectian 14,; ot 
.(i) ~paots Ito f»rMiP ~y ~~tiQII rr~ by 
_tion lB; 

19 
shall be punishable with simple imprisonment which may extend to 
six months or with fine or with both, and when the offence is a con-
tinuing one, with a daily fine not exceeding fiifty rupees during the 
period of the continuance of the offence: 
Provided that no prosecution for an offence against this Act shall 
be instituted in respect of the same facts in respect of which a panalty 
has been imposed under section 11. 
• • • • 
• • • • Power !('I 
21. (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of lD&ke ruj~s. 
the foregoing power, such rules may prescribe:-
(a) the proportion referred to in sub-clause (i) of clause 
(h) of section 2; 
(00) the authority referred to in the proviso to clause (j) 
of section 2; 
• • • • • • 
(c) the taxable quantum for particular classes of dealers 
under clause (b) of sub-section (5) of section 4; 
• • • • 
27. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act-
(a) a tax on sale or purchase of goods shall not be imposed 
under this Act-
(i) where such sale or purchase takes place outside the 
State of Delhi; 
(ii) where such sale or purchase takes place in the 
course of import of the good,> into, or export of the goods out 
of, the territory of India; 
(b) a tax on the sale or purchase of any goods shall not be 
imposed where such sale or purchase takes place in the course 
of inter-State trade or commerce except insofar as Parliament 
may by law otherwise provide. 
(2) The Explanation to clause (1) of article 286 of the Constitu-
tion shall apply for the interpretation of sub-clause (i) of clause (a) 
of sub-section (1) . 
• • • • 
Savini. 

tot<. SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Bengal Finance (Sales Tax) Act, 1941, 
as in force in the Union territory of Delhi. 
The President has, in pursuance af clauses (I) and (3) of article 
I I 7 of the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha 
the introduction and consideration of the Bill. 
M. N.KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri Morarji Desat, 
Minister of Fi1JallU.) 