THE ESSENTIAL COMMODITIES (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1957 
(AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 

Bill No. 27 of 1957. 
THE ESSENTIAL COMMODITIES (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1957 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Essential Commodities Act, 1955. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Essential Commodities (Amend- Short title. 
ment) Act, 1957. 
10 of I9SS. 5 2. In section 3 of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955, after sub- Amendment 
section (3), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- of section 3. 
"(3A) (i) If the Central Government is of opinion that it 
is necessary so to do for con trolling the rise in prices, on 
preventing the hoarding, of any foodstuff in any locality, it may, 
10 by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that notwithstand-
ing anything contained in sub-section (3), the price at which 
the foodstuff shall be sold in the locality in compliance with an 
order made with reference to clause (f) of sub-section (2) shall 
be regulated in accordance with the provisions of this sub-
IS section. 
(ii) Any notification issued under this sub-section shall 
remain in force for such period not exceeding three months as 
may be speclfled in the notification. 

2 
(iii) Where, after the issue of a notification under this sub-
section, any person sells foodstuff of the kind specified therein 
and in the locality so specified, in compliance with an order 
made with reference to clause (f) of sub-~ection (2), there 
shall be paid to the seller as the price therefor- S 
(4) where the price can, consistently with the con-
trolled price of the foodstuff, if any, fixed under this sec-
tion, be agreed upon, the agreed price; 
(b) where no such agreement can be reached, the price 
calculated with reference to the controlled price, if any; 10 
(c) where neither clause (4) nor clause (b) applies, 
the price calculated with reference to the average market 
rate prevailing in the locality during the period of three 
months immediately preceding the date of the notification. 
(iv) For the purposes of sub-clause (c) of clause (iii), the IS 
average market rate prevailing in the locality shall be deter-
mined by an officer authorised by the Central Government in 
this behalf, with reference to the prevailing market rates for 
which published figures are available in respect of that locality 
or of a neighbouring looo.lity; and the average market rate so 20 
determined shall be final and shall not be called in ~uestion in 
any court.". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under clause (f) of sub-section (2) of section 3 of the Essential 
Commodities Act, 1955, the Central Government can direct a person 
holding stocks of food· grains to sell the whole or a specified part of 
it to any person or class of persons. Under sub-section (3) of the 
said section, the person holding the stocks is required to be paid the 
price for the food grains at the market rate prevailing in the locality 
at the date of the sale, if there is no controlled price in force at the 
time. At present, there is no control of prices in any part of the 
country. In a rising market, the presen,t provisions of the Act do 
not discourage hoarding as the stockists can at any time obtain the 
prevailing market price on the date of issue of orders by the Cen-
tral Government directing them to sell the stocks. 
2. In view of the present high level of prices, it is considered 
necessary, in order to discourage hoarding and to prevent undue 
profiteering by the traders, to alter this proviSion. It is proposed 
that in the absence of a controlled price, the stockist should be 
entitled to receive the average market rate prevailing in the locality 
during the period of three months preceding the date of the issue 
of the notification applying the new provisions, and not the market 
rate prevailing on the date of sale . 
• 
NEW DELm; 
The 29th May. 1957. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE ESSENTIAL COMMOD1TIJ'.S ACT, 1955 
(No. 10 or 1955) 
* * * • 
powerol to 3. (1) If the Central Government is of opinion that it is necessary 
contr pro- di d f .. . . in 1· f duction, 8Up- or expe ent so to 0 or mamtammg or mcreas g supp les 0 any 
~ly, di8tribUr essential commodity or for securing their equitable distribution and 
tlon, etc., 0 ·1 bi!· f· .. b d ·d fo gulat· eSgential aval a lty at 8lr pnces, It may, y or er, preVl e r re . mg 
commodities. or prohibiting the production, supply and distribution thereof and 
trade and commerce therein. 
(2) Without prejudice to the ,generality of the powers conferred 
by sub-section (1), an order made thereunder may provide-:--
(a) for regulating by licences, permits or otherwise the 
production or manufacture of any essential cOrrunodity; 
(b) for bringing under cultivation any waste or arable 
land, whether appurtenant to a building or not, for the growing 
thereon of food-crops generally or of specified food-crops, and 
for otherwise maintaining or increasing the cultivation of food-
crops generally, or of specified food-crops; 
(c) for controlling the price at which any essential com-
modity may be bought or sold; 
(d) for regulating by licences, permits or otherwise the 
storage, transport, distribution, disposal, acquisition, use or 
consumption of, any essential commodity; 
(e) for prohiblting the withholding from sale of any 
essential commodity ordinarily kep} for sale; 
(f) for requiring any person holding in stock any essential 
commodity to sell the whole or a specified part of the stock to 
such person or class of persons and in such circumstances as 
may be specified in the order; 
(g) for regulating or prohibiting any class of commercial 
or financial transactions relating to foodstuffs or cotton textiles 
which, in the oplnioll of the authority making the order, are, 
or if unregulated, are likely to be, detrimental to the public 
interest; 
4 
• 

~ 
(h) tor collecting any information or statistics with a view 
to regulating or prohibiting any of the aforesaid matters; 
(i) for requiring persons engaged in the production, sup-
ply or distribution of, or trade and commerce in, any essential 
commodity to maintain and produce for inspection such books, 
accounts and records relating to their business and to furnish 
such information relating thereto, as may be specified in the 
order; 
(j) for any incidental and supplementary matters, includ-
ing in particular the entering and search of premises, vehicles, 
vessels and aircraft, the seizure by a person authorised to make 
luch search of any articles in respect of which such person has 
~eason to believe that a contravention of the order has been, is 
being, or is about to be committed, the grant or issue of licences, 
permits or other documents, and the charging of fees therefor. 
(3) Where any person sells any essential commodity in com-
pliance with an order made with reference to clause (I) of sub-sec-
tion (2), there shall be paid to him the price therefor as hereinafter 
provided:-
(a) where the price can, consistently with the controlled 
price, if any, fixed under this section, be a~eed upon, the agreed 
price; 
(b) where no such agreement can be reached, the price 
calculated. with reference to the controlled price, if any; 
(c) where neither clause (a) nor clause (b) applies, the 
price calculated at the market rate prevailing in the locality 
at the date of Al .. 
• • • • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Essential Commodities Act, 1955. 
--
... 
(SAri Ajit Prasad !latt!, 
Minister of Food and 
Agriculture) 