AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

- 2 JUN 1998

Bill_No. 27 of 1998

THE PROVISION OF EMPLOYMENT BILL, 1998
By
Dr. T. Sunparami Reppy, M.P.
A
BILL

de employment or for means and res-urces for self-employment to at least one
adult member of every family.

it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as

1. This Act may be called Provision of Employment Act, 1998. Shorttitle.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, “family” means and includes Definition.
fe, husband and minor children.


Central Govern-
ment to provide
employment,

Anemployce
notto involve
in any activity
resulting in
financial gains.

Periodical
promotions to
umployees,

Dependents to
getemployinent
after retirement

Family to get
benefitsin case
of unemplay-
ment ofany
member,

Power to make
rules.

3. It shall be the duty of the Central Government to provide cmployment to at=
Jeast one adult member of every family.

4. Every person who has been provided with a job under Section 3 shall not involve
himself in any activity other than his employment 0: financial or other gains,

5. The Central Government shall evolve a Process ensuring periodical promotions to
all its employees on the basis of tests and their performance.

6. The Central Government shall provide employment to the dependant of an
employee, who had been provided with a job under section 3, after his retirement from
service,

7. The Central Government shall provide credit, subsidy and all other facilities
or resources for self-employment to a family where it is not possible to provide
employment to atleast one member of that family.

8. The Central Government may make rules for carrying out the purposes of this
Act.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

In India, poverty is one of the biggest problems. Even after fifty years of independ-

we have not been able to contain the poverty. Although our country has progressed in
any fields, yet it has failed to improve the standard of living of the people. There may be
any reasons for poverty.

It has been observed that income of a small family as compared to its income in the
1965 has not improved. There are a large number of families where there is not even
le earning member and most of them earn their livelihood by working as labourers,

omestic servants, bonded labourers, etc. Majority of population lives below poverty line.
ountry being a welfare State should take necessary steps to improve the lot of the
le and formulate schemes and plans to eradicate poverty from the country.

With this in view it is proposed to make a positive step towards eradicating poverty.
sed that atleast one adult member of every family should be provided with em-

ent and where it is not possible to provide employment, the family should be given
ry facilities for decent and reasonable livelihood.

The Bill secks to achieve the above objective.

T. SUBBARAMI REDDY


FINANLIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of 0.2 Bill provides that the Central Government shail provide employment
to one adult member of every family. Clause 7 provides that the Central Government shall
provide credit, subsidy and all other facilities or resources for self-employment to a femily
where it is not possible to provide employment. The Bill, if enacted, “ould involve ex:
penditure from the consolidated Fund of India in implementing the provisions of the Bill.

It is likely to involve an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand crore
from the Consolidated Fund of India.

A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of one hundred crore is likely to be,
involved.



| REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

lause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry out the
of the Bill. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters of
or detail only. The delegation of legislative power is, thus, of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide employment or for means and resources for self-employment to atleast one
adult member of every family,

(Dr: T. Subbarami Reddy, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)JMAND—76LS—30-4-98