1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI GOPAL CHINAYYA SHETTY, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2015.
2.  After article 21A of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
‘‘21B.  Every citizen shall have the right to safe and adequate quantity of drinking
water at a convenient place at regular intervals.”.
Bill No. 27 of  2015
Short title.
Insertion of
new article
21B.
Right to safe
and adequate
drinking water.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Basic requirement for human life is food, cloth, shelter and safe drinking water. As
many people in our country are poor, it is the duty of the Government to provide basic
facilities to the citizens. At the same time, India, being a vast country with a large population,
it is not possible to fulfil all basic needs of every citizen. Nevertheless, a beginning can be
made by providing at least safe drinking water to the citizens. Presently, drinking water is not
easily available to most of the population. People have to go to remote places to fetch water
which is generally not potable.
In view of the above, it is proposed to make it mandatory for the State to provide safe
drinking water to all the citizens.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; GOPAL CHINAYYA SHETTY
December 18, 2014.
2

3
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to insert a new article 21B to the Constitution, with a view to
making the right to safe and adequate drinking water a fundamental right of the citizens. The
Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees two hundred crores will be involved from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be involved.

GMGIPMRND—4333LS(S-3)—20.02.2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty, M.P .)