THE PERSONS AFFECTED BY NAXALITE TERRORISM
(RELIEF AND REHABILITATION) BILL, 2009
By
SHRI BAIJAY ANT PANDA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for relief, compensation and rehabilitation measures through employment
and other means for the persons affected by naxalites or maoist terrorism in various
parts of the country and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Y ear of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Persons Affected by Naxalite Terrorism (Relief and
Rehabilitation) Act, 2009.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
Bill No. 27  of  2009
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short tilte,
extent and
commencement.
5

2
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
(ii) “dependant” means and includes spouse, minor children and parents; and
(iii) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
(2) words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the
Indian Penal Code, 1860, the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and the Unlawful
Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 shall have the same meaning as assigned to them in
the respective Acts.
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the appropriate Government shall pay compensation to the victims of naxalite or maoist
violence in the following manner:—
(i) in case of loss of life,
(a) an ex gratia grant to the dependants which shall not be less than five
lakh rupees; and
(b) financial assistance to the dependants at the rate of not less than two
thousand rupees per month per dependant.
to be paid in such manner as may be prescribed;
(ii) in case of serious injury leading to incapacitation, medical treatment free of
cost till such period as is necessary for full recovery and payment of an ex gratia
amount which shall not be less than two lakh rupees;
(iii) in case of damage to the dwelling unit as a result of torching or bombing,
repair of the dwelling unit, if viable or construction of a new dwelling unit;
(iv) in case of loss of livestock, adequate compensation for such loss in the
prescribed manner; and
(v) in case of loss of  livelihood by damage or destruction of shops or kiosks or
business establishment, payment of such compensation as is necessary, in the opinion
of the appropriate Government, for rehabilitation.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Act, naxalite or maoist violence means any act to
strike terror in the people or any section of the people by using bombs, dynamite or other
explosive substances or inflammable substances or weapons in such a manner as to cause, or
as is likely to cause, death of, or injuries to, any person or persons or loss of, or damage to, or
destruction of, property or disruption of any supplies or services essential to the life of the
community by an activist or a group of activists belonging to naxalite or maoist organisation.
4. (1) The Central Government, as soon as may be, in consultation with the Governments
of the States affected by Naxalite or Maoist violence, shall formulate a national policy for
Naxalites who wish to shun violence and return to the mainstream of the nation for their
rehabilitation through general amnesty and by providing them with employment, assistance
for self employment or by any other means as the Government may deem necessary to do so
in the national interest.
(2) The appropriate Government shall promote village level defence system through
teams of volunteers for the protection of their village from Naxalite or Maoist violence.
(3) The appropriate Government shall make arrangements for training of volunteers
in self-defence and equip such volunteers with necessary weapons for protection of villages
from naxalite or maoist violence from time to time in such manner as may be prescribed.
5. The Central Government shall provide, after due appropriation made by Parliament
by law in this behalf, adequate funds to the States affected by Naxalite or Maoist violence for
carrying out the purposes of this act.
Definitions.
Provision of
compensation
to the victims
or dependants
of persons
killed by
naxalites.
Miscellaneous
provisions.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
45 of 1860
2 of 1974
37 of 1967

3
6. The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force, but save as aforesaid the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not
in derogation of any other law for the time being in force.
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to make
rules.
5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Many parts of our country are in the grip of Naxalite violence being spearheaded by
disgruntled elements, mostly youth, who identify themselves with different names such as
naxalites, Peoples War Group (PWG), Maoists, Leninist-Maoist, etc. The worst affected
States are Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand and parts of Andhra Pradesh, Orissa, Maharashtra, Bihar,
Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, West Bengal, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu. The Naxalites are
killing hundreds of innocent people, policemen, personnel of paramilitary and armed forces,
men, women and children frequently just to create panic and spread terror. Houses and
shops are being torched or blown up. Even the thatched huts of the poorest of the poor are
not being spared. Crops are being destroyed. They kidnap innocent people for ransom.
They attack Police Stations to loot the weapons and kill the Policemen. They blow up
vehicles with mines. In naxalite affected areas, people do not venture out of their houses in
the evening or night time. They collect illegal taxes in many areas and run a parallel
Government.
Despite the fact that innocent people are killed or injured in Naxalite violence, they are
not compensated at all or only a meagre sum is given as compensation with much hassles.
Similar is the case of persons who have lost houses, livestock, crops, business, etc. In a
democratic country like ours, it is the duty of the State to protect the life and property of its
citizens and if the State fails to give the required protection, the affected persons and their
dependants should be duly compensated by the State.
Similarly, the disgruntled and misguided youth who join these outfits for variety of
reasons should be brought back to the mainstream of the nation. They should be given
amnesty, employment opportunities and other incentives. There should be a national policy
for these naxalites who too are the citizens of this nation.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BAIJAYANT  PANDA
June 6, 2009
4
SER5\F\BILL 2009/LS/2294LS

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for compensation to the victims or dependants of persons
killed during attacks by naxalites or maoist terrorists. Clause 4 provides for rehabilitation,
employment or other assistance to those naxalites who shun violence and join mainstream
of the nation. Clause 5 provides that the Central Government shall provide funds to the State
Governments for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The Bill, if enacted, will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees five
hundred crore may involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
5
SER5\F\BILL 2009/LS/2294LS

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only. The delegation of
legislative power is of normal character.
6
SER5\F\BILL 2009/LS/2294LS

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for relief, compensation and rehabilitation measures through employment and
other means for the persons affected by naxalites or maoist terrorism in various parts of
the country and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Baijayant Panda, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2294LS(S5)—26-06-2009.
SER5\F\BILL 2009/LS/2294LS