Bill No. 27 of  2020
THE PROTECTION FROM LYNCHING BILL, 2020
By
DR. SHASHI THAROOR, M.P.
——————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
——————
CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
DUTIES OF POLICE OFFICER AND DISTRICT MAGISTRATE
3. Designation of Nodal Officer
4. Duties of Nodal Officer
5. Duties of Police Officer.
6. Duties of District Magistrate.
CHAPTER III
P
REVENTION OF ACTS LEADING TO LYNCHING
7. Duty to Prevent Lynching.
8. Power to exercise authority against mobs.
CHAPTER IV
PUNISHMENT FOR LYNCHING
9. Punishment for offence of Lynching
10. Punishment for conspiracy or abetment or aides or attempt to lynch.
11. Punishment for obstructing legal process.
CHAPTER V
O
THER OFFENCES AND PUNISHMENT
12. Punishment for dissemination of offensive material.
13. Punishment for causing damage to any property movable and immovable.
14. Punishment for false information or failure to give information.
15. Dereliction of duty by police officer.
16. Punishment for dereliction of duty by police officer.
17. Dereliction of duty by District Magistrate.
18. Punishment for dereliction of duty by District Magistrate.
19. Punishment for enforcing a hostile environment.
A
S INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

CLAUSES
CHAPTER VI
INVESTIGATION, PROSECUTION AND TRIAL
20. Application of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
21. Offences to be cognizable, non-bailable and non-compoundable.
22. Investigation by senior Police Officers.
23. Sanction not required for offences under the Act.
24. Cases triable by designated Judges.
25. Power to appoint designated Judges.
26. Procedure and power of the designated Judges.
27. Rights of victims and witnesses during trial.
28. Constitution of review committee.
CHAPTER VII
R
ELIEF AND REHABILITATION
29. Treatment to Victim.
30. Duty to provide compensation.
31. Displacement.
32. Establishment of relief camps.
CHAPTER VIII
A
PPEALS
33. Appeals.
CHAPTER IX
MISCELLANEOUS
34. Power to remove difficulties.
35. Act to be in addition to any other law.
36. Power to make rules.
(ii)

1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 27 of  2020
THE PROTECTION FROM LYNCHING BILL, 2020
By
DR. SHASHI THAROOR, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for effective protection of the Constitutional rights of vulnerable persons, to
punish acts of lynching, to provide for designated courts for the expeditious trial of
such offences, for rehabilitation of victims of lynching and their families and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
WHEREAS the Constitution of India guarantees to all persons the right to life and
personal liberty and the Equal Protection of Laws:
AND WHEREAS in recent times, there have been a spate of incidents resulting in loss of
livelihood, injuries and death of persons at the hands of lynch mobs;
AND WHEREAS it is deemed necessary and expedient to enact legislation for the protection
of these rights guaranteed by the Constitution:
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Protection from Lynching Act, 2020.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Definitions.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force within thirty days of its enactment.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government.
(b) "hostile environment" means intimidating or coercive environment that
is created against the victim or the family members of the victim or against any
witnesses or any one providing assistance to the witness or victim, which includes
being subjected to the following act—
(i) boycott of the trade or businesses of such person or making it otherwise
difficult for him or her to earn a living; or
(ii) extern such person or his family from the locality where he or his family
has normally been residing as permanent resident; or
(iii) public humiliation through exclusion from public services, including
education, health and transportation or any act of indignity; or
(iv) deprive or threaten to deprive such person of his fundamental rights;
or
(v) force such person to leave his home or place of ordinary residence or
livelihood without his or her express consent; or
(vi) any other act, whether or not it amounts to an offence under this Act,
that has the purpose or effect of creating an intimidating, hostile or offensive
environment.
(c) "lynching" means any act or series of acts of violence or aiding, abetting or
attempting an act of violence, whether spontaneous or planned, by a mob on the
grounds of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth, language, dietary practices, sexual
orientation, political affiliation, ethnicity or any other related grounds.
(d) "mob" means a group of two or more individuals, assembled with an intention
of lynching.
(e) "offensive material" means any material that can be reasonably construed to
have been made to incite a mob to lynch a person on the grounds of religion, race,
caste, sex, place of birth, language, dietary practices. sexual orientation, political
affiliation, ethnicity or any other related grounds.
(f) "victim" means any person, who has suffered physical, mental, psychological
or monetary harm as a result of the commission of any offence under this Act, and
includes his or her relatives, legal guardian and legal heirs of a deceased victim.
(g) "witness" means any person who is acquainted with the facts and
circumstances, or is in possession of any information or has knowledge necessary for
the purpose of investigation, inquiry or trial of any crime involving an offence under
this Act, and who is or may be required to give information or make a statement or
produce any document during investigation, inquiry or trial of such case and includes
a victim of such offence.
(h) Words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 or the Indian Penal Code shall have the meanings
assigned to them respectively in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, or as the case
may be, in the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
20 of 1947
45 of 1860

3
CHAPTER II
DUTIES OF POLICE OFFICER AND DISTRICT MAGISTRATE
3. (1) The Director General of Police shall appoint a State Coordinator to prevent
lynching who shall be the officer not below the rank of inspector General of Police.
(2) Every District Superintendent of Police shall be the District Coordinator, who shall
be assisted by one of the Deputy Superintendents of Police in the distict for taking measures
to prevent incidents of mob violence and lynching.
4. (1) The District Coordinator so designated under sub-section (2) of Section 3 shall
hold regular meetings (at least once in a month) with the local intelligence units in the district
along with all the officers  in-charge of the Police Station of the district so as to identify the
existence of the tendencies of vigilantism, mob violence or lynching in the district and take
steps to prohibit instances of dissemination of offensive material for inciting such tendencies.
(2) The District Coordinator shall,—
(i) make efforts to eradicate hostile environment against any community or caste
which is targeted in such incidents;
(ii) bring to the notice of the State Coordinator and Director General of Police
any issue having inter district ramification of mob violence for devising a strategy to
tackle the same at the State level;
(iii) monitor the investigation of such offenders personally and be duty bound
to ensure that the investigation is carried out effectively and that the charge-sheet is
filed within the statutory period from the date of registration of the First Information
Report or arrest of the accused as the case may be.
5. (1) Every police officer, directly in charge of maintaining law and order in an area
shall take all reasonable steps to prevent any act of lynching including its incitement and
commission; and to that end—
(i) make all possible efforts to identify instances of dissemination of offensive
material or any other means employed in order to incite or promote lynching of a
particular person or group of persons;
(ii) act in furtherance of the duty to prevent lynching in accordance with the
powers vested in them; and
(iii) make all possible efforts to prevent the creation of hostile environment
against a person or group of persons.
(2) Every police officer shall take every possible action to the best of their ability, to
prevent the commission of all offences under this Act.
6. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
whenever the District Magistrate has reason to believe that in any area within his jurisdiction,
a situation has arisen where there is an apprehension of lynching he may, be order in writing,
prohibit any act which in his opinion is likely to lead to the incitement and commission of an
act of lynching.
(2) The District Magistrate shall take every possible action to the best of his or her
ability to prevent the creation of a hostile environment against a person or group of persons.
CHAPTER III
P
REVENTION OF ACTS LEADING TO LYNCHING
7. (1) It shall be the duty of every police officer, in-charge of a police station to take all
reasonable steps to prevent any incident of lynching, including its incitement, commission
and possible spread in the area under their jurisdiction and to that end—
(i) make all possible efforts to identify patterns of violence in the area under their
jurisdiction, that indicate occurrence of targeted violence;
Designation of
Nodal Officer.
Duties of
Nodal Officer.
Duties of
Police Officer.
Duties of
District
Magistrate.
2 of 1974.
Duty to
prevent
lynching.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(ii) obtain information regarding the likelihood of an act of lynching; and
(iii) act in furtherance of the duty to prevent any act of lynching in accordance with
the powers vested in them.
(2) Every police officer exercising powers under this Act in discharge of their duties
shall act without any delay in a fair, impartial and non-discriminatory  manner.
8. (1)  It shall be the duty of every police officer in-charge of a police station to exercise
his authority on a mob in order to cause it to disperse.
(2) In exercise of his authority, a police officer in-charge of a police station may use
such powers as vested under Section 129 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
CHAPTER IV
PUNISHMENT FOR LYNCHING
9. Whoever commits an act of lynching—
(a) where the act leads to the victim suffering hurt, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years and
with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees.
(b) where the act leads to the victim suffering grievous hurt shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and
with fine which shall not be less than twenty-five thousand rupees and may extend to
three lakh rupees.
(c) where the act leads to the death of the victim, shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for life and with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees and
may extend to five lakh rupees.
10. Whoever takes part in a conspiracy or conspires to lynch another person, or abets
or aides or attempts an act of lynching shall be punished in the same manner as if they had
taken part in the actual incident of lynching.
11. Any person who—
(a) knows or have reasonable cause to believe that any other person is guilty of
an offence under this act, give that other person any assistance with intent thereby to
prevent, hinder or otherwise interfere with his arrest, trial or punishment for the said
offence, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years
and shall also be liable to fine which may extend to one lakh rupees.
(b) threatens a witness with any injury to his person or property or to the person
or property of any one in whom that person is interested, with intent to cause harm to
that person, or to compel that person to refrain or withdraw from being a witness in any
investigation or trial under this Act shall be punished with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to five years and shall also be liable to fine which may extend to one
lakh rupees.
CHAPTER V
O
THER OFFENCES AND PUNISHMENT
12. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
whoever publishes, communicates or disseminates by any method, physical or electronic,
any offensive material, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
of not less than one year which may extend to three years, and with fine which may extend to
fifty thousand rupees.
Power to
exercise
authority
against mobs.
Punishment
for offence of
lynching.
Punishment
for conspiracy
or abetment
or aides or
attempt to
lynch.
Punishment
for obstructing
legal process.
Punishment
for
dissemination
of offensive
material.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

5
13. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
whosoever cause damage to any property movable or immovable in the act of lynching, shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term of not less than one year
which may extend upto three years, and with fine which may extend to twice the amount of
damage or loss caused to the property, as may be determined by the Court.
14. Any person willfully and maliciously giving false information and so causing an
arrest or a search to be made under this Act shall on conviction be liable for imprisonment for
a term which may extend to two years with fine which may extend upto fifty thousand rupees
or both.
15. When any police officer, directly in charge of maintaining law and order in an area,
omits to exercise lawful authority vested in them under law, without reasonable cause and
thereby fails to prevent lynching shall be guilty of dereliction of duty.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, dereliction of duty by a police officer
shall also include the following:
(i) failure to provide protection to a victim of lynching;
(ii) failure to act upon apprehended lynching;
(iii) refusing to record any information under sub-section (1) of section 154 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 relating to the Commission of an offence under
this Act; and
(iv) failure to perform his duties under section 3, 4 and 5 of this Act.
16. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law being in force, whoever
being a police officer is guilty of dereliction of duty shall be punished with imprisonment of
one year, which may extend to three years, and with fine which may extend to fifty thousand
rupees.
17. Whoever being a District Magistrate authorized to act under any provisions of this
Act—
(a) exercised the lawful authority vested in him under this Act in a mala fide
manner, which causes or is likely to cause harm or injury to any person or property; or
(b) willfully omits to exercise lawful authority vested in him under this Act and
thereby fails to prevent the commission of any act of lynching, shall be guilty of
dereliction of duty.
18. Whoever being a District Magistrate is guilty of dereliction of duty shall be punished
with imprisonment for a term of one year which may extend to three years, and with fine
which may extend to fifty thousand rupees.
19. Whoever contributes or enforces a hostile environment on a person or a group of
person, shall be punished with imprisonment for six months.
CHAPTER VI
I
NVESTIGATION, PROSECUTION AND TRIAL
20. The provisions of the code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, shall apply to this Act,
save and except as amended or supplemented to the extent provided under this Chapter.
21. Unless otherwise specified, all offences specified under this Act, shall be cognizable,
non-bailable and non-compoundable.
Punishment
for causing
damage to any
property
movable and
immovable.
Punishment
for false
information
or failure to
give
information.
Dereliction of
duty by Police
Officer.
2 of 1974.
Punishment
for dereliction
of duty by
Police Officer.
Dereliction of
duty by
District
Magistrate.
Punishment
for dereliction
of duty by
District
Magistrate.
Punishment
for enforcing
a hostile
Environment.
Application of
Code of
Criminal
Procedure,
1973.
Offences to be
cognizable,
non-bailable
and non-
compoundable.
2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

6
22. No police officer below the rank of Inspector of Police shall investigate any offence
committed under this Act.
23. The provisions of sections 196 and 197 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
shall not apply to offences by police officers and the Court may take cognizance of such
offence when satisfied that the said offence has been committed.
24. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, or in
any other law for the time being in force, the offences specified under this Act shall be tried
by designated Judges appointed under this Act.
25. (1) The appropriate Government by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint as
many Designated Judges in consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court as it may be
necessary to try offences punishable under this Act.
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Designated Judge or Additional
Designated Judge under this Act unless he or she is or has been a Sessions Judge under the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
26. (1) A designated Judge may take cognizance of any offence, without the accused
being committed to it for trial, upon a police report.
(2) In trying the accused persons, the Designated Judge shall follow the procedure for
the trial of warrant cases prescribed by the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
(3) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, shall, so far as they are not
inconsistent with this Act, apply to be proceedings before a Designated Judge; and for the
purposes of the said provisions, the Court of the Designated Judge shall be deemed to be a
Court of Session.
(4) When trying the accused person, a Designated Judge may also try any offence,
other than an offence specified under this Act, with which the accused may, under the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1973, be charged at the same trial if the offence is connected with the
offence under this Act.
(5) If in the course of any trial under this Act, it is found that the accused person has
committed any other offence, the Designated Judge may, whether such offence is or is not an
offence under this Act, try such person of such offence and pass any sentence authorised
by law for the punishment thereof.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 a
Designated Judge shall hold the trial of an offence on day-to-day basis save and except for
reasons beyond the control of parties:
Provided that where a Designated Judge is unable to hold the trial of the offence on a
day-to-day basis, the reasons for the same, shall be recorded in writing by the Designated
Judge.
(7) In so far as reasonably possible, all statements of victims and witnesses should be
recorded within a period of one hundred and eighty days from the date of incident.
(8) In so far as reasonably possible, it shall be the endeavour of the Court to ensure
that any witness is not required to attend court on more than two dates of hearing.
27. (1) A Designated Judge may, on an application made by a witness in any proceedings
before it or by the Public Prosecutor in relation to such witness or on its own motion, take
such measures as it deems fit for keeping the identity and address of the witness secret.
(2) A victim shall have the right to reasonable, accurate, and timely notice of any court
proceeding and shall be entitled to be heard at any proceeding under this Act in respect of
bail, discharge, release, parole, conviction or sentence of an accused or any connected
proceedings or arguments and file written submissions on conviction, acquittal or sentencing.
Investigation
by senior
Police
Officers.
Sanction not
required for
offences under
the Act.
2 of 1974.
Cases triable
by Designated
Judges.
2 of 1974.
Power to
appoint
Designated
Judges.
Procedure and
Power of the
Designated
Judge.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.
Rights of
victims and
witnesses
during trial.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
2 of 1974.

7
(3) The Superintendent of Police, or officer designated by him or her shall inform the
victim in writing about the progress of investigations into the offence, whether or not the
offender has been arrested, charge-sheeted, granted bail, charged, convicted or sentenced,
and if a person has been charged with the offence, then the name of the suspected offender.
(4) The victim shall have the right to receive a copy of any statement of the witness
recorded during investigation or inquiry, and a copy of all statements and documents filed
under section 173 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 including the charge-sheet or
closure report submitted by police.
(5) A victim shall be entitled to receive free legal aid if he or she so chooses and to
engage any advocate who he or she chooses from among those enrolled in the legal aid
panel under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 and the Legal Aid Services Authority
established under the said Act shall pay all costs, expenses and fees of the advocate appointed
by the victim or informant in accordance with relevant rules.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law being in force, the Designated
Judge trying a case may permit the prosecution to be conducted by any advocate
recommended by the victim:
Provided that no person, other than the Advocate-General or Government advocate or
a Public Prosecutor or Assistant Public Prosecutor, shall be entitled to conduct the prosecution
without the prior approval of the Designated Judge.
(7) Where the prosecution is conducted by an advocate recommended by the victim,
the expenses arising out of such service, shall be borne by the appropriate Government.
(8) It shall be the duty and responsibility of the appropriate Government for making
arrangements for the protection of victims and witnesses against any kind of intimidation,
coercion or inducement or violence or threats of violence.
(9) The appropriate Government shall inform the concerned Designated Judge about
the protection provided to any victim, informant or witnesses and the Designated Judge
shall periodically review the protection being offered under this section and pass appropriate
orders.
(10) It shall be the duty of the Investigating Officer to record the complaint of victim,
informant or witnesses against any kind of intimidation, coercion or inducement or violence
or threats of violence, whether given orally or in writing and copy of the same shall be sent
to the Designated Judge within twenty-four hours of recording it.
28. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,
every case, registered in connection with an offence under this Act and where the Investigating
Officer does not file a charge sheet within a period of three months from the date of registration
of the First Information Report, shall be reviewed by a Committee headed by an officer of the
level of an Inspector-General of Police to be constituted by the appropriate Government and
such committee may pass orders for a further investigation by another officer not below the
rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police wherever it comes to the conclusion that, having
regard to the nature of investigation already carried out, such investigation would be
necessary.
(2) The Committee constituted under sub-section (1) may also review cases of such
offences where the trial ends in acquittal and issue orders for filing appeal, wherever required.
(3) The Committee shall submit a report of its findings and action taken in each case or
cases to the Director General of Police.
CHAPTER VII
R
ELIEF AND REHABILITATION
29. All hospitals, public or private, whether run by the Central Government, the State
Government, local bodies or any other person, shall immediately provide the first aid or
medical treatment free of cost to victim and shall immediately inform the police of such
incident.
2 of 1974.
39 of 1987.
Constitution
of Review
Committee.
Treatment of
victim.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

8
30. (1) The appropriate Government through the office of the level of Chief Secretary
shall provide compensation to victims of lynching within thirty days of the incident.
(2) Where the death of a person has occurred as a consequence of lynching, the
compensation for such death shall be paid to the next of kin of the deceased.
(3) While computing compensation, the appropriate Government must give due regard
to the bodily injury, psychological injury, material injury and loss of earnings including
loss of opportunity of employment and education expenses incurred on account of legal and
medicinal assistance:
Provided that in no case of death caused due to lynching, should the compensation
given be less than twenty five lakh rupees.
31. (1) Where the offence under this Act has led to displacement of the victims from
their residence, the appropriate Government shall arrange for the accommodation of the
victims and take all necessary steps to rehabilitate such victims.
(2) Where the offences under this Act, have led to the displacement of more than fifty
persons, the appropriate Government shall setup relief camps in the manner specified
under Section 27.
32. (1) In accordance with sub-section 2 of section 27, the appropriate Government
shall establish relief camps in safe locations for all victims.
(2) Relief camps under sub-section (1) shall continue to be operated by the appropriate
Government until such persons return to their original habitations, or are resettled in a
new suitable location.
(3) Relief camps established under sub-section (1) shall, at the minimum, regardless
of the circumstances and without discrimination, provide such persons with:
(a) basic shelter which is appropriate and adequate to protect the residents of
the camps from extremes of the weather and which provides due privacy especially to
women and girls;
(b) twenty four hour security at the relief camp;
(c) adequate nutritious and culturally appropriate food;
(d) potable drinking water;
(e) adequate clothing which is culturally appropriate and sufficient to protect
the residents of the camp from extremes of weather;
(f) essential medical services including antenatal and postnatal care of expectant
mothers, pediatric care and emergency and rehabilitative services for the injured
and referral services wherever necessary;
(g) adequate sanitation;
(h) psycho-social and trauma counselling and psychiatric services;
(i) child care services for infants and small children;
(j) educational facilities for children;
(k) special facilities and assistance, as may be necessary and reasonable for the
medical condition and treatment of certain residents of the relief camps as children,
especially unaccompanied minors, expectant mothers, mothers with young children,
female heads of household, elderly and disabled persons with special needs.
CHAPTER VIII
A
PPEALS
33. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973;
(i) an appeal shall lie as a matter of right from any judgment, sentence or order,
not being interlocutory order, of a Designated Judge to the High Court both on facts
and on law; and
Duty to
provide
compensation.
Displacement.
Establishment
of Relief
Camps.
Appeals. 2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

9
(ii) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a period of sixty
days from the date of the judgment, sentence or order appealed from:
Provided that the High Court may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period
of sixty days if it is satisfied that the appellant had sufficient cause for not preferring the
appeal within the period of sixty days.
CHAPTER IX
M
ISCELLANEOUS
34. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government, may by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty :
Provided that no such order shall be made after expiry of the period of two years from
the date of commencement of this Act.
35. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, any
other law for the time being in force except to the extent the provisions of other laws are
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act.
36. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of
the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Act to be in
addition to
any other law.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25

10
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The idea of India, as envisaged by our founding fathers, is of one land embracing
many, a nation that may endure differences of caste, ceed, colour, conviction, culture, cuisine,
costume and custom and continue to maintain its composition as a pluralistic democracy, the
underlying seamless web that unites India as a sovereign, socialist, secular, democratic
republic. Article 21 of the Constitution of India guarantees every person the right to life and
personal liberty which includes the right to a dignified existence, in celebration of one's
choices and social identity.
The freedom of speech and expression under article 19 of the Constitution, which
includes the freedom to express one's identity and choices without fear of repercussions, is
the embodiment of the freedom that the makers of modern India dedicated their lives for.
Every Indian has the right to a dignified existence irrespective of their religion,  race, caste,
sex, place of birth, language, dietary practices, sexual orientation, political affiliation and
ethnicity.
The rising spate of vigilantism and mob lynching on the basis of one's individual
identity and choices threatens the notion of an all-embracing India and is a direct threat to
the Constitutional ethos of our country. This, therefore, necessitates the need for a special
law to aid vulnerable individuals and communities.
The act of wilful omissions and commissions by the custodians of the State, which
facilitates mob lynching, must be recognized as a criminal act under the eyes of the law. The
State must act as the bulwark of the freedoms enshrined in the Constitution of India, and
special procedures are required to ensure an effective and independent prosecution of
crimes, to deter the growing number of vigilante groups which act with impunity, in contempt
of the secular fabric of India.
Therefore, there is an urgent requirement to re-enforce the founding values of our
nation through special laws and procedure to curb mob lynching and related violence against
an individual Indian citizen's identity.
Hence this Bill
N
EW DELHI; SHASHI THAROOR
November 6, 2019

11
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the appointment of a State Coordinator and District
Coordinators to prevent acts of lynching. Clause 27  mandates the appropriate Governments
to remunerate the expenses arising out of the prosecution in the manner set forth under such
provision. Clause 29 provides for medical treatment of victims. Clause 30 provides for payment
of compensation to the victims. Clause 31 provides for arrangement of accommodation to the
victims by the appropriate Government. Clause 32 provides for establishment of relief camps
by the appropriate Government. The expenditure relating to States shall be borne out of the
Consolidated Funds of respective States. The expenditure relating to Union territories shall
be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure
of about rupees two hundred crore per annum would be involved from the Consolidated
Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore is also likely to be involved.

12
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 36 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for effective protection of the Constitutional rights of vulnerable persons, to
punish acts of lynching, to provide for designated courts for the expeditious trial of
such offences, for rehabilitation of victims of lynching and their families and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Shashi Tharoor, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—3731LS(S3)—27-01-2020.