TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 27  of  2011
THE LAND ACQUISITION BILL, 2011
————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
————
PART I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
3. Mandatory social impact assessment prior to acquisition of land under this Act.
PART II
A
CQUISITION
PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATION
4. Publication of preliminary notification and power of officers thereupon.
5. Payment for damage.
6. Hearing of objections.
7. Declaration that land is required for a public purpose.
8. After declaration, Collector to take order for acquisition.
9. Land to be marked out, measured and planned.
10. Notice to persons interested.
11. Power to require and enforce the making of statements as to names and interests.
12. Enquiry and award by Collector.
13. Period within which an award shall be made.
14. Criteria for determination of market value of the land.
15. Award of Collector when to be final.
16. Adjournment of enquiry.
17. Correction of clerical errors, etc.
18. Power to summon and enforce attendance of witnesses and production of
documents.
19. Matters to be considered and neglected.
20. Power to call for records, etc.
21. Power to take  possession.
22. Special powers in case of urgency.

CLAUSES
PART III
REFERENCE TO AUTHORITY AND PROCEDURE THEREON
23. Reference to Authority.
PART IV
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE STATE AUTHORITY
24. Establishment of Land Acquisition Compensation Disputes Settlement Authority.
25. Term of office and conditions of service of Members.
26. Removal of Member.
27. Officers and employees of Authority.
28. Proceedings of Authority.
29. Filling of a casual vacancy.
30. Powers of Authority.
31. Proceedings before Authority.
32. Speedy disposal of disputes by Authority.
33. Members and officers of Authority to be public servants.
34. Jurisdiction of civil courts barred.
PART V
E
STABLISHMENT OF THE AUTHORITY FOR THE CENTRE
35. Establishment of Land Acquisition Compensation Disputes Settlement Authority
for the Centre.
36. Application of certain provisions relating to Authority for compensation disputes
settlement to Authority for the Centre.
37. Collector's statement to the authority.
38. Service of notice.
39. Restriction on scope of proceedings.
40. Proceedings to be in open hearings of the Authority.
41. Matters to be considered on determining compensation.
42. Matters to be neglected in determining compensation.
43. Amount of compensation awarded by Authority not to be lower than the amount
awarded by the Collector.
44. Forms of awards.
45. Costs.
46. Collector may be directed to pay interest on excess compensation.
47. Re-determination of the amount of compensation on the basis of the award of the
Court/Authority.
48. Determination of amount of compensation in pending or unsettled cases.
(ii)

CLAUSES
PART VI
APPORTIONMENT OF COMPENSATION
49. Particulars of apportionment to be specified.
50. Dispute as to apportionment.
PART VII
P
AYMENT
51. Payment of compensation or deposit of same in Authority.
52. Investment of money deposited in respect of lands belonging to person incompetent
to alienate.
53. Payment of interest.
PART VIII
T
EMPORARY OCCUPATION OF LAND
54. Temporary occupation of waste or arable land.
55. Power to enter and take possession and compensation on restoration.
56. Difference as to condition of land.
PART IX
M
ISCELLANEOUS
57. Service of notices.
58. Penalty for obstructing acquisition of land.
59. Magistrate to enforce surrender.
60. Completion of acquisition not compulsory, but compensation to be awarded when
not completed.
61. Acquisition of part of house or building.
62. Acquisition of land at cost of a local authority.
63. Exemption from stamp duty and fees.
64. Acceptance of certified copy as evidence.
65. Notice in case of suits for anything done in pursuance of Act.
66. Code of Civil Procedure to apply to proceedings before Authority.
67. Appeals in proceedings before Court.
68. Utilization of land for the purpose it is acquired.
69. Sharing of difference of cost of acquisition and consideration received by transfer
of the land.
70. Repeal and savings.
71. Power to make rules.
(iii)

1
THE LAND ACQUISITION  BILL,  2011
By
SHRI JAYANT CHAUDHARY, M.P.
A
BILL
to consolidate and amend the law relating to acquisition of land for public purposes.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second  Year of the Republic of  India  as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Land Acquisition  Act, 2011.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different provisions
of  this Act and any reference in any provision to the commencement of this Act shall be
construed as reference to the coming into force of that provision.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) the expression “appropriate Government” means,—
(i) in relation to acquisition of  land for the purposes of the Union, the
Central Government;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No.  27  of 2011
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Definitions.
5
10

2
(ii) in relation to acquisition of land for the purposes of any infrastructure
project in more than one State, the Central Government; and
(iii) in relation to acquisition of land for any other purpose, the State
Government;
(b) the expression “Authority” means the Land Acquisition Compensation
Disputes Settlement Authority established by the State Government under sub-section
(1) of section 24;
(c) the expression “Authority for the Centre” means the Land Acquisition
Compensation Disputes Settlement Authority for the Centre established by the Central
Government under sub-section (1) of section 35;
(d) the expression “Collector” means any officer specially appointed by the
appropriate Government to perform the functions of a Collector under this Act;
(e) the expression “corporation owned or controlled by the State” means any
body corporate established  by or under a Central, Provincial or State Act, and includes
a Government company as defined in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956;
(f) the expression “cost of acquisition” includes—
(i) compensation awarded including the solatium and other amount and
interest payable thereupon;
(ii) demurrage to be paid for damages caused to the land and standing
crops in the process of acquisition;
(iii) cost of acquisition of out-project land for settlement of displaced or
adversely affected families;
(iv) cost of development of infrastructure and amenities at resettlement
sites;
(v) additional cost of resettlement as may be required after admissible
adjustment of rehabilitation and resettlement cost against compensation awarded
to affected persons or families;
(vi) administrative cost of acquisition of land including both in-project
and out-project areas lands; and
(vii) administrative cost involved in planning and implementation of
resettlement and rehabilitation packages for providing physical rehabilitation
and resettlement to the entitled and interested families, displaced or adversely
affected on account of in-project acquisition of land;
(g) the expression “Court” means a principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction
unless, the appropriate Government has appointed a special judicial officer within any
specified local limits to perform functions of the Court under this Act;
(h) the following persons shall be deemed person “entitled to act” as and to the
extent hereinafter provided (that is to say)—
trustees for other persons beneficially interested shall be deemed the
person entitled to act with reference to any such case, and that to the same
extent as the person beneficially interested could have acted if free from disability;
a married woman in cases to which the English law is applicable shall be
deemed the person so entitled to act, and whether of full age or not, to the same
extent as if she were unmarried and of full age; and
the guardians of minors and the committees or managers of lunatics shall
be deemed respectively the persons so entitled to act, to the same extent as the
minors or lunatics themselves, if free from disability, could have acted:
1 of 1956.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
Provided that—
(i) no person shall be deemed “entitled to act” whose interest in the subject
matter shall be shown to the satisfaction of the Collector or the Authority for the
Centre or, as the case may be, the Authority to be adverse to the interest of the
person interested for whom he would otherwise be entitled to act;
(ii) in every such case the person interested may appear by a next friend
or, in default of his appearance by a next friend, the Collector or the Authority
for the Centre or, as the case may be, the Authority shall appoint a guardian for
the case to act on his behalf in the conduct thereof;
(iii) the provisions of Order XXXII of the First Schedule to the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908 shall, mutatis mutandis, apply in the case of persons
interested appearing before a Collector or Authority, by a next friend, or by a
guardian for the case, in proceedings under this Act; and
(iv) no person “entitled to act” shall be competent to receive the
compensation money payable to the person for whom he is entitled to act,
unless he would have been competent to alienate the land and receive and give
a good discharge for the purchase money on a voluntary sale;
(i) the expression “infrastructure project” shall include,—
(i) any project relating to generation, transmission or supply of electricity;
(ii) construction of roads, highways, bridges, airports, ports, rail systems or
mining activities;
(iii) water supply project, irrigation project, sanitation and sewerage system; or
(iv) any other public facility as may be notified in this regard by the Central
Government in the Official Gazette;
(j) the expression “land” includes benefits to arise out of land, and things attached to
the earth or permanently fastened to anything attached to the earth;
(k) the expression “local authority” includes a town planning authority, by whatever
name called, set up under any law for the time being in force;
(l) the expression “member” means a Member of the Authority for the Centre, or as the
case may be, the Authority, and includes the Chairperson;
(m) the expression “persons interested” includes,—
(i) all persons claiming an interest in compensation to be made on account of
the acquisition of land under this Act;
(ii) tribals and other traditional forest dwellers, who have lost any traditional
rights recognised under the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers
(Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006;
(iii) a person interested in an easement affecting the land; and
(iv) persons having tenancy rights under the relevant State laws;
(n) the expression “public purpose” includes,—
(i) the provision of land for strategic purposes relating to naval, military and air
force works or any other work vital to the State, which are owned and funded out of
State Exchequer to the tune of minimum fifty one per cent. of the total project cost;
(ii) the provision of land for infrastructure projects of the appropriate
Government, where the benefits accrue to the general public; and such infrastructure
project must be owned and funded out of the State Exchequer to the tune of minimum
fifty one per cent. of the total project cost;
(iii) the provision of land for any other purpose useful to the general public, and
necessary for planned development for which land has been purchased by a person under
5 of 1908.
2 of 2007.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
lawful contract to the extent of eighty five per cent. but the remaining fifteen per cent.
of the total area of land required for removing hurdles in completion of the project.’
Explanation.—The word “person” shall include any company or association or body
of individuals, whether incorporated or not.
3. Whenever the appropriate Government intends to acquire land for public purpose
involving physical displacement of—
(i) one hundred or more families en masse in plain area; or
(ii) twenty five or more families en masse in tribal or hilly areas or Desert
Development Programme blocks or areas specified in Fifth Schedule or Sixth Schedule
to the Constitution, a social impact assessment study shall be carried out in the
affected area for the purpose of social impact appraisal, incorporation of Tribal
Development Plan, plan for giving emphasis for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled
Tribes and other vulnerable sections of the society, provision for infrastructural
amenities and facilities in the proposed resettlement area in such manner and within
such time as may be prescribed by rules made by the Central Government.
PART II
ACQUISITION
Preliminary investigation
4. (1) Whenever it appears to the approrpriate Government that land in any locality is
needed or is likely to be needed for any public purpose, a notification to that effect shall be
published in the Official Gazette and in two daily newspapers circulating in that locality of
which at least one shall be in the regional language, and, except in cases of land to which by
virtue of the direction of the State Government under sub-section ( 6) of section 22, the
provisions of the section 6 shall not apply, the Collector shall issue notice to all persons
interested in the land as defined under section 2(m), to appear personally or by agent before
him at the place and time mentioned therein, within a period of thirty days, after the date of
publication of the notice, and to submit objection to the acquisition of the land notified
under  this sub-section and the Collector shall also cause public notice of the substance of
such notification to be given at convenient places in the said locality, the last of the dates
of such publication and the giving of such public notice and notice to the persons interested,
being hereinafter referred to as the date of the publication of the notification:
Provided that where no declaration is made consequent upon the issue of a notification
under sub-section (1) within the time-limit specified in sub-section (1) of section 7, no fresh
notification under this sub-section shall, subsequent to the expiry of the period aforesaid,
be made for a period of one year in respect of the same land:
Provided further that in case a notification issued under sub-section (1) in respect of
a particular land lapsed for the second time, no proceeding under sub-section ( 1) shall be
initiated at least for a period of five years from the date of such notification.
(2) After issuance of notice under sub-section (1), the Collector shall, before issue of
declaration under section 7, undertake and complete the exercise of updating of land records,
classification of land and its tenure, survey and standardization of land and property values
in respect of the land under acquisition, together with finalization of the survey and such
scheme of Rehabilitation and Resettlement as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.
(3) Thereupon it shall be lawful for any officer, either generally or specially authorized
by such Government in this behalf, and for his servants and workmen,—
to enter upon and survey and take levels of any land in such locality;
to dig or bore into the sub-soil;
to do all other acts necessary to ascertain whether the land is adapted for such
purpose;
Mandatory
social impact
assessment
prior to
acquisition of
land under this
Act.
Publication of
preliminary
notification
and power of
officers
thereupon.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
50
45

5
to set out the boundaries of the land proposed to be taken and the intended line
of the work (if any) proposed to be made thereon;
to mark such levels, boundaries and line by placing marks and cutting trenches;
and
where otherwise the survey cannot be completed and the levels taken and the
boundaries and line marked, to cut down and clear away any part of any standing
crop, fence or jungle:
Provided that no person shall enter into any building or upon any enclosed court or
garden attached to a dwelling house (unless with the consent of the occupier thereof)
without previously giving such occupier at least seven days’ notice in writing of his intention
to do so.
5. The officer so authorized shall at the time of such entry pay or tender payment for
all necessary damage to be done as aforesaid, and, in case of dispute as to the sufficiency
of the amount so paid or tendered, he shall at once refer the dispute to the decision of the
Collector or other chief revenue officer of the district, and such decision shall be final.
Objections
6. (1) Any person interested in any land which has been notified under section 4, sub-
section (1), as being needed or likely to be needed for a public purpose may, within thirty
days from the date of the publication of the notification, object to the acquisition of the land
or of any land in the locality, as the case may be.
(2) Every objection under sub-section ( 1) shall be made to the Collector in writing,
and the Collector shall give the objector an opportunity of being heard in person or by any
person authorized by him in this behalf or by pleader and shall, after hearing all such
objections and after making such further inquiry, if any, as he thinks necessary, either make
a report in respect of the land which has been notified under section 4, sub-section ( 1), or
make different reports in respect of different parcels of such land, to the appropriate
Government, containing his recommendations on the objections, together with the record
of the proceedings held by him for the decision of that Government within a maximum
period of sixty days from the last date of filing of objections under sub-section (1) and the
decision of the appropriate Government on the objections shall be final:
Provided that the appropriate Government shall take a final decision in this regard
within a maximum period of thirty days from the date of making of report by the Collector.
(3) For the purpose of this section, a person shall be deemed to be interested in land
who would be entitled to claim an interest in compensation if the land were acquired under
this Act.
(4) The appropriate Government shall appoint a fulltime officer to exercise the powers
of collector and such appointed officer would not discharge any other duties except such
duties as are provided under the provisions of this Act.
Declaration of intended acquisition
7. (1) When the appropriate Government is satisfied, after considering the report, if
any, made under section 6, sub-section ( 2), that any particular land is needed for a public
purpose, a declaration shall be made to that effect under the signature of a Secretary to such
Government or of some officer duly authorized to certify its orders, and different declarations
may be made from time to time in respect of different parcels of any land covered by the
same notification under section 4, sub-section ( 1), irrespective of whether one report or
different reports has or have been made (wherever required) under section 6, sub-section (2):
Provided that no declaration in respect of any particular land covered by a notification
under section 4, sub-section ( 1),—
(i) published after the commencement of the Land Acquisition (Amendment)
Act, 1984 but before the commencement of the Land Acquisition Act, 2011 shall be
Payment for
damage.
Hearing of
objections.
Declaration
that land is
required for a
public
purpose.
68 of 1984.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

6
made after the expiry of one year from the date of the publication of the
notification;
(ii) Published after the commencement of the Land Acquisition Act, 2011 shall
be made after the expiry of one year from the date of the publication of the notification.
Explanation 1.— In computing any of the periods referred to in the proviso, the
period during which any action or proceeding to be taken in pursuance of the notification
issued under section 4, sub-section (1), is stayed by an order of a Court shall be excluded.
Explanation 2.—  Where the compensation to be awarded for such property is to be
paid out of the funds of a corporation owned or controlled by the State, such compensation
shall be deemed to be compensation paid out of public revenues.
(2) Every declaration shall be published in the Official Gazette and in two daily
newspapers circulating in the locality in which the land is situated of which at least one
shall be in the regional language, and and Collector shall cause public notice of the substance
of such declaration to be given at convenient places in the said locality, the last of the dates
of such publication and the giving of such public notice, being hereinafter referred to as the
date of the publication of the declaration, and such declaration shall state the district or
other territorial division in which the land is situated, the purpose for which it is needed, its
approximate area, and, where a plan is to be made of the land, the place where such plan may
be inspected.
(3) The said declaration shall be conclusive evidence that the land is needed for a
public purpose and, after making such declaration, the appropriate Government may acquire
the land in manner hereinafter provided.
8. Whenever any land is so declared to be needed for public purpose, the appropriate
Government, or some officer authorized by the appropriate Government in this behalf, shall
direct the Collector to take order for the acquisition of the land.
9. (1) The Collector shall thereupon cause the land (unless it has been already marked
out under section 4) to be marked out and measured, and if no plan has been made thereof,
a plan shall be made of the same.
(2) The damages caused while carrying out works on land such as survey, digging or
boring sub-soil, marking boundaries or cutting trenches or clearing away any standing
crop, fence or forest or doing such other acts or things which may cause damages while
acting under section 4 particularly relating to land which is excluded from acquisition
proceeding, shall be evaluated and compensation shall be paid to the persons having
interest in that land, within six months from the completion of the said works.
10. (1) The Collector shall then cause public notice to be given at convenient places
on or near the land to be taken, stating that the Government intends to take possession of
the land, and that claims to compensations for all interests in such land may be made to him.
(2) Such notice shall state the particulars of the land so needed, and shall require all
persons interested in the land to appear pesonally or by agent before the Collector at a time
and place therein mentioned (such time not being earlier than thirty days after the date of
publication of the notice) and to state the nature of their respective interests in the land and
the amount and particulars of their claims to compensation for such interests, and their
objections, if any to the measurements made under section 9 and the Collector may, in any
case, require such statement to be made in writing and signed by the party or his agent.
(3) The Collector shall also serve notice to the same effect on the occupier, if any, of
such land and on all such persons known or believed to be interested therein, or to be
entitled to act for persons so interested, as reside or have agents authorized to receive
service on their behalf, within the revenue district in which the land is situated.
(4) In case any person so interested resides elsewhere, and has no such agent, the
notice shall be sent to him by post in a letter addressed to him at his last known residence,
After
declaration,
Collector to
take order for
acquisition.
Land to be
marked out,
measured and
planned.
Notice to
persons
interested.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

7
address or place of business and registered under sections 28 and 29 of the Indian Post
Office Act, 1898.
11. (1) The Collector may also require any such person to make or deliver to him, at a
time and place mentioned (such time not being earlier than thirty days after the date of the
requisition), a statement containing, so far as may be practicable, the name of every other
person possessing any interest in the land or any part thereof as co-proprietor, sub-proprietor,
mortgagee, tenant or otherwise, and of the nature of such interest, and of the rents and
profits, if any, received or receivable on account thereof for three years next preceding the
date of the statement.
(2) Every person required to make or deliver a statement under this section or
section 10 shall be deemed to be legally bound to do so within the meaning of sections 175
and 176 of the Indian Penal Code.
12. ( 1) On the day so fixed or on any other day to which the enquiry has been
adjourned, the Collector shall proceed to enquire into the objection, if any, which any
person interested has stated pursuant to a notice given under section 10 to the measurements
made under section 9, and into the value of the land at the date of the publication of the
notification under section 4, sub-section (1), and into the respective interests of the persons
claiming the compensation and shall make an award under his hand of—
(i) the true area of  the land;
(ii) the compensation which in his opinion should be allowed for the land; and
(iii) the apportionment of the said compensation among all the persons known
or believed to be interested in the land, or whom, or of whose claims, he has information,
whether or not they have respectively appeared before him:
Provided that no award shall be made by the Collector under this sub-section without
the previous approval of the appropriate Government or of such officer as the appropriate
Government may authorize in this behalf:
Provided further that it shall be competent for the appropriate Government to direct
that the Collector may make such award without such approval in such class of cases as the
appropriate Government may specify in this behalf.
(2) Nothwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), if at any stage of the
proceedings, the Collector is satisfied that all the persons interested in the land who appeared
before him have agreed in writing on the matters to be included in the award of the Collector
in the form prescribed by rules made by the appropriate Government, he may, without
making further enquiry, made an award according to the terms of such agreement.
(3) The determination of compensation for any land under sub-section (2) shall not in
any way affect the determination of compensation in respect of other lands in the same
locality or elsewhere in accordance with the other provisions of this Act.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Registration Act, 1908, no agreement
made under sub-section (2) shall be liable to registration under that Act.
13. The Collector shall make an award under section 12 within a period of one year
from the date of the publication of the declaration and if no award is made within that period,
the entire proceedings for the acquisition   of the land shall lapse:
Provided that in a case where the said declaration has been published before the
commencement of this Act, the award shall be made within a period of one year from such
commencement:
Provided further that the Collector may, after the expiry of the period of limitation, if he
is satisfied that the delay has been caused due to unavoidable circumstances, and for the
reasons to be recorded in writing, he may make the award within an extended period of
six months:
6 of 1898.
Power to
require and
enforce the
making of
statements as
to names and
interests.
Enquiry and
award by
Collector.
45 of 1860.
16 of 1908.
Period within
which an
award shall be
made.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

8
Provided also that where an award is made within the extended period, the entitled
person shall, in the interest of justice, be paid an additional compensation for the delay in
making of the award, every month for the period so extended, at the rate of not less than five
per cent. of the value of the award, for each month of such delay.
14. (1) The Collector shall adopt the following criteria in assessing and determining
the market value of the land,—
(i) the minimum land value, if any, specified in the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 for the
registration of sale deeds in the area, where the land is situated; or
(ii) The highest sale price for similar type of land situated in the village or
vicinity ascertained from the sale prices of transactions within preceding one year
period from the date of notification under section 4.
(2) Where the provisions of sub-section ( 1) are not applicable for the reason that:
(i) the land is situated in such area where the transactions in land are restricted
by or under any other law for the time being in force in that area; or
(ii) the registered sale deeds for similar land as mentioned in clause (i) of sub-
section (1) are not available for the preceding one year; or
(iii) the minimum land value has not been specified under the Indian Stamp
 Act, 1899 by the appropriate authority,
the concerned State Government shall specify the floor price per unit area of the said land
based on the highest prices paid for similar type of land situated in the adjoining areas or
vicinity, ascertained from the sale deeds registered during the preceding one year where
highest price has been paid, and the Collector may calculate the value of the land accordingly.
(3) The Collector shall, before assessing  and  determining the market value of the
land being acquired under this Act,—
(a) ascertain the intended land use category of such land; and
(b) take into account the value of the land of the intended category in the
adjoining areas or vicinity,
for the purpose of determination of the market value of the land being acquired.
(4) In determining the market value of the building and other immovable property or
assets attached to the land or buildings which are to be acquired, the Collector may use the
services of a competent engineer or any other specialist in the relevant field, as may be
considered necessary by the Collector.
(5) The Collector may, for the purpose of determining the value of trees and plants,
use the services of experienced persons in the field of agriculture, forestry, horticulture,
sericulture, or any other field, as may be considered necessary by him.
(6) For the purpose of assessing the value of the standing crops damaged during the
process of land acquisition proceedings, the Collector may utilize the services of experienced
persons in the field of agriculture as he considers necessary.
15. (1) Such award shall be filed in the Collector’s office and shall, except as hereinafter
provided, be final and conclusive evidence, as between the Collector and the persons
interested, whether they have respectively appeared before the Collector or not, of the true
area and value of the land, and the apportionment of the compensation among the persons
interested.
(2) The Collector shall give immediate notice of his award to such of the persons
interested as are not present personally or by their representatives when the award is made.
(3) The Collector shall keep open to the public and display a summary of the entire
proceedings undertaken in a case of acquisition of land including the amount of
compensation awarded to each individual along with details of the land finally acquired
under this Act.
2 of 1899.
Criteria for
determination
of market
value of the
land.
2 of 1899.
Award of
Collector
when to be
final.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

9
(4) For the purposes of sub-section (3), the summary of the entire proceedings shall
include the summary of schedule for payment of compensation; dates of taking possession
of the land and such other information as may be prescribed.
(5) It shall be the duty of the Collector to ensure that physical possession of the land
is taken over and the amount of compensation is paid within a period of sixty days commencing
from the date of the award.
(6) When amount of compensation is not being paid to the interested person within
sixty days as aforesaid, unless prevented by one or more of such contingencies as provided
in section 51 of this Act, the entitled person shall, in the interest of justice, be paid an
additional compensation for every month for the period so delayed, at the rate of not less
than five per cent. of the value of the award, for each month of such delay.
(7) The possession of the land acquired shall not be taken unless the compensation
due under this Act is paid in full or is tendered to the entitled person.
16. The Collector may, for any cause he thinks fit, from time to time, adjourn the
enquiry to a later date to be fixed by him.
17. (1) The Collector may, at any time but not later than six months from the date of the
award, or where he has been required under section 23 to make a reference to the Authority,
before the making of such reference, by order, correct any clerical or arithmetical mistakes in
the award or errors arising therein either on his own motion or on the application of any
person interested or a local authority:
Provided that no correction, which is likely to affect prejudicially any person, shall be
made unless such person has been given a reasonable opportunity of making a
representation in the matter.
(2) The Collector shall give immediate notice of any correction made in the award to
all the persons interested.
(3) Where any excess amount is proved to have been paid to any person as a result of
the correction made under sub-section ( 1), the excess amount so paid shall be liable to be
refunded and in the case of any default or refusal to pay, the same may be recovered as an
arrear of land revenue.
18. For the purpose of enquiries under this Act, the Collector shall have powers to
summon and enforce the attendance of witnesses, including the parties interested or any of
them, and to compel the production of documents by the same means, and, in the same
manner as is provided in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
19. In determining the amount of compensation, the collector shall be guided by the
provisions contained in sections 14, 41 and 42.
20. The appropriate Government may at any time before the award is made by the
Collector under section 12 call for any record of any proceedings whether by way of inquiry
or otherwise for the purpose of satisfying itself as to the legality or propriety of any
findings or order passed or as to the regularity of such proceedings and may pass such
order or issue such direction in relation thereto as it may think fit:
Provided that the appropriate Government shall not pass or issue any order or direction
prejudicial to any person without affording such person a reasonable opportunity of being
heard.
Taking Possession
21. When the Collector has made an award under section 12, he may take possession
of the land, which shall thereupon vest absolutely in the Government, free from all
encumbrances.
22. (1) In cases of urgency, whenever the appropriate Government so directs, the
Collector, though no such award has been made may, on the expiration of thirty days from
Adjournment
of enquiry.
Correction of
clerical errors,
etc.
Power to
summon and
enforce
attendance of
witnesses and
production of
documents.
Matters to be
considered and
neglected.
Power to call
for records,
etc.
5 of 1908.
Power to take
possession.
Special powers
in case of
urgency.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

10
the publication of the notice mentioned in section 10, sub-section (1) take possession of
any land needed for a public purpose and such land shall thereupon vest absolutely in the
Government, free from all encumbrances.
(2) Whenever, owing to any sudden change in the channel of any navigable river or
other unforeseen emergency, it becomes necessary for any Railway Administration to acquire
the immediate possession of any land for the maintenance of their traffic or for the purpose
of making thereon a river-side or Ghat station, or of providing convenient connection with
or accesses to any such station, or the appropriate Government considers it necessary to
acquire the immediate possession of any land for the purpose of maintaining any structure
or system pertaining to irrigation, water supply, drainage, road communication or electricity,
the Collector may immediately after the publication of the notice mentioned in
sub-section (1) and with the previous sanction of the appropriate Government, enter upon
and take possession of such land, which shall thereupon vest absolutely in the Government
free from all encumbrances:
Provided that the Collector shall not take possession of any building or part of a
building under this sub-section without giving to the occupier thereof at least forty-eight
hours notice of his intention so to do, or such longer notice as may be reasonably sufficient
to enable such occupier to remove his movable property from such building without
unnecessary inconvenience.
(3) In every case under either of the preceding sub-section the Collector shall at the
time of taking possession offer to the persons interested compensation for the standing
crops and trees, if any on such land and from any other damage sustained by them caused
by such sudden dispossesson and not excepted in section 42; and, in case such offer is not
accepted, the value of such crops and trees and the amount of such other damage shall be
allowed for in awarding compensation for the land under the provisions herein contained.
(4) Before taking possession of any land under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2),
the Collector shall, without prejudice to the provisions of sub-secton (3),—
(a) tender payment of eighty per centum of the compensation for such land as
estimated by him to the persons interested entitled thereto, and
(b) pay it to them, unless prevented by some one or more of the contingencies
mentioned in section 51, sub-section (2), and where collector is so prevented, the
provisions of section 51, sub-section (2), (except the second proviso thereto), shall
apply as they apply to the payment of compensation under that section.
(5) The amount paid or deposited under sub-section 4, shall be taken into account for
determining the amount of compensation required to be tendered under section 51, and
where the amount so paid or deposited exceeds the compensation awarded by the Collector
under section 12, the excess may unless refunded within three months from the date of
Collector’s award, be recovered as an arrear of land revenue.
(6) In the case of any land to which, in the opinion of the appropriate Government, the
provisions of sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) are applicable, the appropriate Government
may direct that the provisions of section 6 shall not apply, and, if it does so direct, a
declaration may be made under section 7 in respect of the land at any time after the date of
the publication of the notification under section 4, sub-section (1).
(7) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (3) and sub-section (4), an
additional compensation of one hundred percent of the market value as determined under
section 14, shall be paid by the Collector in respect of land and property for acquisition of
which proceedings have been initiated under sub-section (1) and sub-section (2).
PART III
REFERENCE TO AUTHORITY AND PROCEDURE THEREON
23. ( 1) Any person interested who has not accepted the award may, by written
application to the Collector, require that the matter be referred by the Collector for the
Reference to
Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

11
determination of the Authority, whether his objection be to the measurement of the land, the
amount of the compensation, the person to whom it is payable, or the apportionment of the
compensation among the persons interested:
Provided that the Collector shall, within a period of fifteen days from the date of
receipt of application, make a reference to the Authority for the Centre, or as the case may
be, the Authority:
Provided further that where the Collector fails to make such reference within the
period so specified, the applicant may apply to the Authority for the Centre, or as the case
may be, the Authority, requesting it to direct the Collector to make the reference to it within
a period of thirty days.
(2) The application shall state the grounds on which objection to the award is taken:
Provided that every such application shall be made,—
(a) if the person making it was present or represented before the Collector at the
time when he made his award, within six weeks from the date of the Collector’s award;
(b) in other cases, within six weeks of the receipt of the notice from the Collector
under section 15, sub-section (2), or within six months from the date of the Collector’s
award, whichever period shall first expire:
Provided further that the Collector may entertain an application after the expiry of the
said period, within a further period of one year, if he is satisfied that there was sufficient
cause for not filing it within the period specified in the first proviso.
PART IV
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE STA TE  AUTHORITY
24. (1) The State Government shall, for the purpose of providing speedy disposal of
disputes relating to land acquisition compensation, establish, by notification in the Official
Gazette, an Authority for the State to be known as the (name of the State) Land Acquisition
Compensation Disputes Settlement Authority to exercise the jurisdiction, powers and
authority conferred on it by or under this Act with regard to acquisition of land by the State
Government:
Provided that a State Government may constitute more than one Authority or the
benches thereof, for the purposes of this Act, if it considers necessary.
(2) The head office of the Authority shall be at such place as the State Government
may, by notification, in the Official Gazette, specify.
(3) The Authority shall consist of not less than three Members, including the
Chairperson and Member Secretary to be appointed by the State Government.
(4) The Members of the Authority shall be persons of ability, integrity and standing
who have adequate knowledge of matters relating to land acquisition, public administration,
finance, economics and law.
(5) A person shall not be qualified to be a Member of the Authority unless he is or has
been—
(i) a retired judge of a High Court;
(ii) an officer of the State Government not below the rank of District Collector;
(iii) any person having adequate knowledge and experience in the matters
relating to land acquisition, agriculture, community service and belonging to the
area of jurisdiction of the Authority:
Provided that a person shall not be qualified to be a member unless he has obtained
a Bachelor’s Degree in law or an equivalent Degree and has attained a minimum age of
fifty years on the date of such appointment.
Establishment
of Land
Acquisition
Compensation
Disputes
Settlement
Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

12
(6) The Members of the Authority shall not hold any other office.
(7) The Authority shall ensure transparency while exercising its powers and
discharging its functions.
25. (1) A Member shall hold office for a term of five years from the date he enters upon
his office:
Provided that the Member  shall not be eligible for reappointment in the same capacity
in that Authority in which he had earlier held the office:
Provided further that no Member shall hold office as such after he has attained the
age of sixty-seven years.
(2) A Member of the Authority may, by notice in writing under his hand addressed to
the State Government, resign his office:
Provided that the Member shall, unless he is permitted by the State Government to
relinquish his office sooner, continue to hold office until the expiry of three months from the
date of receipt of such notice or until a person duly appointed as his successor enters upon
his office or until the expiry of his term of office, whichever is the earliest.
(3) The salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the Members
shall be such as may be prescribed by the State Government:
Provided that the salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the
Members, shall not be varied to their disadvantage after appointment.
26. (1) No Member shall be removed from office  except in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
(2) The State Government may by order remove from office any Member, if he—
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent;
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the State
Government, involves moral turpitude;
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a Member;
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially
his functions as a Member;
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial
to the public interest; or
(f) has been guilty of proved misbehaviour.
(3) No person shall be removed under this section until that persons has been given
an opportunity of being heard in the matter.
27. (1) The State Government may specify the numbers, nature and categories of the
officers and employees of the Authority.
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service
of, the officers and employees of the Authority shall be such as may be prescribed by the
State Government.
28. The Authority shall have its sittings at the head office or any other place and at
such time as the Chairperson may direct, and shall observe such rules of procedure in
regard to the transaction of business in its sittings as it may specify.
29. A casual vacancy in the office of a Member of the Authority shall be filled by the
State Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, as soon as may be, after the
occurrence of the vacancy.
30. (1) The Authority shall, for the purposes of the settlement of disputes relating to
land acquisition compensation under this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a
civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 in respect of the following matters,
namely:—
Term of
office and
conditions of
service of
Members.
Removal of
Member.
Officers and
employees of
Authority.
Proceedings
of Authority.
Filling of a
casual
vacancy.
Powers of
Authority.
5 of 1908.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

13
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him
on oath;
(b) discovery and production of any document or other material object
producible as evidence;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning of any public record;
(e) issuing commission for the examination of witnesses;
(f) reviewing its decisions, directions and orders;
(g) any other matter which may be prescribed;
(2) The Authority shall have the powers to pass such interim order in any proceeding,
hearing or matter before it as it may consider appropriate.
31. All proceedings before the Authority shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings
within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code and the Authority shall
be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of sections 345 and 346 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973.
32. The applications relating to settlement of land acquisition compensation under
this Act shall be decided by the Authority as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall
be made by it to dispose of the disputes finally within a period of six months from the date
of receipt of the reference under section 23.
33. The Members and officers of the Authority shall be deemed to be public servants
within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
34. No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any dispute relating to land
acquisition in respect of which the Collector or the Authority is empowered by or under this
Act, and no injunction shall be granted by any court in respect of any such matter.
PART V
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE AUTHORITY FOR THE CENTRE
35. (1) The Central Government may, for the purpose of providing speedy disposal of
disputes relating to land acquisition compensation, by notification, in the Official Gazette,
establish one or more Authority to be known as the Land Acquisition Compensation
Disputes Settlement Authority for the Centre to exercise jurisdiction, powers and authority
conferred on it by or under this Act with regard to the acquisition of land by the Central
Government.
(2)  The Central Government shall specify in the notification referred to in sub-
section (1) the matters and places in relation to which the Authority for the Centre may
exercise jurisdiction.
(3) The Authority for the Centre shall consist of a Chairperson and not less than two
Members to be appointed by the Central Government.
(4) A person shall not be qualified to be a Member of the Authority for the Centre
unless he,—
(i) is or has been a Judge of a High Court; or
(ii) is a person who is or has been a member of the Indian Administrative Service
having sufficient knowledge of land acquisition and has held the post of Collector of a
district and a post equivalent to a Joint Secretary in the Government of India; or
(iii) is a person having adequate knowledge and experiences in the matters
relating to land acquisition, agricultural and community services:
Proceedings
before
Authority.
Speedy
disposal of
disputes by
Authority.
Members and
officers of
Authority to
be public
servants.
Jurisdiction of
civil courts
barred.
Establishment
of Land
Acquisition
Compensation
Disputes
Settlement
Authority for
the Centre.
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.
45 of 1860.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

14
Provided that no appointment of a sitting Judge under clause (i) shall be made except
after consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court concerned:
Provided further that no appointment of a person under clause (iii) shall be made
unless he has obtained a bachelor degree in law or an equivalent degree and has attained
a minimum age of fifty years on the date of such appointment.
(5) The Authority for the Centre shall have a Secretariat consisting of a
Secretary-General and such other staff as may be decided by the Central Government.
36. The provisions of sections 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33 and 34 shall apply to the
Authority for the Centre and shall have effect, subject to the following modifications,
namely:—
(a) references to “Authority” shall be construed as references to “Authority
for the Centre”;
(b) references to “State Government” shall be construed as references to “Central
Government”; and
(c) for the reference “any Member” in sub-section (2) of section 26, the reference
“any Member except a sitting Judge of a High Court” shall be substituted.
37. (1) In making the reference, the Collector shall state for the information of the
Authority, in writing under his hand—
(a) the situation and extent of the land, with particulars of any trees, buildings
or standing crops thereon;
(b) the names of the persons whom he has reason to think interested in such
land;
(c) the amount awarded for damages and paid or tendered under sections 5 and
22, or either of them, and the amount of compensation awarded under section 12;
(d) the amount paid or deposited under sub-section ( 4) of section 22; and
(e) if the objection be to the amount of the compensation, the grounds on which
the amount of compensation was determined.
(2) To the said statement shall be attached a schedule giving the particulars of the
notices served upon, and of the statements in writing made or delivered by the parties
interested respectively.
38. The Authority shall thereupon cause a notice specifying the day on which the
Authority will proceed to determine the objection, and directing their appearance before the
Authority on that day, to be served on the following persons, namely:—
(a) the applicant;
(b) all persons interested in the objection, except such, if any, of them as have
consented without protest to receive payment of the compensation awarded; and
(c) if the objection is in regard to the area of the land or to the amount of the
compensation, the Collector.
39. The scope of the enquiry in every such proceeding shall be restricted to a
consideration of the interest of the persons affected by the objection.
40. Every such proceeding shall take place in open hearing of the Authority, and all
persons entitled to practice in any Civil Court in the State shall be entitled to appear, plead
and act, as the case may be, in such proceeding.
41. (1) In determining the amount of compensation to be awarded for land acquired
under this Act, the Authority shall take into consideration—
first, the market-value of the land in the terms of section 14 on the date of the publication
of the notification under section 4, sub-section ( 1);
Application
of certain
provisions
relating to
Authority for
compensation
disputes
settlement to
Authority for
the Centre.
Collector’s
statement to
the authority.
Service of
notice.
Restriction on
scope of
proceedings.
Proceedings
to be in open
hearings of
the Authority.
Matters to be
considered on
determining
compensation.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

15
secondly, the damage sustained by the person interested, by reason of the taking of
any standing crops, trees which may be on the land at the time of the Collector’s
taking possession thereof;
thirdly, the damage, if any sustained by the person interested, at the time of the
Collector’s taking possesssion of the land, by reason of severing such land from his
other land;
fourthly, the damage, if any, sustained by the person interested, at the time of the
Collector’s taking possession of the land, by reason of the acquisition injuriously
affecting his other property, movable or immovable, in any other manner, or his
earnings;
fifthly, if in consequence of the acquisition of the land by the Collector, the person
interested is compelled to change his residence or place of business, the reasonable
expenses, if any, incidental to such change; and
sixthly, the damage, if any bona fide resulting from diminution of the profits of the
land between the time of the publication of the declaration under section 7 and the
time of the Collector’s taking possession of the land.
(2) in addition to the market value of the land, as above provided, the Authority shall
in every case award an amount calculated at the rate of twelve per centum per annum on
such market value for the period commencing on and from the date of the publication of the
notification under section 4, sub-section (1), in respect of such land to the date of the award
of the Collector or the date of taking possession of the land, whichever is earlier.
Explanation— In computing the period referred to in this sub-section, any period or
periods during which the proceedings for the acquisition of the land were held up on
account of any stay or injunction by the order of any Authority shall be excluded.
(3) In addition to the market value of the land as above provided, the Authority shall
in every case award a sum of sixty per cent. on such market value, in consideration of the
compulsory nature of the acquisition.
42. The Authority shall not take into consideration—
first, the degree of urgency which has led to the acquisition;
secondly, any disinclination of the person interested to part with the land acquired;
thirdly, any damage sustained by him which, if caused by a private person, would not
render such person liable to a suit;
fourthly, any damage which is likely to be caused to the land acquired, after the date
of the publication of the declaration under section 7, by or in consequence of the use
to which it will be put;
fifthly, any outlay or improvements on, or disposal of the land acquired, commenced,
made or effected without the sanction of the Collector after the date of the publication
of the notification under section 4, sub-section (1); or
sixthly, any increase to the value of the land on account of its being put to any use,
which is forbidden by law or opposed to public policy.
43. The amount of compensation awarded by the Authority shall not be less than the
amount awarded by the Collector under section 12.
44. (1) Every award under this part shall be in writing signed by all the members of the
Authority having jurisdiction and shall specify the amount awarded under clause first of
sub-section (1) of section 41, and also the amounts, if any, respectively awarded under
Matters to be
neglected in
determining
compensation.
Amount of
compensation
awarded by
Authority not
to be lower
than the
amount
awarded by the
Collector.
Forms of
awards.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

16
each of the other clauses of the same sub-section, together with the grounds of awarding
each of the said amounts.
(2) Every such award shall be deemed to be a decree and the statement of the grounds
of every such award a judgment within the meaning of section 2, clause (2) and section 2,
clause (9), respectively, of the Code of Civil Procedure 1908.
45. (1) Every such award shall also state the amount of costs incurred in the
proceeding under this Part, and by what persons and in what proportions they are to be paid.
(2) When the award of the Collector is not upheld, the cost shall ordinarily be paid by
the Collector, unless the Authority is of the opinion that the claim of the applicant is so
extravagant or that he is so negligent in putting his case before the Collector that some
deduction from his costs should be made or that he should pay a part of the Collector’s
costs.
46. If the sum, which in the opinion of the Authority the Collector ought to have
awarded as compensation is in excess of the sum which the Collector did award as
compensation, the award of the Authority may direct that the collector shall pay interest on
such excess at the rate of nine per centum per annum from the date on which he took
possession of the land to the date of payment of such excess into Authority:
Provided that the award of the Authority may also direct that where such excess or
any part thereof  is paid into Authority after the date of expiry of a period of one year from
the date on which possession is taken, interest at the rate of fifteen per centum per annum
shall be payable from the date of expiry of the said period of one year on the amount of such
excess or part thereof which has not been paid into Authority before the date of such expiry.
47. (1) Wherein an award under this part, the authority allows to the applicant any
amount of compensation in excess of the amount awarded by the collector under section 12,
the persons interested in all the other land covered by the same notification under section
4, sub-section (1) and who are also aggrieved by the award of the Collector may,
notwithstanding that they had not made an application to the Collector under section 23, by
written application to the Collector within three months from the date of the award of the
Authority require that the amount of compensation payable to them may be re-determined
on the basis of the amount of compensation awarded by the  Authority:
Provided that in computing the period of three months within which an application to
the Collector shall be made under this sub-section, the day on which the award was
pronounced and the time requisite for obtaining a copy of the award shall be excluded.
(2) The Collector shall, on receipt of an application under sub-section (1), conduct an
inquiry after giving notice to all the persons interested and giving them a reasonable
opportunity of being heard, and make an award determining the amount of compensation
payable to the applicants.
(3) Any person who has not accepted the award under sub-section ( 2) may, by
written application to the Collector, require that the matter be referred by the Collector for
the determination of the Authority and the provisions of sections 23 to 46 shall, so far as
may be, apply to such reference as they apply to a reference under section 23.
48. Where an award is pending or remains unsettled at any stage prior to the coming
into force of this Act then the amount of compensation payable to the entitled person may
be determined on the basis of section 14 of this Act.
PART VI
APPORTIONMENT OF COMPENSATION
49. When there are several persons interested, if such persons agree in the
apportionment of the compensation, the particulars of such apportionment shall be specified
in the award, and as between such persons the award shall be conclusive evidence of the
correctness of the apportionment.
Costs.
5 of 1908.
Collector
may be
directed to
pay interest
on excess
compensation.
Re-determina-
tion of the
amount of
compensation
on the basis
on the award
of the
Authority.
Determination
of amount of
compensation
in pending or
unsettled
cases.
Particulars of
apportionment
to be
specified.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

17
50. When the amount of compensation has been settled under section 12, if any
dispute arises as to the apportionment of the same or any part thereof, or as to the persons
to whom the same or any part thereof, is payable, the Collector may refer such dispute to the
decision of the Authority.
PART VII
PAYMENT
51. (1) On making an award under section 12, the Collector shall tender payment of
the compensation awarded by him to the persons interested entitled thereto according to
the award and shall pay it to them unless prevented by some one or more of the contingencies
mentioned in the next sub-section.
(2) If they shall not consent to receive it, or if there be no person competent to
alienate the land, or if there be any dispute as to the title to receive the compensation or as
to the apportionment of it, the Collector shall deposit the amount of the compensation in
the Authority to which a reference under section 23 would be submitted:
Provided that any person admitted to be interested may receive such payment under
protest as to the sufficiency of the amount:
Provided also that no person who has received the amount otherwise than under
protest shall be entitled to make any application under section 23:
Provided also that nothing herein contained shall affect the liability of any person,
who may receive the whole or any part of any compensation awarded under this Act, to pay
the same to the person lawfully entitled thereto.
52. (1) If any money is deposited in Authority under sub-section ( 2) of the last
preceding section and it appears that the land in respect whereof the same was awarded
belonged to any person who had no power to alienate the same, the Authority shall direct
the payment of the interest in terms of section 53 to the person or persons who would for
the time being have been entitled to the possession of the said land, from the date of
possession until it shall have been so paid.
(2) In all cases of money deposited to which this section applies, the Authority shall
order the payment by the Collector of the costs of the orders for the payment of the interest
and for the payment out of Authority of the principal of such moneys, including therein all
reasonable charges and expenses incident thereon.
53. When the amount of such compensation is not paid or deposited on or before
taking possession of the land, the Collector shall pay the amount awarded with interest
thereon at the rate of nine per centum per annum from the time of so taking possession
until it shall have been so paid or deposited:
Provided that if such compensation or any part thereof is not paid or deposited within
a period of one year from the date on which possession is taken, interest at the rate of
fifteen per centum per annum shall be payable from the date of expiry of the said period of
one year on the amount of compensation or part thereof which has not been paid or deposited
before the date of such expiry.
PART VIII
TEMPORARY OCCUPA TION OF LAND
54. ( 1) Whenever it apears to the appropriate Government that the temporary
occupation and use of any waste or arable land are needed for any public purpose, the
appropriate Government may direct the Collector to procure the occupation and use of the
same for such term as it shall think fit, not exceeding three years from the commencement of
such occupation.
(2) The Collector shall thereupon give notice in writing to the persons interested in
Dispute as to
apportionment.
Payment of
compensation
or deposit of
same in
Authority.
Investment of
money
deposited in
respect of
lands
belonging to
person
incompetent
to alienate.
Payment of
interest.
Temporary
occupation of
waste or
arable land.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

18
such land of the purpose for which the same is needed, and shall, for the occupation and
use thereof for such term as aforesaid, and for the materials, if any, to be taken therefrom,
pay to them such compensation, either in a gross sum of money, or by monthly or other
periodical payments, as shall be agreed upon in writing between him and such persons,
respectively.
(3) In case the Collector and the persons interested differ as to the sufficiency of the
compensation or apportionment thereof, the Collector shall refer such difference to the
decision of the authority.
55. (1) On payment of such compensation, or on executing such agreement, or on
making a reference under section 54, the collector may enter upon and take possession of
the land, and use or permit the use thereof in accordance with the terms of the said notice.
(2) On the expiration of the term, the Collector shall make or tender to the persons
interested compensation for the damage, if any, done to the land and not provided for by
the agreement, and shall restore the land to the persons interested therein:
Provided that, if the land has become permanently unfit to be used for the purpose for
which it was used immediately before the commencement of such term, and if the persons
interested shall so require, the appropriate Government shall proceed under this Act to
acquire the land as if it was needed permanently for a public purpose.
56. In case the Collector and persons interested differ as to the condition of the land
at the expiration of the term, or as to any matter connected with the said agreement, the
Collector shall refer such difference to the decision of the Authority.
PART IX
MISCELLANEOUS
57. (1) Service of any notice under this Act shall be made by delivering or tendering
a copy thereof signed, in the case of a notice under section 4, by the officer therein mentioned,
and, in the case of any other notice, by or by order of the Collector or the Authority.
(2) Whenever it may be practicable, the service of the notice shall be made on the
person therein named.
(3) When such person cannot be found, the service may be made on any adult male
member of his family residing with him; and, if no such adult male member can be found, the
notice may be served by fixing the copy on the outer door of the house in which the person
therein named ordinarily dwells or carries on business, or by fixing a copy thereof in some
conspicuous place in the office of the officer aforesaid or of the Collector or in the building
housing the authority, and also in some conspicuous part of the land to be acquired:
Provided that if the Collector or the Authority so direct, a notice may be sent by post,
in a letter addressed to the person named therein at his last known residence, address or
place of business and registered under sections 28 and 29 of the Indian Post Office
Act, 1898, and service of it may be proved by the production of the addressee’s receipt.
58. Whoever willfully obstructs any person in doing any of the acts authorized by
section 4 or section 9, or willfully fills up, destroys, damages or  displaces any trench or
mark  made under section 5, shall, on conviction before a Magistrate, be liable to imprisonment
for a term not exceeding one month, or with fine  not exceeding five thousand rupees, or
both.
59. If the Collector is opposed or impeded in taking possession under this Act of any
land, he shall, if a Magistrate, enforce the surrender of the land to himself, and if not a
Magistrate, he shall apply to a Magistrate or to the Commissioner of Police, and such
Magistrate or Commissioner, as  the case may be, shall enforce the surrender of the land to
the Collector.
Power to
enter and take
possession and
compensation
on
restoration.
Difference as
to condition
of land.
6 of 1898.
Service of
notices.
Penalty for
obstructing
acquisition of
land.
Magistrate to
enforce
surrender.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

19
60.  (1) Except in the case provided for in section 55, the Government shall be at liberty
to withdraw from the acquisition of any land of which possession has not been taken.
(2) Whenever the Government withdraws from any such acquisition or the Collector
does not make an award under section 12 within a period of one year from the date of
publication of declaration under section 7 of this Act or within a period of one year from the
commencement of this Act, in cases of declaration published under section 6 of the Land
Acquisition Act, 1894, as the case may be, the Collector shall determine the amount of
compensation due for the damage suffered by the owner in consequence of the notice or of
any proceedings thereunder, and shall pay such amount to the person interested, together
with all costs reasonably incurred by him in the prosecution of the proceedings under this
Act relating to the said land.
(3) The provision of Part III of this Act shall apply, so far as may be, to the determination
of the compensation payable under this section.
61. (1) The provisions of this Act shall not be put in force for the purpose of acquiring
a part only of any house, manufactory or other building, if the owner desires that the whole
of such house, manufactory or building shall be so acquired:
Provided that if any question arises as to whether any land proposed to be taken
under this Act does or does not form part of a house, manufactory or building within the
meaning of this section, the Collector shall refer the determination of such question to the
Authority and shall not take possession of such land until after the question has been
determined:
Provided also that in deciding on such a reference, the Authority shall have due
regard to the question whether the land proposed to be taken, is reasonably required for the
full and unimpaired use of the house, manufactory or building.
(2) If, in the case of any claim under section 41, sub-section (1), thirdly, by a person
interested, on account of the severing of the land to be acquired from his other land, the
appropriate Government is of opinion that the claim is unreasonable or excessive, it may, at
any time before the Collector has made his award, order the acquisition of the whole of the
land of which the land first sought to be acquired forms a part.
(3) In the case last hereinbefore provided for, no fresh declaration or other proceedings
under sections 7 to 11, both inclusive, shall be necessary; but the Collector shall without
delay furnish a copy of the order of the appropriate Government to the person interested,
and shall thereafter proceed to make his award under section 12.
62. (1) Where the provisions of this Act are put in force for the purpose of acquiring
land at the cost of any fund controlled or managed by a local authority, the charges of and
incidental to such acquisition shall be defrayed from or by such fund.
(2) In any proceeding held before a Collector or Authority in such cases the local
authority concerned may appear and adduce evidence for the purpose of determining the
amount of compensation:
Provided that no such local authority shall be entitled to demand a reference under
section 23.
63. No award or agreement made under this Act shall be chargeable with stamp duty,
and no person claiming under any such award or agreement shall be liable to pay any fee for
a copy of the same.
64. In any proceeding under this Act, a certified copy of a document registered under
the Registration Act, 1908, including a copy given under section 57 of that Act, may be
accepted as evidence of the transaction recorded in such document.
65. No suit or other proceeding shall be commenced or prosecuted against any
person for anything done in pursuance of this Act, without giving to such person a month’s
previous notice in writing of the intended proceeding, and of the cause thereof, nor after
tender of sufficient amends.
Completion
of acquisition
not
compulsory,
but
compensation
to be awarded
when not
completed.
Acquisition of
part of house
or building.
Exemption
from stamp
duty and fees.
Acceptance of
certified copy
as evidence.
Acquisition of
land at cost
of a local
authority.
Notice in case
of suits for
anything
done in
pursuance of
Act.
16 of 1908.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

20
66. Save in so far as they may be inconsistent with anything contained in this Act, the
provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, shall apply to all proceedings before the
Authority under this Act.
67. Subject to the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, applicable to
appeals from original decrees, and notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any enactment
for the time being in force, an appeal shall only lie in any proceedings under this Act to the
High Court from the award, or from any part of the award, of the Authority and from any
decree of the High Court passed on such appeal as aforesaid, an appeal shall lie to the
Supreme Court subject to the provisions contained in section 109 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908, and in Order XLV thereof.
68. (1) The land acquired under this Act shall not be transferred to any other purpose
except for a public purpose, and after obtaining the prior approval of the appropriate
Government.
(2) When any land or part thereof, acquired under this Act remains unutilized for a
period of five years from the date of taking over the possession, the same shall return to the
the erstwhile owner or owners of the land on payment of compensation received.
(3) An application together with the proof of deposit of compensation received under
sub-section (2) shall be filed before the Collector within a period of one year from the date
of expiring of period of five years referred to in sub-section (2):
Provided that after receiving such application the Collector shall ensure the reversal
of title and possession to the erstwhile owner within a period of six month from the date of
receipt of such application.
69. Whenever any land acquired under this Act is transferred to any person for a
consideration, eighty per cent. of  the difference in the acquisition cost and the consideration
received, which in no case shall be less than the acquisition cost, shall be shared amongst
the persons from whom the lands were acquired or their heirs, in proportion to the value at
which the lands were acquired, and for the purpose, a separate fund may be maintained
which shall be administered by the Collector in such manner as may be prescribed.
70. (1) The land Acquisition Act, 1894, is hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the land Acquisition Act, 1894, anything done or
any action taken under the said Act shall, in so far as such thing or action is not inconsistent
with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been done or taken under the provisions
of this Act and shall continue in force accordingly until superseded by anything done or
any action taken under this Act.
71. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.
Code of Civil
Procedure to
apply to
proceedings
before
Authority.
5 of 1908.
Appeals in
proceedings
before Court.
Utilization of
land for the
purpose it is
acquired.
5 of 1908.
Sharing of
difference of
cost of
acquisition
and
consideration
received by
transfer of
the land.
Repeal and
savings.
Power to
make rules.
5 of 1908.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The ‘Land Acquisition Act’ was enacted by the British in the year 1894 with the
express purpose of compulsory acquisition of privately held property/land by the State.
After independence in 1947, the Government of India adopted the Land Acquisition Act of
1894 as a tool for regulating land acquisition. Though various amendments have been made
to the Act from time to time,  the administrative procedure and the parameters for determining
the compensation still remain almost the same. The owner of the property has no bargaining
power with the State in such circumstances nor does he have any say in the process of
determination of compensation.
The definition of  “public purpose” under the Act has been  so inclusive and
ambiguous that anything and everything can be acquired under this heading for any purpose.
The instances of acquisition of private land by the Central Government and various State
Governments for the activities carried on by private individuals or by the public authorities
for a distinct profit motive are not uncommon. If any land is acquired for making bridges,
hospitals or other buildings for public use, then it can be called ‘public purpose’. But if the
land is handed over to private parties to develop plots, golf courses, buildings, etc. for
profit, it cannot be called public purpose.
The very basis of determining compensation is flawed since it is titled against the
interest of the landowner to fix the compensation on the lower side. Since the compensation
fixed is always significantly lower than its potential value, there has always been the tendency
to acquire land and to use the same to make profits by allotting to the private individuals or
public authorities. While determining compensation, the purpose of acquisition is never
taken into consideration. In almost all cases of land acquisition in the past, the compensation
awarded has been found grossly inadequate and the issues relating to inadequate
compensation have given rise to serious problems of law and order and in large number of
cases leading to loss of life and property. Inadequate compensation compels the farmer to
approach judicial forums, which puts him under costly, prolonged, and unending litigation.
Delays in awarding compensation are also a common feature, which not only have led to
loss of livelihood but also immense economic burdens and mental agony to the affected
families.
India is a country of 1.2 billion people and food and livelihood security for all is of
paramount importance. The indiscriminate acquisition of vast tracts of most fertile land
adversely affect the food security. The Land Acquisition Act, 1894 does not take into
account such concerns. In the name of urgency,  millions of farmers have been arbitrarily
deprived of their land since independence for the execution of so called urgent projects
though, in some cases it took decades to initiate work on these projects on the acquired
land.
The focus on inclusive growth models and a desired growth in agriculture has come
to the fore with the emergence of inflation and food security as major challenges before the
nation. As in an equitable society there is no sanctity and primacy of private interest over
the general interest of the community, this must be reflected in the laws of the land. It is,
therefore, suggested that the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 has lived its life and deserves to
be immediately repealed. The 1894  Act must be substituted by a more pragmatic, progressive,
unambiguous and comprehensive law wherein the acquisition must pass the scrutiny of the
test of real public purpose which is founded on the doctrine of superior claims of whole
community and not for making profit by the private individuals or public authorities. The
proposed law must provide clear and consistent compensation rules and the State at the
time of acquiring land must also take into consideration the purpose of acquisition while
21

22
fixing quantum of compensation. The Bill seeks to protect our fertile agricultural land resource
and the interests of the landowners to enable growth in agriculture, ensure food and livelihood
security and sustainable development.
N
EW DELHI; JAYANT CHAUDHARY
April 26, 2010.
PRESIDENT'S  RECOMMENDATION  UNDER  ARTICLE 117(1), 274(1) AND 117(3) OF
THE CONSTITUTION
[Copy of letter No. 1105/07/2010-LRD dated 14th March, 2011 from Shri Vilasrao
Deshmukh, Minister of Rural Development and Minister of Panchyati Raj to the Secretary-
General, Lok Sabha].
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the land Acquisition Bill,
2011 by Shri Jayant Chaudhary, M.P., recommends its introduction under articles 117(1) and
274(1) and consideration under article 117(3) of the Constitution in Lok Sabha.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 provides for payment for damages by the officer so authorized by the
appropriate Government. Clause 24 provides for the establishment of Land Acquisition
Compensation Disputes Settlement Authority for providing speedy disposal of disputes
relating to land acquisition and compensation. Clause 35 of the Bill provides that the
Central Government shall, by notification, establish one or more authorities to be known as
the Land Acquisition compensation disputes settlement Authority to exercise jurisdiction,
powers and authority conferred on it by or under this Act with regard to the acquisition of
land by the Central Government, for  the purpose of providing speedy disposal of disputes
relating to land acquisition compensation. Clause 46 provides that the Authority may direct
the Collector to pay interest in case the compensation awarded was less than what should
have been awarded. Clause 51 provides for payment of compensation to the persons
interested. Clause 53 provides for payment of interest on compensation amount in such
cases where possession  of  land was undertaken before payment of compensation. The
Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. The
expenditure relating to States shall be borne out of the Consolidated Funds of the respective
States while the expenditure relating to Union territories shall be borne out of the Consolidated
Fund of India.
The exact expenditure, which will be involved under the proposed Bill, will depend
upon the composition of the above mentioned Authority, which will be decided after the Bill
is passed. Hence, it is not practicable to make an exact estimate of the recurring and non-
recurring expenditure for the purpose at this stage. However, it is likely to involve a recurring
expenditure of about rupees three hundred crore. A non-recurring expenditure of about
rupees four hundred and fifty crore is also likely to be involved.
23

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 71 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation
of legislative  power is of a normal character.
24

LOK  SABHA
————————
A
BILL
to consolidate and amend the law relating to acquisition of land for public purposes.
————
(Shri Jayant Chaudhary, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2959LS(S4)—15-04-2011.