THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014
By
SHRI BAIJAY ANT P ANDA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Information Technology Act, 2000
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth  Year of the Republic of  India  as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Information Technology  (Amendment) Act, 2014.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act)—
(i) clause (ha) shall be re-numbered as clause (hb) and before clause (hb) as so
re-numbered, the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
'(ha) "commercial electronic message" means an electronic message the
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 27 of 2014
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Amendment of
section 2.
21 of 2000. 5

2
primary purpose of which is to market or promote a product or a service or a
business or an investment opportunity;';
(ii) after clause (s), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
'(sa) "electronic message" means a message or an information created,
transmitted or received on a computer, computer system, computer resource or
communication device including attachments in text, images, audio, video or
any other electronic record, which may be transmitted with the message;'; and
(iii) after clause (zg), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
'(zga) "unsolicited commercial electronic message" means a commercial
electronic message that is sent to the addressee or the recipient without his/her
consent;'.
3. For section 66A of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
"66A. Any person who sends, by means of a computer resource or a
communication device,—
(a) any unsolicited commercial electronic message;
(b) any commercial electronic message in which the identity of the originator
or the person on whose behalf the message is sent has been disguised or
concealed; or
(c) any commercial electronic message which cannot be unsubscribed or
replied to by the addressee or the recipient due to the absence of a valid electronic
address or otherwise,
shall be punished with fine which may extend to rupees one crore."
Substitution of
new section for
section 66A.
Punishment
for sending
unsolicited
commercial
electronic
messages, etc.
5
10
15
20

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
There has been phenomenal growth in the use of  internet for exchange of information,
ideas and opinions. Since easy accessibility to internet has empowered the citizens with
information and knowledge, it is extremely important that the rights of our citizens to express
themselves freely over the internet be zealously protected. However, law enforcing agencies
have, on several occasions, misused the law to subvert these rights.
Part of the problem is the law itself, which has been drafted in a broad manner that
leaves wide scope for misinterpretation and abuse. Section 66A of the Information Technology
Act, 2000, in particular, has come under severe criticism from various quarters. Clause (a) of
the section 66A uses expressions such as 'grossly offensive' and 'menacing', which are not
only vague but also highly subjective by individual standards. Clause (b) prescribes penalties
for offences such as 'annoyance', 'criminal intimidation', 'insult' and promoting 'hatred' or
'ill-will' between groups. Prescribing the same punishment for 'annoyance' as well as 'criminal
intimidation' by bundling disparate terms within the same clause is bound to lead to confusion
and misuse. Moreover, most of these offences are already covered under various sections of
the Indian Penal Code, 1860. As a result, offenders often get booked under both the statutes
for the same offence. Clause (c) of that section is meant to be an anti-spam provision but
does not do justice to the requirement of either the users or the industry.
What is more, in some cases, penalties for the same offences are higher in the Information
Technology Act as compared to those in the Indian Penal Code. Thus, if an offence is
committed through an electronic medium such as the internet, it would attract a higher
penalty than otherwise. For instance, threatening someone with injury to their reputation
through email attracts a penalty of three years' imprisonment under the Information
Technology Act, while the same offence when committed verbally attracts a penalty of two
years' imprisonment under the Indian Penal Code (sections 503 and 506). This is inconsistent
and unjustified.
The significance of this change goes beyond the increase in penalty. Under the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1973, offences punishable with a jail term of three years or more are
'cognizable' where a police officer can arrest the offender without a warrant. This leaves more
discretion to the police officer and makes the section liable to be misused.
Our Constitution accords high importance and sanctity to the freedom of speech and
expression. Article 19(1) of the Constitution provides our people the freedom to freely express
their opinion while article 19(2) empowers the legislatures to impose reasonable restrictions
on this freedom. Reasonable restrictions can only be imposed in the interest of the
sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly relations with foreign
States, public order, decency or morality, or in relation to contempt of court, defamation or
incitement to an offence. No other grounds have been provided.
Our Supreme Court has upheld that restrictions on freedom of speech and expression
should be narrowly and specifically defined. It is pertinent to note that some other democracies
use the principle of incitement to violence with clear and present danger as the defining
guideline for such restrictions.
Given that section 66A of the Information Technology Act is broadly defined and
open to varied interpretation by the enforcers, it ceases to be 'reasonable'. The present law
needs to be amended in order to narrowly delineate the contours of situations under which
free speech on the internet may be restricted. Any attempt to provide our people an atmosphere
conducive to healthy debate and deliberation, will have to begin with an amendment of this
Act, which strikes at the very root of our democratic values.
3

Therefore, clauses (a) and (b) of section 66A must be omitted and clause (c) must be
reworded to provide for a potent anti-spam provision. Several countries, such as USA, UK,
Canada and Singapore already have a comprehensive anti-spam legislation in place. In India,
despite demands from various quarters, the Information Technology Act has so far not
adequately addressed the issue of spam.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW D ELHI; BAIJAYANT PANDA
June 11, 2014.
4

ANNEXURE
THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000
(21 OF 2000)
* * * * *
2.  (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) * * * * *
(b) * * * * *
(c) * * * * *
(d) * * * * *
(e) * * * * *
(f) * * * * *
(g) * * * * *
(h) * * * * *
(ha) “communication device" means cell phones, personal digital assistance or
combination of both or any other device used to communicate, send or transmit any
text, video, audio or image;
* * * * *
(s) “Electronic Gazette" means the Official Gazette published in the electronic
form;
* * * * *
(zg) “subscriber" means a person in whose name the Digital Signature Certificate
is issue;
* * * * *
66A. Any person who sends, by means of a computer resource or a communication
device,—
(a) any information that is grossly offensive or has menacing character; or
(b) any information which he knows to be false, but for the purpose of causing
annoyance, inconvenience, danger, obstruction, insult, injury, criminal intimidation,
enmity, hatred or ill-will, persistently by making use of such computer resource or a
communication device; or
(c) any electronic mail or electronic mail message for the purpose of causing
annoyance or inconvenience or to deceive or to mislead the addressee or recipient
about the origin of such messages,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
years and with fine.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, terms “electronic mail” and “electronic
mail message” means a message or information created or transmitted or received on a
computer, computer-system, computer resource or communication device including
attachments in text, image, audio, video and any other electronic record, which may be
transmitted with the message.
Definitions.
5
Punishment
for sending
offensive
messages
through
communication
service, etc.

LOK  SABHA
——————
A
BILL
further to amend the Information Technology Act, 2000
————
(Shri Baijayant Panda, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—732LS(S-3)—27-06-2014.