1
THE COMPANIES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
By
SHRI OM BIRLA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Companies Act, 2013.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called as the Companies (Amendment) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No.  27 of  2018
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In section 134 of the Companies Act, 2013 after sub-section (8), the following sub-
section shall be inserted, namely:—
"(9) If the Registrar of Company after scrutinising the report provided under clause (o)
of sub-section (3) finds it inappropriate, he shall pass an order directing the company to
deposit a fine which shall not be less than the unspent amount marked by Corporate Social
Responsibility Committee constituted under sub-section (1) of section 135 but which may
extend upto twice of that amount and every officer who is in default shall be punishable with
fine which may extend upto one thousand rupees for every day during which the default
continues."
Amendment
of Section
134.
18 of 2013.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Companies Act, 2013 has been the first law in the world which has provided for the
mandatory social contribution to be made by the Companies which had net worth of rupees
five hundred crore or more, or turnover of rupees one thousand crore or more or a net profit
of rupees five crore or more during any financial year. For carrying out the Corporate Social
Responsibilities mandated by the Act, the companies are required to constitute a Corporate
Social Responsibility Committee.
While the Companies Act, 2013 in section 135 provides for the general prerequisites
associated with the Corporate Social Responsibilities and directs that the Board provides for
a report as per clause (o) of sub-section (3) of section 134 citing reasons for failure in non-
expenditure of amount earmarked for carrying Corporate Social Responsibility. The Companies
Act, 2013 fails to carry out the intention behind insertion of section 135 as it doesn't contain
any provision as to the penalty for this default. Even the Courts shy away from imposing any
penalty. Due to the absence of sub provision, this mandatory social contribution has been
reduced to dead letters. The same was also pointed out by the Committee on Public
Undertakings in its December 2015 report titled 'CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
IN SELECT CENTRAL PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS (CPSUs)'.
Hence this amendment has been introduced for effective implementation of the
Corporate Social Responsibility regime in Indian environment.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; OM BIRLA
November 30, 2017.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE  COMPANIES ACT, 2013
(18 OF  2013)
134. (1)*  *  *
(3) There shall be attached to statements laid before a company in general meeting, a
report by its Board of Directors, which shall include—
(a)*  *  *
(o) the details about the policy developed and implemented by the company on
corporate social responsibility initiatives taken during the year;
* * *
(8) If a company contravenes the provisions of this section, the company shall be
punishable with fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may
extend to twenty-five lakh rupees and  every officer of the company who is in default shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with fine which
shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees, or with
both.
135. (1) Every company having net worth of rupees five hundred crore or more, or
turnover of rupees one thousand crore or more or a net profit of rupees five crore or more
during any financial year shall constitute a Corporate Social Responsibility Committee of the
Board consisting of three or more directors, out of which at least one director shall be an
independent director.
Financial
statement,
Board’s report,
etc.
Corporate
Social
Responsibility.
4
*****

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Companies Act, 2013.
————
(Shri Om Birla, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—3630LS(S3)—30-01-2018.