1
Bill No. 27 of  2016
THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
BY
SHRI DUSHY ANT CHAUTALA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Right to Information Act, 2005.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of
India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right to Information (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as Central Government may, by notification in
the official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Right to Information Act, 2005, in section 19, after sub-section (6), the following
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
"(6A) The second appeal under sub-section ( 3) shall be disposed of within ninety
days of the receipt of the appeal or within such extended period not exceeding a total of one
hundred and twenty days from the date of filing thereof, as the case may be, for reasons to
be recorded in writing."
Short title and
commencement.
22 of 2005. Amendment of
section 19.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Right to Information Act, 2005 is one of the highly-acclaimed welfare legislations.
The Act seeks to secure for citizens access to information, promote transparency and
accountability in the working of the Government, contain corruption and make out democracy
work for the people in real sense. To achieve such objectives, it is important that information
is being provided in a time bound manner.
Though the Act specifies time limit for providing information in case of first appeal by
the Public Information Officers, no such time limit has been set for second appeal before the
Commission. As per the data available, as on 26 January, 2016, at the Central Information
Commission, a total of 27682 appeals are pending. Similar will be the case for various State
Information Commissions. This makes the objectives of the Act defeated.
The proposed amendment seeks to put a time limit of ninety days for disposal of
second appeals filed under sub-section (3) of section 19 of the Act. The proposed
amendment also ensures that a person is not deprived of his legal right for an unreasonable
time period. Moreover, one cannot ignore the plausibility of information losing its relevance
over a period of time.
Thus, the proposed amendment provides that the information is disclosed within a
specified time period so as to maintain its relevance. Moreover, a time bound disposal of
second appeal will create a sense of urgency and compel the Commissions to fill up the
vacancies in the offices of Chief Information Commissioner and State Information
Commissioners. Thus, to fill a gap in the parent Act, the present amendment is being
proposed.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; DUSHYANT CHAUTALA
February 10, 2016.
2

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Right to Information Act, 2005.
————
(Shri Dushyant Chautala, M.P . )
GMGIPMRND—4228LS(S3)—26.02.2016.