AS INTRODUCED IN Lox SaBHa

Bill No. 27 of 2000
—_———

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
By
Stiri G.M. BaNatwaLta,M.P.
a
BILL

JSurther to amend the Constitution of India.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
lows:—

1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2000,

Short title,
2. In article 81 of the Constitution, —

article 81.
(2) for clause (1), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:-—

“() Subject to the provisions of clause (4) and article 331, the House of
the People shall consist of —

(@) not more than five hundred and thi

‘itty members chosen by
direct election from the territori

‘al constituencies in the States;


Amendment
of article
170.

2

(b) not more than twenty members to represent the Union
territories, chosen in such manner as Parliament may by law provide;
and

(०) not more than two hundred and seventy five members
chosen according to the list system in such manner as the Parliament
may by law provide to ensure proportional representation to political
Parties as may be registered with the Election Commission of India
and as may have secured at least one seat in the House of the
People by direct clection in accordance with sub-clause (a) or
sub-clause (b).",

(0) in clause (3) in proviso, for the figure “2000”, the figure "2025" shall be
substituted.

(2) after clause (3) the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—

“(4) For the purposes of clause (7), the Parliament may by law provide propor-
tionate representation in the House of the People for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled
Tribes, Other Backward Classes and each of the minorities, in proportion to the
Population of each of them and the total strength of the House of the People,

Explanation: In this clause,—

(a) the expression Other Backward Classes shall mean such castes, classes or
Sroups as may be recownised as other backward classes by the Central Government
by notification in the -fficial Gazette;

(8) the expr-ssion minorities shall mean and include Muslims, Christians,
Sikhs and such other groups or communities as may be recognised as “minorities”
by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette.”.

3. In article 170 of the Constitution,-—
(@) for clause (1), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—

“(2 Subject to the provisions of clause (4) and article 333, the Legislative
Assembly of cach State shall consist of —

(a) not more than five hundred and not less than sixty, members
chosen by direct election from the territorial constituencies in the State;
and

(6) such additional number of members as may be chosen according
te the fist system in such manner as the Parliament may by law provide
‘© easure proportional representation to political parties as may be.
registered with the Election Commission of India and as may have secured
at least ons seat in the State Legislative Assembly concemed by direct
election in » ‘cordance with sub-clause (a):

Provide hat the number of members chosen according to the list
system shall noi exsced fifty per cent. of the strength of the Legislative
Assembly by direct election pursuant to sub-clause (a).”.

(d)after clause (3) the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—

-“(4) For the purposes of clause (1), the Parliament may by law provide
Proportionate representation in the Legislative Assembly of each State for

10

20

25

30

35

40


10

3

Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward Classes and each of the
minorities, in Proportion to the population of each of them in the respective
State and the total strength of the Legislative Assembly concerned:

Explanation: In this clause,—

(9) the expression “Other Backward Classes” shall mean such castes,
classes Or groups as may be recognised as “other backward classes” by the
Central Government or the State Government concerned by notification in the
Official Gazette.

(8) the expression “minorities” shall mean and inchud: Muslims,
Christians, Sikhs and such other groups or communities as mov re recognised
as “minorities” by the Central Government or the State * ~verument by
notification in the Official Gazette,”.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS.

India follows the First-past-the post (FPP) system of election, The candidate who
secures the highest number of votes among the contesting candidates in a territorial
constituency is declared elected. The operation of this electoral system leads to serious
distortions in “vote-seat relationship”. The reform of our electoral system is much overdue.

Not only have the polls to be just and fair, but the electoral system itself needs to be
fair in its outcome. The basics of the electoral system require the system to reduce
disproportionality be highly proportional and represent the wishes of the electorate as
effectively as possible.

As an initial step towards the reform of our electoral system, the Bill amends the
Constitution to provide for a combination of the List System under the method of
Proportional representation and the existing FPP system for elections to the Lok Sabha
and the State Legislative Assemblies while the members as per the present strength of the
Lok Sabha and the Assemblies will continue to be elected according to the FPP, an
additional fifty per cent of the members will be elected according to the List System.

Further, in case of the direct election from the territorial constituencies, the Bill
freezes the number and distribution of seats in the Lok Sabha among the States for another
twenty five years, that is, till 2025. This is to avoid a peculiar adverse situation against
some States which have witnessed decline in their population, if the latest census were to
be made the basis to determine the number of seats from every State to the Lok Sabha.

The electoral system must so operate as to result in an elected body truly representa-
tive of our multiple society. The various sections of the society need to be adequately and
effectively represented, so as to avoid frustration and strengthen national unity, The Bill,
therefore, also provides for proportionate representation of the Scheduled Castes,
Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward Classes and each of the minorities.

New Detat; G.M. BANATWALLA
February 2, 2000.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill provides that not more
of Lok Sabha shall be chosen accord

than two hundred and seventy five
ing to the list system to ensure Proportional


Composition
of the House
of the
People.

‘Composition
of che
Legislative
Assemblies.

ANNEXURE

EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

* * * * *

81. (1) Subject to the provisions of article 331, the House of the People shall consist
of

(a) not more than five hundred and thirty members chosen by direct election from
territorial constituencies in the States, and

(©) not more than twenty members to represent the Union territories, chosen in such
manner as Parliament may by law provide.

* . * * हू

(3) In this article, the expression "population" means the population as ascertained
at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published:

Provided that the seference in this clause to the last preceding census of which the
relevant figures have been published shall, until the reievant figures for the first census
taken after the year 2000 have been published, be construed as a reference to the 1971
census.

* * . * *
170. (1) 1.९६ to the provisions of article 333, the Legislative Assembly of each

State shall consist of not more than five hundred, and not 1९55 than sixty, members chosen
by direct election from territerial constituencies in the State.

* * * * *


ac »

~ Ve So |
ane 0 बन eee