THE CHILD WELFARE BILL, 2013
By
DR. BHOLA SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare of children and for matters connected therewith .
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Child Welfare Act, 2013.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, 'child' means a person who has
not completed the age of fifteen years.
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, no
child shall be employed by any person for any work in any manner.
Short title and
extent.
Bill No. 27 of 2013
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Definition.
Prohibition of
child
employment.
5

2
4. (1) The Central Government shall establish adequate number of juvenile homes
with all basic amenities for the welfare of children in every district of the country.
(2) Any child who is abandoned, orphan, destitute, neglected or engaged in any job,
occupation or begging shall be admitted to the juvenile homes set up under sub-section (1).
5. (1) Every child who is admitted into the juvenile home shall be entitled to the
following facilities free of cost,—
(a) accommodation, food and clothing;
(b) education including higher and technical education; and
(c) medical assistance.
(2) Every child shall also be entitled to such other facilities as are necessary for his
all-round development.
6. The Central Government shall make provisions of reservation in posts and services
under its control for children admitted to juvenile homes on attaining the age of eighteen
years.
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Establishment
of juvenile
homes.
Facilities to be
provided to
the children in
juvenile
homes.
Provision for
reservation in
posts and
services under
Central
Government.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
A large number of children are forced by their parents to do menial labour, in order to
sustain their livelihood. Due to lack of proper diet and health care, these children become
victims of a number of diseases. Some of them even succumb to premature death. Many of
these children are highly talented. But due to lack of proper education and other opportunities,
their talent goes waste.
Children are the future of a country. It is, therefore, the responsibility of the Government
to provide opportunities of all-round development to every child and also to provide protection
against exploitation. Thus, it is proposed to bring in a legislation for the welfare and protection
of children against exploitation.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BHOLA  SINGH
February 7,  2013

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for setting up of adequate number of juvenile homes with
all basic amenities for the welfare of children in every district of the country by the Central
Government. Clause 5 provides for free of cost food, accommodation, clothing, education
and medical facilities to the children in juvenile homes. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual
recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is likely to be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five crore is also likely to be involved.
4

5
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
——————
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare of children and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Dr. Bhola Singh, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4808LS(S-4)—25-02-2013.