1
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
PROF. SAUGA TA ROY, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government  may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 27 of  2017
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In the Representation of the People Act, 1951, after section 8A, the following section
shall be inserted, namely:—
"8B. Notwithstanding anything in section 8A, any person convicted of an
offence of corrupt practice of using religion, race, caste or community during election
campaign in order to influence the vote of electors shall be disqualified for whole of life
from the date of conviction.".
Insertion of
new section
8B.
Disqualifica-
tion on ground
of corrupt
practice of
using religion,
caste, etc. to
influence
electors.
43 of 1951.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Religion and caste have become so interwined in Indian politics that it is almost
impossible to imagine political parties functioning without using them. Many Governments
have stormed to power on the back of promises on issues directly or indirectly related to
religion and caste. The Hon'ble Supreme Court's recent ruling on use of religion and caste
seems an admirable but difficult to implement measures to clean up electoral politics in the
country. From amongst the number of political parties in the country, many are being
accused of using religion for electoral gains. The Supreme Court ruled that no political party
or contender can seek votes in the name of religion or caste during elections. What this
seeks to do ideally is to bring the political parties on a level-playing field and contest election
on issue of inclusive social and economic development. But that seems difficult given the
leading personalities have dug their feet deep in divisive or focus-groups politics. Working
for specific sections, however, without harming others can't be classified as a wrong doing.
But the apex Court's reiteration of rules of the Election Commission is a sign that there is an
attempt to clean electoral politics of religion and caste. The Election Commission can only
comprehensively monitor rally videos, posters and sizeable campaign activities in major
locations and routes. It is difficult to monitor campaigning at micro levels across the State.
Therefore, the challenge is to stop indirect propagation because as already stated, the
on-ground and door-to-door campaigning and also other forms of direct contact and
engagement campaigning cannot be monitored.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951 with a
view to provide that any person convicted of an offence of corrupt practice relating to the
use of religion, race, caste, community or language during election campaign for the purpose
of influencing vote of electors shall be disqualified for the whole of life from the date of
conviction.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SAUGATA  ROY
January 18, 2017.
3

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
————
(Prof. Saugata Roy, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4239LS(S3)—16.02.2017.