$

10

As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

१ 8 JUL १00४

THE INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT BOARD BILL, 2006
By :
Suri K.S. Rao, M.P.

A
BILL

to provide for the setting up of an Infrastructure Development Board for providing
infrastructural facilities in the country and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (/) This Act may be called the Infrastructure Development Board Act, 2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) ‘Board’ means the Infrastructure Development Board set up under section 3;

(ii) ‘infrastructure! means and includes communication facilities, drinking water,
roads, electricity, drainage and water harvesting, airports and public transport
facilities; and

(iii) ‘prescribed’ means prescribed by rules.made under this Act.

Short title,
extent and
commencement.

Definitions.


2

Infrastructure 3. (1) The Central Government shall set up an Infrastructure Development Board.
Development
Board. (2) The Board shall consist of the following: —

(i) the Prime Minister as its ex-officio Chairman;

(ii) the Union Ministers of Finance, Civil Aviation, Power, Communications,
Road Transport, Urban Development and Water Resources as members;

(iii) the Deputy Chairman of the Planning Commission as member;

(iv) three experts in the fields of urban development, communications and road
transport, respectively, as members; and

(v) one representative from each State Government.

State Govern- 4, Every State Government shall assess its infrastructure requirements from time to

ments to time and submit the same to the Board for its consideration.
submit their

infrastructure
requirements.

Functions of 5. The Board shall perform the following functions,—
the Board,
(i) compilation of the infrastructural requirements State-wise;

(ii) deputing team of experts to the States for making ground assessment of their
infrastructural requirements; %

(iii) making recommendation to the Central Government regarding quantum of
amount to be provided to a State for improvement in their infrastructure facilities;

(iv) determine a time frame within which a project for which fund is released by
the Central Government is to be implemented by a State Government; and

(v) such other functions as may be assigned to it by the Central Government.

Infrastructure 6. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Fund to be known as the
Development Infrastructure Development Fund.
Fund.
iy (2) The Fund shall consist of contributions made by the Central Government and the
State Governments in such proportion as may be prescribed.
(3) Such other sums as may be received by way of donation, contribution or assistance or
otherwise by the Central Government or a State Government shall also be credited to the Fund.
Central 7. The Central Government shall, on its own or on the recommendation of the Board,
Government release funds to the States for creation and improvement of infrastructural facilities.
to release
funds, =
Board to have 8. The Board shall meet as often as it considers necessary but there shall not be a gap
regular of three months between its two consecutive meetings.
meetings.
Appropriate 9. The appropriate Government shall ensure that every infrastructure project is
Government — completed within the time frame fixed by the Board.
to ensure
timely
completion of *
infrastructural
projects.
Laying of 10. The Central Government shall lay before each House of Parliament, an annual
aaa report giving full account of implementation of this Act.”
Power to make 11. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for

roles. carrying out the purposes of this Act.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The condition of infrastructural facilities in our country is pathetic. For a huge country
like ours, the availability is far below requirement. The population is increasing at a high rate
and the pressure on the urban infrastructure is so immense that a breakdown seems imminent.
A time bound programme to create new infrastructure and improve existing infrastructure is
required in order to make our country strong and competitive in world market. Only those
countries can progress which have developed sound infrastructure. China is an example of
this.

The State Governments do not have enough resources to build infrastructure on their
own. The Central Government need to come to their assistance in this regard.

Hence this Bill.

New Detut; K.S.RAO
February 15, 2006.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to provide for the constitution of an Infrastructure Develop-
ment Board. Clause 6 of the Bill seeks to constitute an Infrastructure Development Fund.
Clause 7 provides that Central Government shall release funds to the States for creation of
infrastructural facilities. Therefore, the Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees
fifty thousand crore may be incurred.

‘Anon-recurring expenditure of about rupees one lakh crore is also likely to be involved.



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Government to make rules for carrying out the
purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of anormal character.


LOK.SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the setting up of an Infrastructure Development Board for providing
infrastructural facilities in the country and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.

" (Shri K.S. Rao, M.P)

MGIPMRND—5686LS—08.03.2006.