AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

° 8 ig AVY, WY; 20 By 5 ~
yg 1४७ ॥

. Bill No. 27 of 2005
| THE CROP INSURANCE BILL, 2005
7 ®
ह SHRI IQBAL AHMED SarRADGI, M.P.
" ६
4 | 7 ‘BILL
x to provide for insurance of crops and for matters connected therewith.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the F ifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:— =

‘1. (J) This Act may be called the Crop Insurance Act, 2005. Short title, |

| extent and
(2) It extends 10416 whole of India. oT commencement:
(3) It shall come into force at once.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Defitiitions.

(a) "crop" includes all agricultural crops such as paddy, wheat, gram, pulses, all
types of fruits, coconut, all types of cotton and cotton seeds, etc. and such other
agricultural commodities which may be notifi

ed, from time to time, by the Central
Government, in the Official Gazette; ै



Insurance
Scheme.

Insurance
Scheme to be
applicable to
all farmers.

Premium.

Payment of
Insurance
amount.

Insurance
amount to be
paid within
two months.

Supply of
essential
commodities
to farmers.

Procurement
of excess crop.

Application of
other laws to
crop insurance.

Pcwer to make
rules.

2

(6) “essential commodity" means food and clothing;

(c) "excess crop" means crop which is produced in excess of the demand and
within the country where the return is very less compared to cost of production;

(0) "natural calamity" means drought, floods, cyclone, storm and heavy rains;
and

(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.

3. The Central Government shall formulate a scheme providing for insurance of
crops and excess of crops throughout the country.

4. The Insurance scheme shall be applicable to all kinds of crops and in all seasons and
to all farmers irrespective of the size of their land holding.

- 5. (7) The premium in respect of insurance shall be borne by the Central Government
and the State Governments in such proportion as may be prescribed.

(2) Each farmer shall contribute towards the premium according to the size of the lan
owned by him and the rate shall be such as may be prescribed.

6. It shall be the duty of the Central Government to pay insurance amount to the
farmers for the loss of crops suffered by them due to any natural calamity or excess of crops
where the returns is less.

7. (1) The insurance amount shall be paid within two months after the full assessment
of the loss suffered by the farmer is made by a Committee of Experts to be constituted by the
Central Government.

(2) The farmers shall be fully compensated for the loss suffered by them.

8. It shall be the duty of both Central and State Governments to provide all essential
commodities to the farmers who have submitted their claims for insurance for their daily
needs free of cost till they are paid the insurance amount for the loss of their crops under
section 6.

9. It shall be the duty of the Central and the State Governments to procure excess crops
from the farmers at the remunerative price to be fixed by the Central Government so as to save
the farmers from losses.

10. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being applicable to crop insurance.

11. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the provisions of this Act.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The farmers always suffer heavily due to floods, cyclone, drought, and rains. It has
been a common phenomenon that the standing crops are destroyed by the natura! calamities
every year. In most parts of the country, drought has also affected the crops. The frequent
loss of crops suffered by the farmers has rendered them helpless and has even forced them

to commit suicide. Due to the loss of crops, farmers are not in a position to repay their loans
to money lenders. | ।

In the last few years, heavy rains have damaged the crops in several parts of the
country. Drought was also experienced in several other States which resulted in heavy loss
to farmers. Farmers have not oniy been victimised by natural calamities but also by Government
by way of not procuring surplus production from them. It is, therefore, necessary to enact a

legislation so that farmers can be compensated for loss of their crops due to natural calamities.

New DELHI: | IQBAL AHMED SARADGI

February 4, 2005.

ee ee Siete Ee eer
जन वन लक के 3००३-०० तप लक “लक तर+ न“ 3०3 ७०3३० -++30+4458:+++ जत-अंअकनकज ७० टन 3 ७>3 32०७० २५०» १. aS ०१७ 02:22: 5 ० *ं+ 2०४ ee San ann ae SRE a ESRI *० ea

a St a
= ध्प््श्ण्म््््भ्य्ण्य्म््जय्६्न्न्न्ण्न््६्य्ण्ग्ग्णभलन्क्



FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for formulation of a Crop Insurance Scheme. Clause 5

provides that the premium in respect of crop insurance shall be borne by the Central _

¢

Government and the State Governments. Clause 6 provides that it shall be duty of the Central
- Government to pay the farmers the insurance amount due to loss of crops. Clause 7 provides
for constitution of an Expert Committee to make assessment of the loss suffered by the
farmers. Clause 8 provides for supply of all essential commodities to farmers for their daily
needs free of cost till they are paid the insurance amount. Fhe Bill, therefore, if enacted, will
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. The State Governments will also
incur expenditure from their respective Consolidated Funds in respect of payment of premium
of crop insurance and procurement of excess crop production. It is likely to involve an

annual recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore from the Consolidated Fund
of India.

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved.

a



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION i: " q

Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out | |

_ the purposes of the Bill. As the matters will relate to detail only, the delegation of legislative
_ power is of a normal character |



| | ee oe LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for insurance of crops and for matters connected therewith.

PF? Sa 3७ So. - S52 LS 35 ee ५ » किक. ee g 2°. .
SE |, Se Te Piste’ @ yo ry

S
i.
he

(Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi, M.P.)

MGIPMRND—4319LS(S-1)—21-02-2005.