     AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
                                                              Bill No. 27 of 2023
THE CENTRAL EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS
(RESERV ATION IN ADMISSION)
AMENDMENT BILL, 2023
By
DR. NISHIKANT DUBEY, M.P.
A
BILL
 further to amend the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation
in Admission)  Act, 2006.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of
India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation
in Admission) Amendment Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 2 of the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission)
Act, 2006 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),—
(i) after clause (e), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
Short title and
commencement.
5
Amendment of
section 2.5 of 2007.

2
“(ca) ‘‘appropriate Government’’ means in the case of a State, the Government
of that State and in other cases, the Central Government.’’
(ii) after clause (e), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(ea) ‘‘government school’’ means any  recognised school managed by the
appropriate Government, imparting elementary or higher secondary education
or both and includes—
(i)  a  school  established,  owned  or  controlled  by  the  appropriate
Government or a local authority;
(ii) an aided school receiving aid or grants to meet whole or part of its
expenses from the appropriate Government or the local authority; and
(iii) corporation schools, municipal schools, tribal welfare schools,
forest department schools and other  schools managed by the Government
departments.”
3. In section 3 of the principal Act, after sub-clause (iii), the following
sub-clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘‘(iv) out of the annual permitted strength in each  branch of study or faculty,
ten per cent. seats shall be reserved horizontally for the students of Government
schools in so far as  by doing so  the total reservation does not exceed fifty per
cent. in any case:
Provided that where reservation exceeds fifty per cent. by the reservation of
ten per cent. seats for students of Government schools, reservation of seats shall
be provided up to the maximum extent possible without breaching the ceiling of
total reservation of fifty per cent.’’
5
10
15
20
Amendment of
section 3.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is the world’s 2nd largest populated country and hosts pluralism in culture,
religion, ethnicity, language and multilayered caste system which often imposes
challenges on the Indian Government to structure and manage a harmonious society.
The challenges include creating equal employment opportunities, providing and
allocating equal distribution of resources and funds of the Government and making
education available to all citizens of India without discrimination on the grounds of
their religion, caste, race, sex, socio-economic background etc. In order to overcome
such challenges, the Government uses reservation as a tool for the smooth
administration of the country.
The term reservation can be described as ‘certain policy measures or the
techniques adopted by the Indian Governance in order to empower, promote and
uplift those social segments or members of community which have remained backward,
or discriminated, or historically oppressed, by reserving their access to seats or quota
for admission into educational institutes, in Governmental jobs, and legislatures.
Students from Government schools and those studying in private schools hail
from different socio-economic backgrounds. Considering these disparities, it would
be unfair to weigh them on an equal footing. Students from Government schools
must get access to quality education and a chance to fulfil their dreams. Those who
are brilliant must not be stopped because of social or economic boundaries.
Professional courses are the stepping stone towards a bright future of young talents
in the country. Providing reservation to students from Government schools in Central
Educational Institutions would be a step in the right direction considering the principles
of equality under article 14 and non-discrimination under article 15 as enshrined
under the Constitution of India. If implemented across the country, this reservation
policy may also help in increasing the enrolments in Government schools.
Affirmative action by the Government is the need of the hour to place students
from all walks of life at an equal footing to secure their future and thereby ensure that
students from weaker socio-economic backgrounds do not suffer in the long run.
Suitable amendment is, therefore, required in the Central Educational Institutions
(Reservation in Admission) Act, 2006.
    NEW DELHI;                  NISHIKANT DUBEY
January 16, 2023.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CENTRAL EDUCA TIONAL INSTITUTIONS
(RESERV A TION IN ADMISSION) ACT, 2006 (5 OF 2007)
* * * * * *
      2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* * * * * *
(c) “appropriate authority” means the University Grants Commission, the Bar
Council of India, the Medical Council of India, the All India Council for Technical
Education or any other authority or body established by or under a Central Act for the
determination, coordination or maintenance of the standards of higher education in
any Central Education Institution;
* * * * * *
(e) “Faculty means the faculty of a Central Educational Institutions;
* * * * * *
“3. The reservation of seats in admission and its extent in a Central Educational
Institution shall be provided in the following manner, namely:—
(i) out of the annual permitted strength in each branch of study or faculty,
fifteen per cent. seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes;
(ii) out of the annual permitted strength in each branch of study or faculty,
seven and one-half per cent. seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Tribes;
(iii) out of the annual permitted strength in each branch of study or faculty,
twenty-seven per cent. seats shall be reserved for the Other Backward Classes:
Provided that the State seats, if any, in a Central Educational Institution
situated in the tribal areas referred to in the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution
shall be governed by such reservation policy for the Scheduled Castes, the
Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward Classes, as may be specified, by
notification in the Official Gazette, by the Government of the State where such
institution is situated:
Provided further that if there are no State seats in a Central Educational
Institution and the seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes exceed the percentage
specified under clause (i) or the seats reserved for the Scheduled Tribes exceed
the percentage specified under clause (ii) or the seats reserved for the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes taken together exceed the sum of percentages
specified under clauses (i) and (ii), but such seats are—
(a) less than fifty per cent. of the annual permitted strength on the date
immediately preceding the date of commencement of this Act, the total percentage
of the seats required to be reserved for the Other Backward Classes under clause
(iii) shall be restricted to the extent such sum of percentages specified under
clauses (i) and (ii) falls short of fifty per cent. of the annual permitted strength;
(b) more than fifty per cent. of the annual permitted strength on the date of
immediately preceding the date of commencement of this Act, in that case no
seats shall be reserved for the Other Backward Classes under clause (iii) but the
extent of the reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes shall not be reduced in respect of Central Educational Institutions in the
specified north-eastern region.”
* * * * * *
4
Definitions.
Reservation of
seats in Central
Educational
Institutions.

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
further to amend the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation
in Admission) Act, 2006.
————
(Dr. Nishikant Dubey, M.P .)