AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

em ? vj Fa ts कि (]
ail P} é } :
< 141 gif 5

Bill No. 27 of 2003.

THE PREVENTION OF VIDEO PIRACY OF FILMS BILL, 2003
By
SHRI RAMESH CHENNITHALA, M.P.
A
| BILL

to prohibit video piracy of films produced by movie makers and audio ptracy of such
films and albums by unscrupulous pirators thereby causing huge losses to the
producers denying substantial revenue to the States by way of entertainment tax
and for providing deterrent punishment for the audio and video pirators and

broadcasters and exhibitors of such pirated audios and videos and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.

_ BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as
 follows:— a

1. (7) This Act may be called the Prevention of Video Piracy of Films Act, 2003.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
5 (3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —

(a) “appropriate Government" means in the case of a State the Government
of that State and in other cases the Central Government;

(b) “audio piracy" means illegally copying or recording of songs of any

Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.

Definitions.


Banning of
audio and
video piracy
of any movie.

Prohibition to
exhibit/
circulate
pirated audio/
video
version(s) of
any movie by
any Cable
Operator/
audio/video
dealer.

Special Cells/
Teams of local
police to deal
with audio and
video piracy.

Penalty.

Act to have
overriding
effect.

Savings.

Power to
make rules.

Operator is hereby prohibited.

2
movie or from album of a singer on audio tape or compact disc or microchip or in
any other form for the purpose of sale or circulation;

(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and

(d) "video piracy” means illegally copying or recording of any movie or film

on a video tape or compact disc or microchip or in any other form for the purpose

of sale or circulation.

3.(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Cinematograph Act, 1952, Copy-
Right Act, 1957, Cable Television Network (Regulation) Act, 1995 or any other law for
the time being in force, the audio and video piracy of any movie produced in any part of
the country is hereby banned. ,

(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be guilty of an
offence under this Act. 7 |

(3) The provisions of this Act shall also apply to the pirated audio or video
cassettes or compact discs of any Indian movie or music album so pirated in any
foreign country and smuggled into the country.

4.(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, the exhibition or showing of a pirated music album or movie by any Cable

(2) No audio/video dealer by whatever name called shall circulate or broadcast or
sell or make available to any member of the general public any pirated cassette or
compact disc of music album or movie for personal viewing or listening or broadcasting
by such a member at home or elsewhere.

(3) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2) shall be
guilty of an offence under this Act.

$,(1) The appropriate Government shall constitute such number of
Special Investigation Cells/Teams with necessary staff and facilities as it
may deem necessary to deal with the video and audio piracy within its
territorial jurisdiction in such manner as may be prescribed.

(2) The appropriate Government shall prepare an annual report on the achievements
of the Special Investigation Cells/Teams created by it and cause the report to be laid
before the Parliament or the Legislature of the State, as the case may be.

6. Whoever,

(a) contravenes the provisions of section 3 shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than four years but may extend to
seven years and also with fine which shall not be less than five lakh rupees but
may extend to ten lakh rupees;

(b) contravenes the provisions of section 4 shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than two years but may extend to
five years and also with a fine which shall not be less than two lakh rupees but
may extend to five lakh rupees.

7. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any
instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.

8. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other law for the time being in force.

9, The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.



- STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Our country produces the largest number of films in the world every year. This
sector provides employment and means of livelihood to millions of people directly and
indirectly. Film Industry earns considerable foreign exchange and generates adequate
employment potential. But today, film industry is under threat of video and audio piracy.
Sometimes, it takes years to produce a good quality entertaining film on which the
producer spends money generally borrowed or financed by film financiers and the
entire film unit works hard to complete the film. However, as soon as the film is released,
it is pirated simultaneously and shown in cable television network by the cable operators.
After viewing the film on television the general public do not turn up to watch the film
in cinema halls. The resultant decline in viewership in cinema halls cause huge losses
to the producer, distributor, etc. The State Governments are also denied revenue as
they lose on entertainment tax.

On an average, every State Government is loosing 30 to 40 crore of rupees every
year owing to the piracy of films. The police which is supposed to check such piracy
does not give any priority to curb it resulting in unabated piracy. Hence, this Bill has
proposed setting up of special Investigation Cells/Teams to deal with video piracy. If
the film industry is to be saved, it is necessary to check the piracy with a heavy hand.
by providing deterrent punishment to the pirators.

Hence this Bill.

New DELHI;
April 1, 2003. RAMESH CHENNITHALA



FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 5 of the Bill provides for setting up of Special Investigation Cells/Teams to
deal with audio and video piracy. This would involve expenditure from the Consoli-
dated Fund of India in respect of cells/teams set up in Union territories and also Staite
Governments. The expenditure may be to the tune of rupees fifty crore per annum as

recurring expenditure and a sum of rupees twenty five crore as a non-recurring expen-



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying»
out the provisions of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only. The delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to prohibit video piracy of films produced by movie makers and audio piracy of such
films and albums by unscrupulous pirators thereby causing huge losses
to the producers denying substantial revenue to the States by way of
entertainment tax and for providing deterrent punishment for the
audio and video pirators and broadcasters and exhibitors of
such pirated audios and videos and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.

(Shri Ramesh Chennithala, M.P.) —

MGIPMRND—361LS—25-04-2003