AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

> 09 SW है) 0

Bill No. 27 of 2004.

THE VICTIMS OF NATURAL CALAMITIES (REHABILITATION AND
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE) BILL, 2004
By
‘Suri Suresh CHanpet, M.P.
A
BILL

to provide for the rehabilitation and financial assistance to the victims of natural
calamities such as flood, drought, cyclone, hailstorm and earthquake and for matters
connected therewith.
Be itenacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Victims of Natural Calamities (Rehabilitation and 5001 title,

exter

Financial Assistance) Act, 2004.
A ‘commencement.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
iS: (3) It shall come into force at once.
Definitions.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —
(a) "Commissioner" means the Commissicner appointed under section 9;
(b) "Government" means the Central Government;


Financial
assistance in
case of death

Financial
rehef and
medical aid in
case of
injury

Financial
assistance for
damage to
crops
Provision of
housing. in
case of
damage of
house and
other
immovable
properties

Financial
assistance for
loss of
livestock

Job for the
dependent ot
person killed
natura!
calamity

Commissioner
to settly
एकड़ ant

है नि नि
एड

Savings

Power to
remove
difficulties

Power to
make tutes

(९) “natural calamity" includes drought, flood, cyclone. hailstorm, landslide,
earthquake. or any such eventuality caused by nature;

(d) “prescribed means prescribed by rules made under this Act:

(९) "victim" means any person who is physically affected or whose property,
‘ivestock, crop, orchard, field or machinery and tools have been affected or damaged
Sy any natural calamity.

3. Many person loses his life due 10 any natural calamity, the Government shall, on an
application made in the prescribed form by his surviving next of kin, pay a minimum sum of
rupees one lakh as financial assistance to such next of kin of the victim.

4. (1) Ifany person is injured due to any natural calamity, the Government shall give
him ५0९8 financial relief as may be prescribed depending upon the nature of injury sustained
by iim,

(1 In addition to the financial relief referred to in sub-section (/) the victim shall
Aalyo he entitled to free medical aid from the Government for such period as may be prescribed,

5. Every person whose standing crops are damaged due to any natural calamity shall,
on an application made in the prescribed form, be given adequate financial assistance by the
Government in proportion to the loys caused to the crop by the natural calamity,

6.¢/) The Government shall provide to every family, whose house has been damaged
by natural calamity, a dwelling house preferably at the same place,

damage has been caused by natural calamity to cultivable or other land of any
person, the Government shall provide alternative land to such person within a reasonable
distance from his residence.

7. Every person who loses his livestock due to natural calamity shall, on an application
made in the prescribed form. be entitled to adequate financial assistance from the
Government,

8. The Central Government or the Government of a State or a Union territories
nistration, in whove territurial jurisdiction any person loses his life due to any natural
- shall provide a suitable job to one of the eligible dependents of the person killed in
the natural calamity,

पु after the commencement of
{his.Xe appoint a Commissioner with such other staffas may be necessary for setling the
ms and disbursing the financial assistance to the victims of natural calamity under this

cha
A

Provided that the financial assistance shall be disbursed, as soon as may be, but not
later than three months of the occurrence of the natural calamity.

10. ‘The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
for the time bewy in force, regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act,

11. ॥ था) difficulty दांत | in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Government
miay make such order 10 give such directions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this
Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the removal of such difficulty,

12. The Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying
‘out the purposes of this Act.

35


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS,

Our country is prone to various natural calamities such as flood, drought, storm,
hailstorm, cyclone and earthquake resulting in extensive damage to life and property. Floods
are an annual occurrence in Assam, Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh,
West Bengal, Tripura and other parts of the country. Droughts are very common and frequent
throughout the country. Cyclones cause havoc in the coastal areas whereas storms and
hailstorms are frequent in hilly areas as well as in the nearby plains. Now the earthquakes and
cloud bursts are also occurring frequently. The havoc caused by the October, 1991 earthquake
in the hills of Uttar Pradesh and cloud bursts in high hills of Kinnaur and Kullu district of
Himachal Pradesh are fresh in our memory. We have also not forgotten the extensive damage
caused by earthquake in the State of Gujarat in the year 2001, As such, the natural calamities
are also responsible for our backwardness, It is so because they cause extensive damage 10
standing crops, livestock, cultivable lands, roads, bridges, houses and other property apart
from taking away precious human lives. The nation has to divert its resources towards
rescue and rehabilitation processes and on repairs, restoration and construction of the
roads. bridges, fields, buildings, etc. which put a heavy burden on the exchequer. Fortunately,
the entire nation rises as one to face Such calamities but the loss caused thereby can never
be recovered by any means,

Although we cannot stop the occurrence of natural calamities yet with our combined
efforts we can certainly minimize the miseries of the victims of such natural calamities by
providing them with timely financial relief and extending the rehabilitation programmes to
them. As usual, the Central Government has to play the main role in this process. At present
there is no law which gives automatic relief to the victims of natural calamities. The States
femain dependent on Central Government for providing relief to the victims. Sometimes,
delay is caused in rushing relief due to procedural wrangles. Hence it is felt that statutory
provision should be made to help the victims of natural calamities instantly. An attempt has
been made in this Bill to provide for giving instant relief to the victims of natural calamities.

Hence this Bill.

New Dewut; SURESH CHANDEL.
June 22,2004.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM.

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for financial assistance of rupees one lakh to the next of
kin ofa person who dies in any natural calamity. Clause 4 provides for medical aid to the
victims of natural calamity. Clause 5 provides for financial assistance for damage to standing
crops. Similarly Clauses 6 and 7 provide for dwelling units and financial assistance for loss of
Property and livestock respectively, Clause 8 provides for provision of job to one of the
dependents of a victim of a natural calamity. Clause 9 provides for appointment of a
Commissioner and other staff for settling the claims arising out of natural calamities. The Bill,
if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. As the natural
calamities cannot be predicted, the recurring expenditure that would be involved cannot be
calculated, at this stage. But it is estimated that an expenditure of rupees six hundred crore
per annum would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.

A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees sixty lakh would also be involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As such the matter will relate to detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.



LOK SABHA

A
BLL
to provide for the rehabilitation and financial assistance to the victims of natural

calamities such as flood, drought, cyclone, hailstorm and earthquake and for
matters connected therewith.

=

(Shri Suresh Chandel, M.P,)

MGIPMRND—883LS—01.07 2004.