1
THE ORISSA (ALTERATION OF NAME) BILL, 2010
A
BILL
to alter the name of the State of Orissa.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Orissa (Alteration of Name) Act, 2010.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appointed day” means the date appointed under sub-section  ( 2) of
section 1 for the coming into force of this Act;
(b) “appropriate Government” means, as respects a law relating to a matter
enumerated in List I in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, the Central
Government, and as respects any other law, the State Government;
(c) “law” includes any enactment, Ordinance, regulation, order, bye-law, rule,
scheme, notification or other instrument having the force of law in the whole or any
part of the State of Orissa.
Short title
and
commence-
ment.
Definitions.
Bill No. 27-C of  2010
AS PASSED BY LOK SABHA ON
THE 9TH NOVEMBER, 2010
5
10

2
Alteration of
name of State
of Orissa.
Amendment of
First Schedule
to the Consti-
tution.
Amendment
of Fourth
Schedule to
the Constitu-
tion.
Power to
adapt laws.
Power to
construe laws.
3.  As from the appointed day, the State of Orissa shall be known as the State of
Odisha.
4. In article 164 of the Constitution, in clause (1), in the proviso, for the word ‘‘Orissa’’,
the word ‘‘Odisha’’ shall be substituted.
5. In article 273, in clause (1), for the word ‘‘Orissa’’, the word ‘‘Odisha’’ shall be
substituted.
6. In the First Schedule to the Constitution, under the heading “I. THE STATES”, in
entry 10, under the column “Name”, for the word “Orissa”, the word “Odisha” shall be
substituted.
7. In the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution, under the heading “TABLE”, in entry 14,
in the second column, for the word “Orissa”, the word “Odisha” shall be substituted.
8. (1) For the purpose of giving effect to the alteration of the name of the State of
Orissa by section 3, the appropriate Government may, before the expiration of one year from
the appointed day, by order, make such adaptations and modifications of any law made
before the appointed day, whether by way of repeal or amendment, as may be necessary or
expedient, and thereupon every such law shall have effect subject to the adaptations and
modifications so made.
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall be deemed to prevent a competent Legislature or
other competent authority from repealing or amending any law adapted or modified by the
appropriate Government under the said sub-section.
9. Notwithstanding that no provision or insufficient provision has been made under
section 8 for the adaptation of a law made before the appointed day, any court, tribunal or
authority, required or empowered to enforce such law, may construe the law in such manner,
without affecting the substance, as may be necessary or proper in regard to the matter before
the court, tribunal or authority.
10. Where immediately before the appointed day any legal proceedings are pending to
which the State of Orissa is a party, the State of Odisha shall be deemed to have been
substituted for the State of Orissa in those proceedings.
Legal
proceedings.
Amendment
of article 164.
Amendment
of article 273.
5
10
15
20
25

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to alter the name of the State of Orissa.
————
(As passed by Lok Sabha)
GMGIPMRND—5059LS(S3)—09-11-2010.