                                                            Bill No. 280 of 2022
THE PREVENTION OF VIOLENCE AGAINST HEALTHCARE
PROFESSIONALS AND CLINICAL ESTABLISHMENTS
BILL, 2022
By
DR. DNV SENTHILKUMAR S., M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the prevention of violence against healthcare professionals
and clinical establishments and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of
India as follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Violence Against
Healthcare Professionals and Clinical Establishments Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
5
 AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,–
(a) “clinical establishment” means the clinical establishment as
defined under clause (c) of section 2 of the Clinical Establishments
(Registration and Regulation) Act, 2010;
(b) “healthcare professionals” includes,–
(i) a registered medical practitioner, possessing a recognised
medical qualification under National Medical Commission Act, 2019;
(ii) a medical practictioner registered for practicing in any other
system of medicine which is recognised under any law for the time
being in force;
(iii) a mental health professionals under the Mental Healthcare
Act, 2017;
(iv) a registered dentist, registered dental hygienist and registered
dental mechanic as defined in the Dentist’s Act, 1948;
(v) a registered nurse, midwife, auxiliary nurse – midwife and
health visitor who is registered under Indian Nursing Council Act,
1947;
(vi) occupational therapist, speech therapists, nutritionists, seeking
or imparting medical education, pharmacists and para-medical staff
who provide healthcare service in clinical establishments;
(vii) a medical or a nursing student who is undergoing education
or training in any system of medicine recognised by any law for the
time being in force; and
(viii) a person who interacts with the families of patients to
facilitate treatment in hospitals such as social worker, bereavement
counselors, transplant coordinators and Arogya Mitra appointed under
PM-JAY Scheme;
(c)  “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(d) “property” means any property movable or immovable, medical
equipment or machinery; owned by or in possession of or under the control
of any healthcare professionals or clinical establishment; and
(e) “violence” means an act which causes or may cause any harm,
injury or endanger of the life of or intimidation, obstruction or hindrance
to any  healthcare professional in discharge of  his duties or causes any
damage or loss to the property or reputation of a healthcare professional
or a clinical establishment.
3. Any act of violence and targeted violence based on caste, gender,
religion, language, place of birth against a healthcare professional or a clinical
establishment shall be prohibited and mitigated at all levels.
4. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973, any offence committed under this Act shall be cognizable and
non-bailable and triable by the Court of Judicial Magistrate of the First Class.
5. (1) Whoever, commits or attempts to commit or abets or incites the
commission of any act of violence in infringement of the provisions of
5
10
15
20
23 of 2010.
Definitions.
25
30
35
40
30 of 2019.
10 of 2017.
16 of 1948.
48 of 1947.
Prohibition of
violence.
Cognizance of
offence. 5 of 1974.
Penalties.

3
section 3, shall be punished with imprisonment which shall not be less
than six months but which may extend up-to five years and with fine
which shall not be less than rupees five thousand but which may extend upto
rupees five lakh.
(2) Whoever, while committing an act of violence cause grievous
hurt as defined under section 320 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 to any
healthcare professionals, he shall upon conviction be punished with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years, but which
may extend to ten years and with fine which shall not be less than two lakh
rupees but which may extend to ten lakh.
6. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, the aggrieved healthcare professional inform the
officer-in-charge of concerned police station of the commission of an offence
under this act and if he so desires request the support of the head of the
clinical establishment for making complaints in such manner as may be
prescribed.
7. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973, any case registered under this Act shall be
investigated by a police officer not below the rank of Deputy Superintendent
of Police.
8. (1) For acts of violence punishable under this Act, in addition to the
punishment provided for the offences under section 5, the convicted person
shall be liable to pay by way of compensation an amount equivalent to twice
the amount of fair market value of the damaged property or the loss caused as
may be determined by the competent court.
(2) The compensation for causing hurt or grievous hurt to healthcare
professionals and damage cause to clinical establishments shall be as per
degree of harm inflicted as may be decided by competent court.
(3) If the convicted person fails to pay the compensation under
sub-section (1) the said sum shall be recovered as an arrear of land revenue
under the Revenue Recovery Act, 1890 in such manner as may be prescribed.
9.  It shall be the responsibility of every healthcare professional or clinical
establishment, as the case may be to,–
(a) ensure that patients do not wait for long duration for their
treatment or consultation;
(b) ensure that all information about patients and their medical
records are available to the family members and the patient or their
family members shall be entitled to obtain second opinion;
(c) ensure that there is no information asymmetry to patients;
(d) establish appropriate grievance redressal system in clinical
establishments;
(e) strengthen hospital security including interlocking with nearby
police station;
(f) ensure transparency on rates of consultation, investigations,
rents and other expenses of hospitals;
Information of
offence.
Compensation.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.
Investigation
of offence.
40
45

4
(g) ensure mandatory reporting of the violence against healthcare
professionals and the clinical establishment including creating a panel
to investigate cases of violence against healthcare professionals;
(h) display the constraints under which most healthcare
professionals operate and sensitise the public visiting clinical
establishments; and
(i) change the curriculum of the medical education and include
the concurrence of cognitive skills, psychomotor skills and empathic
skills.
10.(1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official
Gazette, establish a District Committee or for such area as may be
specified in such notification to hear appeals and grievances of the victims
of medical negligence or mismanagement under this Act and to aid and
advice such victims for taking recourse to an appropriate forum for a
suitable relief including dealing with issues in insurance claiming by the
patients.
(2) The District Committee shall convene every month.
(3) The District Committee shall provide suitable relief to the parties
within two sittings.
(4) Notwithstanding anything prescribed in this Act, the deliberations
made hereto may be held by a court of law of competent jurisdiction within
the territories of the country.
(5) The Committee established under sub-section (1) shall consist of–
(a) the Member of Parliament of the respective constituency who
shall be the Chairperson of the District Committee; and
(b) one expert each from the field of medicine, law, consumer
movement, health management and human rights to be appointed
by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(6) Any appeals, arguments or rebuttals presented to this effect by
either of the parties shall be kept transparent and open for media and public
scrutiny without any prejudices.
(7) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and
conditions of service of experts mentioned in the sub-section (4), and the
procedure to be followed by the committee shall be such as may be prescribed.
11. The Central Government shall provide after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, necessary requisite funds,
from time to time, for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
12. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act,
the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make
such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to
it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such orders shall be made after the expiry of the
period of three years from the date of commencement of this Act.
13.(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
Establishment
of District
Committee.
Central
Government
to provide
requisite funds.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a
total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree
in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.
5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The violence against healthcare service personnel is not only endemic
to India but also in western countries where over the years the violence
against them has been reduced in western countries due to increase
spending in healthcare and deterrent act which tends to prevent the violence
against healthcare workers.
According to a study made by the Indian Medical Association, more than
75 per cent. of the doctors have faced some form of violence while on duty.
The violence is not just physical they also face verbal abuse almost every
day. Many states have enacted laws to prevent violence against healthcare
professionals and damage to hospital property.
However, various lacuna exists in the State acts. The need is to focus on
both positive deterrence and negative deterrence.
As already mentioned there are acts to prevent the violence but excessive
focus on increasing punishment and penalties is simply not working unless
the underlying cause of violence is addressed. The need is also to consider
the most significant aspect which is the conduct or state of mind that
specifically focus on targeted violence. The important dimension which lead
to violence against healthcare service workers in the government and private
hospitals is long waiting period, patients relatives feel that the doctors are not
giving enough attention, trust deficiency etc. The need is to provide a
mechanism to act as positive deterrence, to state a few, optimizing the long
waiting period, a good grievance addressal and redressal mechanism,
displaying the constraints under which healthcare service personnel works,
etc. which will sensitize the public visiting hospitals. The change in medical
education curriculum is one such measure in this regard where Medical
Council of India has proposed new teaching learning approaches which
includes structural longitudinal programme on “AETCOM”. The grief
counseling should be the essential part of medical training. The need is also
to establish a committee chaired by the Member of Parliament which will
hear the appeals and grievances of the victims of medical negligence or
mismanagement and to aid and advice such victims. It is also  required  that
an  investigation  panel  be  created  by  the  clinical  establishment  to
investigate the case of violence against the healthcare workers. The mere
increase of punishment does not serve the deterrence purposes whereas the
same act has to better enforced or which increase the likelihood of  being
caught  and  ensuring  speedier  consequences.  The  present  Bill  not  only
merely  focuses on punishment but also address the other parameters which
lead to violence. It will ensure that all the healthcare service personnel have
the right to work in a safe and secure work place which is free of violence and
also secure the rights of patients.
Hence this Bill.
   NEW DELHI;                                  DNV SENTHILKUMAR S.
August 8, 2022.
6

7
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 10 of the Bill provides for establishment of district-wise
Committee to provide timely assistance to the victims of medical negligence.
It also provides for appointment of experts to the Committee. Clause 11
provides for the Central Government to provide adequate funds for carrying
out the purposes of this Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted and brought into
operation, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
It is estimated that a sum of rupees fifty crore of recurring expenditure per
annum would involve from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also
likely to be involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 13 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters
of detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
8

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to provide for the prevention of violence against healthcare professionals
and clinical establishments and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. DNV Senthilkumar S., M.P .)