Short title and
commencement.
THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (AMENDMENT)  BILL, 2019
By
SHRI KODIKUNNIL SURESH, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Information Technology Act, 2000
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Information Technology (Amendment)  Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 280 of 2019
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2.  After section 66C of the Information Technology Act, 2000, the following section
shall be enserted, namely:—
"66CA. Whoever, fraudulently or dishonestly or illegally, solicits the details of
mobile phone numbers of any other person purchasing goods or services from a store
or institution, unless proven otherwise, with an intent to sell or transfer such numbers
to organizations or individuals who commit identity theft and vishing, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years and
shall also be liable to fine which may extend to rupees one lakh.".
Insertion of
new section
66CA.
2
21 of 2000.
Punishment
for dishon-
estly
soliciting
details of
mobile phone
numbers and
vishing.
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Information Technology Act, 2000, is an important gatekeeper legislation that
protects the rights to privacy of individuals utilizing the electronic and internet enabled
services and equipments provided by internet service providers in the country.
With alarming rise in breach of privacy and data, including personal and financial
identity being rampantly breached, often with established service providers and companies
in connivance, it is imperative to consistently safeguard the right to privacy and data integrity
of individuals. In a recent development several individuals who visit shops and service
providers are fraudulently made to divulge their mobile phone numbers under flimsy pretexts
and numbers collected thus are transferred to various fraudulent groups that steal and pilfer
personal data by means of vishing and spamming. It is thus needed to enact a legislation that
protect the rights of citizens against all evolving forms of data theft.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Information Technology Act, 2000, with a view
to—
(a) comprehensively protect and safeguard the rights of individuals against
data theft;
(b) deter surreptitious attempts at gaining mobile phone numbers of individuals
visiting shops and establishments for obtaining goods and services; and
(c) extend the ambit of the principal Act to ensure the evolving techniques and
modus operandi of individuals engaged in data theft.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KODIKUNNIL SURESH
November  1, 2019.
3

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Information Technology Act, 2000.
————
(Shri Kodikunnil Suresh, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—3184LS(S3)—18.11.2019.