1
THE DISTRESSED FARMERS (SPECIAL FACILITIES,
PROTECTION AND WELFARE) BILL, 2015
By
SHRIMATI RANJEET RANJAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the special facilities and protection of distressed farmers who are
affected by various natural calamities, and victims of indebtedness, physical
infirmities, diseases, old age, exploitation, etc. by giving adequate
compensation, extending  relief measures, removal of indebtedness,
prevention of exploitation by moneylenders and other unscrupulous
elements, extending easy and hassle free bank loans, giving
remunerative prices for their produce, improving farming
practices through scientific means, extending compulsory
market intervention in case of  bumper crop, compulsory
insurance of crops and livestock, old age  allowance,
medicare and other welfare measures to ensure that
they  do not commit suicide and for matters
connected  therewith and
incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Distressed Farmers (Special Facilities, Protection and
Welfare) Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 280  of  2015
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) “agricultural produce” includes wheat, paddy, coarse cereals like maize, jowar,
gram, bajra, millet, barley, madwa, soyabean, pulses and all types of beans and peas,
cotton, sugarcane, oilseeds, tobacco, vegetables, jute, all types of spices, coconut, all
fruits including areca nuts, chillies and such other crops grown by farmers and produces
which may be notified by the Central Government in the Official Gazette, from time to
time and also includes seeds as defined in the Seeds Act, 1966;
(b) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(c) “bumper crop” means the excess yield of any agricultural produce of a farmer
which does not give reasonable return to the farmer after selling the yield as compared
to its cost of production;
(d) “crop insurance” means insuring the crops in the event of loss of crop due to
any natural calamity and include losses suffered by farmer on account of bumper crop;
(e) “farmer” means a person who owns land and cultivates or causes it to be
cultivated for agricultural purposes or for horticulture purposes and includes all farmers
big, middle, small and marginal farmers as identified by the Central Government;
(f) “Fund” means the Farmers Natural Calamity Assistance Fund constituted
under section 4;
(g) “natural calamity” includes drought, flood, excessive rains, cloudbursts,
cyclone, super cyclone, tsunami, storm, hailstorm, winds, frost, winterkill, lightening,
fire, excessive snowfall, earthquake, wild life, insect infection, plant disease and such
other natural calamities as may be notified from time to time; and
(h) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall as soon as may be, but within one year of the
commencement of this Act, formulate and publish in the Official Gazette, a long term action
plan for the overall welfare of the farmers particularly for the distressed farmers of the desert,
drought prone, hilly, flood prone, coastal and other natural calamity prone areas and regions
and shall take appropriate measures for the uniform implementation of such action plan.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in
sub-section (1), such action plan may include:—
(a) provision of immediate interim relief or ex-gratia payment to distressed farmers
affected by natural calamity;
(b) comprehensive crop and livestock insurance scheme in which insurance
premium of small and marginal farmers shall be borne by the Central Government to
provide relief to the farmers in distress affected by natural calamity or who suffer
losses on account of bumper crop;
(c) ensuring remunerative prices for the agricultural produce of the farmers
through Minimum Support Price mechanism or other appropriate measures;
(d) compulsory market intervention scheme in case of bumper crop of any
agricultural produce without the formalities of making requests etc., by the concerned
State authorities so as to procure or arrange to procure the excess yield of the farmers;
(e) institutional mechanism for efficient marketing and export of agricultural
produce of the farmers;
(f) making easy availability of fertilizers, pesticides and quality seeds to farmers
at affordable prices;
(g) ensuring timely completion of irrigation projects to provide requisite irrigation
facilities to the farmers to save them from the vagaries of nature;
Definitions.
Long-term
National
Action Plan for
Welfare of
Farmers.
54 of 1986.5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(h) comprehensive measures for the removal of indebtedness of the distressed
farmers by way of writing-off loans and interest accrued thereon if crops are lost due
to natural calamity, providing easy loans with nominal interest from banks and financial
institutions and saving the distressed farmers from the clutches of greedy moneylenders
so that they may be saved from resorting to extreme step of committing suicide; and
(i) welfare scheme including old age allowance for all farmers and their spouses,
free medical care, shelter to the needy farmers and for such other provisions as may be
deemed necessary.
4.  (1)  The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but within six months of the
commencement of this Act, constitute a Fund to be called the Farmers Natural Calamity
Assistance Fund for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The initial corpus of the Fund shall be fifty thousand crore rupee to be provided by
the Central Government after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf.
(3) After the initial constitution of the Fund, moneys shall be provided to the Fund by
the Central and the State Governments in such proportion and in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(4) Any sum of moneys received from the general public, body corporates, domestic
and foreign financial institutions as donations and gifts shall be credited into the Fund.
(5) The Fund shall be utilized for providing immediate financial assistance, ex-gratia,
compensation to the distressed farmers affected by any natural calamity or disaster in such
manner as may be prescribed.
(6) The Fund shall also be utilized for providing special assistance or package as may
be formulated by the appropriate Government for the children, women, physically challenged
farmers, old farmers and such other persons vulnerable to the aftermath of natural calamity in
such manner as may be prescribed.
5. (1) It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to:—
(a) make sure that every distressed farmer affected by natural calamity who has
lost his crop, livestock, movable or immovable property or life of kith or kin gets timely
adequate compensation;
(b) publicise the weather forecasts during the sowing seasons in different parts
of the country through the print and electronic media and in particular through All
India Radio and Doordarshan in such manner as the appropriate Government may
deem fit and necessary;
(c) to consistently monitor the sowing and production trends of crops of
agricultural produce right from the beginning of every sowing season so as to make
correct estimates of likely yields, local consumption needs, purchases by Government
agencies under Minimum Support Price (MSP) mechanism, surplus and such other
eventualities to ensure that farmers are not affected in any manner therefrom;
(d) prevent distress sale of agricultural produce by farmers in case of bumper
crop by extending compulsory market intervention scheme in such area and providing
subsidised transportation facility to carry the surplus produce to the identified areas
where such produce is likely to be consumed or in demand and make necessary
marketing and yard facilities for such bumper crop;
(e) remove the middlemen, moneylenders and unscrupulous traders who exploit
the farmers in case of bumper crop in such manner as it may deem fit necessary to do
so;
(f) establish agricultural farms in every block of the country which shall ensure
timely and adequate supply of quality seeds and saplings at affordable rates to the
farmers;
3
Constitution
of Farmers
Natural
Calamity
Assistance
Fund.
Certain
facilities and
miscellaneous
provisions for
farmers.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(g) establish Agricultural Universities and Krishi Vigyan Kendras at conspicuous
places for promotion of agriculture;
(h) establish modern veterinary hospitals and clinics in every block to assist
farmers in animal husbandry;
(i) promote agro based industries such as food processing, dairy, poultry, rearing
of animals, piggery, bee keeping and bakery in order to enhance the farm income of the
farmers;
(j) promote cooperative farming and contract farming to promote better farm
management and farm techniques with a view to making agriculture economically
viable and sustainable;
(k) promote cultivation of vegetable, floriculture, horticulture, spices, pisciculture,
sericulture, herbals and plants of medicinal values, bamboo and cane, along with
handloom and handicrafts and other village arts in the suitable areas to supplement
the income of the farmers;
(l) promote organic farming, use of natural manure, use of biomass for energy
production, rain water harvesting techniques, use of solar and wind energy for the
benefit of farmers;
(m) promote traditional water bodies such as wells and ponds and provide
sprinkler and other irrigation facilities and regular power supply to the farmers; and
(n) provide such other facilities as may be necessary, incidental and expedient as
may be prescribed.
6. It shall be duty of the appropriate Government to provide every farmer:—
(a) medical facilities including medicines and hospitalisation wherever
necessary free of cost;
(b) educational facilities including technical, medical, vocational, information
technology and higher education at the college and University level free of cost to the
children of farmers;
(c) adequate old age allowance to lead a dignified life;
(d) disability pension in case he is physically challenged;
(e) recreational and entertainment facilities through individual or Community
Centres; and
(f) such other welfare and protective measures as may be deemed necessary and
appropriate or as may be prescribed.
7. (1) It shall be obligatory for all the public, private and cooperative sector banks and
financial institutions to provide hassle free credit facilities with nominal interest or without
any interest thereon to the distressed farmers affected by any natural calamity or to face the
aftermath of any natural calamity in his agricultural operations.
(2) The banks and financial institutions referred to in sub-section (1) shall also waive
off outstanding loan availed by any distressed farmer affected by any natural calamity.
(3) The banks and financial institutions shall not refuse a fresh loan to any farmer in
distress to enable him to carry out his agricultural operations.
8. (1) The Central Government shall provide after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, necessary requisite funds, from time to time, for carrying
out the purposes of this Act.
(2) It shall be the duty of every State Government to implement the provisions of this
Act and the Central Government shall provide necessary funds to the State Governments
for this purpose.
Certain
welfare
measures for
farmers.
Special credit
facilities for
distressed
farmers.
Central
Government to
provide
requisite funds.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
9.  (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act, remove the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of two years from the
Commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under sub-section (1) of section 9 shall be laid, as soon as may
be, after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
10. The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force but save as aforesaid the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not
in derogation of any other law for the time being in force dealing with the subject matter of
this Act.
11.  (1) The Central Government, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Act to have
over-riding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
It is rightly said that our country resides in villages because majority of our population
is in the rural areas and agriculture is the main occupation. The farmers are the backbone of
our economy and they mainly depends on good harvests during the sowing seasons. Inflation
and price rise are also decided by the yield of the farmers. Agriculture extensively contributes
to our Gross Domestic Product (GDP). This sector generates maximum number of employment
opportunities, ensures food security to the nation and provides largest share of raw materials
to our industries. But unfortunately, the lot of most of the farmers has not improved even
after more than six decades of independence and implementation of eleven Five Year Plans.
They are still poverty stricken, indebted and being exploited. The farmers are on the mercy of
vagaries of nature for their yields in the absence of irrigation facilities in abundance. At the
same time natural calamities do occur very frequently in one part or the other, of the country
round the year. Drought affects various parts of the country at regular intervals and so is the
case of floods which devastate many parts of the country regularly year after year. The
coastal areas face the brunt of cyclones very frequently and sometimes they are affected by
super cyclone and even Tsunami. Similarly, many other parts of our vast nation are adversely
affected by earthquake, excess rains, cloudbursts, hailstorm, frost, winterkill, lightening, fire,
excess snow, wild life, insect infection, plant diseases and other vagaries of nature. The
farmers who lose their crops and other belongings have to bear the brunt of these natural
calamities and with that their hopes too are dashed. They become indebted inorder to survive
and restart their agricultural operations and fall in the unending trap of greedy moneylenders
and many of them also take the extreme step of committing suicide. Such suicides are very
rampant in the States of Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and Punjab. Similarly,
when the farmer grows a bumper crop there are no buyers of his yield and he is forced to opt
for distress sale of his agricultural produce at throwaway prices and sometimes resorts to
burning his crop. The indebted farmers do not get any support to live a dignified life in their
old age. There is no social security for them. In some States, they are given a meagre old age
pension which cannot fetch even two square meals for them. They do not get the medical
facilities. The plight of infirm and physically challenged farmers is more precarious.
In a welfare State like ours, it is the sacred duty of the State to protect the farmers who
have remained neglected and exploited. They should be given sufficient protection by the
State by implementing comprehensive crop and livestock insurance, extending soft loans by
banks and financial institutions, by giving adequate and timely compensation when affected
by natural calamity. It should be ensured that they get remunerative prices for their yield and
the State must implement welfare measures for the farmers so that they too reap the fruits of
progress made by our nation.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RANJEET RANJAN
November 17, 2015.
6

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the Farmers Natural Calamity
Assistance Fund with initial Corpus of rupees fifty thousand crore and thereafter Central
Government has to provide requisite funds every year. Clause 5 provides for certain facilities
for farmers. Clause 6 provides for certain welfare measures to farmers. Clause 8 makes it
obligatory for the Central Government to provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes
of the Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. Apart from the initial amount of fifty thousand crore, it is estimated that a sum of
rupees sixty thousand crore may involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees fifty thousand crore may also involve
from the Consolidated Fund of India.
7

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
8

GMGIPMRND—2914LS(S-3)—03.12.2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the special facilities and protection of distressed farmers who are
affected by various natural calamities, and victims of indebtedness, physical
infirmities, diseases, old age, exploitation, etc. by giving adequate
compensation, extending  relief measures, removal of indebtedness,
prevention of exploitation by moneylenders and other unscrupulous
elements, extending easy and hassle free bank loans, giving
remunerative prices for their produce, improving farming
practices through scientific means, extending compulsory
market intervention in case of  bumper crop, compulsory
insurance of crops and livestock, old age  allowance,
medicare and other welfare measure to ensure that
they  do not commit suicide and for matters
connected  therewith and
incidental thereto.
————
(Shrimati Ranjeet Ranjan, M.P .)