1
THE DISTRESSED VETERAN SPORTSPERSONS (WELFARE) BILL,
2015
By
SHRIMATI RANJEET RANJAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare measures for the distressed veteran sportspersons such
as old age pension for subsistence, disability assistance, healthcare
facilities and housing faciliteis to be undertaken by the State
and for the constitution of Distressed Veteran Sportspersons
 Welfare Fund and for matters connected
therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Distressed V eteran Sportspersons (Welfare) Act,
2015.
 (2) It extends to the whole of India and applies to sportspersons who are citizens of
India and are for the time being, in distress.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent,
application
and
commencement.
Bill No.  281 of  2015
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) ‘‘appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) ‘‘Fund” means the Distressed V eteran Sportspersons Welfare Fund
established under section 3;
(c) ‘‘prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(d) ‘‘veteran sportsperson” means a sportsperson who has represented a State
in National games or represented India in Olympic Games or Commonwealth Games or
Asian Games or in any International sports event.
3. ( 1) The Central Government shall, within a period of six months of the
commencement of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute the Distressed
Sportspersons Welfare Fund for the purposes of this Act with an initial corpus of rupees
ten thousand crore to be provided by the Central Government after due appropriation made
by Parliament by law in this behalf.
(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute to the Fund
in such ratio as may be prescribed.
(3) Any sum of money received from body corporates, financial institutions and sports
bodies, both domestic and international ones, individuals and bodies in the form of
contributions and donations shall be credited into the Fund.
(4) The Fund shall be administered by a Board consisting of:—
(i) the Union Minister of Sports, as the Chairperson—ex-officio;
(ii) five members to represent each of the sports bodies called Associations,
Federations or by whatever name called, recognized by the International Olympic
Committee (IOC) or as may be recognized by the Central Government, by notification
in the Official Gazette, who shall be rotated in alphabetical order after every three
years in such manner as may be prescribed;
(iii) three members to represent the States to be nominated by the Central
Government on the recommendation of the States who shall be rotated in alphabetical
order after every three years, in such manner as may be prescribed;
(iv) two members to represent the veteran sportspersons to be nominated by the
Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(5) Any veteran sportsperson who is in distress and who intends to avail old age
pension for his subsistence or for disablity assistance shall apply to the Board constituted
under sub-section (4) in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed.
(6) The Board shall, on receipt of an application under sub-section (5), hold an enquiry
to ensure that the particulars furnished by the sportsperson are in order and applicant
fulfils the conditions for old-age pension or disability assistance, as the case may be, under
the provision of this Act.
(7) On being satisfied that the applicant fulfils the prescribed conditions, the Board
shall sanction the old age pension not less than rupees ten thousand per month or disability
allowance not less than rupees five lakhs, as the case may be.
4. The Fund shall be utilized, in addition to the purposes referred to in sub-section (4)
of section 3, for the following purposes, namely:—
(a) payment of premium of life insurance of veteran sportspersons;
(b) free healthcare facilities including medicines, pathological tests, X-rays and
various scans, treatment as outdoor and indoor patients for the distressed veteran
sportspersons and their family members; and
(c) for such other purposes and welfare measures, as may be prescribed.
Definitions.
Constitution
of the
Distressed
Sportspersons
Welfare Fund.
Utilization of
the fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
3
5. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to set up a special cell for the
purposes of monitoring the implementation of the provisions of this Act within its territorial
jurisdiction.
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
7. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act.
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and, if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
Appropriate
Government
to set up
special cell.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Our Nation has produced world renowned sportspersons and of late, our Nation has
improved its medal tally at the Olympics, Asian Games, Commonwealth Games and other
International events which proves that games and sports are gaining popularity in our
country. There are sports like cricket, lawn tennis or to some extent badminton in which
sportspersons are earning good money which may be enough to lead a  normal life but there
are games where there is no money for the sportspersons. Very often incidents are reported
by the media that veteran sportsperson is pulling bicycle rickshaw, or working as a labourer
or as a waiter and so on so forth. With the passage of time, many veteran sportspersons
become distresed either due to old age, disability, infirmity, due to chronic diseases, etc..
They do not have money even for their subsistence, let alone spending money on their
medical treatment and other necessities of life. Circumstances compel them to lead isolated
life. It is felt that Welfare Fund should be established for the sportspersons so that they may
be provided old age pension, disability allowance, medical treatment or financial assistance
for self employment. The Bill proposes to achieve this objective.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RANJEET RANJAN
November 17, 2015.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of  Distressed Sportspersons Welfare
Fund with initial corpus of rupees ten thousand crore to be provided by the Central
Government and thereafter contribute to the fund. Clause 6 makes it obligatory for the
Central Government to provide adequate funds for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The
Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated  fund of India. It is
not possible to quantify the actual amount which may be involved at this stage but it is
estimated that a sum of rupees one thousand crore may involve as recurring expenditure per
annum.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative powers is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare measures for the distressed veteran sportspersons such as old
age pension for subsistence, disability assistance, healthcare facilities and housing
facilities to be undertaken by the State and for the constitution of Distressed
V eteran Sportspersons Welfare Fund and for matters connected therewith
and incidental thereto.
————
(Shrimati Ranjeet Ranjan, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2856LS(S3)—03-12-2015.