1
Bill No. 281 of  2016
THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI JAY ADEV GALLA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Amendment) Act,
2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 11 of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960 (hereinafter referred
to as the principal Act), in sub-section (1), for the words "he shall be punishable, in the case
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of section 11.
59 of 1960.
5

2
of a first offence, with fine which shall not be less than ten rupees but which may extend to
fifty rupees, and in the case of a second or subsequent offence committed within three years
of the previous offence, with fine which shall not be less than twenty-five rupees but which
may extend to one hundred rupees or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
months, or with both.", the words "he shall be punishable, in the case of a first offence, with
fine which shall not be less than five thousand rupees but which may extend to ten thousand
rupees, and in the case of a second or subsequent offence committed within three years of
the previous offence, with fine which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees or with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with both." shall be substituted.
3. For section 12 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
"12. If any person performs upon any cow or other milch animal the operation
called phooka or doom dev or any other operation (including injection of any substance
or oxytocin) to improve lactation which is injurious to the health of the animal or
permits  such operation being performed upon any such animal in his possession or
under his control, he shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than twenty
thousand rupees but which may extend to fifty thousand rupees, or with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to four years, or with both, and the animal on which the
operation was performed shall be forfeited to the Government.".
4. In section 20 of the principal Act, for the words "which may extend to two hundred
rupees", the words "which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees but which may extend
to twenty thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
5. In section 26 of the principal Act, for the words "he shall be punishable on conviction
with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with imprisonment which may extend
to three months, or with both", the words "he shall be punishable on conviction with fine
which shall not be less than twenty thousand rupees but which may extend to fifty thousand
rupees, or with imprisonment which may extend to six months, or with both" shall be
substituted.
6. For section 31 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:
"31. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973 (2 of 1974), any offence punishable under this Act shall be a cognizable offence
within the meaning of that Code."
7. In section 38 of the principal Act, for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall
be substituted, namely:—
"(3) If any person contravenes, or abets the contravention of, any rules made
under this section, he shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than ten
thousand rupees but which may extend to fifty thousand rupees, or with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to six months, or with both.".
Substitution
of new
section for
section 12.
Penalty of
practising
phooka,
doom dev  or
use of
oxytocin.
Amendment
of section 20.
Amendment
of section 26.
Substitution
of new
section for
section 31.
Cognizability
of offences.
Amendment
of section 38.
2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Animal cruelty has various forms. It not includes only overt and intentional acts of
violence towards animals, but also includes neglect of animals or failure to provide food to
them. Animal cruelty can generally be described as any act of omission or commission that
causes unnecessary or unreasonable harm to an animal. Cruelty include torturing or beating
an animal or confining or transporting an animal in a way that is inappropriate for its welfare
or killing an animal in an inhumane manner or failing to provide appropriate or adequate food
or water to an animal or failing to provide appropriate treatment for disease or injury or failing
to provide appropriate living conditions.
We have seen how Shaktiman, a horse, succumbed to injuries recently in Uttarakhand.
It is not Shaktiman, but there are hundreds and thousands of animals which are subjected to
cruelty day-in-and-day-out and persons committing such crimes either go scot-free or come
out freely by paying a paltry sum as penalty prescribed under the Prevention of Cruelty to
Animals Act, 1960.
There are many organizations working in the area of protecting animals and these
organizations are receiving complaints of animal cruelty—from acid attacks, brutal stoning,
hunting, beating, illegal transport and even poisoning—everyday. It is all happening in spite
of the fact that it is one of the Fundamental Duties of every citizen as mentioned in our
Constitution to be compassionate to all living creatures. Secondly, animals are one of the
most important components, other than plants and microbes, of our ecosystem. So, protection
of animals is all the more important for survival and existence of humankind.
Penalties imposed for abuse of animals under the Prevention of Cruelty Act are too
meagre. Hence, law enforcement agencies, animal welfare organizations and activities have
been demanding for increasing the penalty to deter cruelty against animals. It is pertinent to
mention that while the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972 has been amended to strengthen penal
provisions, yet, there has been no move to amend the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act,
1960.
Hence, it is proposed to strengthen penal provisions in the parent Act to deter persons
who indulge in such crime against animals.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.
N
EW DELHI; JAYADEV GALLA
July 11, 2016.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960
* * * * *
11. (1) If any person
(a) beats, kicks, over-rides, over-drives, over-loads, tortures or otherwise treats
any animal so as to subject it to unnecessary pain or suffering or causes, or being the
owner permits, any animal to be so treated; or
* * * * *
(o) promotes or takes part in any shooting match or competition wherein animals are
released from captivity for the purpose of such shooting:
He shall be punishable 19 (in the case of a first offence, with fine which shall not be less
than ten rupees but which may extend to fifty rupees and in the case of a second or subsequent
offence committed within three years of the previous offence, with fine which shall not be
less than twenty-five rupees but which may extend, to one hundred rupees or with
imprisonment for a term which may extend, to three months, or with both.]
* * * * *
12. If any person upon any cow or other milch animal the operation called practising
phooka or 21 [doom dev or any other operation (including injection of any or doom dev
substance) to improve lactation which is injurious to the health of the animal] or permits such
operation being performed upon any such animal in his possession or under his control, he
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to two years, or with both, and the animal on which the operation
was performed shall be forfeited to the Government.
* * * * *
20. If any person—
(a) contravenes any order made by the Committee under section 19; or
(b) commits a breach of any condition imposed by the Committee under that
section:
he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees, and, when
the contravention or breach of condition has taken place in any institution the person
incharge of the institution shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be punishable
accordingly.
* * * * *
* * * * *
26. If any person—
(a) not being registered under this chapter, exhibits or trains any performing
animal; or
(b) being registered under the Act, exhibits or trains any performing animal with
respect to which or in a manner with respect to which, he is not registered; or
4
Treating
animals
cruelly.
Penalty for
practising
phooka or
doom dev .
Penalties.
Offences.

5
(c) exhibits or trains as a performing animal, any animal which is not to be used
for the purpose by reason of a notification issued under clause (ii) of section 22; or
(d) obstructs or wilfully delays any person or police officer referred to in section
25 in the exercise of powers under this Act as to entry and inspection; or
(e) conceals any animal with a view to avoiding such inspection; or
(f) being a person registered under the Act, on being duly required in pursuance
of this Act to produce his certificate under this Act, fails without reasonable excuse so
to do; or
(g) applies to be registered under this Act when not entitled to be so registered.
He shall be punishable on conviction with fine which may extend to five hundred
rupees or with imprisonment which may extend to three months, or with both.
* * * * *
31. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code or Criminal procedure, 1898, (5 of
1898) an offence punishable under clause (1) or clause (n) or clause (o) of sub-section (1) of
section 11 or under section 12 shall be a cognizable offence within the meaning of that code.
* * * * *
38. (1) * * * * *
(3) If any person contravenes, or abets the contravention of, any rules made under this
section, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees, or with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with both.
* * * * *
Cognizability
of offences.
Power to
make rules.

GMGIPMRND—2605LS(S3)—21-11-2016.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960
————
(Shri Jayadev Galla, M.P.)