Short title and 
commencement.
Tඈ ൻൾ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Bill No. 281 of 2022
THE COMPANIES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
Sඁඋං Gൺඎඋൺ ඏ Gඈ඀ඈං, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Companies Act, 2013.
Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Companies (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) Save as otherwise provided for in this Act, it shall come into force on such date as 
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint and different 
dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and any reference in any such 
provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming 
into force of that provision.

2. In section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act,–
(i) for sub-section (52), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:–
“(52) “listed Company” means a company or an   entity which  has  listed, on   
a   recognized  stock exchange(s), the designated securities issued by it or designated 
securities issued under schemes managed by it, in accordance with the listing 
agreement entered into between the entity and the recognized stock exchange(s); and
(ii) after sub-section (56), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:–
“56A. “National Business Responsibility Standard Board” means National 
Business Responsibility Standard Board constituted under section 138A.”.
3. In section 134 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), after clause (m), the following 
clause be inserted, namely:–
“(ma) the reporting framework as outlined in the Form V , under Rule 14 of 
Environment Protection Rules, 1986, under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 or 
as prescribed by the National Business Responsibility Standard Board.”.
4. In section 137 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),
“for the words “all the documents”, the words ‘all the documents’ including 
Form V , as specified, under Rule 14 of Environment Protection Rules, 1986 under 
the Environment Protection Act, 1986 or as prescribed by the National Business 
Responsibility Standard Board while filing annual financial statement with the 
Registrar, shall be substituted.
5. After Chapter IX of the principal Act, the following CHAPTER and sections 
thereunder shall be inserted, namely:–
“CHAPTER IXA
NATIONAL BUSINESS RESPONSIBILITY STANDARD BOARD
138A. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish 
a National level apex body in this Chapter  called in the National Business Responsibility 
Standard Board, hereinafter referred to as the National Board, for carrying out the purposes 
of the act.
(2) The head office of the National Board shall be at the New Delhi and the Board may, 
with the previous approval of the Central Government, establish offices at other places in 
the country.
(3) The National Board shall consists of,
(a) one full-time Chairperson, who shall be an eminent person having a minimum of 
fifteen years of work experience and expertise in the matter related to the environmental 
pollution, climate change and sustainable development;
(b) one officer in the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India to be 
appointed by the Central Government as a full-time Member-Secretary of the Board;
Amendment of 
Section 2.
18 of 2013.
Amendment of 
Section 134.
Amendment of 
Section 137.
Insertion of new 
Chapter IIA.
Eﬆablishment 
of National 
Business 
Responsibility 
Standard Board.

(c) following ex officio members to be appointed by the Central Government, in 
such manner as may be prescribed–
(i) one officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India 
each from the Union Ministries of Corporate Affairs,  Finance (Department of 
Economic Affairs), Commerce and Industry (Department of Promotion of Industry 
and Trade), Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Health and Family Welfare, 
Science and Technology, Power, Road Transport and Highways, Petroleum and 
Natural Gas and Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare;
(ii) one member from National Institution for Transforming India (NITI 
Aayog) not below the rank of Joint Secretary or advisor; 
(iii) one member from the Central Pollution Control Board;
(vi) one member from the Indian Space Research Organization;
(v) one member from Invest India;
(vi) one member from the Securities and Exchange Board of India; and
(vii) one member from the Reserve Bank of India.
to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be 
prescribed; and
(d) Following non-official members to be appointed from amongst specialists/
stakeholders –
(i) one member from Indian Banks’ Association;
(ii) three members from Industry Associations;
(iii) two members from academia;
(iv) two members from Civil Society;
(v) such other  members to be appointed by the Central  Government in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 
138B. (1) The Board shall, 
(a) carry out their functions in accordance with the following criteria and conditions, 
in so far as the functions contained herein are in compliance with the framework of 
rules and regulations made under this Act, including the rules thereof pertaining to the 
functions of a company registrar and other entities mentioned therein;
(b) advise the Central Government on matters relating to the environmental 
concerns and steps required to improve the quality of the environment to abate all forms 
of environmental pollution;
(c) update periodically the reporting framework for companies in consultation with 
stakeholders and ensure its compliance;
Functions of the 
Board.

(d) engage in consultation with stakeholders at regular intervals to update, revise 
and incorporate the reporting framework;
(e) continuously oversee the reporting of companies;
(f) publish annual report and maintain a year-round public visibility of the data;
(g) develop and deploy comprehensive and relevant standards, indicators, and 
disclosure formats for various classes of industries conforming to best practices and 
globally accepted standards in consultation with stakeholders;
(h) monitor compliance, issue notice, and take action in case of non-compliance;
(i) undertake capacity building initiatives and continuous research and development 
work for achieving reporting standards and global practices and commitments;
(j) promote adoption of the reporting frameworks by companies through appropriate 
subsidies and incentives; and
(k) any other matter which the National Board may deem expedient for fulfilling 
the objective of reducing environmental pollution.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the National Board may also 
require companies or classes of companies as defined in clause (20) and (21) of section 2 to 
furnish any such information pertaining to factors involving responsible business practices 
or as laid by the Board, within such time as may be specified in the order: 
Provided that if any company fails to comply with an order made under clause (k) 
of sub-section (1) or knowingly furnishes information which is incorrect or incomplete in 
any aspect intricately concerning sustainability, carbon emissions and environment, the 
Company shall be liable to the penalties in accordance with the quantum contained in  under 
sub-section (4) of section 405.
138C.(1) The National Board shall meet at such time and place and shall observe such 
rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including the 
quorum at its meetings) as may be prescribed.
(2) The Chairperson of the National Board shall preside at the meetings of the Board:
Provided that if for any reason the Chairperson is unable to attend any meeting of the 
National Board, any member of the Board chosen by the members present at the meeting 
shall preside at the meeting.
(3) The Member-Secretary shall be the chief coordinating officer and the convener of 
the Board and shall assist the National Board in the discharge of its functions under this Act.
(4) The Member-Secretary shall also discharge any other function as may be prescribed.
138D. The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of 
service of, the Chairperson, Member Secretary ex-officio and other member shall be such as 
may be prescribed.
Meetings of the 
Board.
Conditions 
of service of 
Chairperson and 
representatives.

138E. The Central Government may remove any member from the Board who, in its 
opinion, has –
(i)     been adjudged as an insolvent; or
(ii)    been convicted of an offence which involves moral turpitude; or 
(iii)   become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a member; or
(iv)   abused his position as to render his continuance in office detrimental to the 
public interest; or 
(v)    acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his 
functions as a member:
Provided that no such Member shall be so removed unless he has been given a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard.
138F. (1) The National Board may appoint such officers and other staff as it 
considers necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under this Act. 
(2) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service 
of such officers and other staff of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.”.
Removal of 
Members.
Appointment 
of officers 
and staff.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The global phenomenon of climate change has assumed alarming proportions now, and 
its severity as a threat to mankind has rapidly escalated owing to the vast quantum of emissions 
released cumulatively over time as a result of anthropogenic activities. Repercussions of 
climate-related impacts cannot be ignored anymore. The world has come together to address 
this amplifying crisis ensued by rapid emissions. The fundamental right to life enshrined in 
Article 21 of the Constitution of India also mandates the continuous pursuance of a clean, 
healthy, and pollution-free environment. It is a known fact that Industrialization has been a 
great contributor to lifting millions out of poverty and increasing social prosperity. At the 
same time, rapid industrialization has also led to an increase in emissions, and across the 
world, Industries are among the largest emitters of GreenHouse Gases (GHG). Lately, at 
the global level, Environment, Social, and Governance (ESG) frameworks have become 
a prudent approach to holistically counter the threat of climate change from companies’ 
viewpoint. In India, The Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) has been issuing 
periodic guidance in that regard and the reporting on such indicators will only be made 
mandatory through Business Responsibility and Sustainability Report (‘BRSR’) from 
Financial Year 2022-23 for the top 1000 listed companies by market capitalization. This 
fragmented approach puts the onus only on select entities beyond a certain threshold while 
excluding the majority of companies from the ambit of ESG reporting. Further, every 
Industry is already reporting to State Pollution Control Boards (SPCBs) on the indictors 
outlined in the Form V, under Rule 14 of the Environment Protection Rules, 1986. Therefore, 
amending the Company Act with insertion of a section for mandatory reporting as per the 
already existing reporting framework, provisioned under the Environment Protection Act 
(EPA), can serve the purpose of pollution abatement to a greater extent. Instead of de novo 
arrangements, the proposed bill, at ceteris paribus, provisions of reporting of Form V to 
the Company registrar instead of SPCBs and creation of an apex body to devise, monitor 
and ensure compliance. This could be a first step towards accurately quantify and report 
emissions and, going forward, keep formulating appropriate responses as the need may be. 
Further, to ensure Indian industry remains competitive globally, it has to pass muster 
with provisions like Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanism (CBAM) proposed under the 
Green Deal by Euro-Zone. Therefore, it is important to empower the domestic entities 
operating at a smaller scale to efficiently deal with such international obligations.
Hence this Bill.
Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                                                                                GAURA V GOGOI
November 21, 2022

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill vide proposed section 138A provides for constitution of the National 
Business Responsibility Standard Board as an apex body to devise appropriate reporting 
frameworks, build capacity of Companies and monitor and check environmental pollution 
created by them. Also the proposed section 138F of this Bill also mandates the appointment 
of officers and staff for ensuring the smooth functioning of the Board. 
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, is likely to involve expenditure from the Consolidated 
Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore per 
annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five crore is also likely to be involved. 

ANNEXURE 
Eඑඍඋൺർඍඌ ൿඋඈආ ඍඁൾ Cඈආඉൺඇංൾඌ Aർඍ, 2013
(Aർඍ Nඈ. 18 ඈൿ 2013)
*   *  *  *           *
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(52) ―listed company means a company which has any of its securities listed on any 
recognised stock exchange;
*  *  *  *  *          *
(56) ―memorandum means the memorandum of association of a company as originally 
framed or as altered from time to time in pursuance of any previous company law or of this 
Act;
*  *  *  *  *           *
134. (1) The financial statement, including consolidated financial statement, if any, 
shall be approved by the Board of Directors before they are signed on behalf of the Board 
at least by the chairperson of the company where he is authorised by the Board or by two 
directors out of which one shall be managing director and the Chief Executive Officer, if 
he is a director in the company, the Chief Financial Officer and the Company Secretary of 
the company, wherever they are appointed, or in the case of a One Person Company, only 
by one director, for submission to the auditor for his report thereon.
*  *  *  *  *           *
(m) the conservation of energy, technology absorption, foreign exchange earnings and 
outgo, in such manner as may be prescribed;
*  *  *  *  *                 *
137. (1) A copy of the financial statements, including consolidated financial statement, 
if any, along with all the documents which are required to be or attached to such financial 
statements under this Act, duly adopted at the annual general meeting of the company, shall 
be filed with the Registrar within thirty days of the date of annual general meeting in such 
manner, with such fees or additional fees as may be prescribed within the time specified 
under section 403: 
Provided that where the financial statements under sub-section (1) are not adopted at 
annual general meeting or adjourned annual general meeting, such unadopted financial 
statements along with the required documents under sub-section (1) shall be filed with the 
Registrar within thirty days of the date of annual general meeting and the Registrar shall 
Deﬁnitions.
Financial 
statement, 
Board’s report, 
etc.
Copy of 
financial 
statement to 
be filed with 
Registrar.

take them in his records as provisional till the financial statements are filed with him after 
their adoption in the adjourned annual general meeting for that purpose: 
Provided further that financial statements adopted in the adjourned annual general 
meeting shall be filed with the Registrar within thirty days of the date of such adjourned 
annual general meeting with such fees or such additional fees as may be prescribed within 
the time specified under section 403: 
Provided also that a One Person Company shall file a copy of the financial statements 
duly adopted by its member, along with all the documents which are required to be attached 
to such financial statements, within one hundred eighty days from the closure of the financial 
year: 
Provided also that a company shall, along with its financial statements to be filed 
with the Registrar, attach the accounts of its subsidiary or subsidiaries which have been 
incorporated outside India and which have not established their place of business in India.
*  *  *  *  *        *

LOK SABHA
__________
A
BILL
further to amend the Companies Act, 2013
_________
(Shri  Gaurav Gogoi, M.P .)