1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
By
SHRI RAM MOHAN NAIDU KINJARAPU, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2019.
2. In article 51A of the Constitution, after clause (k), the following clause shall be
inserted namely:—
“(1) to value and promote the ideals and philosophy of our great leader
Mahatama Gandhi.”.
Bill No. 282 of  2019
Short title.
Amendment of
article 51A.5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
On the occasion of Mahatma Gandhi's 150th birth anniversary, his philosophy and
ideals remain more relevant than ever.
"All my actions have their rise in my inalienable love of mankind........ I have known no
distinction between relatives and strangers, countrymen and foreigners, white and coloured,
Hindus and Indians of other faiths ..... I have ceased to hate anybody". This, in brief, sums
up Gandhi's philosophy of life.
Gandhi Ji has been regarded as the 'Father' of the nation. He was the most influential
and revered of all the leaders who participated in the freedom struggle. He awakened the
inner strength of  people and inspired them to bring the change themselves.
The post-truth world has made Gandhian principles even more relevant today, Gandhi's
Ram Rajya has no place for poverty, hatred, inequality, crime against women and the social
evils which hinder the growth of our motherland.
Gandhian principles of peace, non-violence, tolerance and harmony must be adopted
by every Indian so as to close the fault lines that exist in our country. Gandhian principles
are the essence of Indianness and hence it is the fundamental duty of every Indian to
respect and follow them.
It is not possible to imagine India without Gandhi.
V arious programmes and policy action like 'Swachh Bharat', 'Make in India', 'Sansad
Adarsh Gram Yojana ' and 'National Rural Employment Gurantee Act' are based on the
sacrosanct Gandhian philosophy.
We, as parliamentarians, owe him the duty to preserve and promote the ideas of
Ahimsa and Satyagraha among the countrymen. It is time we honor his wishes and give him
the respect he deserves.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAM MOHAN NAIDU KINJARAPU
November 7, 2019.

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
PART-IVA
FUNDAMENTAL DUTIES
* * * * *
51A. Fundamental duties:—It shall be the duty of every citizen of India—
* * * * *
(k) who is a parent or guardian to provide opportunities for education to his
child or, as the case may be, ward between the age and of six and fourteen years.
* * * * *

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Ram Mohan Naidu Kinjarapu, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—3092LS(S3)—15-11-2019.