1
Bill No.  282  of  2015
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE MEDICAL CONSUL TANCY AND OTHER SERVICES
(RATIONALISATION OF FEES)  BILL, 2015
By
DR. MANOJ  RAJORIA , M.P.
A
BILL
to rationalise the consultancy and other medical services fees for making them
affordable for the common man in the country and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Medical Consultancy and Other Services
(Rationalisation of Fees) Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Committee" means the Medical Consultancy and Other Services
Rationalisation of Fees Committee constituted under section 3;
(b) "diagnostic laboratory" means a place owned or run by an industrial or a
group of persons or by a private or corporate hospital where pathological tests or
investigations are conducted on the advice of a bonafide medical practitioner or
consultant;
Definitions.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Constitution
of the
Medical
Consultancy
and Other
Services
Rationalisation
of Fees
Committee.
Central
Government
to provide
Assistance to
the
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
(c) "medical consultancy and other services" includes,—
(i) consultancy by qualified medical practitioners in all branches of
medicines/surgery including alternative branches, namely, Allopathy,
Homoeopathy, Ayurveda, Unani and Siddha, whether in private clinics or in the
private or corporate hospitals;
(ii) all such pathological tests as are prescribed by the qualified doctors
whether in a private clinic or in a private and/or corporate hospital; and
(iii) all such scanning or imaging services, namely, x-ray, ultra sound,
MRI, or  CT scan,  whether in a private clinic or in a private/corporate hospital.
(d) "medical practitioner" means a person legally qualified and duly registered
by the Medical Council of India and engaged in the business of consultancy and
providing advice to patients whether as a private practitioner or in a private corporate/
hospital; and
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Committee to be known as the Medical Consultancy and Other Services Rationalisation
of Fees Committee to determine the fees of a medical practitioner and prices of pathological
tests, scanning and imaging.
(2)The Committee shall consist of—
(i) the Minister of Health and Family Welfare, — Chairman, ex-officio
Government of India
(ii) Chairman of the Department-related — member
Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Health and Family Welfare
(iii) three representatives of major — member
Hospitals/Laboratory Including
Government run Hospitals/Laboratory
(iv) three representatives of the — member
Non-Governmental Organisation
in the health sector;
(v) two representatives of Medical Practitioners — member
(vi) one representative each from the National — member; and
Political Parties
(vii) Secretary to the Government of India — Secretary, ex-officio
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.
(3) Members under clauses (iii), (iv) and (v) shall be appointed by the
Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(4) Members under clause (vi) shall be appointed by the Central Government on
the recommendation of the respective political party.
4. The Central Government shall provide the Committee such assistance as may be
necessary for the efficient functioning of the Committee.
35
40

3
5. The Committee shall —
(i) determine the consultancy fees to be charged by the medical practitioners
from patients either in their private clinics or in a private hospital/corporate hospital
after taking into consideration such factors as may be necessary;
(ii) determine  the rate for the pathological tests and scanning taking into the
consideration the inputs used in carrying out the tests;
(iii) encourage  private practitioners to organize free medical camps on a regular
basis to provide  free consultancy for the local community.
6. (1) No Medical practitioner shall charge from any patient the fee exceeding the fee
fixed by the Committee;
(2) It shall be mandatory for every  medical practitioner and diagnostic laboratory to
display the fees as determined by the Committee in such manner as may be prescribed.
7. ( 1) Whoever contravenes the provisions of this Act shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term not less than one year and with fine which may extend up to five lakh
rupees.
(2) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company/hospital/
laboratory, the license of such company/hospital/laboratory shall be cancelled forthwith.
Explanation .—For the purpose of sub-section ( 2), "company", means any body
corporate, and includes a firm or other association of individuals.
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Functions of
the
Committee.
Mandatory
display of
consultancy
and other
fees.
Penalty.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The medical practitioners are charging exorbitant consultancy fees from patients
ranging from  rupees five hundred to two thousand  per visit. The pathological tests and
scanning, etc. in the private hospitals are exceedingly expensive and becoming out of reach
for the common people. The Government is committed to provide health services free of cost
to its citizens regardless of their economic status. However, considering the size of our
population and the unmatched health  facilities, it is imperative that the private practitioners
either in their private clinics or in the private/corporate hospitals should provide the medical
consultancy at a reasonable price which can be afforded by a common man, particularly
when the majority of private hospitals are running on the leased Government land and the
private clinics do not pay commercial charges for their premises from where they run their
clinics. The consultancy fee of private medical practitioners is arbitrarily high. As a result,
the Government hospitals are overcrowded with patients. In this background, it is felt that
the consultancy by the private medical practitioners and other medical services all over the
country needs to be rationalized.
It is therefore, proposed to constitute a Committee to fix the consultancy fees and
pathological and other test charges, promote the free medical campus and rationalizes the
fees for medical services for the poor.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI;
November 18, 2015. MANOJ  RAJORIA
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of a Committee to be known as the
Medical Consultancy and Other Services Rationalisation of  Fees Committee to rationalize
the medical services fees. Clause 4 provides that the Central Government shall provide
assistance to the Committee for its efficient functioning. The Bill, therefore,  if enacted,
would involve expenditure for the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring
expenditure of about rupees fifty crore per annum.
No non-recurring expenditure of  is likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to rationalise the consultancy and other medical services fees for making them affordable
for the common man in the country and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
.
————
(Dr. Manoj Rajoria, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2860LS(S3)—03.12.2015.