1
THE SCHEDULED CASTES AND THE SCHEDULED TRIBES
(PRVENTION OF CASTE-BASED DISCRIMINATION IN
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS)  BILL, 2016
By
SHRI NISHIKANT DUBEY, M.P.
A
BILL
to effectively prevent the caste-based discrimination in educational institutions and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes
(Prevention of Caste-Based Discrimination in Educational Institutions) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “authority”, in relation to an educational institution, means the executive or
the administrative head of an educational institution;
(b) “caste-based discrimination”, means any act of an employee or authority of
an educational institution that, on the basis of caste or tribe, results in unjust treatment,
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 283 of  2016
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
10

2
individually or collectively, to any student or staff, whether teaching or non-teaching,
belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes;
(c) “educational institution” means any college, institute, university, deemed
university, whether established by the Government or by any citizen or body of
citizens and whether in receipt of aid from Government or not, recognised by Central
or State Government for the award of a certificate, diploma or a degree in any course
of study, education or training;
(d) “employee”, in relation to an educational institution, means a person
employed for any work including teaching or administrative or technical on regular,
temporary, ad-hoc or daily wages basis, either directly or indirectly or through an
agent or contractor, whether for remuneration or not, and includes a co-worker, a
contract worker, a probationer, a trainee or an apprentice;
(e) “head of the institution” means the Vice-Chancellor in case of a university or
a deemed university and in case of any other institution, the Principal or the Director,
as the case may be;
(f) “Inquiry Committee” means Inquiry Committee constituted under section 6;
(g) “student” includes any person who is pursuing any academic programme
including a part-time programme in an educational institution; and
(h) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3.  Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
whoever does any act of caste-based discrimination shall be deemed to have committed the
offence of caste-based discrimination.
4. Any aggrieved person or any other person on his behalf may file a complaint of
caste-based discrimination to the Officer designated under section 5 in such form and
manner, as may be prescribed.
5. (1) Every educational institution shall designate an officer or head of the department
to entertain complaints of offences of caste-based discrimination under this Act.
(2) The designated officer shall,—
(a) on receipt of a complaint, acknowledge the same to the complainant and
forward it to the head of the educational institution;
(b) take steps for safety and security of the complainant and witnesses to the
committal of offence of caste-based discrimination; and
(c) monitor the progress of cases of caste-based discrimination filed in the
courts.
6. (1) The head of the educational institution shall, within two weeks from the date of
receipt of the complaint from the designated officer, appoint an Inquiry Committee to
investigate into the complaint.
(2) The Inquiry Committee shall consist of—
(i) the Dean of the Faculty in the case of a university or one of the head of the
departments in case of a college or a person immediately below the head in hierarchy
in case of all other educational institutions, as the Chairperson;
(ii) a member of the Senate or Academic Council in the case of a university or a
person to be nominated by the head of the educational institution from amongst the
senior teachers of the institution or the senior most professor or researcher in the
case of all other educational institutions, as a member;
Educational
Institutions
to designate
an officer for
entertaining
complaints.
Act of caste-
based
discrimination
to be an
offence.
Aggrieved
person to
make
complaint.
Duties of
designated
officer.
Appointment
of Inquiry
Committee.
Composition
of Inquiry
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(iii) a person to be nominated from amongst the Senior Professors belonging
to the Scheduled Castes by the National Commission for Scheduled Castes, as a
member;
(iv) a person to be nominated by the National Commission for Scheduled Tribes,
as a member; and
(v) a person to be nominated by the National Human Rights Commission, as a
member.
(3) The terms and conditions of appointment of the members nominated under clauses
(iii) to (v) of sub-section (2) shall be such as may be prescribed.
7. (1) The Inquiry Committee shall—
(i) inquire into the contents of the complaint;
(ii) record both oral and documentary evidence;
(iii) give opportunity of being heard to the complainant and the charged
employee for presenting and defending the case;
(iv) submit its findings to the head of the educational institution within a period
of three weeks of its appointment.
(2) If the inquiry is not completed within a period of three weeks of the date of
appointment of the Inquiry Committee, the Inquiry Committee shall, for the reasons to be
recorded in writing, complete the inquiry within a further period of three weeks.
8. The head of the educational institution shall, within one week from the date of
receipt of report from the Inquiry Committee, make available a copy of the report to the
complainant and the charged employee.
9. (1) Any person aggrieved of the recommendations of the Inquiry Committee may
prefer an appeal to the head of the educational institution within a period of thirty days from
the date of the receipt of the copy of the report.
(2) The head of the educational institution shall, after affording an opportunity of
being heard to the aggrieved party including Inquiry Committee, if required, dispose of the
appeal within a period of thirty days and communicate the final decision in writing to the
complainant and the charged employee.
10. Where the Inquiry Committee or the Appellate Authority finds that the allegation
against the charged employee has been proved, it shall recommend to the authority to take
action against charged employee for committing the offence of caste-based discrimination
under this Act.
11. (1) Any employee who commits the offence under this Act shall be punished for
the first offence, with suspension for a minimum period of six months but which may extend
upto two years or with fine or both, and for subsequent offence with termination of service.
(2) The authority shall, in case of second time offence, forward a copy of the report of
Inquiry Committee to the nearest police station for registration of the case against the
charged employee.
12. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
to carry out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
Role of Inquiry
Committee.
Provision of
supply of copy
of report to the
complainant
and the charged
employees.
Appeal.
Disposal of
appeal.
Disciplinary
action against
charged officer.
Punishment.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions afore-
said, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that
the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form
or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5

5
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes constitute
about one-fourth of the total population of India. Though, their socio-economic conditions
have somewhat improved due to various policies adopted by the Government in the post-
Independence period, they are still the most vulnerable sections of the Indian society. It is
agonizing that they continue to be victims of caste-based discrimination in practically every
sphere of the country's socio-economic and cultural life.
Such caste-based discrimination in various forms and to varying degrees is rampant in
the educational institutions in general; and higher educational institutions, in particular. Of
late, the extent and magnitude of such caste-based discrimination has increased manifold.
Due to the apathetic attitude of concerned educational institutions on the one hand and
colossal neglect towards such caste-based discrimination by the Government on the other
hand, the victims of discrimination become so desperate that some of them commit suicide.
There is a need to effectively and expeditiously address the incidents of caste-based
discrimination specifically in the educational institutions and eliminate it at the earliest.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; NISHIKANT DUBEY
October 10, 2016.

6
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 6 of the Bill provides for nomination of three persons as members of the Inquiry
Committee for investigating into complaints of caste-based discrimination. The members will
be paid TA/DA for attending meetings of the Committee. At this stage, it is not possible to
give the exact amount to be incurred on this account as the appointment of Inquiry Committees
in educational institutions would depend upon the number of complaints of caste-based
discrimination. However, the recurring expenditure, which cannot precisely be estimated at
this stage, would be involved out of the Consolidated Fund of India in case of educational
institution under the Central Government.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

7
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Act. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to effectively prevent the caste-based discrimination in educational institutions and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Nishikant Dubey, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2906LS(S3)—21.11.2016.