1
THE RIGHT OF CHILDREN TO FREE AND COMPULSORY
EDUCATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
By
SHRI JAYANT SINHA, M.P.
A
BILL
 further to amend the Right of Children to Free and
Compulsory Education Act, 2009.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education
(Amendment) Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 283 of  2019
Short title and
commencement.
5
AS  INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. For section 11 of the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009,
the following section shall be substituted, namely:—
"11. With a view to prepare children above the age of three years for elementary
education and to provide early childhood care and education for all children until they
complete the age of six years, the appropriate Government shall make necessary
arrangement for providing free pre-school education and care for such children,
within the premises of the elementary school or at such other place as it deems fit.".
Substitution of
new section
for section
11.
35 of 2009.
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 was enacted to
provide for free and compulsory education to all children of the age of six to fourteen years.
Section 11 of the Act provides for the arrangement of early childhood development
care and provision for children up to six years of age. The section leaves the implementation
of this provision as a choice up to the appropriate Government.
It has been observed in several academic research studies that early childhood
development is essential for every child's lifetime well-being. Ensuring comprehensive
development assistance for every child will translate into improved human development
indicators in the country. It is known that robust human capital is an integral aspect of every
nation's development. To improve the conditions of anganwadi centres and workers, and to
ensure access to early childhood development care and education to every child, the above-
mentioned provision has to be made mandatory.
The need is, therefore, to make early childhood care and education mandatory and the
appropriate Government to be put under an obligation to set up infrastructure and other
facilities for the provision of the same.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; JAYANT SINHA
October 28, 2019
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill makes in mandatory on the appropriate Government to provide pre-
school education to children. The expenditure in respect of the State Government shall be
met out of their respective Consolidated Funds for implementing the provisions of this Bill.
The expenditure in relation to Union territory shall be borne by the Central Government. The
Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve an expenditure of rupees fifty thousand crore from
the Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT RIGHT OF CHILDREN TO FREE AND COMPULSORY EDUCA TION ACT, 2009
(35 OF 2009)
* * * * *
11. With a view to prepare children above the age of three years for elementary education
and to provide early childhood care and education for all children until they complete the age
of six years, the appropriate Government may  make necessary arrangement for providing
free pre-school education for such children.
* * * * *
Appropriate
Government
to provide
for pre-
school
education.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
 further to amend the Right of Children to Free and
Compulsory Education Act, 2009
————
(Shri Jayant Sinha, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—3048LS(S3)—15-11-2019.