Bill  No. 284 of  2016
THE JUTE GROWERS AND WORKERS (WELFARE) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI RAJESH RANJAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for payment of the remunerative prices for the raw jute to the jute growers,
compulsory purchase of raw jute by Government agencies, compulsory
insurance of jute crops free of cost by the Central Government
and certain welfare measures to be undertaken by the
Central and the State Governments for the
jute growers and jute workers and
for  matters  connected
therewith or incidental
 thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Jute Growers and Workers (Welfare) Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "Fund" means the Jute Growers and Workers Welfare Fund constituted
under section 4;
(c) "jute grower" means any person who cultivates Jute and obtains fibre
therefrom;
Short title
and extent.
Definitions.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(d) "jute worker" means any person engaged in jute related works as a wage
earner, whether in cash or kind, for his livelihood and includes a person engaged
through a contractor or middleman; and
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the Central Government shall in consultation with the concerned State Governments fix and
declare remunerative prices of raw jute under the Minimum Support Price regime on the basis
of cost of production of jute before every sowing season.
(2) while fixing the remunerative prices of jute under sub-section (1), the Central
Government shall take into account the following factors, namely:—
(a) cost incurred by jute growers in sowing, growing and harvesting of jute and
obtaining its fibre;
(b) cost incurred on seeds, fertilizers or manure, insecticides and pesticides;
(c) cost incurred on labour;
(d) maintenance cost of the field;
(e) cost incurred on transportation of raw jute to the market or yard or mandi or
factory, as the case may be;
(f) climatic conditions and occurrence of natural calamity; and
(g) any other contingency expenditure incurred by jute growers.
(3) The appropriate Government shall give wide publicity to the remunerative prices
fixed for raw jute under this Act through print and electronic media and the village
Panchayats.
(4) The agencies of appropriate Government shall purchase the raw jute from the jute
growers at the prices fixed by the Central Government in case the jute growers fail to sell their
raw jute in the open market.
(5) It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to keep a watch on the dubious
activities of jute traders and middlemen during the immediate post harvest period to ensure
that prices of raw jute do not fall as a result of speculation and take such measures, as it may
deem necessary to protect the interests of Jute growers.
(6) The entire jute crop and the yield thereof shall be compulsorily insured free of cost
by the Central Government against natural calamities, fall in the yield of jute, fall in the prices
of raw jute and such other eventualities as may be prescribed.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the Official
Gazette, constitute a Fund to be known as the Jute Growers and Workers Welfare Fund with
an initial corpus of rupees thirty thousand crore to be provided by the Central Government
by due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf.
(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute to the Fund in
such ratio as may be prescribed.
(3) Such other sums as may be received by way of donation, contribution or assistance
from corporate houses, financial institutions, individuals, organisations or otherwise shall
also be credited to the Fund.
5. The Fund shall be utilized for the following purposes, namely:—
(a) to provide financial assistance to jute growers for purchasing seeds, manure,
fertilizers, pesticides, insecticides, and any other material necessary for cultivation of
jute or prevent loss of crop due to natural calamities, fire or wild life;
(b) to pay compensation to the next of kin of jute grower or jute worker, as the
case may be in the event of his death;
Fixation of
remunerative
price of raw
jute.
Constitution
of Jute
Growers and
Workers
Welfare Fund.
Utilization of
Fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(c) to pay insurance premium on behalf of the jute growers;
(d) to provide free healthcare facilities for the jute growers and jute workers and
their families including maternity facilities to the female members of the families;
(e) to provide education including technical, medical, higher education, and
vocational training to the children of Jute growers and Jute workers free of cost;
(f) to provide financial assistance to the jute growers and jute workers in the
event of their disability; and
(g) for such other purposes as the appropriate Government may deem fit and
necessary for the purposes of this Act.
6. The appropriate Government shall,—
(i) maintain district-wise register of all the jute growers and jute workers with
such particulars and in such manner as may be prescribed; and
(ii) make provisions for payment of old age pension to the jute growers and jute
workers.
7. The Central Government shall from time to time, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
8. The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
9. The provision of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
laws for the time being in force dealing with the subject matter of this Act.
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Appropriate
Government
to maintain
register of
Jute growers
and Jute
workers.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The States of West Bengal and Bihar are the major Jute producing States of the nation.
Though it is grown in some other States also but in small quantities mainly for local
consumption. Jute fibre which is also known as golden fibre, used to hold a glorious position
in our country. Even today jute is one of the main commercial crops of the country. Jute fibre
is used to make bio-degradable, eco-friendly and cheap bags known as gunny bags used to
keep wheat and other agricultural produce including sugar. Earlier almost every product
used to be filled in jute bags but with coming of polymer synthetic bags in the market now
jute bags are used only for foodgrains.
Of late, jute growers in West Bengal, Bihar and other parts of the country are facing
various problems and they are not getting remunerative prices for their produce. Jute
cultivation is becoming non-profitable for the growers due to various factors such as increase
in the prices of jute seeds, fertilizers, manure, insecticides and pesticides and other inputs.
Due to high investment involved in cultivation of jute, jute growers take loans on very high
interest rates and unable to repay the loan becoming debt ridden and distressed. Since jute
is a commercial crop, insurance facility is not available to the jute growers and the growing
use of synthetic fibre bags is adding to the miseries of jute growers. In some cases their
financial condition or getting into debt trap is compelling many of them to take extreme step
of committing suicide.
Ours is a welfare state and therefore it is the responsibility of the Central Government
to ensure the welfare of the Jute growers and their families. The Central Government should
fix remunerative prices of Jute and implement various welfare measures for them and for the
jute workers who are dependent on the jute crops for their employment and livelihood. Their
condition is also pitiable because of the plight of jute growers. The Central Government has
to establish a Welfare Fund for the jute growers and jute workers to meet their various need
which will make them feel that our welfare State will take care of them.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAJESH  RANJAN
October 28, 2016.

5
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for constitution of the Jute Growers and Workers Welfare
Fund with the initial corpus of rupee thirty thousand crore to be provided by the Central
Government. Clause 6 provides for maintaining register and payment of old age pension to
jute workers and jute growers. Clause 7 makes it mandatory for the Central Government to
provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The expenditure relating to
States shall be borne out of the Consolidated Funds of the State Governments concerned.
However, the expenditure relating to Union territories shall be borne out of the Consolidated
Fund of India. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is estimated rupee five thousand crore may be involved as recurring expenditure per
annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A sum of rupee one thousand crore may also be involved as non-recurring expenditure.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 10 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to provide for payment of the remunerative prices for the raw jute to the jute growers,
compulsory purchase of raw jute by Government agencies, compulsory
insurance of jute crops free of cost by the Central Government
and certain welfare measures to be undertaken by the
Central and the State Governments for the
jute growers and jute workers and
for  matters  connected
therewith or incidental
 thereto.
————
(Shri Rajesh Ranjan, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3139LS(S3)—21-11-2016.
————