THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT)   BILL, 2019
By
SHRI M ANISH T EWARI, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 126 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, in sub-section ( 1), after
clause (c), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
"(d) where his parent or parents reside together, in case of such proceedings
being taken against such person by either parent of such person or both parents, as
the case may be; or
(e) where his child or all his children reside, in case of such proceedings being
taken against such person by any of his children or all of his children, as the case may
be.".
Bill No. 284 of 2019
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of section
126.
2 of 1974.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Sub-section (1) of section 126 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter
referred to as 'the Code') reads as under:—
'Proceedings under section 125 of the Code may be taken against any person in
any district—
(a) where he is, or
(b) where he or his wife resides, or
(c) where he last resided with his wife, or as the case may be, with the
mother of the illegitimate child.'
Thus, a wife seeking an allowance for maintenance or interim maintenance and expenses
of proceedings under section 125 of the Code may make an application for the same in the
district (a) where the husband is, or (b) where he resides, or (c) where the wife resides, or
(d) where he last resided with the wife, i.e., the applicant.
However, a parent, under sub-section ( 1) of section 126 of the Code, may file an
application in the district (a) where the son is, or (b) where he resides, or (c) where the wife
of his son resides, or (d) where the son last resided with his wife. There is an ambiguity left
open due to certain lacunae in section 126 of the Code. As a matter of fact, whereas the wife
has been given the privilege to file an application under section 125 of the Code where she
resides, but the parents have not been given the facility of filing an application in the district
where they reside.
Similarly, an application, on behalf of the child, may be filed in the district (a) where the
father is, or (b) where the father or mother reside, or (c) where the father has last resided with
the mother of the child. But the child too has not been given the facility of an application
being filed in the district where the child resides.
There seems to be no logic to prevent the extension of the facility of filing an application
under section 125 of the Code in the district where such parents or children reside. Therefore,
it is proposed to amend the Code suitably by inserting new clauses ( d) and ( e) in
sub-section (1) of section 126 of the Code with a view to extend to parents and children the
facility of filing an application under section 125 of the Code for maintenance in the district
they reside.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW DELHI; MANISH TEWARI
October  24, 2019.
2

Procedure.
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973.
* * * * *
126. (1) Proceedings under section 125 may be taken against any person in any district—
(a) * * * * *
(b) * * * * *
(c) where he last resided with his wife, or as the case may be, with the mother of
the illegitimate child.
* * * * *
3

LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
—————
(Shri Manish Tewari, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—2998LS(S3)—15-11-2019.