 
As ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Bill No. 284 of 2022
THE SPORTSPERSONS (RESERV ATION IN SPORTS BODIES) 
BILL, 2022
By
Sඁඋං Pൺඋඏൾඌඁ Sൺඁංൻ Sංඇ඀ඁ, M.P.
ൺ
BILL
to provide for reservation for sportspersons in national sports 
administration bodies in India.
Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Sportspersons (Reservation in Sports bodies) Bill, 2022. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(b) “sportsperson” means a person who has represented India as a member of the 
5
Short title, 
extent and 
commencement.
Deﬁnitions.

national team, or a member of the State or regional team, or has established himself as a 
sportsperson of international repute in chosen field of sport; and 
(c) “sports body” means –
(i) the Indian Olympic Association; or
(ii) Sports Authority of India; or
(iii) a national sports federation recognized by the Ministry of Sports and Youth Affairs 
of the Central Government, and its affiliated federations; or
(iv) national sports promotion organizations recognized by the Ministry of Sports and 
Youth Affairs of the Central Government; or
(v) a federation recognized by the International Olympic Association; or 
(vi) a federation or a body which regulates sport at international level and its affiliated 
federations or bodies regulating sport in India.
3. The Central Government shall reserve fifty percent of administrative posts for 
sportspersons in sports bodies in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that out of fifty percent reserved posts, twenty percent shall be reserved for 
women sportspersons.
4. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to it to be necessary for removing 
the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a period of 
two years from the date of commencement of this Act.
5. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make  rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule and every notification or order issued under this Act shall be laid, before 
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry 
of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule 
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in a such modified form or be 
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall 
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Reservation in appointment in Sports bodies.
10
5
25
20
15
Power to remove 
diﬃculties.
2
Power to make 
rules.
30

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Sports play a vital role in physical development of human body. It also plays an 
important role in psychological conditioning of human brain. Therefore, sports has occupied 
crucial place in Indian way of life and culture since ages. 
Given the wide variety of sports that are played in India, administering them has always 
been a challenge. India has successfully created various institutions for sports administration 
at State and National level. However, our sports administration has been many a times 
proved impediment in allowing emerging sportspersons to realize their full potential and 
leave a mark of India at international competition. 
This bill, seeks to attempt reforms in sports administration through reservation of seats 
for sportspersons in national sports administrative bodies. Within the seats reserved for 
sportsperson, 50 percent of the seats shall be reserved for women. 
The primary motive of this bill is to utilize the experience and perspective of sportsperson 
in making sports administration more effective and efficient. It will give a bird eye view to 
sports institutions regarding the actual needs of sportsperson and addressing them in best 
possible manner.
Hence this Bill.
    Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                                                   PARVESH SAHIB SINGH                                                             
November 21, 2022

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
_______
ൺ
BILL
to provide for reservation for sportspersons in national sports 
administration bodies in India.
_______
(Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh, M.P .)