1
THE COMPULSORY PHYSICAL FITNESS OF CHILDREN THROUGH
SPORTS IN SCHOOLS AND DEVELOPMENT OF SPORTS
INFRASTRUCTURE BILL, 2015
By
SHRIMATI RANJEET RANJAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to promote sports education and physical fitness for an all-round development of
children in the country and to develop international standard sports infrastructure
in the country, by making sports a compulsory regular subject in schools and
providing equal opportunity and incentives to sportspersons across the
country and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
WHEREAS the Memorandum of Understanding between India and Netherlands signed
in New Delhi on the Thirtieth day of January, 2014 recognises that India aims to create a
lasting legacy with the development of sports infrastructure for promoting sports, education
and allied areas along with India’s ambition to host global sports events in the future:
Bill No.  284  of  2015
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
AND  W HEREAS  the United Nations, in its resolution 58/6 adopted by the
General Assembly and sponsored by India, on the third day of November, 2003, recognises
sport as means to build a peaceful and better world and increased implementation of projects
for development through sport:
A
ND  W HEREAS  the United Nations in its resolution 58/5 adopted by the
General Assembly on the third day of November, 2003 recognises sport as a means to
promote education, health, development and peace:
A
ND WHEREAS it is considered necessary to give effect to the said resolution.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Physical Fitness of Children through
sports in Schools and Development of Sports Infrastructure Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for coming into force of
different provisions of this Act, and any reference in any such provision to the commencement
of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
the State, and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “coach” includes any trained person involved with development of skills of
an athlete for the sport;
(c) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the
expression “notify” shall be construed accordingly;
(d) “physical Fitness” means optimal state of physical, mental health and
wellbeing to be able to cope with daily needs and the ability to perform ones daily
tasks efficiently; and
(e) “sports” means the sports specified in the Schedule.
3. (1) From such date, as the Central Government may, in consultation with the
State Governments, by  notification specify, training in Sports and Physical Fitness shall be
imparted as a compulsory subject in all schools.
(2) The appropriate Government shall take such measures as may be necessary to
develop infrastructure of international standard for over-all development of student.
(3) The appropriate Government shall provide equal opportunities in sports to all
sportspersons, create awareness, reduce stress and develop skill in sports as a whole in the
country to achieve excellence in sports at the international arena.
4. The appropriate Government shall ensure capacity and awareness building
programmes in sports through physical education that may include orientation on national
cadets, scouts and guides, sports training and competitive sports along with demonstrations
or workshops to guide students and help in building awareness about sports.
5. The appropriate Government shall issue guidelines to be followed by each school
to,—
(a) treat sports as a regular subject as a part of the curriculum in school, with
separate theory and practical training for the students’ mental well-being and physical
fitness;
(b) make evaluation of the subject through continuous grading and examinations
so that the subject has equal weightage as other academic subjects;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
Sports and
Physical
Fitness as a
regular Subject
in Schools.
Mandatory
Capacity and
Awareness
building
programmes.
Guidelines to
be followed by
Schools.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

3
(c) mandatorily include the result of the subject as part of the regular mark-sheet
obtained by the students in school;
(d) mandatorily allocate a minimum number of hours in a month, for the training
to be imparted to students from sixth to twelfth standard; and
(e) allow students to choose from various sports with accredited coaches and
coaching facilities:
Provided that schools may choose to offer separate sports facilities to students,
depending on their infrastructure and accessibility to sports infrastructure.
6. The appropriate Government shall ensure that every school makes special
provisions for physically challenged students to,—
(i) engage them into games and less-physically involving sporting activities
like Chess and Carrom.
(ii) arrange for special assistance programmes in each school for those
physically challenged students who fail in the module or course:
Provided that the special assistance programmes for physically challenged students
shall be scheduled before or after regular school hours, to support the students to gain
insights and strive to bring each student on the same platform as against failing them in the
module.
7. (1) The appropriate Government shall take measures to ensure that the necessary
sports infrastructure is provided in every school.
(2) In case any school does not possesses sufficient sports infrastructure to facilitate
sports training, the appropriate Government shall extend facilities to such school by—
(i) facilitating free access to Sports Authority of India infrastructure in the
divisional and district sports complex;
(ii) making necessary transport arrangements for students to avail the nearest
facility accompanied by at least one school sports staff personnel in accordance with
the strength of students in school.
(3) Every school and respective school board shall maintain a record of students
availing sports infrastructure with a view to determine aid, assistance or funds to the respective
schools.
(4) Every divisional or district sports office or the place where the schools are availing
the facilities shall maintain a record for consideration by the appropriate Government while
granting funds for the upgradation of the divisional or districts sports infrastructure facilities.
8. The appropriate Government shall regulate the selection of sportspersons for
international and national events by selecting who qualify the standard selection criteria, in
relation to international parameters and norms as benchmark provided that the appropriate
Government may authorise the Sports Authority of India for regulating the selection under
this section.
9. The appropriate Government shall take necessary measures to spread awareness
about sports education, including the right use of sports medicines, regulations on antidoping
and other malpractices along with incentivising and promoting sports as a serious profession.
Special
Provisions for
Physically
Challenged
Students.
Adequate
access to
sports
infrastructure.
Selection
procedure for
international
and national
sporting
events.
Promoting
sports as a
profession and
creating
awareness
about
antidoping
regulation.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
10. (1) The appropriate Government, by notification, shall mandate that any new
infrastructure to be built in the country to be in accordance with international norms and
guidelines as set by the International Olympic Committee for the development of Sports
infrastructure by,—
(a) building both soft and hard infrastructure by taking international standards
as benchmarks for the purpose of easing the accessibility to infrastructure for sports
and games by sportspersons;
(b) commissioning sports infrastructure in Divisional, State and National Level,
in rural and urban parts of the country; and
(c) commissioning the construction of separate infrastructural facilities for
both men and women in each sporting facility, like toilets and changing rooms etc.
(2) The appropriate Government shall ensure to provide at least minimum basic
sports infrastructural facilities at the grassroots level, like in villages and small towns to
encourage sportspersons.
(3) the appropriate Government shall invest in the scaling up of the quality of
infrastructure at major towns and regional centres.
11. The appropriate Government shall frame guidelines to promote talent and give
incentives to students and sportspersons who represent the country and bring laurels at
the national and international level, by— (a) rescheduling of examinations, compensation
of attendance and granting credits or by providing equitable credit system where in extra
credits and grades shall be given to ensure that the students  do not lose out or refrain from
taking up sports at an extra-meritorious level; and (b) providing job opportunities, preference
for government loans, concession on travel fares and minimum financial benefits.
12. (1) The appropriate Government, shall ensure that Government owned or Public
Sector Undertaking Companies take responsibility for supporting talent and promising
sportspersons who have achieved State, National and International accolades by mandating
a quota for employment and funding expenses for meeting sports expenditure in the
requirement of equipments and medial aid for sportspersons;
(2) All such Government or PSU companies as mentioned in clause (2) shall provide
sports by allowing, not just their employees and sportspersons, but even the general public
and schools to avail their sports infrastructural facilities.
13. The appropriate Government shall curtail grants and aids to a school if that school
fails to comply with any of the provisions of this Act.
14. The Central Government, shall from time to time provide, after due appropriation
made by the Parliament by law in this behalf, requisite funds for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
15. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government, in consultation with State Governments, may make such order or give such
direction, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary
or expedient for the removal of any difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of two years from the date
of commencement of this Act.
16. (1) The Central Government, in consultation with the State Governments, may by
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
Development
of sports
in frastructure
according to
international
parameters.
Incentives to
and
promotion of
sports
persons.
Public sector
undertakings
to promote
and support
Sports
persons.
Penalty.
Central
Government
to provide
Funds.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.

6
THE SCHEDULE
[ See section 2 (C) ]
   Sl. No. Name of Sport
1. Aero Sports
2. Archery
3. Athletics
4. Atya Patya
5. Aquatics
6. Badminton
7. Ball Badminton
8. Baseball
9. Basketball
10. Billiards and Snooker
11. Bridge
12. Body Building
13. Boxing
14. Carrom
15. Chess
16. Cricket
17. Cycling
18. Cycle Polo
19. Equestrian
20. Fencing
21. Football
22. Golf
23. Gymnastics
24. Handball
25. Hockey
26. Ice Hockey
27. Judo
28. Kabaddi
29. Karate Do
30. Kho-Kho
31. Motor Sports
32. Netball
33. Polo
34. Power-lifting
35. Rowing
36. Roller Skating
37. Rugby
38. Shooting
39. Shooting Ball
40. Soft Ball
41. Soft Tennis Ball
42. Special Olympic Sports
43. Sports for deaf persons
44. Table Tennis
45. Tennis
46. Tennis Ball Cricket
47. Throw Ball
48. Tug of war
49. Volleyball
50. Weightlifting
51. Winter Games (Skiing and Snowboarding)
52. Wrestling (Free Style and Greco Roman)
53. Wrestling (Indian Style)

7
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is home to a billion plus population. However, our dismal performance at
International sports like the Olympics, Asian Games and the Common Wealth Games make
it evident that there is an absence of thrust in sports in the country. Clearly, our culture and
attitude towards sports is a major deterrent towards improving sporting standards in our
country. Promoting sportspersons while providing equal opportunity, incentives and access
to sporting  facilities is essential, however, changing the attitude  of people and bringing
seriousness about sports education and training in physical fitness is of utmost importance.
Moreover, sporting activities are means of a holistic development for all, a potential tool for
the physical and mental well-being of people by inculcating values of leadership, team-
work, endurance, and focus along with bringing exposure, helping in skill development and
increasing immunity towards various illnesses that in turn would increase the productivity
of people and hence boost economic development throughout the country.
The United Nations recognises sport as a low-cost and high-impact tool in
humanitarian development and peace-building efforts, the standard of which is  increasingly
being recognised. In India the prevalent scenario does not provide for students and
sportspersons to excel in the arena of sports, leave alone emphasizing the importance of
sports in physical fitness. Many schools across the country barely recognise the necessity
of including sports in their schedule. The education system need to be revamped to give
sports an equal importance in the holistic upbringing  of future flag-bearers of the country.
The lack of infrastructural facilities and training of international standards are major
impediments in the process of development of sports in India. Moreover, considering
sports as a serious carrier option comes at the cost of education and job opportunities,
falling attendance, grades and the struggle to earn a livelihood. Added to that is the cost
and struggle to avail sporting facilities in various parts of the country.
This  shouldn’t be used in excuse and deter the Government to wash their hands off
the responsibility of providing for sporting facility, from the grassroots level, in villages
and small towns to upgrade the quality of infrastrucuture at major towns and regional
centres.
This Bill intends to give sports education and physical fitness a status at par with
other academic subjects taught at schools and hence makes sports education a compulsory
module in all schools across the country, the evaluation of which would be through
continuous grading and examinations as is the case with other subjects. Moreover, the Bill
lays guidelines for schools to arrange for special assistance programs for those who fair
poorly in the evaluation of the sports module to monitor their progress and physical
fitness. The Bill seeks to make guidelines for the building of such infrastructure to meet the
benchmark of international parameters. This is a step towards promoting a culture of sports
and making the facility easily accessible to all sportspersons.
Also, the Bill seek to give incentives to those who excel in any field of sport by
providing concessions an financial benefits, along with mandating all Public Sector
Undertakings and Enterprises to provide compulsory quota for employment of
sportspersons and make available their sporting infrastructure to all willing sportspersons
in the country, as part of their social responsibility. Creating awareness about sports and
physical fitness is imperative to empower sportspersons and students alike for their overall
development, in order to harness the talent and potential of the youth and bring international
acclaim to India.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RANJEET RANJAN
November 17, 2015

8
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides sports and physical fitness education as a compulsory
and regular subject in schools. Clause 4 mandates capacity and awareness building
programmes. Clause 6 allows for special provisions for physically challenged students to
participate in sports. Clause 7 provides that appropriate government shall ensure availability
of necessary sports infrastructure in every school. Clause 10 lays down guidelines to be
adhered to while commissioning sports infrastructure in the country to meet international
standard. Clause 14 makes it obligatory for the Central Government to provide requisite
funds for carrying out the purposes of this Bill. The Bill does involve expenditure towards
building of infrastructure of international standards whenever it commissions the building of
any such infrastructure after the enactment of the Act for Union territory. The Bill will also
involve expenditure towards infrastructural facilities and awareness programmes.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure which cannot be estimated right
now from the Consolidated Fund of India.

9
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 16 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government, in consultation with the
State Governments, to make necessary rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the
rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a
normal character.

GMGIPMRND—2919LS(S3)—03.12.2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to promote sports education and physical fitness for an all-round development of children
in the country and to develop international standard sports infrastructure in the country,
by making sports a compulsory regular subject in schools and providing equal
opportunity and incentives to sportspersons across the country and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shrimati Ranjeet Ranjan, M.P .)