1
THE CENTRAL ANTI-SLA VERY AGENCY BILL, 2016
By
SHRI JAGDAMBIKA PAL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for constitution of a Central Anti-Slavery Agency to
prohibit the practice of slavery, bonded labour and human
trafficking and to rehabilitate the victims thereof.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Central Anti-Slavery Agency Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 285 of 2016
Short title,
and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Agency" means the Central Anti-Slavery Agency constituted under
section 3; and
(b) "slavery" means selling or buying any person.
3. (1) The Central Government shall constitute an agency to be known as the Central
Anti-Slavery Agency to prohibit trafficking, bonded labour and slavery and to rehabilitate
the victims thereof in co-ordination with Government and non-Governmental Organisations
working in the field of prevention of trafficking, bonded labour or slavery.
(2) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and staff as it
considers necessary for the efficient functioning of the Agency.
(3) The headquarter of the Agency shall be at New Delhi.
(4) The Agency shall have its offices in every State and Union territory.
4. The Agency shall—
(a) co-ordinate with law enforcing agencies and non-Governmental Organisations
engaged in either prohibiting trafficking, bonded labour or slavery or in rehabilitation
of the victims thereof;
(b) establish rehabilitation centres for rehabilitation and welfare of the victims
of trafficking, bonded labour and slavery;
(c) regulate the efforts of various stakeholders engaged in welfare and
rehabilitation of victims of trafficking, bonded labour and slavery;
(d) pay adequate compensation to the victims of trafficking, bonded labour and
slavery;
(e) maintain a database of victims of trafficking, bonded labour and slavery
rescued and rehabilitated;
(f) identify the persons engaged in perpetuating the offences of trafficking,
bonded labour and slavery and report such cases to law enforcing agencies; and
(g) provide medical and other facilities including psychological counselling by
experts to the victims of trafficking, bonded labour and slavery, if required.
5. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Definitions.
Functions of
the Agency.
Constitution
of the Central
Anti-Slavery
Agency.
Act to have
over-riding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Article 23 of the Constitution proscribes trafficking of human and forced labour. India
ranks at the top when it comes to the incidence of human trafficking in the world. The
identified lacunae in the laws pertaining to the prevention of such offences include the
absence of forced labour in the definition of human trafficking in section 370 of the Indian
Penal Code. There is also an absence of a central coordinating agency to integrate the
outcomes and co-ordinate the functioning of the various agencies of the Government and
non-Governmental organisations engaged in the prevention and prosecution of the egregious
act of modern day slavery. There is also a requirement of a pan-India regulatory body to
actively engage in the provision of properly established centres which can help a victim to
rejoin the mainstream society. Therefore, it is imperative to constitute such an agency for the
purpose of removal of above-mentioned discrepancies in the system.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; JAGDAMBIKA PAL
October 19, 2016.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the Central Anti-Slavery Agency
to prohibit trafficking, bonded labour and slavery and to rehabilitate the victims of slavery in
co-ordination with Government and non-Governmental Organisations working in the field of
prevention of slavery. Clause 4 provides for certain welfare measures for the victims of
trafficking, bonded labour and slavery. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees
Five hundred crore per annum would be involved from Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees One hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relates to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for constitution of a Central Anti-Slavery Agency to
prohibit the practice of slavery, bonded labour and human
trafficking and to rehabilitate the victims thereof.
————
(Shri Jagdambika Pal, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2889LS(S3)—21.11.2016.