1
THE PLASTIC MANUFACTURING (REGULATION) BILL, 2019
By
SHRI JASBIR SINGH GILL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for a framework to enable India to ban plastic manufacturing to
safeguard the environment
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth  Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Plastic Manufacturing (Regulation) Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "fund" means the Extended Producer Responsibility Fund constituted under
section 6;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
Bill No.  285 of  2019
5
10
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(c) "plastic" means material which contains as an essential ingredient a high
polymer such as polyethylene terephthalate, high density polyethylene, Vinyl, low
density polyethylene, polypropylene, polystyrene resins or multimaterials like
acrylonitrile butadiene styrene, polyphenylene oxide, polycarbonate or polybutylene
terephthalate;
(d) "plastic packaging" means all products which are—
(i) used for the containment, protection, handling, delivery and
presentation of goods; and
(ii) partly or wholly composed of plastic;
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(f) "single-use plastic" means any disposable plastic item which is designed to
be used only once before it is thrown out or recycled and includes plastic forks and
knives, plastic shopping bags, plastic coffee cup, lids, plastic water bottles, styrofoam,
plastic take out containers and plastic straws.
3. The Central Government shall, within three months from the commencement of this
Act,—
(a) prescribe a target of complete elimination of plastic waste by the year 2050 in
accordance with international obligations, if any, agreed to by India:
(b) specify the year 2022 as target year to implement a complete ban on single-
use plastic and the proportion of reduction of single-use plastic during each year
following the date of fixing of target year 2022; and
(c) formulate and implement a National Plastic Control Strategy for carrying out
the purposes of this Act.
4. The appropriate Government shall take measures to ensure—
(a) elimination of the production and use of plastics including plastic packaging
single-use plastic.
(b) increase in recycling, reuse and other forms of waste recovery in relation
to plastics; and
(c) removing plastics already in the environment for the purpose of recycling,
reusing or applying another form of waste recovery to the plastics.
5. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, no
person shall, after the target year 2022, use, stock, distribute, manufacture, sell or trade in
any single-use plastic item.
6. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Fund to be called the Extended Producer Responsibility Fund for improving the plastic
waste treatment system.
(2) There shall be credited to the fund—
(a) any grants and loans made by the Central Government or any State
Government;
(b) any voluntary donations or contributions, whether or not for any specific
purpose as may be decided upon by the Central Government;
(c) any fine recovered as penalty for the commission of an offence punishable
under this Act;
(d) portion of the Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) fund received from
any company as notified by the Central Government in the Official Gazette; and
(e) such other sums as may be received.
Plastic target
setting.
Phasing out
of existent
plastic.
Ban on single
use plastic
items.
Constitution
of Extended
Producer
Responsibility
Fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(3) The Extended Producer Responsibility Fund shall be utilized under this Act by the
Central Government for—
(i)  funding of any national or State level research study or project for development
of innovative and efficient methods of treatment of plastic waste;
(ii) raising awareness regarding the impact of plastic waste and the benefits of
recycling plastic waste and its substitution with bio-degradable alternatives;
(iii) funding of small scale recyling or waste to energy plants on a district level;
and
(iv) any other activity that may be required for effective implementation of this
Act.
7. (1) The Central Government may appoint such number of officers with such
designation as it deems fit for the purpose of this Act and may entrust to them such powers
and functions under this Act as may be prescribed.
(2) Any person who is appointed as an officer under sub-section (1) and is empowered
by the Central Government in this behalf, if he has reason to believe that plastic packaging
or plastic items as stated under section are being manufactured, stored, transported or
distributed in any premises contrary to section 4, may enter into and search such place,
premise or vehicle.
(3) Where, as a result of the search made under sub-section (2), any plastic packaging
item in contravention of section 4 are found, the authorized officer may seize such item and
any other item which he may consider necessary under the provisions of this Act.
(4) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, relating to searches and
seizures shall, so far as may be, apply to every search or seizure made under this section.
8. Whoever violates the provision of this Act shall be punished with a fine which shall
not be less than rupees one lakh but which may extend upto rupees five lakhs.
9. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Central
Government
to appoint
Officer and
Staff.
Penalty.
Central
Government
to provide
requisite
funds.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
4 of 1974.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Plastic waste is not managed effectively in the world and especially in India. Further
only nine per cent of nine billion metric tons of plastic ever produced has been recycled and
that most plastic ends its life in landfills, dumps and the environment. If current patterns of
consumption and waste management practices are not altered, by 2050 there will approximately
12 billion metric ton of plastic litter in the environment. India's 1.3 billion population currently
produces 25,940 metric tonnes of plastic waste per day.
While plastic plays an important role in the economy, plastic packaging accounts for
about half the plastic waste in the world, and that the poor management of that waste affects
the environment. The serious environmental, social and economic impact of plastic waste
and pollution including the clogging of sewers and blocking of waterways, leading to breeding
of mosquitoes and other pests and the blocking of airways and stomachs of animals. This
makes plastic waste management absolutely essential.
India thus needs to develop and implement national or regional actions, as appropriate,
to address the environmental impacts of single-use plastic products. We also need to promote
the identification and development of environmentally friendly alternatives to single-use
plastic products, after taking into account the full life-cycle implications of those alternatives.
It is essential to promote improved waste management that will contribute to reducing the
discharge of plastic waste into the environment. We also need to work together with industries
to encourage the private sector to innovate and find affordable and environmentally friendly
alternatives to single-use plastic products and to promote business models that take into
account the full environmental impact of their products. The Government and the private
sector together must promote the more resource-efficient design, production, and use and
sound management of plastic across their life cycle.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; JASBIR SINGH GILL
October 31, 2019.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall take measures to
increase in recycling, reuse and other forms of waste recovery  in relation to plastics. Clause
6 provides for constitution of an Extended Producer Responsibility Fund for improving the
plastic waste treatment system in the country. Clause 8 provides that the Central Government
shall provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The Bill, therefore, if
enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an
annual recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred and fifty crores would involve
from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees sixty crores is also likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

MGIPMRND—3049LS—15-11-2019.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for a framework to enable India to ban plastic manufacturing to
safeguard the environment
————
(Shri Jasbir Singh Gill, M.P.)