As introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 285 of 2022
THE CHILD MARRIAGE ABOLITION BILL, 2022
By
Shri Rahul Shewale, M.P.
a
BILL
to abolish the practice of child marriages in the country.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Child Marriage Abolition Act, 2022.
 ( 2) It extends to the whole of India.
 ( 3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
  ( a) “child” means a person either male or female who has not completed twenty-
one years of age;
  ( b) “child marriage” means a marriage to which either of the contracting parties is 
a child;
  ( c) “contracting party”, in relation to a marriage, means either of the parties whose 
marriage is or is about to be thereby solemnised;
Short title, 
extent and 
commencement.
Definitions.
5
10

  (d) “Child Marriage Annulment Officer” includes the Child Marriage Annulment 
Officer appointed under sub-section (1) of section 6; and
  ( e) “district court” means, in any area for which a Family Court established under 
section 3 of the Family Courts Act, 1984 exists, such Family Court, and in any area 
for which there is no Family Court but a city civil court exists, that court and in any 
other area, the principal civil court of original jurisdiction and includes any other civil 
court which may be specified by the State Government, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, as having jurisdiction in respect of the matters dealt with in this Act.
 3.  Notwithstanding anything contained in any law at the time being in force, every 
child marriage solemnized on or after the date of coming into force of the Child Marriage 
Abolition Act, 2022 shall be “void ab initio”.
 4. (1) Where a child marriage is solemnised, any person having charge of the child, 
whether as parent or guardian or any other person or in any other capacity, lawful or 
unlawful, including any member of an organisation or association of persons who does any 
act to promote the marriage or permits it to be solemnised, or negligently fails to prevent 
it from being solemnised, including attending or participating in a child marriage, shall be 
punishable with rigorous imprisonment which may extend to ten years and shall also be 
liable to fine which may extend up to five lakh rupees or both.
  ( 2) For the purposes of this section, it shall be presumed, unless and until the contrary 
is proved, that where a child marriage was solemnised, the person having charge of such 
child has negligently failed to prevent the marriage from being solemnised.
 5. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, an 
offence punishable under this Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable.
 6. (1) The State Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint for 
the whole State, or such part thereof as may be specified in that notification, an officer or 
officers to be known as the Child Marriage Annulment Officer having jurisdiction over the 
area or areas specified in the notification.
  ( 2) The State Government may also request a respectable member of the locality 
with a record of social service or an officer of the Gram Panchayat or Municipality or 
an officer of the Government or any public sector undertaking or an office bearer of any 
non-governmental organisation to assist the Child Marriage Annulment Officer and such 
member, officer or office bearer, as the case may be, shall be bound to act accordingly.
  ( 3) It shall be the duty of the Child Marriage Annulment Officer,—
(a) to prevent solemnisation of child marriages by taking such action as he may 
deem fit;
(b) to collect evidence for the effective prosecution of persons contravening the 
provisions of this Act;
(c) to advise either individual cases or counsel the residents of the locality generally 
not to indulge in promoting, helping, aiding or allowing the solemnisation of child 
marriages;
(d) to create awareness of the evil which results from child marriages;
(e) to sensitize the community on the issue of child marriages;
(f) to furnish such periodical returns and statistics as the State Government may 
direct; and
(g) to discharge such other functions and duties as may be assigned to him by the 
State Government.
  ( 4) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, subject to such 
conditions and limitations, divest the Child Marriage Annulment Officer with such powers 
of a police officer as may be specified in the notification and the Child Marriage Annulment 
Officer shall exercise such powers subject to such conditions and limitations, as may be 
specified in the notification.
2
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Child marriages 
to be void.
Punishment 
for promoting 
or permitting 
solemnisation of 
child marriages.
Offences to be 
cognizable and 
non-bailable.
Child Marriage 
Annulment 
Officers.
40
45
50
66 of 1984.
2 of 1974.

 7. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act, if, on an application 
of the Child Marriage Annulment Officer or on receipt of information through a complaint 
or otherwise from any person, a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or a Metropolitan 
Magistrate is satisfied that a child marriage in contravention of this Act has been arranged 
or is about to be solemnised, such Magistrate shall issue an injunction against any person 
including a member of an organisation or an association of persons voiding such marriage.
  ( 2) A complaint may be made by any person having personal knowledge or having 
reason to believe, and a non-governmental organisation having reasonable information, 
relating to the likelihood of taking place of solemnisation of a child marriage or child 
marriages.
  ( 3) The Court of the Judicial Magistrate of the first class or the Metropolitan Magistrate 
may also take Suo motu cognizance on the basis of any reliable report or information.
  ( 4) For the purposes of preventing solemnisation of mass child marriages on certain 
days such as Akshaya Trutiya, the District Magistrate shall be deemed to be the Child 
Marriage Annul Officer with all powers as are conferred on a Child Marriage Annul Officer 
by or under this Act.
  ( 5) The District Magistrate shall also have additional powers and he may take all 
appropriate measures and use the minimum force required to stop or prevent solemnisation 
of mass child marriages.
  ( 6) No injunction shall be issued against any person or member of any organisation or 
association of persons unless the Court has previously given notice to such person, members 
of the organisation or association of persons, as the case may be, and has offered him or 
them an opportunity to show cause against the issue of the injunction:
  Provided that in the case of any urgency, the Court shall have the power to issue an 
interim injunction without giving any notice under this section.
  ( 7) An injunction issued may be confirmed or vacated after giving notice and hearing 
the party against whom the injunction was issued.
  ( 8) The Court may either on its own motion or on the application of any person 
aggrieved, rescind or alter an injunction issued.
  ( 9) Where an application is received the Court shall afford the applicant an early 
opportunity of appearing before it either in person or by an advocate and if the Court, after 
hearing the applicant rejects the application, wholly or in part, it shall record in writing its 
reasons for so doing.
  ( 10) Whoever knowing that an injunction has been issued against him disobeys such 
injunction shall be punishable with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to two years or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees or with both.
 8. The Child Marriage Annulment Officers shall be deemed to be public servants within 
the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
 9.  No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Child Marriage 
Annulment Officer in respect of anything in good faith done or intended to be done in 
pursuance of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder.
 10. (1) The Central Government or the State Governments may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
  ( 2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon 
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in the making any modification in the rule 
or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
3
Power of court to 
issue annulment 
prohibiting child 
marriages.
Child Marriage 
Annulment Officers 
to be public servants.
Protection of action 
taken in good faith.
Power of Central 
Government and 
State Governments 
to make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
45 of 1860.

any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that rule.
 11. (1) The Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006 is hereby repealed.
  ( 2) Notwithstanding such repeal, all cases and other proceedings pending or continued 
under the said Act at the commencement of this Act shall be continued and disposed of in 
accordance with the provisions of the repealed Act, as if this Act has not been passed.
4
Repeal.
5
6 of 2002.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The problem of child marriage in India is a complex one because of religious traditions, 
social practices, economic factors and blind beliefs.
The legal age of marriage for women being 18 years, child marriages continue in India 
and a decrease in such marriages has been not because of the existing law, but an increase in 
girls’ education and employment opportunities. 
The Prohibition of Child Marriage Amendment Act, 2021, (PCMAA) has no provisions 
to make child marriage void. 
The PCMAA outlines conditions under which a marriage is void. When a minor child 
is enticed out of the keeping of the lawful guardian to marry, is forced or compelled or by 
deceitful means is induced to go from any place or is sold for marriage.
However, marriage itself with a minor is not void under the PCMAA. It makes child 
marriage voidable at the option of any contracting party, who was a ‘child’ at the time of the 
marriage. 
Hence this Bill.
  New Delhi;                                                   RAHUL SHEWALE
November 21, 2022
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government and the State Governments 
to make rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of 
detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 
6

LOK SABHA
________
A
BILL
 to abolish the practice of child marriages in the country.
________
(Shri Rahul Shewale, M.P.) 