1
Short title
and
commencement.
THE SPECIAL FINANCIAL  ASSISTANCE FOR ANCIENT MONUMENTS AND
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES AND REMAINS IN THE STATE OF
RAJASTHAN BILL, 2015
By
SHRI C.P. JOSHI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Rajasthan to meet the costs of
repairs, renovations and preservation of ancient and historical monuments and
archaeological sites and remains including excavation of new archaeological
sites and remains situated in the State of Rajasthan.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance for Ancient Monuments
and Archaeological Sites and Remains in the State of Rajasthan Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notifica-
tion in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires “ancient monument” means any
structure, erection or monument, or any tumulus or place of interment, or any cave, rock-
Bill No. 286 of 2015
Definition.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
sculpture, inscription or monolith which is of historical, archaeological or artistic interest and
which has been in existence for not less than one hundred years and includes—
(i) remains of an ancient monument,
(ii) site of an ancient monument,
(iii) such portion of land adjoining the site of an ancient monument as may be
required for fencing or covering in or otherwise preserving such monument; and
(iv) the means of access to, and convenient inspection of, an ancient monument.
3. There shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India,
every year, as Parliament may be due appropriation provide, as special financial
assistance to the State of Rajasthan to meet the costs of repairs, renovations and preservation
of ancient and historical monuments and archaeological sites and remains including
excavation of new archaeological sites and remains situated in the State of Rajasthan, as
may be undertaken by the State with the approval of the Central Government.
4. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law.
Special
financial
assistance to
the State of
Rajasthan.
5
10
15

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The State of Rajasthan is one of the favourite destinations of tourists, both domestic
and foreign. Rajasthan is famous for its rich culture and tradition, fairs and festivals worldwide.
The different tourist destinations attract the tourists because of various reasons including
its ancient and historical monuments and archaeological sites and remains.
At present, the Archaeological Survey of India is looking after the maintenance and
conservation of 161 monuments/sites. These monuments and archaeological remains of
diverse nature are located in the region since prehistoric times and are scattered from Dholpur
in the east to Jaisalmer in the West and Ganganagar in the north and Banswara in the South
of Rajasthan.
Taking care of the monuments is an important duty that devolves on the respective
State Government as well as the Central Government. It needs funds to engage people who
can look after monuments, ensure that the miscreants do not harm them, as also to get the
damaged portion repaired from expert designers and engineers. The Central Government
must provide adequate funds for each monument.
The proper upkeep and maintenance of ancient and historical monuments and
archaeological sites and remains in Rajasthan shall boost heritage tourism which will in turn
increase employment, revenue generation and local business in Rajasthan.
It is, therefore, necessary that the Central Government should provide special financial
assistance to the State of Rajasthan to meet the costs of repairs, renovations and preservation
of ancient and historical monuments and archaeological sites and remains including excavation
of new archaeological sites and remains situated in the State of Rajasthan.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; C.P. JOSHI
November 16, 2015
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that there shall be paid such sums of money out of the
Consolidated Fund of India, every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as
special financial assistance to the State of Rajasthan to meet the costs of repairs, renovations
and preservation of ancient and historical monuments and archaeological sites and remains
including excavation of new archaeological sites and remain situated in the State of Rajasthan,
as may be undertaken by the State with the approval of the Government of India.
The Bill, therefore, on enactment, will involve expenditure out of the Consolidated
Fund of India. As the sums of moneys which will be given to the State of Rajasthan as special
financial assistance by appropriation by law made by Parliament will be known only after the
plans to be implemented by the State Government with the approval of Government of India
are identified, it is not possible at present to give the estimates of recurring expenditure,
which would be involved out of the Consolidated Fund of India at this stage.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of
India.
4

LOK SABHA
——————
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Rajasthan to meet the costs of
repairs, renovations and preservation of ancient and historical monuments and
archaeological sites and remains including excavation of new archaeological
sites and remains situated in the State of Rajasthan.
————
(Shri C.P. Joshi, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3030LS(S3)—03-12-2015.