5
                                        AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE CITIZENSHIP (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
Byy
DR. KALANIDHI VEERASW AMY, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Citizenship Act, 1955.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
(3)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In the Citizenship Act, 1955 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in section 2,
in sub-section (1), in clause (b), after sub-clause (ii), the following second proviso shall be
inserted, namely:
“Provided further that any person belonging to the Tamil community from Sri Lanka,
who entered into India after 1st day of July, 1983 shall not be treated as illegal migrant for the
purposes of this Act.”
Short title, and
commencement
Amendment of
section 2.
 Bill No. 286 of  2022
10
57 of 1955

2
Amendment of
the Third
Schedule.
3.  In the Third Schedule to the principal Act, in clause (d), in the proviso, for the words
“Bangladesh or Pakistan”, the  words “Bangladesh or Pakistan and any person belonging to
the Tamil community in Sri Lanka” shall be substituted.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Citizenship Act, 1955 (57 of 1955) was enacted to provide for the acquisition and
determination of Indian citizenship. It is a historical fact that trans-border migration of Tamil
population has been taking place continuously to the territories of India from the areas
comprised in Sri Lanka since the wake of the Sri Lankan Civil War. Tens of thousands of
Sri Lankan Tamils have fled to India to seek shelter and continued to stay in India even if their
travel documents have expired or they have incomplete or no documents. According to the
records of the Ministry of Home Affairs, there are over 92,000 Sri Lankan Tamil refugees
residing in Tamil Nadu as of 2021.
Under the existing provisions of the Citizenship Act, migrants belonging to the
Tamil community from Sri Lanka who entered into India without valid travel documents or if
the validity of their documents has expired are regarded as illegal migrants and ineligible to
apply for Indian citizenship under section 5 or section 6 of the Act.
The Bill seeks to grant immunity to the migrant of the aforesaid Sri Lankan Tamil community
so that any proceedings against them regarding in respect of their status of migration or
citizenship does not bar them from applying for Indian citizenship. The competent authority,
to be prescribed under the Act, shall not consider any proceedings initiated against such
persons regarding their status as illegal migrant or their citizenship matter while considering
their application under section 5 or section 6 of the Act, if they fulfil all the conditions for
grant of citizenship.
Many persons of Indian origin including persons belonging to the said minority
community from the Sri Lanka have been applying for citizenship under section 5 of the
Citizenship Act, 1955 but they are unable to produce proof of their Indian origin. Hence, they
are forced to apply for citizenship by naturalisation under section 6 of the said Act, which,
inter alia, prescribe twelve years residency as a qualification for naturalisation in terms of
the Third Schedule to the Act. This denies them many opportunities and advantages that
may accrue only to the citizens of India, even though they are likely to stay in India
permanently. Therefore, it is proposed to amend the Third Schedule to the Act to make
applicants belonging to the Tamil community from Sri Lanka eligible for citizenship by
naturalisation if they can establish their residency in India for five years instead of the
existing eleven years.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
Hence this Bill.
NEW DELHI;                                                 KALANIDHI VEERASWAMY
 July 13, 2022
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CITIZENSHIP ACT, 1955
(57 OF 1955)
*                 *              *                            *                              *                               *
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
      (a) *                           *                                 *                                         *                                      *
(b) “illegal migrant” means a foreigner who has entered into India—
(i) without a valid passport or other travel documents and such other document
or authority as may be prescribed by or under any law in that behalf; or
(ii) with a valid passport or other travel documents and such other document
or authority as may be prescribed by or under any law in that behalf but remains
therein beyond the permitted period of time.
          “Provided that any person belonging to Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain, Parsi or Christian
community from Afghanistan, Bangladesh or Pakistan, who entered into India on or before
the 31st Day of December, 2014 and who has been exempted by the Central Government by
or under clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 3 of the Passport (Entry into India) Act, 1920
or from the application of the provisions of the Foreigners Act, 1946 or any rule or order made
thereunder, shall not be treated as illegal migrant for the purposes of this Act.”.
*                 *              *                            *                              *                               *
THE THIRD SCHEDULE
QUALIFICATIONS FOR NA TURALISATION
The qualifications for naturalisation of a person are —
(a) *                           *                                 *                                         *                                      *
(b) *                           *                                 *                                         *                                      *
(c) *                           *                                 *                                         *                                      *
(d) that during the fourteen years immediately preceding the said period of twelve
months, he has either resided in India or been in the service of a Government in India, or
partly the one and partly the other, for periods amounting in the aggregate to not less than
eleven years;
“Provided that for the person belonging to Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain, Parsi or Christian
Community in Afghanistan, Bangladesh or Pakistan, the aggregate period or residence or
service of Government in India as required under this clause shall be read as “not less than
five years” in place of “not less than eleven years.”.
*                 *              *                            *                              *                               *
4
Interpretation.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Citizenship Act, 1955.
————
(Dr. Kalanidhi Veeraswamy, M.P .)