1
Short title.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL,  2019
By
SHRI KULDEEP RAI SHARMA,  M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1)  This Act may be called Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2019.
2.  After article 239B of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,
namely:—
239C. (1) There shall be a Legislative Assembly for the Union territory of Andaman
and Nicobar Islands and the total number of  seats in the Legislative Assembly shall be
filled by members chosen by direct election from territorial constituencies in the Union
territory of  A & NI.
(2) The total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly shall be forty.
Bill  No. 286 of  2019
5 Special
provisions
with respect
to Andaman
and Nicobar
Islands.
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Insertion of
new article
239C.

2
(3) For the purposes of election to the Legisltive Assembly, the Union territory of
Andaman and Nicobar Islands shall be divided into single-member assembly constituencies
in such manner that the population of each of the constituencies shall, so far as precticable,
be the same throughout the Union territory.
(4) Seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly, and
the number of seats so reserved shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the
total number of seats in the Assembly as the population of the Scheduled Tribes in the
Union territory bears to the total population of the Union territory and the provisions of
article 334 shall apply to such reservation.
Explanation.— For the purpose of  clause ( 4), the expression "population," means
the population as ascertained in the last preceding census of which the relevant figures
have been published:
Provided that where such figures have not been published, then for the purpose of
election for the constitution of the first Legislative Assembly under this Act, the provisional
figures of the population of the Union territory as published in relation to the 2011 census
shall be deemed to be the population of the Union territory.
(5) The provisions of article 324 to 327 and 329 shall apply in relation to the Union
Territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands, the Legislative Assembly of Andaman  and
Nicobar Islands and the members thereof  as they apply, in relation to a State, the Legislative
Assembly of a State and the members thereof respectively.
(6) (a) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legislative Assembly shall
have power to make laws for the whole or any part of the Union Territory of Andaman and
Nicobar Islands with respect to any of the matters enumerated in the State List or  in the
Concurrent List in  so far as any such matter is applicable to Union territories.
(b) Nothing in sub-clause (a) shall derogate from the powers of Parliament under this
Constitution to make laws with respect to any matter for a Union territory or any part
thereof.
(c) If any provision of a law made by the Legislative  Assembly  with respect to any
matter is repugnant to any provision of a law  made  by Parliament with respect to that
matter, whether passed before or after the law  made by the Legislative Assembly, or of an
earlier law, other  than a law made by the Legislative Assembly, then, in either case, the law
made by Parliament, or , as the case may be, such earlier law, shall prevail and the law made
by the Legislative Assembly shall, to the extent  of the repugnancy, be void:
Provided that if any such law made by the Legislative Assembly has been reserved
for the consideration of the President and has received his assent, such law shall prevail in
the Union territory:
Provided further that nothing in this sub-clause  shall prevent Parliament from enacting
at any time any law with respect to the same matter including a law adding to, amending,
varying or repealing the law  so made by the Legislative Assembly.
(7) There shall be a Council of Ministers consisting of  not more than fifteen per
cent. of the total number of members in the Legislative Assembly, with the Chief Minister
at the head to aid and advise the Lieutenant Governor in the exercise of his functions in
relation to matters with respect to which the Legislative Assembly has power to make
laws, except in so far as he is, by or under any law, required to act in his discretion:
Provided that in the case of difference of opinion between the Lieutenant Governor
and his Ministers on any matter, the Lieutenant Governor shall refer it to the President for
decision and  act according to the decision given thereon by the President and pending
such decision it shall be competent for the Lieutenant Governor in any case where the
matter, in his opinion, is so urgent that it is necessary for him to take immediate action, to
take such action or to give such direction in the matter as he deems necessary.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

3
(8) The Chief Minister shall be appointed by the President and the other Ministers
shall be appointed by the President on the advice of the Chief Minister and the Ministers
shall hold office during the pleasure of the President.
(9) The Council of Ministers shall be collectively responsible to the Legislative
Assembly.
(10) Parliament may, by law, make provisions for giving effect to, or supplementing
provisions contained in the foregoing clauses and for all matter incidental or consequential
thereto.
(11) Any such law as is referred to in sub-clause (a) shall not be deemed to be an
amendment of this constitution for the purposes of article 368 notwithstanding that it
contains any provision which amends or has the effect of amending this constitution.
5
10

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Andaman and Nicobar Administration currently works under the Lt. Governor
who is appointed by the President of India. Andaman and Nicobar Islands currently have
only one Member of Parliament in House of the People and no representation in the Council
of States. The creation of a Legislature in Andaman and Nicobar Islands has been a long
standing demand and was also raised during the Home Ministry Advisory Committee meeting
for Andaman and Nicobar Islands on 28th July, 2017.
The Andaman and Nicobar Islands  are situated in the middle of the Bay of Bengal and
have been appropriately described by a Roman geographer in the second century as the
Islands of Good Fortune. Andaman and Nicobar Islands  have been blessed with exotic
fauna and flora-brilliant tropical flowers, orchids, hundreds of species of  birds, mammals,
reptiles and the like-the place also came to be known as a living museum on earth. Some of
the inhabitants are the oldest tribal communities in the world, their antiquities said to be
going back to Paleolithic times.
The  population of  these islands in 1971 was 1.15 lakh but now estimated population
is about 4.2 lakh. Andaman and Nicobar Islands  also occupies a unique place from the point
of view of defence. Andaman and Nicobar Islands  is a place of pilgrimage for every Indian.
During the freedom struggle also people were deported.
This Bill is in furtherance of the demand for a separate Legislature for Andaman and
Nicobar Islands  to achieve national integrity which can fulfilled after considering the local
aspirations, reasonable and legitimate aspirations of the people of Andaman and Nicobar
Islands. There is an imminent need to take cognizance of the growing demands and
aspirations of the people of Andaman and Nicobar Islands. Due to increasing population,
the people of Andaman need to have a proper forum to express themselves or to have a rule
of their own through the people's mandate. Their demand for a forum to express themselves
and to have a rule of their own is a highly justified demand.
So, through this Bill a democratic setup in the form of a Legislature for Union territory
with constitutional powers is proposed. Having a Legislature, Chief Minister & Council of
Ministers for Andaman and Nicobar Islands. The need of the hour is to give a voice to the
people of Andaman and Nicobar Islands and accept their long pending demand. The creation
of a Legislature will be a right step to lay the foundation of democracy and rule of law in the
Andaman and Nicobar Islands.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KULDEEP RAI SHARMA
October  31, 2019.

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for creation of Legislative Assembly for the Union
territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands. It further provides for appointment of  Council of
Ministers to be headed by a Chief Minister to aid and advise the Lieutenant Governor. The
Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
At this stage, it is not possible to give exact estimate of expenditure, both recurring  and
non-recurring, which will be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Kuldeep Rai Sharma, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—3059LS(S3)—15-11-2019.