1
Bill No. 287 of  2015
THE PROHIBITION BILL, 2015
By
SHRI KODIKUNNIL SURESH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for prohibition and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prohibition Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the Union territories only.
Short title
and extent.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Prohibition.
Punishment.
Reimbursement
of loss to the
States.
Power to make
rules.
2. Nothwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the Central Government shall, within a period of six months from the coming into force of this
Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, impose a total prohibition in the Union territories.
3. (1) After the issue of notification under section 2, no person shall manufacture, sell,
trade, export or import liquor in any Union territory.
(2) Whoever violates the provision of sub-section ( 1) shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than two years and also with a fine of rupees
one lakh.
4. All States having a prohibition law in force and any State which enacts a prohibition
law after the coming into force of this Act, shall be reimbursed by the Central Government,
the loss of revenue on account of prohibition for a period of five years to the extent of
one-half of such revenue loss.
5. (1) The Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule of both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rules shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5
10
15
20

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
It has been seen that many of the grave and serious crimes are committed under the
influence of liquor. Youth even at the age of teens have started drinking. They follow their
role models especially in movies and have made this a regular habit. Not only the families of
those who drink are affected but the Government also has to bear the health cost due to
frequent medical care required by heavy drinkers. Some of the State Governments are not
able to impose prohibition because of a huge revenue they get by sale of liquor. In fact, some
of the State Governments fix a target for sale of liquor during festival seasons.
Drinking is not India's culture. We have imported it from the west. Therefore, it is high
time of total prohibition is imposed throughout the country. Initially, some State Governments
will lose revenue on acount of this and the Central Government can compensate for a few
years.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KODIKUNNIL SURESH
November 18, 2015.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall reimburse the loss of
revenue on account of prohibition for a period of five years to the extent of half of such
revenue loss to the State Government. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. A recurring expenditure of about rupees five thousand
crore is likely to be involved.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

5
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legisative power is of a normal character.

GMGIPMRND—3048LS(S3)—03-12-2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for prohibition and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Kodikunnil Suresh, M.P.)