1
Short title.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL,  2019
By
SHRI GAURAV GOGOI,  M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2019.
2.  After article 26 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
26A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in articles 25 and 26, the State shall not
administer, control or manage any institution, including its properties, established or
maintained for religious or charitable purposes by a religious denomination or any section
thereof.
(2) All laws in force in the territory of India, or any law stipulated hence, in so far as
they are inconsistent with the provisions of clause ( 1), shall, to the extent of such
inconsistency, be void.".
Bill  No. 287 of  2019
Insertion of
new article
26A.
State not to
administer,
control or
manage any
institution,
including its
properties,
established or
maintained
for religious
or charitable
purposes by a
religious
denomination.
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The right to religious freedom, persevered from article 25 to article 28 of the Indian
Constitution, has served as a hallmark of India's status as a secular republic. However,
despite this right being sacralized in the coveted text, India's Hindu community has, over
the years, lost autonomous control over managing its temples and places of ritualistic
worship.
Several State Governments, through tailor-made versions of 'Hindu Religions and
Charitable Endowments Act', have seized away, from the Hindu community, administrative
and financial control over Hindu temples. On the other hand, presenting the more positive
and ideal trend, other faiths that equally co-inhabit secular India have continued to rightfully
exercise and celebrate their religious institutions. There is an imbalance prevalent in the
rights to religious freedoms in practicality. State laws that produce a situation of State
control over temples have also resulted in an increase in malpractices and mismanagement
of temples. As a result, several hundred temples in India are in an overall disgruntled
condition.
It is pertinent to raise the question of the relevance of State Governments administering
temples in a secular country. The Supreme Court, in the case of the Chidambaram (Nataraja)
temple in 2014, has shown the same questionability concerning the legality or requirement
of the State Governments on taking over temples and their management. The Court has
reinstated the undeniable importance of article 26 of the Indian Constitution, which confers
on the Indian citizens inalienable religious freedoms. It has been established that a state’s
permanent observation of control over a religious institution would be tantamount to
usurpation of the community's proprietary rights and violation of the fundamental rights
guaranteed by the Constitution.
Despite these proclamations, State control over temples has been on an upward
trend. The temples of India are required to be restored to being managed by true devotees
of the faith. The Bill, therefore, seeks to insert article 26A to the Constitution with a view to
rework the fundamental rights to ensure that such a discrepancy is resolved by preventing
the Governments from legislating over any matter that thwarts a religious community's
control over their places of worship or their religious freedoms. The Bill, therefore, attempts
to restore article 26 to its true intent and purpose.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; GAURAV GOGOI
October 31, 2019
2

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of  India
————
(Shri Gaurav Gogoi, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—3056LS(S3)—15-11-2019.