AS ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Bill No. 287 of  2022
THE MOTOR VEHICLES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
Sඁඋං Sൺඇඃൺඒ Bඁൺඍංൺ,  M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988
Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third  Year of the Republic  of India 
as follows:—     
1. (1) This Act may be called the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Short title and 
commencement.

  2. In section 41 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, in sub-section (1), after second 
proviso, the following provisos shall be inserted, namely:–
 "Provided also that no registration of new motor vehicle shall be made 
unless the applicant possess the requisite and valid driving license:
 Provided also that if the applicant does not possess requisite and valid 
driving license, he may apply jointly either with his spouse or a family member 
possessing the requisite and valid driving license and such applicant shall be 
deemed to be joint owner of the said motor vehicle:
 Provided also that an applicant whose license has been suspended may also 
be permitted to apply for registration of a new motor vehicle if the State in 
which the applicant intends to register permits the same:
 Provided also that if the dealer registers the new motor vehicle without the 
requisite and valid driving license of the applicant, such dealer shall be liable to 
imprisonment for three months and fine as may be prescribed:
 Provided also that an applicant possessing a learners license may apply for 
registration of a motor vehicle of upto 50 cc capacity.".
Amendment of 
section 41.
59 of 1988.

STATEMENT  OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 As per section 18 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 a driving license can be 
issued to such persons who clear the driving test. License is required to drive a 
vehicle, which means no person can take a vehicle for a drive without a valid license. 
Therefore, under section 181 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, it is a punishable 
offence to drive a vehicle without a license. 
 The Bill proposes that every vehicle dealer shall check every prospective 
buyer for a valid driving license for registration of new car and those dealers who 
violate this rule and register vehicles in the name of those persons without a valid 
driving license, they shall be punished with an imprisonment of three months or fine 
shall be imposed on them. 
 The Bill also seeks to include an amendment making it possible for a person 
not having driving license, to register a motor vehicle in co-ownership with spouse, 
close relative, or family member etc. Such vehicles which are registered in co-
ownership, cannot be sold or transferred without the agreement of both the parties 
and it means it would be illegal to sale the vehicle without consent of other partner. 
 Insurance companies follow the guidelines of Insurance Regulatory and 
Development Authority of India (IRDAI). According to the guidelines a valid 
driving license is mandatory for the vehicle driver. Therefore, if a driver does not 
have the driving license at the time of accident, the Insurance Company can reject 
the claim. 
 V alid driving license is necessary for the registration and without it one may 
face problem at the time of insurance and registration. A valid driving license is 
mandatory to avail the full coverage of insurance. Hence having a valid driving 
license is a necessity.
 The Bill also provides for registration of vehicle with a suspended license but 
it depends on the policy of concerned State in this regard. 
 Hence this Bill.
     Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                          SANJAY BHATIA
November 21,  2022

ANNEXURE 
[Eඑඍඋൺർඍ ൿඋඈආ ඍඁൾ Mඈඍඈඋ Vൾඁංർඅൾඌ Aർඍ, 1988] 
(59 ඈൿ 1988)
 * * * *
 41. (1) An application by or on behalf of the owner of a motor vehicle for 
registration shall be in such form and shall be accompanied by such documents, 
particulars and information and shall be made within such period as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government: 
 Provided that where a motor vehicle is jointly owned by more persons than one, 
the application shall be made by one of them on behalf of all the owners and such 
applicant shall be deemed to be the owner of the motor vehicle for the purposes of 
this Act. 
 Provided further that in the case of a new motor vehicle, the application for 
registration in the State shall be made by the dealer of such motor vehicle, if he 
knew motor vehicle is being registered in the same State in which the dealer is 
situated.
 * * * *
Registration, 
how to be made.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988
————
(Shri Sanjay Bhatia, M.P .) 