1
THE MILITARY SERVICE (REGULATION OF TRANSFER OF
PERSONNEL APPOINTED ON COMPASSIONATE
GROUNDS) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI KUNWAR PUSHPENDRA SINGH CHANDEL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the regulation of transfer of military personnel appointed on
compassionate  grounds.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Military Service (Regulation of Transfer of Personnel
Appointed on Compassionate Grounds) Act, 2016.
Short title,
commencement.
and application.
Bill No. 288 of  2016
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Definitions.
Provisions for
transfer of
dependant
family
member of
military
personnel
appointed on
compassionate
grounds.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
(3) It shall apply to the military services under the control of the Central Government.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appointment on compassionate grounds" means any appointment of a
dependant family member of military personnel on compassionate grounds;
(b) "competent Authority" refers to an officer serving in army or navy or air force
and empowered to issue orders of transfer of military personnel;
(c) "dependant family member" means
(i) spouse; or
(ii) son (including adopted son; or
(iii) daughter (including adopted daughter); or
(iv) in the case of unmarried military personnel, brother or sister who was
wholly dependent on the military personnel; or
(v) parents, if the military personnel was their only child; and
(d) "military personnel" means a person employed in army or naval or air force
and who—
(i) dies in harness; or
(ii) killed in action; or
(iii) medically boarded out and is unfit for civil employment.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law or rule or order or bye-law or
notification or any judgment or order of any court, for the time being in force, the competent
Authority shall, while effecting transfer of the dependant family member appointed on
compassionate grounds, take into consideration the sex, economic condition of his family
and distance from his residence to place of posting:
Provided that if the widow of the military personnel is appointed on compassionate
grounds and the children are pursuing education and has been serving at the same station,
in such case transfer shall be at the same station or at the station near to the place of
residence of such personnel.
5
10
15
20
25

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Our national borders are safe and secure due to indomitable courage, sacrifice and
selfless services of our military forces. Their acts are invaluable. They do not hesitate to
sacrifice their lives while serving the nation. In the post Independence era, India has faced
many wars and a good number of military personnel had sacrificed their lives. On one hand,
the country loses its great soldier, a family loses the sole earning members on the other. The
person dying in harness leaves behind him old parents, spouse and young children as
survivors. Though one of the eligible and dependant family member  is offered an appointment
on compassionate grounds, yet, after a particular period of service at one place of posting
when one is transferred to far located station consequent upon completion of tenure or on
one's promotion, the entire family is literally left in the lurch. The problem gets compounded
and assumes all the more severe proportion in case the dependant widow has to move with
little kids and, old aged in-laws at new place of posting. However, in case the military personnel
appointed on compassionate grounds are allowed to remain at the same station or posted at
a station which is near to the place of ordinary residence, the dependant members of family
will not only get a respite from moving to new place but will also enable the person to stay
committed to the service to the nation with all the more diligence and dedication.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KUNWAR  PUSHPENDRA  SINGH  CHANDEL
October 10, 2016.
3

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the regulation of transfer of military personnel appointed on
compassionate grounds.
————
(Shri Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2950LS(S4)—21-11-2016.