1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
By
SHRI JANARDAN SINGH SIGRIWAL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2019.
Bill No.  288 of  2019
Short title.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. After article 21A of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,—
‘‘21B. (1) Every citizen shall have the right to shelter in such manner as the
State may, by law, determine.
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall prevent the State from making any provision for
fixing criteria for allotment of houses to the citizens.
(3) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any special housing
schemes for senior citizens, physically challenged persons, persons belonging to the
scheduled castes and scheduled tribes, other backward classes, divorced women and
other weaker sections of the society.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this article, ‘‘shelter’’ means a dwelling unit
with all basic civic amenities.’’.
Insertion of
new article
21B.
5
10

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Even after seven decades of independence, crores of citizens are still homeless. They
have to suffer the elements in all its fury—be it winter, summer or rainy season. The problem
of homelessness is increasing day-by-day both in rural and urban areas. Population explosion
and other social and economic factors are the major reasons for housing shortage in the
country. Due to acute shortage of houses in the country, lakhs of poor people are forced to
live on the pavements, footpaths, bus shelters, under flyovers and bridges, as they cannot
afford houses of their own. Crores of people are living in Jhuggi and Jhopris, kutcha and
semi-pucca houses which lack basic facilities like sanitation, electricity, clean water, etc.
Shelter is one of the basic human needs. It is necessary that the Government should come
forward to ensure adequate housing for homeless citizens not only because it is their right,
but, because it is an investment that would guarantee a healthy and satisfied citizens.
The Supreme Court has recognized the right to housing by bringing it within the ambit
of right to life. At the same time, housing right has been recognized and reaffirmed in all
international and regional covenants, which have been ratified by our country. Hence, the
Central and State Governments are under legal obligation to provide adequate housing to
the millions of people who are living in absolute homelessness. Therefore, it has become
more necessary to incorporate right to shelter as a fundamental right in the Constitution.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.
N
EW DELHI; JANARDAN SINGH 'SIGRIWAL'
October  29, 2019.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for incorporation of right to shelter in the Fundamental
Rights of the citizens. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. At this stage, it is not possible to give an exact amount of
expenditure to be involved. However, it is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of
about rupees ten thousand crore is likely to be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees two thousand crore is also likely to be
involved.

5
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * * *
21A. The State shall provide free and compulsory education to all children of the age
of six to fourteen years in such manner as the State may, by law, determine.
* * * * * * *
Right to
Education.

MGIPMRND—3058LS(S3)—15-11-2019.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Janardan Singh 'Sigriwal', M.P .)