1
THE RELIGIOUS CONVERSION (PROHIBITION) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for prohibition on religious conversions by inducement, coercion or undue
influence and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Religious Conversion (Prohibition) Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “coercion” means compelling an individual to act against his will by the use
of psychological pressure or physical force causing bodily injury or threat thereof;
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 288 of  2015
Definitions.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(b) “inducement” means offering any gratification or benefit, whether material
or otherwise;
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(d) “undue influence” means the unconscientious use by one person of his
power or influence over another in order to persuade the other to act in accordance
with the will of the person exercising such influence.
3.  (1) No person shall convert or encourage conversion of any individual from one
religion to another by inducement or coercion or undue influence.
(2) The onus of proof as to whether a religious conversion was not effected through
inducement, coercion or undue influence shall lie on the person so converted and, where
such conversion has been facilitated by any person, such other person.
4. Every individual converting from one religion to another shall submit to such authority
as may be prescribed a declaration to the effect that the conversion was not effected through
inducement, coercion and undue influence:
Provided that where the prescribed authority is satisfied that there is evidence of
inducement, coercion or undue influence, it may cause the matter to be investigated further.
5. (1) Whoever contravenes the provision of sub-section ( 1) of section 3 shall be
punished with imprisonment for a term, which may extend to five years and also liable to a
fine, which may extend to five lakh rupees.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (1), whoever contravenes the provisions
of section 3 in respect of any person belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled
Tribes shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years and
also be liable to a fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees.
6. (1) If any difficulty arise in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from
the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid
before each House of Parliament.
7. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument having
effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.
8. (1) The Central Government may make, by notification in the Official Gazette, rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Prohibition of
religious
conversion on
certain
grounds.
Power to
make rules.
Punishment.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Declaration as
to conversion.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Constitution confers on each individual the fundamental right to profess, practice
and propagate his religion. However, the individual right to freedom of conscience and
religion cannot be extended to construe a collective right to proselytise; for the right to
religious freedom belongs equally to the person converting and the individual sought to be
converted.
Still, there have been umpteen cases of religious conversions, both mass and individual.
Obviously, such incidents have been hotly debated, more so in a multi-religious society,
such as ours. The presence of pseudo-social organizations with a hidden agenda to convert
the vulnerable sections of other religions has further vitiated the environment of mutual
harmony among different religions. There have been instances when gullible people have
been converted by offering inducements or under undue influence. Some have been forced
to convert to other religions. Such incidents not only infringe the freedom of religion of the
persons so converted but also militate against the secular fabric of our society.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to:—
(i) prohibit religious conversions which are effected through inducement, undue
influence or coercion by making it an offence;
(ii) provide greater punishment for such conversion of persons belonging to the
Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes;
(iii) provide that the onus of proof that the conversion was not effected through
inducement, coercion or undue influence lies on the person converting them and the person
converted; and
(iv) provide that every individual converting from one religion to another shall submit
to the prescribed authority a declaration that the conversion was not effected through
inducement, coercion and undue influence and such authority can make an inquiry in
suspected cases.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; BHAR TRUHARI  MAHTAB
November 13, 2015.

4
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for prohibition on religious conversions by inducement, coercion or undue
influence and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3027LS(S3)—03-12-2015.