Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
                   
                                                       
          
Bill No. 289 of  2022
THE CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
Dඋ. Sඁඋං඄ൺඇඍ E඄ඇൺඍඁ Sඁංඇൽൾ,  M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third  Year of the Republic  of India as 
follows:— 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2022. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
   2. In section 23 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (hereinafter referred to as the 
principal Act), sub-section (3) shall be omitted.
Short title and commencement.
5 of 1908.

 3.   In section 35A of the principal Act,—  
  (1) for the marginal heading, the following marginal heading shall be substituted, 
namely:—
    “Additional and exemplary costs in respect of false or vexatious claims or defences”. 
 (2) in sub-section (1), for the words “of cost by way of compensation”, the words 
“of additional and exemplary costs” shall be substituted.
 ( 3) after sub-section (1), following provisos shall be inserted, namely:—  
  “Provided that the court shall, while determining the additional and exemplary cost, 
take into consideration the party’s adverse socio-economic condition and the hardship 
that may be caused by imposing such costs:
  Provided further that out of the costs so awarded, part of the costs shall be ordered 
to be paid to the party against whom the claim or defence of false or vexatious nature has 
been set up and part of it shall be ordered to be deposited in the Judicial Infrastructure 
Fund set up under section 149A.” 
 4. For section 89 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:— 
  “89.( 1) Where it appears to the court, having regard to the nature of the dispute 
involved in the suit or other proceeding that the dispute is fit to be settled by one of 
the non-adjudicatory alternative dispute resolution processes, namely, conciliation, 
judicial settlement, settlement through Lok Adalat or mediation the court shall, 
preferably before framing the issues, record its opinion and direct the parties to 
attempt the resolution of dispute through one of the said processes which the parties 
prefer or the court determines: 
    Provided that where the parties prefer conciliation, they shall furnish to the 
court the name or names of the conciliators and on obtaining his or their consent, the 
court may specify a time limit for the completion of conciliation and thereupon, the 
provisions of sections 65 to 81 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, as far 
as may be, shall apply mutatis mutandis and to this effect, the court shall inform the 
parties and a copy of the settlement agreement reached between the parties shall be 
sent to the court concerned: 
   Provided further that in the absence of the settlement, the conciliator shall send 
a brief report on the process of conciliation and the outcome thereof to the court.
      ( 3) Where the dispute has been referred:— 
   ( a) for judicial settlement, the court shall endeavour to effect a compromise 
between the parties and shall follow such procedure as may be prescribed; 
    ( b) to Lok Adalat, the provisions of sub-section (3) to (7) of section 20, sections 
21 and 22 of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 shall apply in respect of the 
dispute so referred and the Lok Adalat shall send a copy of the award to the court 
concerned and in case no award is passed, send a brief report on the proceedings 
held and the outcome thereof; 
Amendment of 
section 35A.
Amendment of 
section 89.
Settlement of 
disputes outside 
the court.
26 of 1996.
39 of 1987.

  ( c) for mediation, the Court shall refer the dispute to a suitable institution or 
person or persons with appropriate directions such as time-limit for completion of 
mediation and reporting to the Court.
  (4) The court shall on receipt of copy of the settlement agreement or the award 
of Lok Adalat, if it finds any inadvertent mistakes or obvious errors, it shall draw the 
attention of the conciliator or the Lok Adalat who shall take necessary steps to rectify 
the agreement or award suitably with the consent of parties. 
(5) Without prejudice to section 8 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 
and other provisions, the court may also refer the parties to arbitration if both parties 
enter into an arbitration agreement or file applications seeking reference to arbitration 
during the pendency of a suit or other civil proceeding and in such an event, the 
arbitration shall be governed, as far as may be, by the provisions of the Arbitration and 
Conciliation Act, 1996 and the suit or other proceeding shall be deemed to have been 
disposed off accordingly.”.
 5. In section 95 of the principal act, in sub-section (1), for the word “not exceeding 
fifty thousand rupees”, the word “not exceeding one lakh rupees” shall be substituted.  
     6.  After section 149 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 
“149A. The High Court shall set up and administer Judicial Infrastructure Fund 
for the purposes of development of infrastructure in subordinate courts under its 
jurisdiction.” 
  7. In Order VII of the principle Act, in rule 14, sub-rule (4), for the word “plaintiff’s 
witness” the word “defendant’s witness” shall be substituted.
  8.  In Order VIII of the principle Act, in rule 1A, in sub-rule (4), in clause (a), for the 
word “plaintiff’s witness” the word “defendant’s witness” shall be substituted.
  9. In Order X of the principal Act,—
    (a) for rule 1A, the following rule shall be substituted, namely:— 
   “( 1A). At the stage of framing issues or the first hearing of the suit, the Court 
shall direct the parties to opt either mode of the settlement outside the court as 
specified in sub-section (1) of section 89 and for this purpose may require the 
parties to be personally present and in case of non-attendance without substantial 
cause, follow the procedure for compelling the attendance of witness. The court 
shall fix the date of appearance before such forum or authority or persons as may 
be opted by the parties or chosen by the court.”;
    ( 2) rule 1B shall be omitted; and
    ( 3) for rule 1C, the following rule shall be substituted, namely:—  
    “( 1C). Where a suit is referred under rule 1A and the presiding officer of 
conciliation forum or authority or the person to whom the matter has been referred 
is satisfied that it would not be proper in the interest of justice to proceed with the 
Amendment of 
Order VIII.
Amendment of 
section 149.
Amendment of 
Order VII.
Amendment of 
section 95.
Amendment of 
Order X.
Direction of the 
court to opt for 
any one mode 
of alternative 
dispute 
resolution.
26 of 1996.
26 of 1996.
Appearance 
before the court 
consequent 
upon the failure 
of eﬀorts of 
conciliation.

matter further, in view of the stand taken by the respective.”.
  10.  In Order XVII of the principal Act, in rule 1, the proviso shall be omitted.
  11.  In Order XX of the principal Act, in rule 6A, for the words, “fifteen days”  the 
words, “thirty days” shall be substituted.
   
Amendment of 
Order XVII.
Amendment of 
Order XX.

STATEMENT  OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 The Supreme Court in the case of Durgesh Shamra vs. Jayshree held that if two 
courts are subordinate to different High Courts, one High Court has no power, jurisdiction 
or authority to transfer a case pending in any court subordinate to that High Court to a Court 
subordinate to another High Court. It is only the Supreme Court (this Court) which may 
order the transfer.  Thus, makes section 23(3) of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. 
 Section 89 of the Code which provides for settlement of disputes outside the 
court is inappropriately worded, as pointed out by the Supreme Court in the case of Afcons 
Infrastructure Ltd. vs. Cherian Varkey Construction Co. (P) LTD. The language adopted has 
created difficulty in giving effect to the provision. Section 89 should be recast as indicated 
above. Secondly, the allied provisions, namely, Order X, rules 1A to 1C had been recast in 
accordance with the provision of section 89. With an aim to make the conciliation scheme 
effective, it is proposed to make it obligatory for the court to refer the dispute after the issues 
are framed for settlement either by way of arbitration, conciliation, mediation, judicial 
settlement or through Lok Adalat. However, the procedure of section 89 is defeating the 
purpose of its enactment. Thus, firstly, the Supreme Court in the Afcon Infrastructure case 
and 19th Law Commission in its report no. 238 titled as “Amendment of Section 89 of the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 and Allied Provisions” recommended certain changes which 
has been incorporated in this act.  
 In addition to it, various Judgments of the Supreme Court and High Courts had 
time and again emphasized that the lack of appropriate provisions relating to costs has 
resulted in a steady increase in malicious, vexatious, false, frivolous and speculative suits. 
Any attempt to reduce the pendency or encourage alternative dispute resolution processes 
or to streamline the civil justice system will fail in the absence of appropriate provisions 
relating to costs. The Supreme Court in the case of Sanjeev Kumar Jain vs. Raghubir Saran 
Charitable Trust addressed the issues relating to costs. Thus, in order to deal with the 
matter in depth the Law Commission in its report no. 240 titled as “costs in civil litigation” 
addressed this issue keeping in view the triple goals of (i) ensuring realistic and reasonable 
costs to the successful party, (ii) curbing false and frivolous litigation, and (iii) discouraging 
unnecessary adjournments.
 Hence this Bill.
 Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                   SHRIKANT EKNATH SHINDE
      23 November, 2022

ANNEXURE 
Eඑඍඋൺർඍඌ Fඋඈආ Tඁൾ Cඈൽൾ Oൿ Cංඏංඅ Pඋඈർൾൽඎඋൾ, 1908
(Aർඍ Nඈ. 5 ඈൿ 1908)
*                         *                            *          *
 35A.    (1) If any suit or other proceedings including an execution proceedings but 
excluding an appeal or a revision any party objects to the claim of defence on the ground 
that the claim or defence or any part of it is, as against the objector, false or vexatious to the 
knowledge of the party by whom it has been put forward, and if thereafter, as against the 
objector, such claim or defence is disallowed, abandoned or withdrawn in whole or in part, 
the Court if it so thinks fit, may, after recording its reasons for holding such claim or defence 
to be false or vexatious, make an order for the payment to the object or by the party by whom 
such claim or defence has been put forward, of cost by way of compensation.
*                         *                            *          *
 89.   (1) Where it appears to the Court that there exist elements of a settlement 
which may be acceptable to the parties, the Court shall formulate the terms of settlement 
and give them to the parties for their observations and after receiving the observations 
of the parties, the Court may reformulate the terms of a possible settlement and refer the 
same for:— 
(a) arbitration; 
(b) conciliation; 
(c) judicial settlement including settlement through Lok Adalat; or 
(d) mediation. 
(2) Where a dispute has been referred— 
 ( a)   for arbitration or conciliation, the provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation 
Act, 1996 (26 of 1996) shall apply as if the proceedings for arbitration or conciliation were 
referred for settlement under the provisions of that Act; 
 ( b)   to Lok Adalat, the Court shall refer the same to the Lok Adalat in accordance 
with the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 20 of the Legal Services Authority
Act, 1987 (39 of 1987) and all other provisions of that Act shall apply in respect of the 
dispute so referred to the Lok Adalat; 
        (c)   for judicial settlement, the Court shall refer the same to a suitable institution 
or person and such institution or person shall be deemed to be a Lok Adalat and all the 
provisions of the Legal Services Authority Act, 1987 (39 of 1987) shall apply as if the 
dispute were referred to a Lok Adalat under the provisions of that Act; 
       (d)   for mediation, the Court shall effect a compromise between the parties and shall 
follow such procedure as may be prescribed.
*                         *                            *          *
Compensatory costs in respect of false or vexatious claims 
or defences.
Settlement of 
disputes outside 
the Court.

 95.      Where, in any suit in which an arrest or attachment has been effected or a 
temporary injunction granted under the last preceding section,— 
 ( a)  it appears to the Court that such arrest, attachment or injunction was applied for 
on insufficient grounds, or 
 ( b) the suit of the plaintiff fails and it appears to the Court that there was no 
reasonable or probable grounds for instituting the same, the defendant may apply to the 
Court, and the Court may, upon such application, award against the plaintiff by its order 
such amount, not exceeding one thousand rupees, as it deems a reasonable compensation to 
the defendant for the expense or injury (including injury to reputation) caused to him:
 Provided that a Court shall not award, under this section, an amount exceeding the 
limits of its peculiar jurisdiction. 
 ( 2)  An order determining any such application shall bar any suit for compensation 
in respect of such arrest, attachment or injunction.
*                         *                            *          *
ORDER VII
14. (1)*                         *                            *          *
      (2) *                         *                            *          *
      (3) *                         *                            *          *
      (4)   Nothing in this rule shall apply to document produced for the cross-examination of 
the plaintiffs witnesses, or handed over to a witness merely to refresh his memory.
*                         *                            *          *
ORDER VIII
1A.  (1) *                      *                            *          *
       (2) *                      *                            *          *
      (3)*                         *                            *          *
    (4) Where a defendant denies an allegation of fact in the plaint, he must not do so 
evasively, but answer the point of substance. Thus, if it is alleged that he received a certain 
sum of money, it shall not be sufficient to deny that he received that particular amount, but 
he must deny that he received that sum or any part thereof, or else set out how much he 
received. And if an allegation is made with diverse circumstances, it shall not be sufficient 
to deny it along with those circumstances.
*                         *                            *          *
ORDER X
 1A.    After recording the admissions and denials, the court shall direct the parties to 
the suit to opt either mode of the settlement outside the court as specified in sub-section (1) 
of section 89. On the option of the parties, the court shall fix the date of appearance before 
such forum or authority as may be opted by the parties. 
Compensation for obtaining arrest, attachment or injunction on insuﬃcient 
grounds.
Production of 
document on 
which plaintiﬀ 
sues or relies.
Evasive-denial.
Direction of the 
court to opt for 
any one mode 
of alternative 
dispute 
resolution.

1B.  Appearance before the conciliatory forum or authority.— Where a suit is referred 
under rule 1A, the parties shall appear before such forum or authority for conciliation of the 
suit. 
1C.  Appearance before the court consequent to the failure of efforts of conciliation.—
Where a suit is referred under rule 1A, and the presiding officer of conciliation forum or 
authority is satisfied that it would not be proper in the interest of justice to proceed with the 
matter further, then, it shall refer the matter again to the court and direct the parties to appear 
before the court on the date fixed by it.
*                         *                            *          *
ORDER XVII
1. The court may, if sufficient cause is shown, at any stage of the suit grant time to 
the parties or to any of them, and may from time to time adjourn the hearing of the suit for 
reasons to be recorded in writing: 
Provided that no such adjournment shall be granted more than three time to a party 
during hearing of the suit.
*                         *                            *          *
ORDER XX
6A. (1) Every endeavour shall be made to ensure that the decree is drawn up as 
expeditiously as possible and, in any case, within fifteen days from the date on which the 
judgment is pronounced. 
(2) An appeal may be preferred against the decree without filing a copy of the decree 
and in such a case the copy made available to the party by the court shall for the purposes 
of rule 1 of Order XLI be treated as the decree. But as soon as the decree is drawn, the 
judgment shall cease to have the effect of a decree for the purposes of execution or for any 
other purpose.
*                         *                            *          *
*                         *                            *          *
Court may grant 
time and adjourn 
hearing.
Preparation of 
decree.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
————
(Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde, M.P .)