Bill No. z8 or 1958 @ 
THE INDIAN OATHS (AMEND-
MENT) BILL, 1958 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 

Bm No. :as of ItsS 
TIlE INDIAN OA TIlS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1958 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Indian Oaths Act, 1873. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Ninth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Indian Oaths (Amendment) Act, Short title. 
1958. 
10 of 18730 5 2. Section 16 of the Indian Oaths Act, 1873, shall be omitted. 
, 
Omission of 
section 16. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
All full time Government servants in civil employ are required to 
take an oath of allegiance to India and to the Constitution of India 
as by law established and the taking of the oath is one of the terms 
of their appointment. This practice of administering oath to new 
entrants to Government service has been in vogue ever since the 
attainment of independence in August, 1947. Section 16 of the Indian 
Oaths Act. 1873, however, provides that no person appointed to any 
office shall, before entering on the execution of the duties of his office, 
be required to make any oath, or to make or subscribe any affirmation 
or declaration whatever. It is, therefore, proposed to repeal the 
section. 
R. M. HAJARNAVIS. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 11th March, 1958. 
" 

• 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE INDIAN OATHS ACT, 1873 
(No. 10 OF 1873) 
• • • • • • • 
3. Nothing herein contained applies to proceedings before Courts SaviJ;lg of tha 
Martial, or to oaths, affirmations or declarations prescribed by the ;::U~a­
Central Government with respect to members of the Armed Forces tiona. 
of the Union . 
• • • • • • • • 
III-PEnsoNS BY WHOM OATHS OR AFFIRMATIONS MUST BE MADE 
5. Oaths or affirmations shall be made ~ the following persons: - Oaths 0: aflirmauon. 
(a) all witnesses, that is to say, all persons who may lawfully to be made 
be examined, or give, or be required to give, evidence by or by witneaae •• 
before Bny Court or person having by law or consent of parties 
authority to examine such persons or to receive evidence; 
(b) interpreters of questions put to, and evidence given by, IDterpretera. 
witnesses; and 
(c) jurors: Juror •. 
Provided that where the witness is a child under twelve years 
of age, and the Court or person having authority to examine such 
witness is of opinion that, though he understands the duty of speaking 
the truth, he does not understand the nature of an oath or affirmation. 
the foregoing provisions of this section and the provisions of section 
6 shall not apply to such witness, but in any such case the absence 
of an oath or affirmation shall not render inadmissible any evidence 
given by suC'h witness nor affect the obligation of the witness to state 
the truth. 
Nothing herein contained shall r-tnder it lawful to administer, in 
a criminal proceeding, an oath or affirmation to the accused person. 
unless he i~ examined as a witness for the defence or necessary to 
administer to the official interpreter of any Court, after he has 
entered on the execution of the· duties of his office, an oath or affirma-
tion that he will faithfully discharge those duties. 
• • • • • • • • 
16. Subject to-the-provisions of sections 3 and 5, no person appoint- Offi8ia1 oatlu 
ed to any office shall, before entering on the execution of the duties abo shed. 
of his office, be required to make any oath, or to make or s)lbscribe 
any affirmation or declaration whatever. 
3 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Indian Oaths Act, 1873. 
(Shri R. M. HajarnafJis, 
Deputy Minister llf Law.) 