DiU No. as of 1954. 
THE TERRITORIAL ARMY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1954 
(As INTRODUCED·IN THE LoK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the TerritoriaZ Army Act, 1948. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
I. Short title.-This Act may be called the Territorial Army 
(Amendment) Act, 1954. 
2. Amendment of section 2, Act LVI of 1948.-In section 2 of the s 
Territorial Army Act, 1948 (hereinafter referred to as the principal 
Act), after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:-
'( dd) "public utility service" means any undertaking which 
supplies power, light, gas or water to the public, or caqies on a 
public transport, or maintains any system of public conservancy 10 
or sanitation and which is declared, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, by the Central Government to be a public utility 
service to which this Act applies: 
Provided that no such notification shall be issued unless the 
Central Government is satisfied that, having regard to the needs [5 
of the Territorial Army, the persons employed in any such pub-
lic utility service should, in the public interest, be made com-
pulsorily liable for service in that Army under this Act.'. 
3. Insertion of new section 6A in Act LVI of 1948.-After section 
6 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, 20 
namely:-
"6A.. LialbiZity of certain persons for compulsory service in the 
Temtorial Army.-(l) Without preJudice to the provision con-
tained in .. ection 6, every person employed under the Govern-
ment or in a public utility service who has attained the age of 
twenty years but has not completed the age of forty years shall, 25 
subject to the other provisions contained in this section and sub-
ject to such rules as may be made in this behaU, be liable, when 
so required to do, to perform service in the Territorial Army. 

5 
10 
IS 
2S 
:0 
35 
45 
2 
(2) Where it appears to the prescribed authority that, having 
regard to the strength of the Territorial Army or of any unit 
thereof in any area or place or, having regard to the exigencies 
of service in the Territorial Army, it is necessary that persons 
compulsorily liable to perform service in the Territorial Army 
undf>r sub-section (1) should be called upon for such service, the 
prescribed authority may call upon such number of persons as 
he thinks fit for the purpose of performing service in the Terri-
torial Army. 
(3) In requisitioning the services of any persons under 8ub-
section (2), the prescribed authority shall have regard to the age, 
physical fitness, qualifications and experience of the persons to 
be called upon for service and the nature of the work previousl)' 
performed by them while employed under the Government or 
in the public utility service, and the work to be performed by 
them in the Territorial Army. 
(4) For the purpose of enabling it to exercise any of the 
powers conferred by sub-section (3), the prescribed authority 
may require any such persons- to fill up such forms as may be 
prescribed and sign and lodge them with the prescribed authority 
within such time as may be allowed in this behalf. 
(5) Any person whose services are requisitioned under this 
section rtlay be required to join the Territorial Army as an officer 
or as an enrolled person according to the rules made in this be-
half by the Central Government, and where any person has so 
joined the Territorial Army, he shall be entitled to the same 
rights and privileges and be subject to the same liabilities as an 
officer or enrolled person under the provisions of this Act. , 
Exp~anation.-For the purposes of this section, the expres-
sion "person employed under the Government or in a public 
utility service" shall not include-
(a) a woman;· 
(b) a member of the regular Army, the Navy or the 
Air Force or a member of any Reserve Force; 
(c) a person who is not a citizen of India; 
(d) a person employed under the Government in any 
country or place outside India for so long as he is so employ-
ed; and 
(e) any other persons as may he exempted from the 
o.per~tion of thi~ Act by the Central Government, by notifica-
tion m the OffiCIal Gazette, on the ground tha~ having regard 
to the nature of the service performed by sueh persons or to 
the exigencies of the service in which they are employed it 
is, in th~ ,!pinion of the Central Government, expedient'in 
the pubhc mlerest that they should not be liable to perform 
service u'nder this Act." 

3 
4. Insertion of new section lOA in Act LVI of 1948.-After section 
10 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely:- ' 
"lOA. Punishment for failure to lodge forms duly filled up 
etc.- 5 
If any person fails without sufficient cause 
(a) to fill up the prescribed forms and lodge them with 
the prescribed authority as required by sub-section (4) of sec-
tion 6A, or 
(b) to report himself for service when so required to do 10 
by the prescribed authority under sub-section (2) of that sec-
tion, or 
(c) to submit himself to medical or other examination 
when so called upon to do by the prescribed authority under 
rules made under this Act, IS 
he shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to 
three months or with fine which may extend to two hundred 
rupees or with both." 
5. Amendment of section 14, Ad LVI of 1948.-In sub-section (21 
of section 14 of the principal Act, clause (a) shall be. relettered as 20 
clause (aaa),and before that clause as so relettered, the following 
clauses shall be inserted, namely:-
"(a) prescribe .. the form under sub-section (4) of section 6A, 
the particulars that should be furnished therein and the authority 
with which, and the period within which, the form should be 25 
lodged; 
(aa) prescrihe the procedure for requiring persons liable 
for compulsory service in the Territorial Army to be medically 
or otherwise examined with a view to determining whether they 
satisfy thp. conditions imposed under this Act;". 30 

4 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Recruitment to the urban units of the Territorial Army has not 
so far been satisfactory, especially in the technical units. The Bill 
seeks to impose compulsory liability for enrolment in the Territorial 
Army for certain categories of employees, namely; Government 
servants and employees of specified public utility concerns in select-
ed age groups. It is proposed to utilize this liability to fill up 
deficiencies in the authorised strength of the Territorial Army units. 
The Bill, if enacted, will also facilitate expansion of the Territorial 
Army in an emergency. Public utility concerns have been included 
in the compulsory enrolment scheme in order to ensure that essential 
services continue to function in an emergency. 
The Bill seeks to provide the necessary legal basis for calling for 
particulars regarding age, calling up for inquiry and medical exami-
nation, of persons liable to be enrolled under the scheme, the 
regist.ration and calling up of the persons considered fit for service 
in the Territorial Army and other allied matters. 
NEW DEIm; 
The 13th May, 1954. 
MAHAVIR TYAGI. 

S 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The scheme for the liability to compulsory enrolment of Govern-
ment servants and certain categories of employees of public utility 
concerns involves expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
The scheme is at present intended to enable Government, to fill up 
deficiencies in the authorised strengths of certain Territorial Army 
Units. The expenditure on the pay and allowances of the enrolled 
personnel and requirement of training officers etc. will be the same 
as for the normal authorised strength of Territorial Army units. A 
small amount of expenditure may have to be incurred on the 
registration of personnel covered by the scheme for compulsory en-
rolment and on the administrative arrangements for their call up, 
where necessary. 
An extract from the explanatory notes to the Defence Services 
Estimates for the year 1954-55 is given below. 
EXPLANATORY NOTES 
The Territorial Army was constituted under the Territorial Army 
Act, 1948 and commenced raising in 1949. When fully formed, it 
will be composed of combatant technical and administrative units. 
The ~ersonnel of the Territorial Army are given periodical military 
trainmg. During the training period and when embodied for service, 
they are entitled to pay, allowances, etc., at the same rates as for 
corresponding ranks of the regular Indian Forces. 

6 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
The Bill which seeks to amend the Territorial Army Act, 1948, 
imposes a liability on all persons employed under the Government 
or in a public utility service, who have attained the age of twenty 
years but ~ave not completed the age of forty years for compulsory 
military service. Having imposed a potential liability for com-
pulsory military service on all such persons, the Bill leaves most of 
the matters relating to administrative details for givinf effect to the 
scheme, from the stage of requiSitioning the services 0 such persons 
to the stage of their being actually called out for service in the Terri-
torial Army, to be prescribed. by subordinate legislation by the 
Central Government. For the successful implementation of the 
scheme, the. powers to determine the circumstances under which the 
services of such persons should be requisitioned for the purpose of 
performing service in the Territorial Army, and the authorities by 
which the services of such persons should be requisitioned, to pre-
scribe the standard.:; of physical fitness and other qualifications of such 
persons, to prescribe forms for obtaining particulars from such 
persons, to lay down the procedure to be followed in bolding medical 
and other examinations etc., have been delegated to the Central 
Government to be prescribed by means of subordinate legislation, as 
it is not practicable for Parliament to lay down such details in the 
Bill. Some of the powers delegated to the Central Government such 
as the power to determine the circumstances under which the services 
of persons l~able for compulsory military service in the Territorial 
Army should be requisitioned, etc. which may not appear prima facie 
to be normal in character are reaily so if one has regard to the fact 
that in enactments relating to the Army, the Navy and the Air Force, 
it is not possible for Parliament to lay down matters relating to such 
administrative details in the law itself. The proposed delegations 
are, therefore, normal. 

LOK SABHA 
BILL 
further to amend the Territorial Army Act, 194R. 
• The President hal), in pursuance of clause (3) of article II7 
of the Constitution of India, recommended to the Lok Sabha 
the consideration of the Bill. 
• 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary • 
(Shri Mahavir Tyagi, 
Minister for Defence Organisation.) ,;. 
UI1'~·).AD-2240 l'H-20-5-540-17GO 