१ 10४ ४38

As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

Bill No. 28 of 1998

THE TOBACCO GROWERS (BENEFIT) BILL, 1998
By
Suri R. Sampasiva Rao, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the protection and welfare of tobacco growers.

| it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows: —

1. (J) This Act may be called the Tobacco Growers (Benefit) Act, 1998. Shor ile,
(2) Itextends to the whole of India, pista

(3) Itshall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification !४४४
in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — Definitions.
(a) “tobacco grower" means any person who cultivates tobacco;

(0) "small and marginal tobacco growers" shall mean tobacco growers who are
declared as such under this Act; and

(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.


Establishment
of Tobacco
Growers
Benefit Fund.

Power to make
rales.

‘ ' 2
3. The Central Government shall procure through the Tobacco Board all the |
tobacco produced in the country and shall also fix remunerative price of tobacco every
year after taking into consideration the increase in prices of tobacco seeds, pesticides
and fertilizers, total investment capacity of tobacco growers and such other factors,
as may be prescribed.

4. The Central Government shall endeavour to export all the excess tobacco produced
in the country during a year,

5. The entire tobacco grown by the small and marginal tobacco growers shall be
compulsorily insured free of cost by the Central Government against natural calamities,
decline in yields of tobacco produced, fall in prices of tobacco and such other
eventualities, as may be prescribed:

6. (7) The Central Government shall establish a Fund to be known as the Tobacco
Growers Benefit Fund.

(2) The Central Government and State Government shall contribute to the Fund
in such ratio, as may be prescribed.

(3) The fund shall be utilized for the following purposes:—

(a) to extend financial help to the small and marginal farmers in such cases, as
may be prescribed; and

(b) giving financial assistance to tobacco growers for purchasing tobacco seeds,
pesticides and fertilizers and in cases of low yields or full in prices of tobacco or
destruction of their crops due to rains, cyclones and floods.

7. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Tobacco is one of the commercial crops being produced in Andhra Pradesh and
पिन States. The estimated area under tobacco cultivation is 6600 hectares and most of

which is under FCV tobacco.

| Due to problems being faced for marketing the produce, the farmers are discouraged
raise the crop as a result of which the area under tobacco cultivation is being reduced.

“The tobacco grower is a victim of fall in the prices and also of other natural calamities like
ns, heavy rains etc. Therefore, there is an urgent need to bring a law ensuring the

acco growers of the Government's help in the event of excess production or fall in

‘or damage to crops. Therefore, the creation of a fund and provision of insurance

er for tobacco growers will help them immensely.

R. SAMBASIVA RAO

23, 1998.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the purchase of tobacco from tobacco growers by the
Central Government through the tobacco Board of India.

Clause 5 provides that the entire tobacco grown by small and marginal tobacco growers
shall be compulsorily insured free of cost by the Central Government against natural
calamities, etc.

Clause 6 provides for the establishment of a Tobacco Growers Benefit Fund to which
the Central Government and State Governments shall contribute in such ratio as may be
prescribed.

The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India . It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of rupees three hundred crore
per annum.

A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees four hundred crore is also likely to
be involved.


7 REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
h Purposes of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only. The delegation
ive power is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

10 provide for the protection and welfare of tobacco growers.

(Shri R. Sambasiva Rao, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—105LS—30.4.1998.