Bill No. 18 011868 
THE VlNDHYA PRADESH LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY 
(PREVENTION OF DISQUALIFICATION) BILL, 1953 
(As INTBODUOJllD IN TBlI HOUSlD OJ' THII PBOPLB) 
& 
BILL 
10 tkdMe cerl4in ojJicu 01 proJU not to tli6tuaUly their holder8 lor being choBen 
aB, or lor being, members 01 the Legislative A88embly 0/ the SltJU oJ 
Vin4hya Pratluh. 
BE it enaeted by Parliament as follaws:-
1. Short title and commencement.-{l) This Ao~ may be called the 
Vindhya Pradesh Legislative Assembly (Prevention of Disqualification) 
Act, 19158. 
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into torce on the 26th (lay of April, 
1962. 0. 
2. DetlnltloD.-In this Aot, "District Advisory Council" meaDS auy 
Distriot Advisory CtllIncil appointed under the order of the Government of 
VindhYB Pradesh in the General Administration Department No. 47, dated 
the 26th April, ]952. 10 
8. Prevention of diaquallflcatlon for membership of the Leifalati'l& 
AssemblY of Vindhya Pradesh In certain cases.-Jt is hereby declared 
that tbe offices of members of any District. Advisory Oounoil ehall no. 
disqualify, and shall be deemed never to have disqualified, the holders 
, thereof fol' being chosen as, or for being, members of the Legislative 15 
Assembly of the State of Vindhya Pradesh. 
4. Indemnity for and removal of disquaJ1flcatlon of oertaln members.-
For th~ removal of doubts it is hereby declared that the members of the 
Legislative Assembly of the State of Vindhya Pradesh memiolled in the 
Schedule shall be deemed never to have be~me disqualified for being 20 
members of the said Assembly by reason only of their having held offices 
of members of any Distriot Advisory Council notwithstanding nny law or 
decision to the contra.ry, IIond their seats shall be deemed never to have 
become vacant on such nc(:ount and they shall be, and are hereby, freed 
and discharged and indemnified from all penal consequences incurred by 25 
them by sitting or voting as members of the said Assembly while holding 
(lffices of members of any District Advisory Council at any time before 
the p&S8ir.g of t.his Act. 

j 
THE SOHEDULE 
(1) Shri Blajraj Singh Tiwari. 
(2) 8hri Ohondra Pratap Tiwari. 
(IJ) 8hri N srendra Singb. 
(4) 8hri I.e.l Mohammad 
(6) Shri Panna W. 
(6) Shri Govinda Du. 
(7) Shri Pyare lAl. 
(8) Shri Shyam Sunder Das .. Sbyam '. 
(9) Shri Laxmi Narain. 
10 (10) 8hri Ramdaa Ohowdhury. 
(11) Slm ~Uli Oharmakar. 
(12) Shri Thakur Das Mishra. 

3 
STATm,{FJNTOF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
On the 26th April, 1952 the Vindhya Pradesh Government set up • 
District Advisory Council in each District of Vindhya Pradesh with a view 
1;0 associating non-official representatives with the administration. The 
Members of the Legislative Assembly were made members of the Distl'ict 
Advisory Councils of their district. It was provided that these members 
should be paid travelling allowance and daily allowance for the day or days 
of the meetings of the District Advisory Council according to the Tates ad-
missible to the 'Members of the Legislative Assembly. Representatiolls 
were made to the President that as certain members of the Legislative 
Assembly had been appointed by the Lieutenant Governor, Vindhya Pra-
desh, as members of the District Advisory Councils. an office of profit, they 
had become disqualified to be Members of the State Assembly under section 
17 of the Government of Part C States Act, 1951. The matter was referr· 
ed to the Election Commission by the President and it came to the COll-
elusion that 12 M;embers of the Vindhya Pradesh Legislative Assembly 
had become subject to disqualification as a result of holding offices of profit 
under the Vindhy.a Pradesh Government. The President has accepted 
the advice of the Election Commission and issued an Order disqualifying 
these 12 members from being members of the Vindhya Pradesh Legifdutive 
Assembly. As the Vindhya Pradesh Government set up these AdviBO~ 
Councils in perfectly good faith. and as the ;M;embers in question have in-
curred disqualification for no fault of theirs, it has been decided to remove 
the disqualification incurred by the :Members in question and also to idem-
nify them from the penalties mentioned in section 18 of the Government 
of Part C States Act, 1951. The present Bill gives effect to this decision. 
NBW DBLIII~ 
TM bt A.pril, 1958. 
x.. N. XATJU. 

HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE 
A 
BILL 
to deolare certain offioes of profit not to disqua.lify their holdertt 
for be~ chosen 80S, or for being, membe1'8 of the Legis-
la.tive Assembly of the State of Vindhya Pradesh. 
(SMi Kailas Nath KtJtjs, 
M lnlster for States.) 
• 
GIPD-LAD-12011 P. 8.-2·4-118-1.760 