* AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

() 2 h > € a दे न sine
i i 4 ढ़ 1 a
> हैं; i # .

Af if
HY

Bill No. 28 of 2003

THE REPATRIATES WELFARE FUND BILL, 2003
By
SHRI RAMESH CHENNITHALA, M.P.
A
BILL

to provide for setting up of a fund for the welfare of repatriates who have worked in
foreign countries and have returned to India after having been terminated from
employment. |

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (/) This Act may be called the Repatriates Welfare Fund Act, 2003.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.

5 (3) It shall come into force at once. .
2. In this Act, unless the.context otherwise requires—

(7) “Authority” means the Authority set up under section 4 to oversee the
administration of the fund;

(ii) “fund” means the Repatriates Welfare Fund set up under section 3;

10 (iii) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and

Short title,
extent and
commencement.

Definitions.


Setting up of
Repatriates
Welfare Fund.

Constitution
of an
Authority to
oversee the
administration
of fund.

Provision of
relief to
repatriates.

Sanctioning of
loan for seN-
employment.

Assistance to
provide
employment.

Non-
application
of provisions
of the Act in
certain cases.

Overriding eff-
ect of the Act.

Power to
make rules.

2

(iv) “Repatriate” means any person who has gone to a foreign country for
the sake of employment and has returned to India due to any of the following
reasons:—

(/) his employment having been terminated by his employer without
assigning any reason therefor;

(2) his employer having closed the establishment due to any reason;
(3) threat of war in the country or neighbouring countries;

(4) not getting suitable employment having been cheated by an agent,
a broker or any other person.

3. The Central Government shall set up a fund to be known as the
‘Repatriates Welfare Fund’ with initial corpus of rupees one thousand crore.

4. (1) The Central Government shall constitute an Authority to oversee
the administration of the Repatriates Welfare Fund.

(2) The Authority shall consist of a Chairman and two other members.

(3) The terms of appointment, conditions of service of the Chairman and other
members shall be as may be prescribed.

(4) The headquarter of the Authority shall be at Cochin.

(5) The Authority may set up its regional office in any such place as the Central
Government may deem fit.

(6) Any office set up under sub-section (5) shall be headed by a Regional Manager.

(7) The Central Government shall make available such number of officers
and staff as may be necessary for the efficient functioning of the Authority
and the regional offices.

5. Any repatriate on his return to India may contact the Authority or a
regional office and upon production of relevant documents, which may be
prescribed, shall be given a grant of not more than rupees one lakh which
shall be non-refundable.

6. (7) Any repatriate who wishes to set up or start any self employment/business may
apply to the Authority or its regional office.

(2) The Authority may after satisfying itself of the correctness of the particulars given
in the application and after making such enquiry as it may deem fit, approach a Nationalised
bank for getting a loan and the nationalised bank on the recommendation of the Authority
shall sanction the loan amount on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed for
starting self employment/business. |

7. Any repatriate who wishes to seek any employment may approach the Authority or
a regional office, who shall render necessary assistance in securing employment.

8. The provisions of the Act shall not apply to—
(i) any person who has returned to India on his own volition;

(ii) any person who has been sacked from his employment due to commission of
any crime or irregularity in the course of his employment,

(iii) any person who has undergone punishment after having been proved of
the charge by a court of law;

(iv) any person who returns to India after serving for more than five years in that
country or any other country; and

(v) any person who returns to India after securing a better employment in India.

9. The provisions of this Act shall apply notwithstanding anything contrary con-
tained in any other law for the time being in force.

10. The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.

10

20

25

30

40

435

.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Our fellow citizens working in foreign countries contribute a great deal to our foreign
exchange reserve. They also participate in the nation building activities. Though their physi-
cal presence is in a foreign land, their mind, culture, tradition and spirit is always associated
with us. But an unfortunate fact is that they are harassed, humiliated and discriminated
against in several countries. Their employment is terminated without being assigned any
reason. Another-distressing fact is that aspirants of foreign employment are vulnerable to
the cheats in the guise of agents securing employment abroad. When our non-resident
workers do their best to our country’s economy, we should also protect their interests.
Hence, this proposal to set up a fund for the welfare of repatriates.

New DELHI; RAMESH CHENNITHALA ©
April 2, 2003.

Uo


|

- FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for setting up of a Repatriates Welfare fund. Clause 4
provides for constitution of an Authority to oversee the administration of the fund. Clauses
5 and 6 make provision for relief, etc. for starting self-employment to repatriates. The Bill
therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
likely to involve a recurring expenditure of rupees two thousand crore per annum |

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand and-five hundred crore is
also likely to be involved



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to frame rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only,

the delegation of
legislative power is of anormal character.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for setting up of a fund for the welfare of repatriates who have worked in
foreign countries and have returned to India after having been terminated from |

employment.

(Shri Ramesh Chennithala, M.P.)

MGIPMRND—319LS—23-04-2003.