AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

44 MAR 2005

Bill No. 28 of 2005

THE COMPULSORY MILITARY TRAINING BILL, 2005
By
SHRI IQBAL AHMED SARADGI, M.P.

A

—"

to provide compulsory military training to all able bodied citizens of the country.

y BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
हैः 1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Military Training Act, 2005. Short title,

= : extent and —
Ee (2) It extends to the whole of India. नि

(3) It shall come into force at once.

2. (1) The Central Government shall provide military training to all the able-bodied © Compulsory
izens including women who have attained the age of eighteen years but have not attained —_™ilitary
eage of fifty years irrespective of their religion, caste, colour and creed. sane.

____ (2) The military training shall be for a period ranging from one year to five years
the expenses of the training shall be borne by the Central Government.


Punishment.

Utilisation of
Services.

Power to.
make rules.

3. Any person who refuses to attend the military training shall be punished with
imprisonment for four months or with fine amounting to rupees one thousand or with both. #

4. The Central Government shall utilise the services of citizens, who have undergone 4
military training, at the time of any emergency or otherwise. P

5. The Central Government may,
Carrying out the purposes of this Act.

2 a रा

by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for —



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

For the last several years, extremist activities have increased almost in every part of the
ountry. The cases of rape of women have become a common factor. The cases of murder and
acoity are also increasing day-by-day. A number of people have been murdered in their
houses or on the road-side and the life has become insecure. Although the police have made
laborate arrangements for the security, it is not possible for the police to go to each and
very house to defend the people. Hence, self-help is necessary at the present juncture and
16 compulsory military training to all able bodied citizens should be provided immediately.
Moreover, their services can be utilised in case of any emergency in any part of the country.
Moreover, this will also help in raising a second line of defence which can be used in case of
y threat to the security of the nation and also for internal security.

__ Hence this Bill.

New Deu; IQBAL AHMED SARADGI
ebruary 4, 2005. | |

Bich ais ee er ne ee
०५+२५५०४५०००६४००-०० न pee eyes
ee ee

Sai

fA eS Se

a

in ete EE EID Dee eee

mi tees et te

a rn ee

Sa

eS REE SRE AS TEESE २.२८ SS

mies inde lao
AI TE ee

eh = श्र So eet
= aoa ee a
a ye E ८७५ +#&#+ 2
pe aL wot


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM.

.

Clause 2 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall provide compulsory
military training to all the able-bodied citizens for a period ranging from one year to fiv
years. Clause 4 provides that services of persons who have undergone military training
shall be utilised at the time of any emergency or otherwise. The Central Government will
have to incur expenditure in respect of the provisions of the Bill. The Bill, therefore, if —
enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to
involve an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore |

_ A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees four crore is also likely to be involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out हु
_ the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only and as such the
delegation of legislative powers is of anormal character. _


LOK SABHA

| | | A
BILL

५ to provide compulsory military training to all able bodied |
; citizens of the country. _ ४

hed का ४५ ५७
=

ee

File he a eer EF ae,

(Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi, M.P)

MGIPMRND—4318LS(S-1)—21 .02.2005.