     AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 28 of 2021
THE RIGHTS OF PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2021
By
DR. MOHAMMAD JAWED, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second  Year of the Republic of
India as follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Amendment)
Act, 2021.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title
and
commencement.
5

2.  In the Schedule to the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016, in
para 4, in sub-para (b), after entry (iii), the following entry shall be inserted, namely:–
“(iiia) ‘diabetes mellitus’ means a chronic and metabolic disease characterised
by high level of blood glucose (blood sugar) in the body of a person, if persists for a
long period of time, causing serious damage to the heart, blood vessels, eyes, kidneys
and nervous system.’’. 5
2
Amendment of
the Schedule. 49 of 2016

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Diabetes mellitus, commonly known as diabetes is a chronic and metabolic
disease characterized by elevated levels of blood glucose (or blood sugar), which
leads over a period of time to serious damage to the heart, blood vessels, eyes, kidneys
and nerves. The most common is Type 2 diabetes, usually in adults, which occurs
when the body becomes resistant to insulin or doesn’t make enough insulin. Type 1
diabetes, once known as juvenile diabetes or insulin-dependent diabetes, is a chronic
condition in which the pancreas produces little or no insulin by itself. For people
living with diabetes, access to affordable treatment, including insulin, is critical to
their survival.
Diabetes is responsible for every one in twenty deaths from all causes and
approximately four million annual deaths are because of complications of diabetes
i.e. six deaths every minute or one death every 10 seconds.
Currently, 4.0-11.6 per cent. of India’s urban population and three per cent. of
the rural population above the age of fifteen has diabetes. India has been called “the
diabetes capital of the world,” and it is estimated that forty-one million Indians have
the disease and “every fifth diabetic in the world is an Indian”. The socio-economic
burden due to diabetes in India is among the highest in the world with low income
families spending upto twenty-five per cent. of the family income on the cost of care
of a diabetic adult.
The Bill, therefore, proposes to amend the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
Act, 2016 to include Diabetes mellitus commonly known as ‘diabetes’ as a form of
disability under the Act.
Hence this Bill.
    NEW DELHI;         MOHAMMAD JAWED
February 2, 2021
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE RIGHTS OF PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES ACT, 2016
THE SCHEDULE
[See clause (zc) of section 2]
SPECIFIED DISABILITY
* * * * *
1. Physical disability
* * * * *
4. Disability caused due to —
(a) chronic neurological conditions, such as—
    * * *      *         *
(b) Blood disorder—
(i) “haemophilia” means an inheritable disease, usually affecting only
male but transmitted by women to their male children, characterised by loss or
impairment of the normal clotting ability of blood so that a minor would may
result in fatal bleeding;
(ii) “thalassemia” means a group of inherited disorders characterised by
reduced or absent amounts of hemoglobin.
(iii) “sickle cell disease” means a hemolytic disorder characterised by
chronic anemia, painful events, and various complications due to associated
tissue and organ damage; “hemolytic” refers to the destruction of the cell
membrane of red blood cells resulting in the release of hemoglobin.
* * * * *
4

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
further to amend the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016
————
(Dr . Mohammad Jawed, M.P .)