1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
BY
SHRI SUSHIL KUMAR SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After 21A of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
"21B. (1) Every citizen shall have the right to privacy which shall include privacy
in matters of personal life, family, home and interpersonal communication.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 28 of 2015
Insertion of a
new article
21B.
Right to
Privacy.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall affect the operation of any existing law in so far it
imposes, or prevent the State from making any law imposing, in the interests of the
sovereignty and integrity of India or public order or morality, reasonable restrictions
on the exercise of the right conferred by the said sub-clause.".

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Right to Privacy has been recognised as an integral part of Right to Life by the
Supreme Court in its various judgments, but the same has not been explicitly reflected in
article 21 of the Constitution till date. It is essential that citizens should be guaranteed a
Right to Privacy as a Fundamental Right. Moreover, respect for privacy as a right has been
recognized in most of the democratic countries. Therefore, Right to Privacy is required to be
inserted in the Constitution so that every citizen can enjoy a dignified life without any
arbitrary or unlawful interference or intrusion into his personal life or affairs or those of his
family.
It is, therefore, proposed to insert a new article 21B in the Constitution with a view to
make 'Right to Privacy' as a Fundamental Right of the citizens.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SUSHIL KUMAR SINGH
November 25, 2014.

GMGIPMRND—4322LS(S3)—20-02-2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the constitution of India.
————
(Shri Sushil Kumar Singh, M.P .)