As introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 28 of 2024
THE TRADITIONAL FISHERMEN (PROTECTION AND 
WELFARE) BILL, 2024
By
Shri Ra vi Kishan, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for protection of traditional fishermen in the country and for welfare measures 
including life insurance coverage, healthcare, educational facilities to the children  
of traditional fishermen and for matters connected therewith  
or incidental thereto. 
 B e it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy- fifth Year of the Republic of India as  
follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Traditional Fishermen (Protection and Welfare) Act, 
2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement.
5

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “accident” means an accident caused during the course of fishing activity including 
drowning;
(b) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of that 
State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(c) “Authority” means the National Traditional Fishermen Welfare Authority constituted 
under section 3;
(d) “traditional fisherman” means a person who generation by generation earns his 
livelihood by catching fish from the fisheries and whose only source of income is the money 
he earns from selling such fish;
(e) “fisheries” which includes the management, catching, processing and marketing  
of fish;
(f) “Fund” means the Traditional Fishermen Welfare Fund constituted under section 5; and
(g) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but within one year from the 
commencement of this Act, in consultation with the Government of the States having 
substantial population of fishermen, formulate, a national policy for the welfare of traditional 
fishermen and their families and protect their fishing rights and interests.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in Official 
Gazette, constitute an Authority to be known as the National Traditional Fishermen 
Welfare  Authority for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual 
succession and common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property both 
movable and immovable and to contract and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.
(3) The Authority shall consist of—
(a) a Chairperson having adequate knowledge and professional experience 
in fisheries sector  to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as 
may be prescribed;  
(b) a Deputy Chairperson with such qualification, to be appointed by the 
Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed;
(c) three members  to represent  traditional fishermen to be appointed by the 
Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed;
(d) four members to represent the Union Ministries of Ministry of Fisheries, Animal 
Husbandry & Dairying (Department of Fisheries), Finance, Planning and Labour and 
Employment, to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be 
prescribed;
(e) five members of Parliament, of whom three shall be from the House of the 
People and two shall be from the Council of States, to be nominated by the Presiding 
Officers of the respective Houses; and
(f) four members to be nominated by the Government of the States on rotation basis 
in alphabetical order.  
(4) The term of Office of the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and members of the 
Authority and the procedure to be followed in the discharge of the functions of the Authority 
shall be such as may be prescribed.
(5) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of the 
service of the Chairperson and members of the Authority shall be such as may be 
prescribed.
National Policy 
for the welfare 
of traditional 
fishermen.
2
Definitions.
Constitution 
of the
National 
Traditional 
Fishermen 
Welfare
Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

(6) The headquarter of the Authority shall be at Gorakhpur in the State of  
Uttar Pradesh.  
(7) The Authority may establish its offices at such other places, as it may deem 
necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(8) The Authority shall have a secretariat with such Officers and members of staff 
and with such terms and conditions of services as may be prescribed.
5. (1) The Authority shall, subject to guidelines issued by the Central Government 
in this regard, in coordination with the State Governments take, steps for the overall 
welfare of  traditional fishermen including, removal of poverty and indebtedness, 
raising the standard of living and making easy availability of market for  selling fish.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the Authority 
shall,—
(a)  implement the national policy for the traditional fishermen formulated 
under section 3;
(b) maintain records of traditional fishermen in all villages and districts 
throughout the country;
(c) maintain a district-wise register of traditional fishermen with such 
particulars and in such manner as may be prescribed;
(d) provide modern tools and techniques for fishing to the traditional fishermen;
(e) encourage and provide all necessary assistance to traditional fishermen 
cooperatives;
(f) organize exhibitions, melas and such other activities to promote fisheries in 
different parts of the country;
(g) make suitable arrangements for purchase of fishes  by  Government 
agencies on cash and carry basis;
(h) encourage export of fish; and
(i) perform such other functions as may be assigned to it by the Central Government 
from time to time.
6. ( 1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute a Fund to be known as the Traditional Fishermen Welfare Fund with a 
corpus of rupees five thousand crore.
(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute to the 
Fund in such ratio as may be prescribed.
(3) There shall also be credited to the Fund such other sums as may be received 
by way of donations, contributions, assistance or otherwise from individuals,  body 
corporates, financial institutions, firms and partnerships.
(4) The Fund shall be administered by a Board of Trustees, which shall be 
constituted by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(5) The Fund shall be utilized for:—
(a) interest free loans to traditional fishermen for purchasing of boats, nets 
and life boat;
(b) making ex-gratia payments at prescribed rates to each of the bereaved 
families of traditional fishermen who die in accident;
(c) life insurance cover to the traditional fishermen and their families;
(d) healthcare facilities to the traditional fishermen and their dependent 
family members;
3
Functions of the 
Authority.
Constitution 
of the
Traditional 
Fishermen 
Welfare Fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

(e) financial assistance to the traditional fishermen for the purchase and repair of 
fishing nets, boats and other equipments required for fishing;
(f) unemployment allowance during illness or financial crisis during lean periods;
(g) providing educational facilities and vocational training to the wards of; 
traditional fishermen; and
(h) such other welfare measures as may be prescribed. 
7.  The appropriate Government shall,—
(a) establish adequate number of schools and vocational training institutes 
and healthcare centres in and around the areas inhabitated by traditional 
fishermen for their benefit including their families and children;
(b) protect the fishing rights and interests of the traditional fishermen; and
(c) take such other measures as it may deem necessary for the protection and 
welfare of traditional fishermen.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by 
law in this behalf, provide to the Authority such sums as may consider necessary for 
the efficient functioning of the Authority.
9. (1) The Authority shall prepare, in such form and manner, as may be prescribed, an 
annual report giving a true and full account of its activities during the previous year and 
submit it to the Central Government.
(2) The Central Government shall cause the report submitted to it under sub-section (1)
to be laid before each House of Parliament.
10. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for 
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years 
from the date of the commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be, after it is made, be 
laid  before each House of Parliament.
11. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other 
law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act.
12. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that 
the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified  
form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that 
rule.
Miscellaneous 
Provisions.
Central
Government to 
provide Funds.
Annual Report.
Power to  
remove
difficulties.
Act not in 
derogation of 
any other law 
for time being in 
force.
Power to make 
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
4

5
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 There are millions of traditional fishermen spread across various parts of our country.  
In the State of Uttar Pradesh the traditional fishermen are termed as ‘nishad’ or ‘mallah’. 
Their main occupation and means of livelihood is catching fish and selling it in the market 
and they are doing this for generations. However, the fishermen and their families live in 
abject poverty nearly hand to mouth. There are many problems experienced by traditional 
fishermen, including a lack of skills, limited facilities, and extreme competition.
 For most of the traditional fishermen, it is their family profession which passes on from 
one generation to other and their entire families are involved in this profession. For them, 
fishing is the only source of their livelihood and prosperity. 
 Since these poor fishermen are part and parcel of our society and ours being a welfare 
State, it is necessary that the fisherman too are provided with adequate insurance cover 
against accidents, healthcare, financial assistance in case of need, educational, vocational 
facilities for their children, etc.
 Urgent remedial measures have to be taken for the welfare and protection of traditional 
fishermen. It has, therefore, been proposed to establish the National Traditional Fishermen 
Authority and also the Traditional Fishermen Welfare Fund to improve the lot of traditional 
fishermen and save them from starvation in various parts of our nation.
 Hence this Bill.
New Delhi;                                   RA VI KISHAN 
June 14, 2024

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
 Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to constitute the National Traditional Fishermen Welfare 
Authority. Clause 5 provides for certain steps to be taken by the Authority for welfare of 
traditional fishermen. Clause 6 provides for the constitution of the Traditional Fishermen 
Welfare Fund. Clause 7 provides for the appropriate Government to establish adequate 
number of schools and vocational training institutes and healthcare centres in and around 
the areas inhabitated by traditional fishermen for their benefit including their families. 
Clause 8 provides that the Central Government shall provide Funds to the Authority. The 
Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It 
is estimated that a sum of rupees five hundred crore may involve as recurring expenditure 
per annum.
 A non-recurring expenditure of rupees two hundred crore is also likely to be incurred.
6

7
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
 Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
a
BILL
to provide for protection of traditional fishermen in the country and for welfare measures 
including life insurance coverage, healthcare, educational facilities to the children  
of traditional fishermen and for matters connected therewith  
or incidental thereto.
(Shri Ravi Kishan, M.P .) 