1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI RAJESH RANJAN, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2016.
2. In article 243G of the Constitution,—
(i) for the words—
(a) "the Legislature of a State may, by law," the words "the Legislature of
a State shall, by law," shall be substituted; and
Bill No. 28 of  2016
Short title.
Amendment
of article
243G.5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(b) "such law may contain" the words "such law shall contain" shall be
substituted.
(ii) in clause (b), after the words "Eleventh Schedule" the following words shall
be added, namely:—
"by the year 2017".
3. In article 243W of the Constitution,—
(i) for the words—
(a) "the Legislature of a State may, by law, endow" the words "the
Legislature of a State shall, by law, endow" shall be substituted; and
(b) "such law may contain" the words "such law shall contain" shall be
substituted.
(ii) in clause ( a), in sub-clause ( ii), after the words "Twelfth Schedule" the
following words shall be added, namely:—
"by the year 2017".
Amendment
of article
243W.
5
10

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
After Seventy Third and Seventy Fourth Amendments to the Constitution came into
force, it was presumed that most of the States shall enact necessary legislations to confer
powers on Panchayats and Municipal Bodies in their respective jurisdiction taking a leaf out
of the same.
Whereas some of the States have endowed the powers to be exercised by the
Panchayats by incorporating the subjects included in the Eleventh Schedule to the
Constitution and similarly the powers to be exercised by Municipal Bodies in regard to
subjects contained in the Twelfth Schedule have been conferred upon the Municipal Bodies.
However, these steps are relatively an eye-wash and infact requisite powers have not yet
been conferred to the Panchayats and Municipal Bodies concerned.
If we actually wish to translate the vision of our former Prime Minister late Shri Rajiv
Gandhi who was inspired by Mahatma Gandhi's ideals of 'GRAM RAJYA', a concrete
mandatory constitutional provision to empower and make effective the institutions of self-
Government at local level is the need of the hour.
It is in this context that the relevant articles of the Constitution are proposed to be
amended so as to make it mandatory for State legislatures to enact laws aimed at conferring
Panchayats and Municipalities with such powers and authority as may be necessary to
enable them to function as institutions of self-Government. It has also been proposed in the
Bill that the law to be enacted by State legislatures shall contain provisions for the devolution
of powers and responsibilities upon Panchayats and Municipalities at appropriate level.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAJESH RANJAN
February  8, 2016

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *
"243G. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legislature of a State may,
by law, endow the Panchayats with such powers and authority as may be necessary to
enable them to function as institutions of self-Government and such law may contain
provisions for the devolution of powers and responsibilities upon Panchayats at the
appropriate level, subject to such conditions as may be specified therein, with respect to—
(a) the preparation of plans for economic development and social justice;
(b) the implementation of schemes for economic development and social justice
as may be entrusted to them including those in relation to the matters listed in the
Eleventh Schedule.
* * * * *
243W.  Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legislature of a State may,
by law, endow—
(a) the Municipalities with such powers and authority as may be necessary to
enable them to function as institutions of self-Government and such law may contain
provisions for the devolution of powers and responsibilities upon Municipalities,
subject to such conditions as may be specified therein, with respect to—
(i) the preparation of plans for economic development and social justice;
(ii) the performance of functions and the implementation of schemes as
may be entrusted to them including those in relation to the matters listed in the
Twelfth Schedule;
(b) the Committees with such powers and authority as may be necessary to
enable them to carry out the responsibilities conferred upon them including those in
relation to the matters listed in the Twelfth Schedule.
Powers,
authority and
responsibilities
of
Panchayats.
4
Powers,
authority and
responsibilities
of
Municipalities,
etc.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Rajesh Ranjan, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4303LS(S3)—24.02.2016.