=

AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

3 MAY 2002

je
THE UNORGANISED WORKERS (PROVIDENT FUND) BILL, 2002
By
‘Suri SusHILKUMAR SHINDE, M.P.
A
BILL

to provide for setting up of a provident fund for protection of the interests of
unorganised workers in the country and for matters connected therewith.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (7) This Act may be called the Unorganised Workers (Provident Fund) Act, 2002. Short tite,

it and
(2) Itextends to the whole of India. सा,
5 (3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Definitions.

(i “appropriate Government” means the State Government in respect of
a State and the Central Government in all other cases;

10 (ii) “Board” means the Board constituted under section 4;

(iii) “Designated Authority” means the Authority constituted under
section 5;


3

(iv) “employer” means any person who employs an unorganised worker;
(०) “unorganised worker” means any person;
(a) who is engaged for any domestic work including cooking, house-
cleaning and attending to all other odd job connected with house hold chore, or;
(b) who is landless and earns daily wages on monthly or annual or any
other basis engaged in agricultural operation including farming, dairy-farming,
production, cultivation, growing and harvesting of any horticultural
commodity, raising livestock, bee-keeping or poultry, growing fodder or
thatching or for grazing cattle for payment either in cash or in kind;
(vi) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(vii) “provident fund” means fund constituted under section 3.
Setting up of 3. (1) The appropriate Government shall set up a fund to be known as
Provident “Unorganised Workers Provident Fund’ to protect the interests of
we in the country.

(2) The Provident Fund shall vest in, and be administered by a Board constituted
under section 4.
Constitution 4. (1) The appropriate Government shall constitute a Board at State level to
of a Board. —_ supervise the functioning of the Designated Authority in each district constituted under
section 5 and in particular to—
(i lay down guidelines to identify and register unorganised workers in
the area to be covered under the scheme of this Act;

(ii) provide for mode of collection and administration of provident funds;
(iii) maintain accounts of provident fund;
(iv) determine the formula for payment of provident fund to
unorganised workers; ie
(7) take action against an employer or an unorganised worker who fails to
make payment to Provident Fund;
(2) The Board shall consist of a Chairman and such number of other members, as
may be determined by the appropriate Government.
Appointment 5. (1) There shall be constituted an authority to be known as ‘Designated Authority’
of Designated in each district to be appointed by the appropriate Government in such manner as may
Authority. bepreseribed,
(2) The Designated Authority shall perform the following functions, namely:—
(@) to maintain a register of all unorganised workers covered under this
Act;
(8) to ensure that every eligible unorganised worker is enrolled as a worker;

() to ensure that every registered worker is paid the fund accumulated
against his name, on attaining the age of superannuation, as may be prescribed
in rules made under this Act;

(d) to perform any other function assigned to it from time to time by the
Board to carry out the purposes of this Act.
Contribution 6. The contribution to the Provident Fund shall consist of:—
A (a) one-third of the salary payable during the preceding year by the
Fund, employer to the employees;

(b) one-third of salary to be received in respect of preceding year from an
employer by an unorganised worker; and

45


3
(c) an amount equal to one third of the salary, to be contributed by the
appropriate Government.

7. This Act shall apply to an organised worker who has worked for not less than Application of
twenty days each month during the preceding year. the Act.

8. The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules for Power to
carrying out the purposes of this Act. make rules,

5



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

‘There are millions of workers who are engaged as domestic servants or agricultural
workers, on daily wages or on permanent basis, throughout the country. These workers are
still unorganised and are exploited by their employers. There is no security of service nor
any provision for their protection from exploitation at the hands of employers. They don't
enjoy any support-system in their old age. The condition of female workers who constitute
a considerable chunk of unorganised workers is miserable. These female workers are
subject to sexual abuse and exploitation and they suffer in silence,

It is, therefore, necessary to set up a provident fund, to protect the interests of
unorganised workers. It will not only provide protection from exploitation but also
help them to lead a life with dignity.

Moveover, this will go a long way to provide some financial support to them in
their old age, when they are left with no strength to carn their livelihood.

The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.

‘New Deut; SUSHIL KUMAR SHINDE.
March 24, 2002


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM.

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of a provident fund to protect the
interests of unorganised workers in the country. Clause 4 provides for constitution of a
Board to administer provident fund for unorganised workers at State level. Clause 5 provides
for constitution of an Authority in each district to identify and enroll the unorganised
workers in cach district, Clause 6 of the Bill provides for contribution to the Provident
Fund by the appropriate Government. The Central Government shall bear expenditure in
respect of Union territories and the State Governments shall bear expenditure in respect of
their State, The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. A recurring expenditure of about rupees one crore per annum is likely to be
involved from the Consolidated Fund of India. A non-recurring expenditure of about
tupees fifty lakh is also likely to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

a
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only.

The delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.

i


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for setting up of a provident fund for protection of the interests of
unorganised workers in the country and for matters connected therewith.

(Shri Sushilkumar Shinde, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—S795LS—20.03.2002.