THE BUREAU OF ACCOUNTABILITY BILL, 2013
By
SHRI J.P. AGARWAL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for establishment of a Bureau of Accountability to suggest measures for
rooting out corruption; making the administration efficient and for
matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth  Year of the Republic of  India  as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Bureau of Accountability Act, 2013.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 28 of 2013
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, the word ‘Bureau’ means the
Bureau of Accountability established under section 3.
3. (1) The Central Government shall establish a Bureau which shall consist of the
following:—
(i) three serving or retired Judges of the Supreme Court of which one shall be
appointed as the Chairman of the Bureau;
(ii) Cabinet Secretary to the Central Government;
(iii) Home Secretary to the Central Government;
(iv) Director of Intelligence Bureau;
(v) Director of Central Bureau of Investigation;
(vi) one retired General of the Army to be nominated by the Central Government;
(vii) an eminent social worker to be nominated by the Central Government;
(viii) an eminent political activist to be nominated by the Central Government;
(ix) two members of Parliament, one each from the House of the People and the
Council of States, to be nominated by the Presiding Officers of the respective Houses;
and
(x) three serving or retired Chairpersons of Public Sector Undertakings to be
nominated by the Central Government.
(2) the members of the Bureau shall have a tenure of six years from the date of their
appointment or nomination, as the case may be.
(3) The office of the Bureau shall be at New Delhi.
(4) The Central Government shall appoint such number of Officers and staff as it
considers necessary for the efficient functioning of the Bureau.
4. The Bureau shall take steps and suggest measures to the Central Government to—
(i) make the administration corruption free;
(ii) accelerate the pace of working in the Ministries of the Government of India;
and
(iii) implement the policies framed by the Central Government within the prescribed
time period.
5. The members of the Bureau shall carry out surprise inspections of various Ministries
and Departments of the Central Government and the Public Sector Undertakings from time to
time and suggest measures for carrying out administrative reforms in the functioning of the
Union Ministries, Departments and Public Sector Undertakings.
6. (1) The Bureau shall formulate rules for its internal working and the rules so made
shall be laid on the Table of each House of Parliament.
(2) If any amendment is made to the rules framed under sub-section (1), the amendment
so made shall also be laid on the Table of each House of Parliament.
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions  aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Definition.
Establishment
of a Bureau of
Accountability.
Functions of
the Bureau.
Powers of
Bureau.
Procedure to
be followed by
the Bureau in
its functioning.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
It has been emphasized time and again that low performing and inefficient bureaucracy
is a big hurdle in the development of the country. Some senior officers and their subordinates
working in Government offices do not dispose of their official works within the prescribed or
reasonable time period. Many important files remain pending for months in Government
Offices and offices of Public Sector Undertakings which in turn leads to corruption. It is,
therefore, necessary that a high powered permanent Bureau should be set up to accelerate
the pace of work of bureaucracy and ensure timely completion of work. This will also help in
rooting out corruption.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; J.P.  AGARW AL
February 8, 2013.
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall establish a Bureau of
Accountability. It also provides that the office of the Bureau shall be located at New Delhi.
It further provides that the Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and
staff as it considers necessary for the efficient functioning of the Bureau. The Bill, therefore,
if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to
involve a recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred and twenty-five crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees eighty crore is also likely to be involved.
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only. The delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
5

LOK  SABHA
——————
A
BILL
to provide for establishment of a Bureau of Accountability to suggest measures for
rooting out corruption; making the administration efficient and for
matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri J.P . Agarwal, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4960LS(S-4)—26-02-2013.