As INTRODUCED IN Lok 5688:

#9 JUL 2004

Bill No. 28 of 2004

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2004
By
‘Sur! MOHAN SincH, M.P.
A
BILL
Further to amend the Constitution of India.

| itenacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-—
4. (J) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2004.

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
ication in the official gazette, appoint.

2. After article 16 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely.—

"164. The State shalll provide gainful employment, to every able bodied citizen, who

ined eighteen years of age:

Provided that if the State fails to provide employment to any such person, he shall be

an unemployment allowance till he gets gainful employment on such terms and
as may be prescribed by law."".

Short title,
and
commencement,

Insertion of
new article
164.

Right to
Employment.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Unemployment is emerging as a major problem in India. The provisions in the Directive

Principles of the State Policy relating to employment to all cannot be fulfilled until it is made
a fundamental right of the citizens, The number of identifiable unemployed in India is more
than four crores but the State administration has no concern for these unemployed youth
which is giving rise to criminal tendency among them and every other day they are either
committing suicide or indulging in criminal activities. The incidents of kidnapping for ransom
is also on the rise. It is difficult to make social equality a reality unless the problem of
unemployment is solved, In such a situation, the State should make its administration frugal
and the money saved thereby should be distributed as unemployment allowance so that the
youth can be involved in constructive acti S.

The Bill seeks to solve this national problem by adding the right to employment in
Part—III of the Constitution thereby making it a fundamental right of the citizens,

Hence this Bill.

New Deu;
June 21,2004,

MOHAN SINGH.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill provides that every able-bodied citizen who has attained eighteen
years of age shall be provided with right to employment and in event of failure of the State to
provide any employment, he shall be provided with an unemployment allowance at such rate
as may be prescribed.

The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. A recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand crores per annum is likely to
be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand crores is also likely to be
involved.


further to amend the Constitution of India.

MGIPMRND—899LS—01.07.2004.