Bill No. 28-F of  2020
THE  AIRCRAFT (AMENDMENT)  BILL,  2020
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT—
LOK SABHA ON 17TH MARCH, 2020
RAJYA SABHA ON 15TH SEPTEMBER, 2020)

THE AIRCRAFT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT)
A
BILL
further to amend the Aircraft Act, 1934.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Aircraft (Amendment) Act, 2020.
2. In the Aircraft Act, 1934 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in section 2,—
(a) after clause ( 1), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
'(1A) "Aircraft Accidents Investigation Bureau" means the Aircraft
Accidents Investigation Bureau constituted under section 4C;';
(b) after clause ( 2A), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
'(2B) "Bureau of Civil Aviation Security" means the Bureau of Civil
Aviation Security constituted under section 4B;
(2C) "Directorate General of Civil Aviation" means the Directorate General
of Civil Aviation constituted under section 4A;'.
Short title.
Amendment
of section 2.
22 of 1934.
Bill  No. 28-F  of  2020

2
3. For section 4A of the principal Act, the following sections shall be substituted,
namely:—
"4A. (1)  The Central Government may constitute a body to be known as the
Directorate General of Civil Aviation, which shall be headed by an officer designated
as the Director General of Civil Aviation to be appointed in this behalf by the Central
Government by notification in the Official Gazette.
(2) The Directorate General of Civil Aviation shall be responsible for carrying
out the safety oversight and regulatory functions in respect of matters specified in
this Act or the rules made thereunder.
(3) The administration of the Directorate General of Civil Aviation shall vest in
the Director General of Civil Aviation.
(4) The Central Government may, by an order published in the Official Gazette,
direct that any power exercisable by the Director General of Civil Aviation may also be
exercisable by any other officer or authority specially empowered in this behalf by the
Central Government.
4B. (1)  The Central Government may constitute a body to be known as the
Bureau of Civil Aviation Security, which shall be headed by an officer designated as
the Director General of Bureau of Civil Aviation Security to be appointed in this behalf
by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette.
(2) The Bureau of Civil Aviation Security shall be responsible for carrying out
the regulatory and oversight functions in respect of matters relating to civil aviation
security specified in this Act or the rules made thereunder.
(3) The administration of the Bureau of Civil Aviation Security shall vest in the
Director General of Bureau of Civil Aviation Security.
(4) The Central Government may, by an order published in the Official Gazette,
direct that any power exercisable by the Director General of Bureau of Civil Aviation
Security may also be exercisable by any other officer or authority specially empowered
in this behalf by the Central Government.
4C. (1) The Central Government may constitute a body to be known as the
Aircraft Accidents Investigation Bureau, which shall be headed by an officer
designated as the Director General of Aircraft Accidents Investigation Bureau to be
appointed in this behalf by the Central Government by notification in the Official
Gazette.
(2) The Aircraft Accidents Investigation Bureau shall be responsible for carrying
out the functions in respect of matters relating to investigation of aircraft accidents or
incidents specified in this Act or the rules made thereunder.
(3) The administration of the Aircraft Accidents Investigation Bureau shall vest
in the Director General of Aircraft Accidents Investigation Bureau.
(4) The Central Government may, by an order published in the Official Gazette,
direct that any power exercisable by the Director General of Aircraft Accidents
Investigation Bureau may also be exercisable by any other officer or authority specially
empowered in this behalf by the Central Government.
4D. The superintendence of the Directorate General of Civil Aviation, the Bureau
of Civil Aviation Security and the Aircraft Accidents Investigation Bureau shall vest
in the Central Government, which shall have the power to issue directions to each of
these organisations, on any matters falling under sub-section ( 2) of sections 4A, 4B
and 4C, respectively, if it considers necessary and expedient so to do in the public
interest.''.
Substitution of
new sections
4A, 4B, 4C
and 4D for
section 4A.
Directorate
General of
Civil Aviation.
Bureau of
Civil Aviation
Security.
Aircraft
Accidents
Investigation
Bureau.
Superintendence
of Central
Government.

3
4. In section 5 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),—
(i) after clause (gc), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(gd) the regulation of air navigation services, that is, aeronautical
information services, aeronautical charting and cartography services,
aeronautical meteorological services, search and rescue services, procedure
for air navigation services and aircraft operations other than those referred to in
clause (gb) and any other matter relating to air navigation services;";
(ii) clause (qq) shall be relettered as clause (qa) thereof and in clause (qa) as so
relettered, the word "and" occurring at the end shall be omitted;
(iii) after clause (qa), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
"(qb) safety oversight and regulatory functions;
(qc) regulatory and oversight functions in respect of matters relating to
civil aviation security; and".
5. In section 5A of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section ( 1), for the brackets, letters and word "( gc), ( h), ( i), ( m)
and (qq)", the brackets, letters and word "(gc), (gd), (h), (i), (m), (qa) and (qb)" shall be
substituted;
(ii) after sub-section (1), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:—
"(1A) The Director General of Bureau of Civil Aviation Security or any
other officer specially empowered in this behalf by the Central Government
may, from time to time, by order, issue directions, consistent with the provisions
of this Act and the rules made thereunder, with respect to any of the matters
specified in clauses (e), (f), (gc) and (qc) of sub-section (2) of section 5, to any
person or persons using any aerodrome, or engaged in the aircraft operations,
air traffic control, maintenance and operation of aerodrome, or safeguarding
civil aviation against acts of unlawful interference, in any case where the Director
General of Bureau of Civil Aviation Security or such other officer is satisfied
that in the interests of the security of India or to ensure security of civil aviation
operations, it is necessary so to do.
(1B) On receipt of a representation from any person or otherwise, if it
considers necessary and expedient to do so in the public interest, the Central
Government may review any order passed under sub-section ( 1) or
sub-section (
1A) and issue directions to the Director General of Civil Aviation
or Director General of Bureau of Civil Aviation Security, as the case may be, to
rescind or modify such order.";
(iii) in sub-section (2), after the word, brackets and figure "sub-section (1)", the
words, brackets, figures and letters "or sub-section (1A) or sub-section (1B)" shall be
inserted.
6. In section 10 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1A),—
(i) for the word, brackets and letters "clause ( qq)", the word, brackets and
letters "clause ( qa)" shall be substituted;
(ii) for the words "ten lakh rupees" wherever they occur, the words "one crore
rupees" shall be substituted.
7. After section 10 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted,
namely:—
"10A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2) of section 10,
the Central Government may, in making any rule under section 4, 5, 7, 8, 8A or section 8B,
Amendment
of section 5.
Amendment
of section 5A.
Adjudication
of penalties.
Amendment
of section 10.
Insertion
of new
sections 10A
and 10B.

4
provide for imposition of penalty not exceeding rupees one crore for the contravention
of any rule for which no other punishment has been provided elsewhere in the Act, or
in the rules made thereunder, for such contravention.
(2) The Central Government may, by an order published in the Official Gazette,
appoint such number of officers not below the rank of Deputy Secretary to the
Government of India or equivalent, as it considers necessary, to be designated officers
for adjudging penalty under sub-section (1), in such manner as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules.
(3) The Central Government may, while appointing designated officers under
sub-section (2), also specify their jurisdiction in that order.
(4) Where the designated officer is satisfied that any contravention of the
provisions of the rules has been committed by any person, he may, by an order in
writing, impose penalty on such person stating the nature of contravention, the
provision of rules which has been contravened and the reasons for imposing such
penalty:
Provided that the designated officer shall, before imposing any penalty, give a
reasonable opportunity of being heard to such person.
(5) Any person aggrieved by an order made under sub-section ( 4) may prefer
an appeal to an appellate officer having jurisdiction in the matter who is next higher in
rank to the designated officer who has passed such order.
(6) Every appeal under sub-section (5) shall be filed within thirty days from the
date on which the copy of the order made by the designated officer is received by the
aggrieved person and shall be in such form and manner, and be accompanied by such
fees, as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules.
(7) The appellate officer may, after giving the parties to the appeal an opportunity
of being heard, pass such order as he thinks fit, confirming, modifying or setting
aside the order appealed against.
10B. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, if any person contravenes
any of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder, the licence, certificate
or approval issued to such person under this Act may be suspended or cancelled in
such manner as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules.".
8. In section 11 of the principal Act, for the words "ten lakh rupees", the words
"one crore rupees" shall be substituted.
9. In section 11A of the principal Act, for the words "ten lakh rupees", the words
"one crore rupees" shall be substituted.
10. In section 11B of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), for the words
"ten lakh rupees", the words "one crore rupees" shall be substituted.
11. After section 12 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted,
namely:—
"12A. ( 1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, any offence punishable under sections 10,11,11A,11B and
section 12 or under any rules made thereunder, may be compounded, either before or
after the institution of any prosecution, by the Director General of Civil Aviation or
Director General of Bureau of Civil Aviation Security or Director General of Aircraft
Accidents Investigation Bureau, as the case may be, in such manner as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules.
Amendment
of section 11.
Amendment of
section 11A.
Amendment of
section 11B.
Insertion of
new sections
12A and 12B.
2 of 1974.
Cancellation
of licence or
certificate or
approval.
Composition
of offences.

5
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section ( 1) shall apply to an offence committed
by a person for the second time or thereafter within a period of five years from the
date of commission of a similar offence which was earlier compounded or for which
such person was earlier convicted.
(3) Every officer referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall exercise the powers to
compound an offence, subject to the direction, control and supervision of the Central
Government.
(4) Every application for the compounding of an offence shall be made in such
manner as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules.
(5) Where any offence is compounded before the institution of any prosecution,
no prosecution shall be instituted in relation to such offence by an officer referred to
in sub-section ( 1) against the offender in relation to whom the offence is so
compounded.
(6) Where the composition of any offence is made after the institution of any
prosecution, such composition shall be brought to the notice of the court in which
the prosecution is pending, in writing, by the officer referred to in sub-section (1), and
on such notice of the composition of the offence being given, the person against
whom the offence is so compounded shall be discharged.
(7) The composition of an offence under this section shall have the effect of an
acquittal of the accused with whom the offence has been compounded.
(8) No offence specified in sub-section ( 1) shall be compounded except as
provided in this section.
12B. (1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this
Act, save on a complaint made by or with the previous sanction in writing by the
Director General of Civil Aviation or Director General of Bureau of Civil Aviation
Security or Director General of Aircraft Accidents Investigation Bureau, as the case
may be.
(2) The complaint referred to in sub-section (1) shall be made within a period of
one year from the date on which the offence came to the knowledge of the Director
General of Civil Aviation or Director General of Bureau of Civil Aviation Security or
Director General of Aircraft Accidents Investigation Bureau, as the case may be.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal
 Procedure, 1973, no court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Magistrate
of the first class shall try the offences under this Act.".
12. In section 19 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),—
(a) after the words "or air forces of the Union", the words "or other armed
forces of the Union constituted by any law for the time being in force"  shall be
inserted;
(b) the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided that any aircraft belonging to an armed force of the Union
other than naval, military or air forces of the Union, for which the provisions of
this Act and the rules made thereunder are applicable on the date of
commencement of the Aircraft (Amendment) Act, 2020, shall continue to be so
governed by this Act and the rules made thereunder till such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify.".
Cognizance of
offences.
Amendment
of section 19.
2 of 1974.

6
13.  Anything done, or any action or decision taken, or any order or direction issued,
by any authority set up pursuant to the provisions of the principal Act or rules made
thereunder, prior to the date of coming into force of this Act,  shall, insofar as such action or
decision or direction are relatable to the functions of the Directorate General of Civil Aviation
or the Bureau of Civil Aviation Security or the Aircraft Accidents Investigation Bureau, as
the case may be, shall be deemed to have been done or taken or issued by the Directorate
General of Civil Aviation or the Bureau of Civil Aviation Security or the Aircraft Accidents
Investigation Bureau, as the case may be, constituted under sections 4A, 4B and 4C,
respectively, of this Act.
The above Bill has been passed by the Houses of Parliament.
Dated the Chairman.
————
I assent to this Bill.
Dated the President.
Transitional
provisions
relating to
existing
authorities.

A
BILL
further to amend the Aircraft Act, 1934.
————
(As passed by the Houses of Parliament)
MGIPMRND—493RS(S3)—15-09-2020.