1
THE INFORMA TION TECHNOLOGY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2025
By
SHRIMATI BHARTI PARDHI, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Information Technology Act, 2000.
   BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1.(1) This Act may be called the Information Technology (Amendment)
Act, 2025.
   (2)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (hereinafter referred
to as the principal Act), after clause (o), the following clauses shall be inserted,
namely:—
Bill No. 28 of 2025
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of section 2.
21 of 2000.

2
   “(oa) “digital asset” means an electronic record in which an individual has
a right or interest and excludes an underlying asset or liability unless such
asset or liability is an electronic record and includes all electronic records of
the user,  email accounts, social media accounts, cryptocurrencies, photos
and videos posted to the internet, websites and online purchasing accounts;
   (ob)  “digital asset will” means any electronic document containing the details
regarding acquisition and distribution of digital asset of any person amongst his
appointees and legal heirs; and
 (oc) “digital executor” means a person authorised to execute digital asset in a
digital asset will of a deceased person;”.
3.  After section 43A of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:–
“43B. Every intermediary shall,  upon receiving a certified copy of the death
certificate and proof of the appointment of a digital executor or legal heir, in
case of digital asset of the deceased person, as the case may be–
(a) allow access to the digital assets of the deceased person as per the
instructions provided in the digital asset will  to the digital executor or
legal heir, as the case may be; and
(b) provide options for data transfer, account deletion or closure of the
digital asset of the deceased person as requested by the digital executor
or legal heirs, as the case may be:
Provided that in case of digital executor, the authority to access, manage,
transfer or deletion of the digital asset of the deceased person prima facie
lies with the digital executor:
Provided further that in absence of  the appointment of the digital executor,
the legal heirs of the deceased person may  access, manage, transfer or
delete the digital asset of the deceased person upon obtaining order of a
competent court in this behalf:
Provided also that in absence of digital executor or legal heirs the   digital
asset of the deceased person shall be managed in such manner as may be
prescribed.”.
4.  After section 66F of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:–
          “66G . Whoever intentionally gains unauthorized access to the digital assets
of a deceased person shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend
upto two years or fine which may extend upto rupees fifty thousand or with
both.”.
5.  In section 87 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after  clause (ob), the
following clause  shall be inserted, namely:–
Insertion of
new section
43B.
Management
of Digital
Assets of a
deceased
person.
Insertion of
new section
66G.
Amendment
of section
87.
Punishment
for
unauthorized
access to
the digital
assets of a
deceased
person.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

3
    “(oc)  the manner of the management of the  digital asset of the deceased
person in absence of digital executor or legal heirs  under section 43B;”.
6.  In FIRST SCHEDULE to the principal Act, at Sl. No. (4), for the words
“including any other testamentary disposition by whatever name called”, the words
“ including any other testamentary disposition by whatever name called but excluding
digital asset will” shall be substituted.
Amendment
of First
Schedule.5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 In the digital age, individuals accumulate significant digital assets, such as social
media profiles, email accounts, cloud storage, and cryptocurrencies, which hold
financial, sentimental, and legal value. However, the absence of a legal framework
for managing these assets posthumously often leads to disputes, privacy violations,
and loss of valuable data.
At present, the Information Technology Act, 2000 is applicable to all digital
information, data and assets. However, the Act does not have specific provisions
pertaining to access, management and transfer of digital assets of the deceased.
This Bill seeks to address these challenges by amending the Information
Technology Act, 2000 to introduce the concept of digital assets, digital wills and
digital executors. It provides legal validity to digital wills and defines the responsibilities
of digital executors, ensuring the testator’s wishes are respected. Additionally, it
mandates intermediaries and online service providers to cooperate with digital
executors or legal heirs to facilitate the smooth transition, transfer, or deletion of
digital assets after death.
The Bill prescribes penalties for unauthorized access or non-compliance by
intermediaries and online service providers, ensuring the protection of user data.
This progressive legislation is a vital step towards addressing the complexities
of digital asset management, benefiting individuals, families and the digital economy.
Hence this Bill.
NEW DELHI;                   BHARTI PARDHI
 January 20, 2025
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLA TION
Clause 5 of the Bill vide proposed amendment to section 87 that empowers the
Central Government to make rules regarding  the manner of the management of
the  digital asset of the deceased person in absence of digital executor or legal
heirs. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative
power is of a normal character.
5

ANNEXURE
[EXTRACT FROM THE INFORMATION  TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000 ]
(ACT NO. 21  OF 2000)
* * * * *
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(o) data means a representation of information, knowledge, facts,
concepts or instructions which are being prepared or have been prepared
in a formalised manner, and is intended to be processed, is being processed
or has been processed in a computer system or computer network, and
may be in any form (including computer printouts magnetic or optical
storage media, punched cards, punched tapes) or stored internally in the
memory of the computer;
87. (1) * * * * *
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:–
(ob) the reasonable security practices and procedures and sensitive
personal data or information under section 43A;
` * * * * *
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
[See sub-section (4) of section 1]
DOCUMENTS OR TRANSACTIONS TO WHICH THE ACT
SHALL  NOT  APPLY
Sl. No.                   Description of documents or transactions
1. A negotiable instrument (other than a cheque) as defined
in section 13 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881.
(26 of 1881)
2. A power-of-attorney as defined in section 1A of the Powers-
of-Attorney Act, 1882. (7 of 1882)
3. A trust as defined in section 3 of the Indian Trust Act, 1882.
(2 of 1882)
4. A will as defined in clause (h) of section 2 of the Indian
Succession Act, 1925 (39 of 1925), including any other
estamentary disposition by whatever name called.
5. Any contract for the sale or conveyance of immovable property
or any interest in such Property.
Definitions.
Power of
Central
Government
to make
rules.
6

LOK  SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Information Technology  Act, 2000.
(Shrimati Bharti Pardhi, M.P .)