As Intropucen ix Lok 50812

Bill No. 28 of 2006

THE PRICE REGULATORY AUTHORITY BILL, 2006
By
Suri K. 5. Rao, M.-P.
A
BILL

to provide for the setting up of an Authority to regulate prices of various commodities
and services in the country and for matters connected therewith.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (7) This Act may be called the Price Regulatory Authority Act, 2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.

(3) It shall come into force at once.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(0 “appropriate Government" means a State Government or the Central
Government, as the case may be;

(i) "commodities" includes milk, rice, wheat, tea, coffee, pulses, edible oils,
cosmetics, health products, medicines, all types of commercial crops, cotton, sugar,

SERVER 1 BILL 2004/LOK SABHA/5783LS._

Short title,
extent and
commencement.

Definitions.


Price
Regulatory
Authority,

Functions of
the
Authority.

Wide publicity
to be given to
price structure
fixed by the
Authority.

No seller to
sell at prices
higher than
the
maximum
price.

Punishment.

Power to
make rules.

2:
salt, packed foods including water, aerated drinks, stationery items, items required for
the use of infants and children and cement and other construction materials;
(iii) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and

(iv) “service” includes banking, courier and cargo, dry cleaning, servicing of
electronic goods, medical service, cable television, internet and broad band service.

3. (1) The Central Government shall set up an Authority to be known as the Price
Regulatory Authority.

(2) The Authority shall consist of:
(i a Chairman to be appointed by the Central Government;
(ii) four members who are experts in the field of commodities and services; and
(iii) one representative of every State Government.

(3) Ther terms and conditions of service, salaries and allowarices of members referred
to in sub-clause (7) and (ii) of sub-section (2) shall be such as may be prescribed.

4. (1) The Authority shall fix the maximum price of each commodity and service, both
quality and location-wise.

(2) Before fixing the price of commodities and services under sub-section (/), the
authority shall take into account:—

(0 the supply and demand of every commodity;

(ii) the quality of services;

(iii) the price and availability of similar products in international market; and
(iv) the export potential of the commodity.

(3) The Authority shall review the price structure of every commodity and service
keeping in view the demand and supply of a commodity/service at the end of every year and
also at such other times as it considers necessary.

(4) The Authority may fix a different price of a good or commodity for different States
in accordance with such factors as it may deem fit to consider.

5. The Authority shall cause the price structure given wide publicity throughout the
country, through such means as it may deem fit.

6. No seller shall sell any commodity or offer any service at a price more than the price
fixed by the Authority for that commodity or service.

॥

. 7. If any person violates the provisions of this Act, he shall be punished with fine
which may extend to rupees fifty thousand.

8. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of the Act.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The prices of all the commodities are on the increase. The increase is not just restricted
to seasonal commodities but also to items of daily use. Sellers sell their products at their
whim and fancy. They inflate the prices to increase their profit. There is no check on the
pricing of any product. Only on few items, the maximum retail price is displayed.

Even in respect of services there is no correlation between the quality of service and
the price charged. Since, a service cannot be quantified, price is fixed according to the wishes
of the provider.

Therefore, it is proposed to regulate the prices of all commodities and services.

The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.

New DELHI; K.S.RAO
February 15,2006.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM.

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for setting up of a Price Regulatory Authority to
determine the price of each commodity and service. Clause 5 provides that the Authority
shall give wide publicity to prices fixed by it. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual
recurring expenditure of about rupees one crore is likely to be involved.

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one crore is also likely to be involved.



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to frame rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL,

to provide for the setting up of an Authority to regulate prices of various commodities
and services in the country and for matters connected therewith.

(Shri K.S. Rao, M.P.)
’

MGIPMRND—5783L S(S1}—08.03.2006.