Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No.  28 of  2018
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE NATIONAL TOURISM (SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT AND
PROMOTION) BILL, 2018
By
SHRI ANURAG  SINGH THAKUR, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Sustainable Tourism Interventions Council for
establishment of tourism as an organized sector in India, for job-creation,
 higher foreign exchange reserve and greater cultural intermingling
and  for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
WHEREAS the United Nations World Tourism Organization in its Bali  Declaration on
Tourism recognizes tourism as a major contributor to world economy and one that may
enhance quality of human relationships in September 1996.
A
ND WHEREAS the Seoul Declaration on Peace and Tourism adopted on the September,
2001 at Seoul recognizes tourism as a means to promote world peace.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Tourism (Sustainable Development and
Promotion) Act, 2018.

2
Employees of
the Council.
(2) It extends to the whole of  India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Agency" refers to the Skill Enhancement Certification Agency constituted
under section 7;
(b) "Chairperson" refers to the Chairperson of the Sustainable Tourism
Interventions Council established under section 3;
(c) "Council" means the Sustainable Tourism Interventions Council established
section 3;
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(e) "States" means the State Governments referred to in under article 1 of the
Constitution of India; and
(f) "Task Force" means the Marketing Task Force constituted under section 9.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, within sixty days of the commencement of
this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish a Council to be known as the
Sustainable Tourism Interventions Council for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Council shall consist of,—
(a)  the Union Tourism Minister, ex-officio, Chairperson;
(b) the Union Ministers of Environment, Forests and Climate Change, Finance,
Housing and Urban Affairs and External Affairs —Members;
(c) the State Tourism Ministers— Members;
(d) the Secretary to Union Tourism Ministry—Member;
(e) the Secretaries to State Tourism Ministries—Member;
(f) representatives from Hotel Associations, Travel Agent's  Associations,
Adventure Sports Operator's Association and other  interested groups of tourism
industry; and
(g) three other persons from amongst the persons, having outstanding
contribution or expertise in the field of development and promotion of tourism
industry and having experience of working in the tourism trade for at least ten
years.
to be nominated by the Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, in such
manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The term of the members of the Council referred to under clauses  ( f) and (g) of
sub-section (2) shall be for four years from the date of election or nomination or attainment
of the age of seventy years or whichever is earlier and shall not be eligible for the re-election
or re-nomination.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service
of members referred to under clauses (f) and (g) of sub-section (2) shall be such as may
be prescribed.
(5) The Council shall meet at least once in a year to decide the annual agenda.
4. (1) The Central Government shall depute to the service of the Council such of
its employees from the Tourism Department or from any other Department or may
employ any person on contractual basis as it considers  necessary for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
Definitions.
Establishment
of Sustainable
Tourism
Interventions
Council.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(2) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service
of deputed and contractual employees shall be such as may be prescribed.
5. The Council shall,—
(a) make recommendations to the Union and the States on important issues related
to tourism including tax-subsidies, new destinations, international promotions and
employment;
(b) create annual State-specific Action Plans on issues mentioned under
clause (a);
(c) create and discover new tourist destinations;
(d) except for adventure tourism destinations, connect through adequate road
connectivity and regulated transport infrastructure;
(e) provide health centres intermittently to destinations of trekking and hiking;
(f) recognize all buildings older than one hundred and fifty years as vintage
building;
(g) constitute a Heritage Fund both at the Central and State level, through
appropriate financial tools, which shall be used to acquire vintage buildings as
recognized under clause (i) under their jurisdictions;
(h) undertake ease-of-tourism initiative using the Tourism Satellite Account
constituted under section 6 to release biennial rankings on the ability of the State
Government to attract tourists, domestic and foreign;
(i) take cognizance of the state security in each State for tourists based on how
friendly the State police is it to the tourists;
(j) establish a Standard Operating Procedure for each State for sensitizing the
people of the States for friendly reception of all kinds of tourists and for helping them
in understanding the culture of the State;
(k) strive to reduce the consumption of energy-intensive and water-intensive
tourism industry through certification to promote sustainable tourism infrastructure;
and
(l) constitute a sub-council consisting of representatives of Central
Government and State Governments to grant Energy Conservation Certificate
to the energy-intensive and water- intensive tourism industry.
6. ( 1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute a Tourism Satellite Account for the economic measurement of tourism in the
country.
(2) The Tourism Satellite Account shall include,—
(a) harmonization and reconciliation of tourism statistics from an economic
perspective;
(b) tourism economic data that is comparable with other economic statistics; and
(c) inbound domestic tourism and outbound tourism expenditure including
internal tourism expenditure, production accounts of tourism industries, the Gross
V alue Added (GV A) and Gross Domestic Product (GDP) attributable to tourism,
employment, investment, Government consumption and non-monetary indicators.
7. ( 1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute an Agency to be known as the Skill Enhancement Certification Agency for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Functions of
the Council.
Constitution of
Tourism
Satellite
Accounts.
Constitution of
Skill
Enhancement
Certification
Agency.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

(2) The Agency shall,—
(a) establish and recognize skill development institutions which provide courses
in any such activity which aid in tourism; and
(b) provide to every student who successfully complete courses in tourism guides,
languages, cookery and driving a certificate for acquiring respective skills.
8. (1) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the Council, choose
five States every two years, from the five regions of the country, namely, North, South,
West, East and North-East, to form a group to be known as the Target Five States for
development and promotion of tourism in those States.
(2) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the Council, for the
purposes of development and promotion of tourism in Target Five States chosen under
sub-section (1),—
(a) allot a fixed percentage of budget of Target Five States for tourism in
those States;
(b) grant tax-holiday for a stipulated period of time to any project by a
private party that may increase the number of tourists and also the stay of tourists
in the Target Five States;
(c) develop tourism circuits viz, spiritual, adventure and natural;
(d) develop nodes in tourism circuits keeping in view the global standards
in cleanliness, water and energy efficiency, crowd management, security, policing
and hospitality;
(e) renovate historical sites to maintain and preserve the monuments from
the vagaries of nature and man-made elements like pollution;
(f) establish at least one museum to be developed and maintained by a
corporate entity or any other organization;
(g) recognize annual festivals in the Target Five States, ranging from tribal
to more modern festivals; and
(h) train the festival conductors with event management training, or give
them the necessary professional assistance.
9. (1) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the Council, constitute
a Task Force to be known as the Marketing Task Force for marketing and campaigning
of the tourism in the country.
(2) The Task Force shall consist of,—
(a) a Chief Public Relations Officer having compulsory training in marketing,
even if recruited from All India Civil Services; and
(b) representatives from the marketing and personal relations industry,
to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The Task Force shall,—
(a) strive to develop positive image of tourism in India and also in other Countries;
(b) make tailor-made ad campaigns and other marketing modes to promote
tourism in the Target Five States;
(c) report negative experiences of tourists in a particular place as collated through
analytics to the local administration for their immediate redressal; and
(d) showcase the trouble-shooting and hassle-free tourism experiences in the
place.
Target Five
States.
Constitution of
Marketing Task
Force.
4
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
10. ( 1) The Council shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, formulate
adequate schemes and policies to incentivise the organizations and buildings involved
in tourism industry to promote and develop environment friendly tourism in the country.
(2) Every organizations and buildings involved in tourism industry in order to avail the
incentives of the schemes and policies formulated under sub-section (1) shall ensure that—
(a) purchasing policy favours environmentally responsible and eco-friendly
products for building materials, capital goods, food and consumables;
(b) purchase of disposable and consumer goods is measured, and the organisation
actively seeks ways to reduce their use;
(c) energy consumption be measured, sources indicated, and measures to decrease
overall consumption be adopted, while encouraging the use of renewable energy;
(d) water consumption be measured, sources indicated and measures to decrease
overall consumption be adopted;
(e) step-by-step plan to identify, and then quantify, sources of greenhouse gas
emissions under its control, and activate measures to offset climate change in a time-
bound manner is effectively implemented;
(f) waste water including grey water, is treated effectively and reused, wherever
possible;
(g) solid waste management plan is implemented, with quantitative goals to
minimise waste that is non-biodegradable, not reused or recycled;
(h) use of harmful substances including pesticides, harmful chemicals, swimming
pool disinfectants and cleaning material is minimized, substituted, when available, by
innocuous products, and all chemical use is properly managed;
(i) pollution from noise, light, runoff, erosion, ozone-depleting compounds and
air and soil contaminants is reduced;
(j) biodiversity, ecosystems and landscapes are conserved;
(k) refrain from participation in, accept, allow or encourage the use of, or display
or trade in endangered species of flora and fauna, except trophy displays, as permitted
under the law:
(1) no wildlife is held in captivity;
(m) use of endemic native species for landscaping and restoration and takes
measures to avoid the introduction of invasive alien species;
(n) biodiversity conservation, including supporting natural protected areas and
areas of high biodiversity value is supported;
(o) interactions with wildlife not produce adverse effects on the viability of
populations in the wild; and
(p) any disturbance of natural ecosystems is minimised, and, if it occurs
inadvertently, steps are taken for immediate rehabilitation and/or compensatory
contribution for conservation of management.
11. (1) The Council shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records
and prepare annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed.
(2) The accounts and Funds of the Council shall be audited by the Comptroller
and Auditor General of India and any expenditure incurred in connection with such
audit shall be payable by the Council.
Formulation of
schemes and
policies to
promote and
develop
environment
friendly
tourism.
Audit and
Account.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

6
(3) The accounts of the Council as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor General
of India together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Central
Government which shall cause it to be laid before each House of Parliament.
12. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against any person or
authority for anything which has been done or intended to be done in good faith under this
Act or the rules made thereunder.
13. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary for removing the
difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of two years from the date
of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament.
14. (1) The Central Government may, by notifica tion in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Power to make
rules.
Protection of
action taken in
good faith.
5
10
15
20

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Today tourism is an important economic sector for any country. Tourism is also a
source of revenue and economic growth. For an ancient civilization like India, tourism shall
play a pivotal role in driving not just our messages and ancient wisdom, but shall also attract
the world's tourists to India.
Tourism is also increasingly being recognised for its contribution to national
development strategies and in the global development. Tourism has been identified by the
United Nations (UN) as one of the ten sectors to drive the change towards a Green Economy
and was included in the Rio+20 Outcome Document as one of the sectors capable of making
"a significant contribution to the three dimensions of sustainable development, has close
linkages to other sectors, and can create decent jobs and generate trade opportunities".
India's share in international tourist arrivals is around 11.8 per cent. Moreover our
foreign exchange due to tourism is also closer to $22 billion. For a country like India with
rich history, heritage and culture, the potential from tourism is much higher.
Therefore, the need is to channelize several policy interventions for tourism in India
and create an affirmative legislative framework to tap into our tourism potential and make
India as  the prominent tourism country around the world.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; ANURAG SINGH THAKUR
January 3, 2018.
7

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for establishment of a Sustainable Tourism Interventions
Council. It also provides for appointment of representatives from Hotel Associations, etc. to
the Council. Clause 4 provides for deputation of employees of the Central Government to
the Council. It also provides for employment of persons on contractual basis to the Council.
Clause 5 provides for constitution of a Heritage Fund to acquire vintage buildings as
recognized under this Act. Clause 6 provides for constitution of a Tourism Satellite Account
for economic measurement of tourism. Clause 7 provides for constitution of an Skill
Enhancement Certification Agency. Clause 8 provides for choosing Target Five States for
development and promotion of tourism in those States. Clause 9 provides for constitution of
a Marketing Task Force for marketing and campaigning of tourism in the country. Clause 10
provides for formulation of schemes and policies to incentivize the organizations and buildings
involved in tourism industry. Clause 11 provides for maintenance of accounts and other
relevant records of the Council. The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees
fifty crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty crore is also likely to be involved.
8

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 14 empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the purposes
of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative
power is of a normal character.
9

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Sustainable Tourism Interventions
Council for establishment of tourism as an organized sector in India,
for job-creation, higher foreign exchange reserve and greater
cultural intermingling and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Anurag Singh Thakur, M.P. )
MGIPMRND—3686LS(S3)—31-01-2018.