Bill No. 290 of 2015
THE PROTECTION OF REFUGEES AND ASYLUM SEEKERS
BILL, 2015
By
SHRI RABINDRA KUMAR JENA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for, in the interest of upholding the values of international human
rights, an appropriate legal framework to process matters relating to
forced migration in respect of determination of refugee status,
protection from refoulement and treatment during stay.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Protection of Refugees and Asylum Seekers Bill, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
Declaration. 2. For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the main objects of this
 Act are:—
(a) to establish an appropriate legal framework to process matters relating to
forced migration in respect of determination of refugee status, protection from
refoulement and treatment during stay;
(b) to do the same in a way that:
(i) it is in adherence with articles 37 and 253 of the Constitution of India,
which provide an administrative system free from arbitrariness and guarantee
equality, fairness and due process of law;
(ii) it maintains India's commitment to upholding international human rights
principles through accession to all major human rights treaties, and adoption of
appropriate legislative steps to implement them; and
(iii) to ensure that the grant of refugee status shall be considered a peaceful
and humanitarian act and will not imply any judgment on the country of origin of
the refugee.
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:
(a) 'asylum seeker' means a person who seeks recognition and protection as a
refugee;
(b) 'Commissioner' means the Commissioner of Refugees appointed under
section 7;
(c) 'country of origin' means the refugee's country of nationality or if he or she
has no nationality, his or her country of former habitual residence;
(d) 'prescribed' means prescribed by rules under this Act.
(e) 'refugee' means—
(i) any person who is outside his or her country of origin, and who is
unable or unwilling to return to, and is unable or unwilling to avail himself or
herself of the protection of that country because of a well-founded fear of
persecution on account of race, religion, sex, nationality, ethnic identity,
membership or particular social group or political opinion; or
(ii) any person who owing to external aggression, occupation, foreign
domination, serious violation of human rights or other events seriously disrupting
public order in either part or whole of his or her country of origin, is compelled to
leave his or her place of habitual residence in order to seek refuge in another
place out his or her country or origin.
Explanation.—In the case of a person who has several nationalities, the term "his or
her country of origin" shall mean each of the countries of which he or she is a national, and
a person shall not be deemed to be lacking the protection of the country of which he or she
is a national, if without any valid reason based on well-founded fear, he or she has not availed
himself of the protection of one or more of the countries of which he or she is a national.
(f) 'Refugee Committee' means the Committee referred to in section 7 as an
Appellate Board; and
(g) 'refugee children' means children below the age of eighteen years who are
seeking refuge or where protection is extended by the State to children under article 22
of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, 1989.
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
4. A person shall be excluded from refugee status for the purpose of this Act if:
(a) there are serious reasons to believe that he or she has committed acts of a
crime against peace, a war crime or a crime against humanity, in accordance with the
applicable principles and rules of International Law and Conventions, including the
SAARC Regional Convention on Suppression of Terrorism, 1987; or
(b) there are serious reasons to believe that he or she has committed a serious
non-political crime contrary to the applicable principles and rules of the SAARC Regional
Convention on Suppression of Terrorism, 1987, prior to his or her admission into India
as a refugee.
5. (1) No refugeee or asylum seeker shall be expelled or returned in any manner
whatsoever to a place in which there are sufficient reasons or well-founded fears to believe
that his or her life or freedom would be under threat on account of any of the reasons set out
in clause (e) of section 3.
(2) Where an asylum seeker or refugee has been convicted by a final judgement of a
crime against peace, a war crime or a crime against humanity and constitutes a danger to the
community, or there are reasonable grounds to believe that an asylum seeker or refugee is a
threat to the sovereignty and integrity of India, such an asylum seeker or refugee shall be
excluded from the protection provided under this Act.
6. (1)  Where an application is made by or on behalf of, or in relation to an asylum
seeker, for the recognition of the said asylum seeker as a refugee, either at the point of entry
or subsequently, the applicant shall, in accordance with the principle laid down in section 5
be directed and assisted to apply to the Commissioner of Refugees.
(2) Where an application is made by or on behalf of, or in relation to an asylum seeker,
for the the determination of refugee status, pending determination of such status, certain
restrictions shall be imposed on the asylum seeker as are considered necessaryin the interests
of sovereignty and integrity or public order of India, or as may be prescribed.
(3) Application under this section may be made within such reasonable time, as may be
prescribed.
(4) Where an application for refugee status is made by or on behalf of, or in relation to
a child, or where a refugee child is found within the territory of India; he or she shall receive
immediate and appropriate protection and humanitarian assistance in accordance with the
existing policy and legal framework of the State.
(5) The requirement of filing an application form on behalf of a child may be entrusted
to a local Legal Service Authority or their representatives or any other recognised non-
Governmental Organisation involved in the welfare of children.
7. (1) In order to implement the provisions of this Act, the President shall appoint—
(a) the Commissioner of Refugees and Deputy Commissioners of Refugees as
may be necessary on the basis of the eligibility requirements and procedures laid
down in section 8;
(b) other officers as may be necessary after consultation with the Commissioner
of Refugees; and
(c) the Chairperson and Members of the Refugee Committee.
(2) The Chairperson of the Refugee Committee shall appoint the staff of the Committee.
(3) The Salary, Allowances Payable to and other terms and conditions of service of the
Commissioner, Deputy Commissioner, Chairperson, Members and Secretarial staff of the
Refugee Committee shall be such as may be prescribed.
Persons who
shall be
excluded
from refugee
status.
Principle of
Non-
Refoulement.
Application
for
recognition of
refugee.
Constitution
of the
Authorities.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
8. (1) The Commissioner of Refugees shall be a sitting or retired High Court Judge and
shall be appointed after consultation with the Chief Justice of India, for a period of three
years.
(2) The Deputy Commissioner shall be appointed from amongst persons who is qualified
to be appointed as a High Court Judge, and shall be appointed after consultation with the
Chief Justice of India, for a period of three years.
(3) The Chairperson of the Refugee Committee shall be a retired Supreme Court Judge
and shall be appointed by the President in consultation with the Chief Justice of India for a
period of three years.
(4) The Refugee Committee shall consist of a sitting or retired High Court Judge,
appointed by the President in consultation with the Chief Justice of India, and two
independent members with knowledge and experience of refugee issues and refugee law,
who shall hold office for a period of three years from the date of their appointment.
(5) The decision of the Commissioner of Refugees shall be final and any appeal against
such decision shall lie only with the Refugee Committee, as the Appellate Board for
reconsideration of the decision.
(6) The functions of the Commissioner of Refugees and the Refugee Committee shall
be as laid down in sections 9 and 11.
(7) The Commissioner of Refugees may assign such of his functions as may be
necessary to the Deputy Commissioner of Refugees appointed under this Act.
9. (1) An asylum seeker who wishes to claim refugee status shall be heard by the
Commissioner of Refugees before the determination of his or her status.
(2) During the refugee determination interview, the asylum seeker shall be provided
necessary facilities by the Commissioner of Refugees, including the service of a competent
interpreter where required, and a reasonable opportunity to present evidence in support of
his or her case.
(3) The asylum seeker, if he or she wishes, shall be given an opportunity, of which he
or she should be duly informed, to contact a representative of United Nations High
Commission for Refugees (UNHCR), as facilitated by the Commissioner of Refugees.
(4) The asylum seeker, if he or she wishes, shall be entitled to be assisted in the
determination of the status by a person of his or her choice, including a legal practitioner.
(5) A list of competent legal practitioners, who are conversant with refugee law, shall
be provided by the Government to the asylum seeker.
(6) If the asylum seeker is not recognised as a refugee, he or she shall be given such
reasonable time as may be prescribed, to appeal to the Refugee Committee.
(7) Where an application by the asylum seeker is rejected, the Commissioner of
Refugees shall give reasons for the order in writing and furnish a copy of it to the asylum
seeker.
(8) If the asylum seeker is recognised as a refugee, he shall be informed accordingly
and issued with documentation, certifying his refugee status.
10. (1) The findings as well as the orders of the Commissioner of Refugees, the
Refugee Committee and other authorities established under this Act shall be published by
them periodically.
(2) The Commissioner of Refugees and the Refugee Committee shall publish, every
year, a report of their work which shall be made public.
Appointment
and functions
of the
authorities.
Determination
of the refugee
status.
Publication of
findings and
decision.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
11. (1) The Refugee Committee shall receive and consider appeals made by asylum
seekers against the decision of the Commissioner of Refugees.
(2) The Committee may also consider applications for the refugee status suo motto.
12. A person shall cease to be a refugee if—
(a) he voluntarily re-avails himself of the protection of the country of his origin;
or
(b) he becomes a citizens of India; or
(c) he has acquires the nationality of some other country and enjoys the protection
of that country; or
(d) he has voluntarily re-established himself in the country which he left, or
outside which he remained owing to fear of persecution; or
(e) he can no longer, because the circumstances in connection with which he
was regcognised as a refugee have ceased to exist, continue to refuse to avail himself
of the protection of the country of his nationality.
Exception:—A person shall not cease to be a refugee for the purpose of this Act if he
shows compelling reasons, arising out of previous persecution, for refusing to avail himself
of the protection of the country of his nationality, such as incidences of previous persecution
by any individual or groups, State or non-State actors.
13. (1) Every refugee and asylum-seeker, so long as he remains within India, shall have
the right to fair and due treatment without discrimination on grounds of race, religion, sex,
nationality, ethnic identity, membership of a particular social group or political group.
(2) Every refugee, so long as he remains within India, shall have the right to:—
(a) receive the same treatment as is generally accorded under the Constitution or
any other laws and privileges as may be granted;
(b) be provided means to seek a livelihood for himself, and for those dependent
on them;
(c) in the case of refugee women and children, be given special consideration to
ensure their protection and material well being;
(d) choose his place of residence and move freely within the territory of India,
subject to any regulation applicable to refugees generally in the same circumstances;
(e) be issued identity documents;
(f) be issued travel documents for the purpose of travel outside and back to the
territory of India unless compelling reasons of national security or public order
otherwise require; and
(g) access to education, health and other related services.
14. (1) The Central Government may, in appropriate cases where there is large-scale
influx of asylum seekers, issue an order permitting them to reside in India without requiring
their individual status to be determined under section 11 until such time as the reasons for
departure from the country of origin have ceased to exist, or the Government decides that
their status should be determined on an individual basis under this Act.
(2) Asylum seekers who have been permitted to reside in India under this provision.
may be subject to reasonable restrictions with respect to their location and movement, in the
interests of public health and order, so, however, they shall normally have the same rights as
refugees under this Act.
Appellate
procedure.
Persons who
shall cease to
be refugees.
Rights and
duties of
refugees.
Situations
of mass influx.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

6
(3) Women and children asylum seekers in mass influx shall be given special
consideration as to their protection and material well being.
15. The Central Government shall not impose penalties on refugees who, coming
directly from a place where their life or freedom was threatened, enter or are present in India
without authorisation, provided they present themselves without delay to the authorities
and are able to show good cause for their illegal entry or presence.
16. (1) The repatriation of refugees shall take place at their free volition expressed in
writing or other appropriate means, before the Commissioner of Refugees.
(2) The voluntary and individual character of repatriation of refugees shall be carried
out under conditions of transparency and safety to the country of origin.
(3) The voluntary repatriation of refugees shall take place in accordance with such
guidelines, as may be prescribed.
17. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the Refugee Committee for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
18. The provisions of this Act shall have effect, notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
19. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Refugees
Unlawfully in
India.
V oluntary
Repatriation.
Central
Government
to provide
adequate
funds.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
20
15
25

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND REASONS
Articles 37 and 253 of the Constitution provide an administrative system free from
arbitrariness and guarantee equality, fairness and due process of law. Moreover, India is also
committed to upholding International Human Rights principles through accession to all
major human rights treaties, and adoption of appropriate legislative steps to implement them.
While India is still not a signatory to the United Nations Convention relating to the
Status of Refugees, 1951 or the 1967 protocol relating to the status of refugees but India does
provide protection to a steady influx of refugees every year. As per the records of the
Government of India, about 10340 Afghan refugees, 4621 refugees from Myanmar, 80806
refugees from Sri Lanka and 1,01,148 stateless refugees including Tibetan refugees are staying
in India.
Hence, in light of the current global scenario and the European refugee crisis, it is
believed that India needs its own legal framework in the form of a uniform law in order to
process matters relating to forced migration in respect of determination of refugee status,
protection from refoulement and treatment during stay of refugees.
The Bill seeks to address the above issues by establishing the posts of the
Commissioner of Refugees, the Deputy Commissioners of Refugees and the Refugee
Committee. The Bill also assigns roles and responsibilities to the above-mentioned authorities
in order to ensure that refugees in India are meted out uniform rights and privileges during
their stay and are justly repatriated.
N
EW DELHI; RABINDRA KUMAR JENA
November 13, 2015.
7

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to provide for the appointment of Refugee Committee. It also
provides for the appointment of officers and staff for the Committee. Clause 10 provides for
periodical publication of findings of the Commission of the Refugees and Refugee Committee.
Clause 17 provides that Central Government shall provide adquate funds to the Refugee
Committee for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred
crore will be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore would also be involved.
8

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 19 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of normal character.
9

GMGIPMRND—3024LS(S3)—04.12.2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for, in the interest of upholding the values of international human
rights, an appropriate legal framework to process matters relating to
forced migration in respect of determination of refugee status,
protection from refoulement and treatment during stay.
————
(Shri Rabindra Kumar Jena, M.P.)