1
THE FOOD SAFETY AND STANDARDS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI RABINDRA KUMAR JENA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 .
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Food Safety and Standards (Amendment)  Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 290 of  2016
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006, (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act), in section 57, in sub-section (1),—
(a) in clause (i), for the words "two lakh rupees", the words "five lakh rupees"
shall be substituted; and
(b) in clause (ii), for the words "ten lakh rupees", the words "twenty-five lakh
rupees" shall be substituted.
3. In section 59 of the principal Act, for clauses (i) to (iv), the following clauses
shall be substituted, namely:—
"(i) where such failure or contravention does not result in injury, with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and also with fine which may
extend to ten lakh rupees;
(ii) where such failure or contravention results in a non-grievous injury, with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years and also with fine which may
extend to fifteen lakh rupees;
(iii) where such failure or contravention results in a grievous injury, with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than seven years but which may extend
to imprisonment for life and also with fine which may extend to twenty-five lakh rupees;
(iv) where such failure or contravention results in death, with imprisonment for
a term which shall not be less than fifteen years but which may extend to imprisonment
for life and also with fine which shall not be less than thirty-five lakh rupees.".
Amendment
of section 57.
34 of 2006.
Amendment
of section 59.
5
10
15
20

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
As it is important to detect adulteration of food for human consumption, we must
also ensure stringent punishment for adulteration as a deterrent against adulteration.
Therefore, this Bill, seeks to amend the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 to increase
the quantum of punishment for adulteration of food for human consumption to life
imprisonment and the fine upto rupees thirty-five lakhs.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW D ELHI; RABINDRA  KUMAR  JENA
October 20, 2016.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE FOOD SAFETY AND STANDARDS ACT, 2006
(34 OF 2006)
* * * * * * *
57. (1) Subject to the provisions of this chapter, if any person who whether by himself
or by any other person on his behalf, imports or manufactures for sale, or stores, sells or
distribute any adulterant shall be liable—
(i) where such adulterant is not injurious to health, to a penalty not exceeding
two lakh rupees;
(ii) where such adulterant is injurious to health, to a penalty not exceeding ten
lakh rupees.
(2) In a proceeding under sub-section (1), it shall not be a defence that the accused
was holding such adulterant on behalf of any other person.
* * * * * * *
59. Any person who, whether by himself or by any other person on his behalf,
manufactures for sale or stores or sells or distributes or imports any article of food for
human consumption which is unsafe, shall be punishable,—
(i) whether such failure or contravention does not result in injury, with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months and also with fine which may
extend to one lakh rupees;
(ii) where such failure or contravention results in a non-grievous injury, with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year and also with fine which may
extend to three lakh rupees;
(iii) where such failure or contravention results in a grievous injury, with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six years and also with fine which may
extend to five lakh rupees;
(iv) where such failure or contravention results in death, with imprisonment for
a term which shall not be less than seven years but which may extend to imprisonment
for life and also with fine which shall not be less than ten lakh rupees.
* * * * * * *
Penalty for
possessing
adulterant.
4
Punishment
for unsafe
food.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006.
————
(Shri Rabindra Kumar Jena, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2907LS(S3)—22.11.2016.