Bill  No. 291 of  2016
THE CHILD DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMMES COORDINA TION
AGENCY BILL, 2016
By
SHRI GAJANAN CHANDRAKANT KIRTIKAR, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of the Child Development Programmes Coordination
Agency in order to ensure smooth functioning of child development programmes
and achievement of targets for such programmes within a set time frame and
for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Child Development Programmes Coordination Agency
Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) "Agency" means the Child Development Programmes Coordination Agency
established under section 4;
Short title
and
commencement.
Definitions.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Coordination
of Child
Development
Programmes.
Functions of
the Agency.
(b) "Child Development Programmes" means the programmes being run by the
Ministry of Women and Child Development of the Central Government with an object
of child development in the country;
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under the Act;
(d) "Supreme Departmental Authority" means the Secretary of the Department
of Women and Child Development of the Central Government; and
(e) "top official" means the head of the Child Development Programmes being
run by the Central Government.
3. It shall be  the duty of the Central Government to coordinate child development
programmes with an objective to ensure that the child development programmes are run
smoothly and the targets are achieved within the set time frame.
4. (1) For the purpose of section 3, the Central Government shall, by notification in the
Official Gazette, establish an agency for the purpose of this Act to be known as the Child
Development Programme Coordination Agency, in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and staff for the
efficient functioning of the agency.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of the
services of officers and staff shall be such as may be prescribed.
(4) The headquarter of the Agency shall be at such place as may be prescribed.
5. The agency shall—
(a) conduct monthly review of child development programmes run by the
Central Government;
(b) hold meetings with the top officials in connection with the quarterly
execution of programme based on the review;
(c) submit half-yearly progress report and give suggestions to Supreme
Departmental Authority; and
(d) perform such other functions as may be prescribed by the Central
Government from time to time.
6. (1) The Central Government shall by notification in the Official Gazette establish a
Fund to be known as Child Development Programmes Coordination Fund for carrying out
the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in
this behalf, provide requisite sums to the Fund for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
7.  The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
8. (i) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rule for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(ii) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
that rule.
Establishment
of Child
Development
Coordination
Agency.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
It is unfair to think of development of a nation without the development of its children.
Actually, child development is the foundation of national development. The responsibility
of ensuing healthcare, availability of good nutrition and quality education to children lies
not only with the parents but also with the Government. Presently, a number of programmes
on child development are being run by the Central Government among which the Integrated
Child Development Services (ICDS) Scheme is the primary one which was started in 1975.
Subsequently, many small or big programmes were introduced. Despite all these Schemes
there seems to be a continuous deterioration in child development scenario in the country,
be it the state of health or nutrition or education. Owing to lack of coordination among
various ongoing programmes, the state of child development in the country continues to be
at the lowest level despite spending hundreds of crores of rupees annually. Therefore, the
need to establish a coordination agency for ensuring smooth functioning of child
development programme and achievement of targets of such programmes within the set time
frame is inevitable.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; GAJANAN CHANDRAKANT KIRTIKAR
October, 28, 2016.

4
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill Provides for the establishment of the Child Development Programmes
Coordination Agency and the appointment of officers and staff in the Agency. Clause 6
provides for the establishment of a Child Development Programme Coordination Fund.
Therefore, the Bill, if enacted, with involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of rupees one thousand crore per annum from
the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one Hundred crore is also likely to be
incurred.

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relates to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative powers is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of the Child Development Programmes Coordination
Agency in order to ensure smooth functioning of child development programmes
and achievement of targets for such programmes within a set time frame and
for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3138LS(S3)—22-11-2016.
————