1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
By
SHRI KUNWAR PUSHPENDRA SINGH CHANDEL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2019.
2. In the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution,—
(a) the existing entries from 4 to 9 shall be re-numbered as entries 5 to 10,
respectively and before entry 5 as so re-numbered, the following entry shall be inserted,
namely:—
“4. Bundeli.”; and
(b) the existing entries from 10 to 22 shall be re-numbered as entries 12 to 24 and
before entry 12 as so re-numbered, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:—
“11. Kumaoni.”.
Short title.
Bill No. 291 of  2019
Amendment of
the Eighth
Schedule.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
It is only from a language that we come to know about the verbs and different nouns.
The desires of human beings are expressed through the views by using language. Due to
this very reason the language has been considered and practised in Indian culture to the
maximum possible extent of human thought. This is why Indian culture has a vast reservoir
of literature and language. The language 'Sanskrit' is known as the mother of all languages
in the world including Indian languages. This is the reason why we have twenty-two
languages in the Eighth Schedule and hundreds of other languages and thousands of
dialects in India and because of these languages and dialects, India has unlimited ideological
power. Like Sanskrit, these other languages do also have the power of providing guidance
for upliftment and development of India which need to be protected and polished. And if
some of these languages get the special constitutional protection then the work of building
a new India will get expediated.
Most of the regional languages of India are identified as the sub-languages of Hindi.
At present, Hindi is the mother-tongue of around fifty-two crore people in which Bundeli
and Kumaoni languages are included.
Bundeli language has its own glorious history. With the very mention of Bundeli
language emerges a picture of such culture and region that does not show its reluctance to
even sacrifice one's life. The Story of 'Alha-Udal' of Bundelkhand region is world famous.
Bundeli language has been in use for official purposes for more than one thousand years
and as per 2001 census nearly fifty six lakh people belonging to the region of Bundelkhand
use this language as their mother tongue. Bundeli language is the fulcrum of identity and
contact for these people.
Besides Bundeli, Kumaoni language too has its illustrious background. Kumaoni was
official language of Chandel rulers of Uttarakhand and even today it continues to be local
language in the region. In various States of the country, people use Kumaoni in their day to
day interaction. Kumaoni literature is fairly enriched and is frequently used in regional
literature as well as in conventions.
Both the languages, that are historically and traditionally very rich, are being subjected
to gross neglect these days. Both of these languages run the risk of losing their existence
and call for protection on the part of the Government. It is both unavoidable and desirable
now. On having been included in the Eighth Schedule, the usage and popularity of these
languages shall spread all across. In both of these languages, rare manuscripts are scattered
here and there in different regions. It is essential on the part of the Government to protect
them.
Further neither of these two languages has so for been in the scheme of examinations
being conducted by the Union Public Service Commission. As a result students proficient
in these languages cannot use them in the examination. By including these two languages
in the Eighth Schedule, avenues of employment shall also be generated. Therefore, these
two languages need to be included in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution with immediate
effect in order that they may receive their due recognition.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KUNWAR PUSHPENDRA SINGH CHANDEL
October 25, 2019.

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
EIGHTH  SCHEDULE
[Articles 344(1) and 351]
Languages
1. Assamese
2. Bengali
3. Bodo
4. Dogri
5. Gujarati
6. Hindi
7. Kannada
8. Kashmiri
9. Konkani
10. Maithili
11. Malayalam
12. Manipuri
13. Marathi
14. Nepali
15. Oriya
16. Punjabi
17. Sanskrit
18. Santhali
19. Sindhi
20. Tamil
21. Telugu
22. Urdu

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—3055LS(S3)—15-11-2019.