1
THE  AIRLINES (FARE STRUCTURE) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI M.K. RAGHA V AN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for determining of fare structure of all airlines operating in the country and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Airlines (Fare Structure) Act, 2015.
2. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the Central Government shall determine the fare to be charged by any airline for air travel by
passengers.
Short title.
Bill No. 291 of  2015
Determination
of air fare by
the Central
Government.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
(2) The Central Government shall, before determining the fare to be charged by any
airline, take into account the following factors—
(i) traffic of passengers on any route;
(ii) geographical location of the destination;
(iii) distance between starting place and destination;
(iv) cost of fuel including air jet fuel; and
(v) facilities offered by an airline.
3. Every airline operating in the country, either on domestic route or international
route, shall not charge fare more than that determined under section 2.
4. (1) If any airline charges more fare than the fare determined by the Central Government
or cancels any scheduled flight without adequate reason or does not provide the facilities for
which the airline charges from the passengers, the licence of such airline shall, in the first
instance, be suspended for one month immediately after hearing the view point of the airline:
Provided that if the Central Government is satisfied that the provisions of this sub-
section were violated due to genuine difficulty faced by the airline, the Central Government
may not suspend the licence or may remove the suspension.
(2) Where any airline after suspension of licence under sub-section ( 1) violates the
provision of that sub-section (1) again, the licence of such airline shall be cancelled by the
Central Government:
Provided that the Central Government shall before taking a decision on cancellation of
licence of an airline shall give reasonable opportunity of being heard, to such airline.
5. Notwithstanding anything in section 4, an airline shall also make compensation to
the passengers, if—
(i) the scheduled flight is cancelled or delayed for more than two hours;
(ii) it over charges; and
(iii) it does not provide the facilities it offered to the passengers at such rates as
may be determined by the Central Government.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Airlines not
to charge
excess fare.
Suspension or
cancellation
of licence of
airline.
Power to
make rules.
Compensation
to passengers.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Airlines charge exorbitant rates. Scheduled flights are delayed or cancelled at the last
minute causing great inconvenience to passengers. Nowadays, a large number of people are
travelling by air. Airlines don't have any criteria to fix the fares. During festive seasons and
holiday season, the prices sky rocket and virtually there is no check on the fares charged by
airlines.
The facilities that are offered are also withdrawn at the last moment. Government has
no control over airlines. There is no mechanism to protect the passengers.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide for determining of fare structure of all airlines
operating in the country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; M.K. RAGHA VAN
November 18, 2015.
3

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for determining of fare structure of all airlines operating in the country and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri M.K. Raghavan, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3025LS(S3)—04-12-2015.