                                                            Bill No. 291 of 2022
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2022
By
SHRI KUNW AR PUSHPENDRA SINGH CHANDEL, M.P .
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of
India as follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
 AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
Amendment of
article 72. 2. In article 72 of the Constitution, after clause (1), the following clause
shall be added at the end, namely:–
“(1A) Nothing in this article shall apply to the punishment or sentence
of any person convicted of rape and murder of a girl child.
Explanation.– For the purpose of this clause ‘girl child’ means a girl
upto the age of sixteen years.”.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
“Where Women are honored, Divinity blossoms there” such thinking is
one of the prominent views of Indian culture. Mother is regarded a first
guru not only in Indian society but in all societies across the world. Many
philosophers and great souls including Swami Vivekanand have given
highest priority to the honor of women. Despite of such sacrosanct
thinking, some people in our society, who have distorted mentality, not
only commit heinous crime such as rape against girls but they also kill
those girls. In our country, many such cases have come to light and such
distorted mentality can be seen in “Nirbhaya Case” as well. No society can
accept this distorted mentality and drastic measures are required to be
taken to protect girl child.
Therefore, the provision of President’s discretionary power to grant pardon
or suspend sentences pronounced by the Supreme Court should not be available
to the persons convicted of rape and killing of girl child.
Hence this Bill.
   NEW DELHI;             KUNW AR PUSHPENDRA SINGH CHANDEL
November 21, 2022.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * *
PART V
THE UNION
CHAPTER I – THE EXECUTIVE
The President and Vice-President
* * * * * *
72. (1) The President shall have the power to grant pardons, reprieves,
respites or remissions of punishment or to suspend, remit or commute the
sentence of any person convicted of any offence—
(a) in all cases where the punishment or sentence is by a Court
Martial;
(b) in all cases where the punishment or sentence is for an offence
against any law relating to a matter to which the executive power of
the Union extends;
(c) in all cases where the sentence is a sentence of death.
(2) Nothing in sub-clause (a) of clause (1) shall affect the power
conferred by law on any officer of the Armed Forces of the Union to suspend,
remit or commute a sentence passed by a Court Martial.
(3) Nothing in sub-clause (c) of clause (1) shall affect the power to
suspend, remit or commute a sentence of death exercisable by the Governor
of a State under any law for the time being in force.
* * * * * *
4
Power of
President to
grant pardons,
etc., and to
suspend, remit
or commute
sentences in
certain cases.

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel, M.P .)