1
THE RIGHT TO MENSTRUAL HYGIENE AND PAID LEA VE
BILL, 2019
By
MS. S. JOTHIMANI, M.P .
A
BILL
to provide the right to menstrual hygiene facilities, health benefits and paid
leave to women during menstruation and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Right to Menstrual Hygiene and Paid Leave Act,
2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India:
Provided that the provisions of this Act in so far as they relate to the mines shall
extend to whole of India, including the territorial waters, continental shelf, exclusive
economic zone and other maritime zones of India as defined under the Territorial
Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and Other Maritime Zones
Act, 1976.
Bill No. 292 of  2019
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. The provisions of this Act shall apply, in the first instance,—
(a) to every establishment being a factory, mine or plantation including any such
establishment belonging to Government and to every establishment wherein persons
are employed for the exhibition of equestrian, acrobatic and other performances;
(b) to every shop or establishment within the meaning of any law for the time
being in force in relation to shops and establishments in a State:
Provided that the State Government may, with the approval of the Central
Government, after giving not less than month's notice of its intention of so
doing, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare that all or any of the
provisions of this Act shall apply also to any other establishment or class of
establishments, industrial, commercial, agricultural or otherwise; and
(c) to every person who is self-employed or working in the unorganized sector or
in establishments where less than ten persons are employed.
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means,—
(i) in relation to an establishment carried on by or under the authority of
the Central Government or the establishment of railways, mines, oil field, major
ports, air transport service, telecommunication, banking and insurance company
or a corporation or other authority established by a Central Act or a central
public sector undertaking or subsidiary companies set up by central public
sector undertakings or autonomous bodies owned or controlled by the Central
Government, including establishment of contractors for the purposes of such
establishment, corporation or other authority, central public sector undertakings,
subsidiary companies or autonomous bodies, as the case may be, the Central
Government; and
(ii) in relation to any other establishment, the State Government;
(b) "company" means a company as defined in clause (20) of section 2 of the
Companies Act, 2013;
(c) "educational institution" means a place where persons of different ages
study to gain an education, including pre-school, childcare, primary or elementary
school, secondary or high schools and universities;
(d) "employee" means,—
(a) in respect of an establishment, a person, including an apprentice
engaged under the Apprentices Act, 1961, employed on wages by such
establishment to do any skilled, semi-skilled, unskilled, manual, operational,
supervisory, managerial, administrative, technical or clerical work for hire or
reward, whether the terms of employment be express or implied; and
(b) a person declared to be an employee by the appropriate Government;
(c) a worker including a gig-worker, home-based worker and wage worker;
but does not include any member of the Armed Forces of the Union:
Provided that notwithstanding anything contained in this clause, in case
of a mine a person is said to be—employed in a mine who works as the manager
or who works under appointment by the owner, agent or manager of the mine or
with the knowledge of the manager, whether for wages or not—
Definitions.
Application.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(i) in any mining operation (including the concomitant operations of
handling and transport of minerals up to the point of dispatch and of
gathering sand and transport thereof to the mine);
(ii) in operations or services relating to the development of the mine
including construction of plant therein but excluding construction of
buildings, roads, wells and any building work not directly connected with
any existing or future mining operations;
(iii) in operating, servicing, maintaining or repairing any part of any
machinery used in or about the mine;
(iv) in operations, within the premises of the mine, of loading for
dispatch of minerals;
(v) in any office of the mine;
(vi) in any welfare, health, sanitary or conservance services required
to be provided under this Code relating to mine, or watch and ward, within
the premises of the mine excluding residential area; or
(vii) in any kind of work whatsoever which is preparatory or
incidental to, or connected with, mining operations;
(e) "employer" means a person who employs, whether directly or through any
person, or on his behalf, or on behalf of any person, one or more employees in his
establishment and where the establishment is carried on by any department of the
Central Government or the State Government, the authority specified, by the head of
such department, in this behalf or where no authority, is so specified the head of the
department and in relation to an establishment carried on by a local authority, the chief
executive of that authority, and includes,—
(i) in relation to an establishment which is a factory, the occupier of the
factory;
(ii) in relation to mine, the owner of the mine or agent or manager having
requisite qualification under the law for the time being in force and appointed by
the owner or agent of the mine as such;
(iii) in relation to any other establishment, the person who, or the authority
which has ultimate control over the affairs of the establishment and where said
affairs are entrusted to a manager or managing director, such manager or managing
director;
(iv) Contractor; and
(v) legal representative of a deceased employer;
(f) "establishment" means—
(i) a factory;
(ii) a mine;
(iii) a plantation;
(iv) an establishment wherein persons are employed for the exhibition of
equestrian, acrobatic and other performances;
(v) a shop or establishment;
(vi) means any place where any industry, trade, business, manufacture or
occupation is carried on and includes Government establishment; or
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
(vii) an establishment to which the provisions of this Act have been declared
under section 2 to be applicable;
(g) "factory" means a factory as defined in clause (m) of section 2 of the Factories
Act, 1948;
(h) "gig worker" means a person who performs work or participates in a work
arrangement and earns from such activities outside of traditional employer-employee
relationship;
(i) "Government establishment" means any office or department of the
Government or local authority;
(j) "home-based worker" means a person engaged in the production of goods or
services for an employer in his home or other premises of his choice other than the
workplace of the employer, for remuneration, irrespective of whether or not the employer
provides the equipment, materials or other inputs;
(k) "menstrual hygiene management" means women and adolescent girls using
a clean menstrual management material to absorb or collect blood or discharge that
may be changed in privacy as often as necessary for the duration of the menstruation
period, using soap and water for washing the body as required, and having access to
facilities to dispose of used menstrual management materials;
(l) "menstruation benefit" means the benefits referred to in section 4;
(m) "notification" means a notification published in the Gazette of India or in the
Official Gazette of a State, as the case may be, and the expression "notify" with its
grammatical variations and cognate expressions shall be construed accordingly;
(n) "organised sector" means an enterprise which is not in an unorganised
sector;
(o) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules under this Act made by the appropriate
Government;
(p) "sanitary napkin" means pad of absorbent material used by women during
menstruation period; and "synthetic napkin" means sanitary napkins made by chemical
synthesis, especially to imitate a natural product;
(q) "self-employed worker" means any person who is not employed by an
employer, but engages himself in any occupation in the unorganised sector subject to
a monthly earning of an amount as may be notified by the Central Government or the
State Government from time to time or holds cultivable land subject to such ceiling as
may be notified by the State Government;
(r) "State" includes a Union Territory;
(s) "unorganised sector" means an enterprise owned by individuals or self-
employed workers and engaged in the production or sale of goods or providing service
of any kind whatsoever, and where the enterprise employs workers, the number of
such workers is less than ten;
(t) "unorganised worker" means a home-based worker, self-employed worker or
a wage worker in the unorganised sector and includes a worker in the organised sector
who is not covered by the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 or Chapter III to VII;
(u) "wage worker" means a person employed for remuneration in the unorganised
sector, directly by an employer or through any contractor, irrespective of place of
work, whether exclusively for one employer or for one or more employers, whether in
cash or in-kind, whether as a home-based worker, or as a temporary or casual worker, or
as a migrant worker, or workers employed by households including domestic workers,
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
with a monthly wage of an amount as may be notified by the Central Government and
State Government, as the case may be;
(v) "wages" means all remuneration, whether by way of salaries, allowances or
otherwise, expressed in terms of money or capable of being so expressed which would,
if the terms of employment, express or implied, were fulfilled, be payable to a person
employed in respect of his employment or of work done in such employment, and
includes;—
(a) basic pay;
(b) dearness allowance; and
(c) retaining allowance, if any;
but does not include—
(a) any bonus payable under any law for the time being in force,
which does not form part of the remuneration payable under the terms of
employment;
(b) the value of any house accommodation, or of the supply of light,
water, medical attendance or other amenity or of any service excluded from
the computation of wages by a general or special order of the appropriate
Government;
(c) any contribution paid by the employer to any pension or provident
fund, and the interest which may have accrued thereon;
(d) any conveyance allowance or the value of any travelling
concession;
(e) any sum paid to the employed person to defray special expenses
entailed on him by the nature of his employment;
(f) house rent allowance;
(g) remuneration payable under any award or settlement between
the parties or order of a court or Tribunal;
(h) any overtime allowance;
(i) any commission payable to the employee;
(j) any gratuity payable on the termination of employment;
(k) any retrenchment compensation or other retirement benefits
payable to the employee or any ex-gratia payment made to him on the
termination of employment:
Provided that, for calculating the wages under this clause, if payments made by
the employer to the employee under clauses (a) to (i) exceeds one-half, or such other
per cent. as may be notified by the Central Government, of all remuneration calculated
under this clause, the amount which exceeds such one-half, or the per cent. so notified,
shall be deemed as remuneration and shall be accordingly added in wages under this
clause;
Provided further that for the purpose of equal wages to all genders and for the
purpose of payment of wages the emoluments specified in clauses (d), (f), (g) and (h)
shall be taken for computation of wage.
Explanation.—Where an employee is given in lieu of the whole or part of the
wages payable to him, any remuneration in kind by his employer, the value of such
remuneration in kind which does not exceed fifteen per cent. of the total wages payable
to him, shall be deemed to form part of the wages of such employee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
(w) "woman" means any person who is of the female sex including adolescent
girls who are women below the age of eighteen, transgender, gender non-conforming
or queer persons, to whom this Act is applicable;
(x) "worker" means any person (except an apprentice as defined under
clause (aa) of section 2 of the Apprentices Act, 1961) employed in any industry to do
any manual, unskilled, skilled, technical, operational, clerical or supervisory work for
hire or reward, whether the terms of employment be express or implied, and includes—
(i) working journalists as defined in clause (f) of section 2 of the Working
Journalists and other Newspaper Employees (Conditions of Service) and
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1955; and
(ii) sales promotion employees as defined in clause (d) of section 2 of the
Sales Promotion Employees (Conditions of Service) Act, 1976, and for the
purposes of any proceeding under this Code in relation to an industrial dispute,
includes any such person who has been dismissed, discharged or retrenched or
otherwise terminated in connection with, or as a consequence of, that dispute,
or whose dismissal, discharge or retrenchment has led to that dispute;
(iii) any person who is employed in the police service or as an officer or
other employee of a prison; or
(iv) any person who is employed mainly in a managerial or administrative
capacity; or
(v) any person who is employed in a supervisory capacity drawing wage
of exceeding fifteen thousand rupees per month or an amount as may be notified
by the Central Government from time to time;
but does not include any such person—
who is subject to the Air Force Act, 1950, or the Army Act, 1950, or the
Navy Act, 1957, during the period of war;
4. Every woman shall be entitled to the following rights—
(a) Right to self-perception of her menstruation including but not limited to
menarche (first menstruation), menopause, menstrual cycle, primary or secondary
dysmenorrhea (PD or menstrual pain) in accordance with the provisions of this Act;
(b) Right to paid leave and absence from work for three days during her
menstruation, for a female employee in any establishment registered with the appropriate
Government;
Provided that if a woman employee undergoing menstruation opts to work instead of
taking leave, she shall be paid overtime wages allowance at such rate and in such manner as
may be prescribed.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this sub-section, the average daily wage means the
average of the woman's wages payable to her for the days on which she has worked during
the period of three calendar months immediately preceding the date from which she absents
herself on account of maternity, or one rupee a day, whichever is higher.
There shall be paid wages at the rate of twice the rate of wages in respect of overtime
work, where a worker works in an establishment or class of establishments for more than
such hours of work in any day or in any week as prescribed by the appropriate Government
and the period of overtime work shall be calculated on a daily basis or weekly basis, whichever
is more favourable to such worker:
Provided further that no worker shall be required to work overtime by the employer
without the prior consent of the worker in writing for such work.
Rights of
women.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
(c) Right to leave of absence from school, college, university or an educational
institution for three days during her menstruation, for an adolescent girl who is a
student in or above Class VIII;
(d) Right to thirty minutes of rest period twice a day for not more than four days
during menstruation in a month, for every woman employee working in the establishment
during her menstruation.
(e) Right to menstrual hygiene management facilities and equity for all women.
(f) Right to receive intimation and information in writing or electronically regarding
every health benefit available under this Act, at the time of the appointment;
(g) Right to separate toilets for women, transgender persons and specially-abled
persons in public spaces, metros, railway stations, highways, airports, malls, theatres,
public toilets, Government offices and educational institutions.
5. (1) Every employer shall be liable for providing three days paid leave and the
payment of adequate wages, overtime allowance and relevant salary to the female employees
and other rights in accordance with the provisions of this Act;
(2) No employee shall discriminate against female employees on the basis of benefits
provided to women under this Act, at the time of hiring or promotion;
(3) Every employee shall set up a grievance redressal mechanism such as the Internal
Complaints Committee constituted under the Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace
(Prevention, Prohibition, and Redressal) Act, 2013 or similar Grievance Redressal Committees
and Human Resource departments constituted within the establishment which shall address
the grievance pertaining to menstrual leave within the establishment:
Provided that if not constituted, the employer shall be held responsible for the non-
implementation of the provisions of this Act, and for addressing or resolving the grievance
pertaining to menstrual leave within the establishment.
6. The appropriate Governments shall:
(a) provide biodegradable sanitary pads, tampons or other such sanitary napkins
in the separate restrooms, at no cost to the women;
(b) ensure provision of adequate waste-baskets, dustbins, trash-cans and tissue
papers, toilet rolls, bags, envelopes or newspapers for the safe, secure and easy
disposal or menstrual discharge;
(c) annually celebrate 28th May as Menstrual Hygiene Day;
(d) ensure the implementation of Guidelines on Menstrual Hygiene Management
(MHM) issued by the Government under the Swachh Bharat Mission Guidelines
(SBM-G).
(e) take such steps, as may be necessary, for creating awareness among the
females and adolescent girls about menstrual hygiene management and removing
stigma or taboo associated with menstruation through the means of mass media and
by organising such events as it deems fit in classes, seminars and counselling sessions
in every Government and private educational institutions in the villages, urban, rural
and remote areas regarding hygienic menstrual practices to be followed.
7. Whoever,—
(a) denies leave to a woman during her menstruation; or
(b) obstructs a female employee from the entitlement of menstrual leave; or
(c) denies or discontinues prescribed rest and recreation facilities to the women
during her menstruation; or
Duties of
employers
including
educational
institutions
and
Government
offices.
Facilities to
women.
Punishment.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

8
(d) contravenes any provision of this Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment
for a term which shall not be less than one month but which may extend up to three
months and with fine which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees but which may
extend to fifty thousand rupees.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in
this behalf, provide such sums of money to the State Governments as it thinks necessary for
carrying out the provisions of this Act.
9. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
10. (1) The apropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central or State Government shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament or the Legislative Assembly
and the Legislative Council, as the case may be, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
Funds to the
State
Government.
Provision to
be in addition.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Only in seven of India's States and Union territories did ninety per cent. or more
women in the fifteen to twenty-five age group use hygienic protection during menstruation,
according to the latest national health data Not even fifty per cent. women used clean
methods of dealing with menstrual hygiene in eight States and Union Territories according
to the National Family Health Survey-4 (NFHS), released in 2015-16. This is the dark reality
behind all the talks of women empowerment. Even now, women are considered "impure"
during their period, subjected to social, religious and cultural restrictions. This shame around
menstruation also forces girls to opt-out of school once they reach puberty, impending the
growth of female literacy in India. In rural India, twenty-three per cent. of girls have listed
menstruation as the chief reason for dropping out of school. Reproductive Tract Infections
(RTIs) are extremely common among women that they are reported to affect one-third of
women of reproductive age around the world, according to a report by the World Health
Organization (WHO). Sexually transmitted infections (of which RTI is a significant contributor)
are also classified among the "top five disease categories",  by WHO. The risk of women
contracting RTIs is high in rural India, where, in the absence of toilets in villages, access to
sanitation is still limited. Sanitary pads are either too expensive or unavailable for women in
many parts of India. And unless we provide awareness to women, remove the stigma, increase
accessibility to affordable prodects; we are not solving the problem in its entirety. Non-
biodegradable sanitary napkins poe a huge challenge in India, where the disposal system is
largely missing in rural areas. Acconding to census 2011 population data, 336 million girls
and women in India experience menstruation and it can be safely estimated that about 121
million girls and women are currently using locally or commercially produced disposable
sanitary napkins. The end result is that a staggering one billion non-compostable pads are
landing up in urban sewers, landfills, as well as in rural fields and water bodies in India every
month which takes years to decompose. The lack of disposal treatment options may lead to
unsafe management of a mammoth volume of menstrual waste, which affects the health of
those living in the areas that the waste is disposed of, as well as negatively affecting the
water cycle in the area. Menstruation is still a taboo subject in India and the lack of first-hand
understanding of the experience of menstruation by most policy makers means that it has not
received the requisite importance it deserves when it comes to framing policy. There is need
to provide information to women and adolescent girls regarding how frequently one should
change sanitary napkins and what is the proper methods to dispose of them. They need
somewhere private to change sanitary cloths or pads; clean water and soap for washing their
hands, bodies and reusable cloths; and facilities for safely disposing of used materials or a
clean place to dry them if reusable. To avoid a staggering amount of non-degradable waste
generated by using synthetic sanitary pads, there is a need to promote manufacturing and
usage of biodegradable pads. There is also a need for both men and women to have a greater
awareness of good menstrual hygiene practices. It is necesary to create awareness among
women and adolescent girls regarding menstrual hygiene, safe usage and disposal of sanitary
napkins, easy access of affordable sanitary napkins to women in villages and remote areas
and promotion and use of biodegradable napkins.
Hence, this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; S. JOTHIMANI
October 28, 2019.
9

10
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 6 of the Bill provides for the construction of separate toilets, distribution of
sanitary napkins, disposal mechanisms and creating awarencess regarding menstrual hygiene
management among women through programmes. Clause & provides that the Central
Government shall provide funds to the State Governments for the effective implementation
of the Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the consolidated Fund
of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand
crore would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India. A non-recurring expenditure
of about rupees five handred crore is also likely to be involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.
11

MGIPMRND—3101LS(S3)—15.11.2019.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide the right to menstrual hygiene facilities, health benefits and paid leave to
women during menstruation and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
————
(Ms. S. Jothimani, M.P.)