1
Bill No. 292 of  2015
THE CLEANING OF RIVERS (PROVISION OF FINANCIAL
ASSISTANCE) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI M.K. RAGHA V AN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for financial assistance to the States for cleaning and dredging of rivers in
the country and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Cleaning of Rivers (Provision of Financial Assistance)
Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. (1) The Central Government shall provide such financial assistance, as may be
necessary, to the State Governments for the purpose of cleaning and dredging such rivers
and construction of such bath ghats, as may be recommended by the State Governments in
their detailed report under sub-section (2).
(2) Every State Government shall prepare and forward a detailed report to the Central
Government about the rivers within the State which require cleaning or dredging or
construction of bath ghats in such manner and containing such details, as may be prescribed
by rules made under this Act.
A
S INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title, ex-
tent and com-
mencement.
Central
Government
to provide
financial
assistance for
cleaning and
dredging of
rivers.
5
10

2
(3) The Central Government shall, on receipt of a detailed report from a State
Government, select one or more rivers in that State after taking into consideration the
following factors, namely:—
(a) length and breadth of the river;
(b) utility of the river, especially in farming;
(c) geographical location like hills or terrain of the river; and
(d) whether it is a holy river and frequented by public in large number.
3. The Central Government shall release the requisite money for cleaning and
dredging of selected river and construction of selected bath ghats to a State Government
within a period of six months from the receipt of detailed report under sub-section (2) of
section 2.
4. (1) The Central Government may make rules for carrying out the purposes of this
Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately  following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree  that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Central
Government to
release requisite
money.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India has a very vast water source but not utilized properly. Rivers are unclean, dirty
and polluted. Dredging is also required to control floods. For some holy rivers, lakhs of
people visit every year and take bath but no facilities are available there.
State Governments do not have enough funds to clean the rivers. Therefore, it is
proposed that the Central Government should extend financial assistance for cleaning rivers.
N
EW DELHI; M.K. RAGHA VAN
November 18, 2015.

4
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to provide financial assistance to State Governments for
cleaning and dredging of the rivers and construction of bath ghats. Clause 3 provides that
Central Government shall release requisite money to State Governments for cleaning and
dredging of rivers. The Bill therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that recurring expenditure of about rupees two thousand crore
per annum would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five thousand crore is also likely to be
involved.

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 4 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

GMGIPMRND—3021LS(S3)—04-12-2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for financial assistance to the States for cleaning and dredging of rivers in the
country and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri M.K. Raghavan, M.P.)