AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
Bill No. 292  of 2022 
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022 
BY 
SHRI PRADYUT BORDOLOI, M.P. 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Short title and 
commencement. 

-2- 
2. In the Seventh Schedule to Constitution,— 
(i)  in List II - State list, in entry 17, the words ''and embankments'' 
shall be omitted; and 
(ii) in List III - Concurrent List, after entry 47, the following entry 
shall be inserted, namely:— 
"48. Flood, riverine erosion control, embankments and management.''. 
Amendment of 
the Seventh 
Schedule. 

                               STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
      Despite flooding being an annual phenomena in the State of Assam, it is  
unfortunate that the struggle of tens of lakhs of people has been sidelined in the 
national discourse on development. In the previous seven decades (1951-2022), 
there was not a single year when the State didn't endure flooding.  Moreover, over 
the years the floods have gotten more widespread and fiercer, inflicting increasing 
losses and damage to the State's economy, agriculture and infrastructure, with 
human misery also growing all around.  
The State witnessed disastrous floods in the years 1951, 1968, 1972, 1987, 
1988, 2004, 2008, 2012 and most recently in 2019. Observing what has already 
transpired in the months of May and June,  the year 2022 has shaped up to become 
one of those catastrophic flood years for the State. Erosion too is a grave concern - 
the Assam Water Resources Department estimated the annual average loss of land 
due to river erosion at nearly 8000 hectares, causing damages running into 
hundreds of crores every year. 
 While the modern approach to flood management is dominated by 
Structural solutions like embankments, the necessity of the hour is to implement 
an integrated flood and erosion management strategy and design a long term action 
plan expressly for the State of Assam to minimise the twin calamity of flood and 
erosion. Given the nature and scale of the problem, and that it involves the larger 
question of river-basin management, the role and support of the Union 
Government is key.  The comprehensive tackling of flooding and riverine erosion, 
cannot be left to the meager resources of a single state like Assam, 40% of 
Assam's area (close to 32 lakh hectares) is flood-prone, roughly four times higher 
than the national  mark. 
 The Standing Committee of Parliament on Water Resources in 2021, 
expressing concern at the nationwide menace of flood mooted that ''flood control 
and management'' should be brought under the concurrent list of the Constitution 
for the overall national interest of integrated development of water resources. This 
intervention is crucial since most rivers flow across multiple States and flood 
control measure taken  by one State State may have inter-state ramifications. 
  

 
 Thus, considering the above facts, it is proposed in the Bill that ''flood, 
Riverine erosion control embankments and management'' be included in the 
Seventh schedule to the Constitution so that both the Centre and State 
governments can play their due role in the field of flood and riverine erosion 
control and management. 
  
Hence this Bill. 
 
 NEW DELHI;                                                                        PRADYUT BORDOLOI 
      November 21, 2022. 
 
 
 
 
  

ANNEXURE 
 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
SEVENTH SCHEDULE 
(Article 246) 
*  *  *  *  *  *  * 
List II—State List 
*  *  *  *  *  
17. Water, that is to say, water supplies, irrigation and canals, drainage and 
embankments, water storage and water power subject to the provisions of 
entry 56 of List I. 
*  *  *  *  *   
 
 
List III- Concurrent List  
*  *  *  *  *   
      47. Fee in respect of any of the matters in this List, but not including 
fees taken in any court. 
*  *  *  *  *  
  
* 
 
 
 
* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
--------- 
 
 
 
 
 
A 
 
BILL 
  
 
 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
 
 
----------  
 
 
 
 
 
(Shri Pradyut Bordoloi, M.P.)  