THE  PROTECTION OF SPEECH AND REPUTATION  BILL,  2016
By
SHRI TATHAGATA SATP ATHY,  M.P.
—————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
—————
CLAUSES
CHAPTER  I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER  II
S
UITS FOR DEFAMATION
3. Suits for defamation.
4. Mandatory notice of a suit for defamation.
5. Response to a notice for a suit of defamation.
6. Acceptance of an offer to make amends.
7. Rejection of an offer to make amends.
CHAPTER  III
I
NSTITUTION AND PARTIES TO A SUIT FOR DEFAMATION
8. Institution of a suit for defamation.
9. Suits by Government and public servants.
10. Defendant to a suit for defamation.
CHAPTER  IV
LIMITATION ON CAUSE OF ACTION IN A SUIT FOR DEFAMATION
11. No cause of action for defamation of, or against, deceased persons.
12. Single cause of action for multiple defamamtory statements in the same matter.
13. Single cause of action for subsequent publication.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No.  292 of  2016
(i)

CHAPTER  V
DEFENCES TO A SUIT FOR DEFAMATION
14. Defence of truth.
15. Defence of opinion and inference.
16. Certain statements not to constitute defamation.
CHAPTER  VI
P
ROCEDURE
17. Jurisdiction.
18. Power to transfer and consolidate cases.
19. Relief in suits for defamation.
20. Quantification of damages.
21. Groundless threats of legal proceedings.
CHAPTER  VII
M
ISCELLANEOUS P ROVISIONS
22. Agreements for indemnity.
23. Overriding effect.
24. Amendments of certain enactments.
25. Power to make rules.
THE  SCHEDULE
(ii)
C
LAUSES

1
THE PROTECTION OF SPEECH AND REPUTATION BILL, 2016
By
SHRI TATHAGATA SATPATHY, M.P.
A
BILL
to balance the right to personal reputation within the right to free speech by providing
for repeal of substantive offence of defamation and its punishments; consolidate
the common law relating to civil defamation; comprehensively provide for the
protection of speech and reputation and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
W
HEREAS the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1948 [General Assembly res.
217A(III)] adopted and proclaimed by United Nations General Assembly on 10th December,
1948; under Article 19 guarantees the right to freedom of expression;
A
ND WHEREAS article 15 of the Constitution of India guarantees the right to freedom of
speech and expression;
AND WHEREAS the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1948 under article 12 further
obligates states to protect honor and reputation of persons by enacting legislation;
Bill No. 292 of  2016
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
AND WHEREAS the UN Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Opinion and Expression
based on these international obligations has stated that imprisonment is not a legitimate
sanction for defamation and called for its repeal in several reports to the UN Commission on
Human Rights including those on 29th January 1999, 18th January 2000 and 26th January
2001;
A
ND WHEREAS it is considered necessary to implement the aforesaid declaration and
the reports.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Protection of Speech and Reputation Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India, except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "amend" includes an explanation, classification, rebuttal, correction, retraction
and apology;
(b) "author" means the first speaker of a statement, but does not include a
person who had no intention for publication of the Statement;
(c) "Code" means the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908;
(d) "defamation" means the serious harm caused to the reputation of any person
as a result of a false statement made by another person;
(e) "editor" means a person having direct editorial or equivalent responsibility
for the content of the statement or the decision to publish it;
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(g) "publisher" includes—
(i) a "publisher" as per the Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867;
(ii) any person or company, owning or operating a, "cable television
network" as defined under the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act,
1995; or
(iii) any person or company, who publishes a statement in an "electronic
form" except an "intermediary" as defined under the Information Technology
Act, 2000;
(h) "publication" means making the statement available to the public;
(i) "public servant" has the meaning assigned to it in the Indian Penal Code,
1860;
(j) "intermediary" has the meaning assigned to it in the Information Technology
Act, 2000;
(k) "statement" means words, pictures, sounds, images, videos, gestures or any
other method signifying meaning, used, individually or in combination, by an author
that is published or communicated to public; and
(l) "serious harm" means a false statement made against a person that affects his
reputation severely which may be proved by circumstances subsequent to the
publication of the statement.
Short title and
extent.
Definitions.
5 of 1908
25 of 1867
21 of 2000
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
7 of 1995
31 of 2000
25 of 1860

3
(2) Words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in the Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908 shall have the meaning assigned to them in the Code.
CHAPTER II
SUITS FOR DEFAMATION
3. (1) A person shall not be prohibited from making a statement except when it has the
effect of causing serious harm to the reputation of another person, resulting in the defamation
of such another person.
(2) Any false statement, which has the effect of marginalizing a person on the basis of
his gender identity or sexual orientation without the consent of such person, shall be deemed
to have the effect of causing serious harm to such person.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for the time being
in force, harm to the reputation of any company, limited liability partnership, partnership firm,
sole proprietorship or other association of individuals engaged in commercial or professional
activities shall not be treated as serious harm unless such harm causes or appears to cause
serious financial loss which may be proved by circumstances subsequent to the publication
of the statement.
(4) Subject to the provisions of this Act, any person who has suffered defamation as
a result of the statement made by another person shall have the right to institute a suit for
damages in the court of competent jurisdiction against such person.
4. (1) No suit under this Act shall be instituted unless, prior to instituting a suit for
defamation, the plaintiff has given notice to the author, editor or publisher of the statement
that is alleged to be defamatory and the author, editor or publisher within a period of two
weeks after receipt of the notice fails to satisfy the demand as per the reasonable satisfaction
of the person seeking to institute a suit for defamation.
(2) A notice for the purposes of sub-section ( 1) shall contain the following
particulars—
(a) the statement alleged to be defamatory with particulars as to when and where
it was made and came to the knowledge of the person issuing the notice;
(b) the reasons as to how the statement alleged to be defamatory caused serious
harm to the reputation of the person issuing the notice;
(c) the role of the author, editor or publisher separately identified in authoring,
editing or publishing the statement;
(d) the name and place of the District Court or a High Court having original civil
jurisdiction where the suit for defamation will be filed; and
(e) the details of any other suit filed in respect of the statement which is same or
substantially similar along with the name and place of the Court where it has been filed.
(3) The demand made under the notice shall include the relief sought and—
(a) apology, correction and/or retraction in a manner and form as demanded; and
(b) monetary damages on the basis of the provisions of this Act.
(4) Any notice to the author, editor or publisher shall be delivered in the following
manner—
(a) all notices shall be sent through registered post to the address of the author,
editor or publisher against whom the suit for defamation is sought to be filed:
Provided that when the address of the author, editor or publisher is not
available, a public notice shall be issued in such form and manner, as may be
prescribed;
5 of 1908
Suits for
defamation.
Mandatory
notice of a
suit for
defamation.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(b) a copy of the notice shall also be sent by registered post to the office
address, if available, of the author, editor or publisher against whom the suit for
defamation is sought to be filed;
(c) notwithstanding anything in clauses ( a) and ( b), in case the publication
containing the statement is made available on the internet, a notice may be delivered
by—
(i) sending an e-mail, if e-mail address is available, attaching therewith
the notice with the electronic signature of the person sending the e-mail;
(ii) the e-mail shall also be sent to any e-mail address which is separately
mentioned in the terms and conditions of the website for service of notices:
Provided that when the e-mail address of the author, editor or publisher is
not available a public notice shall be issued in such form and manner, as may be
prescribed:
Provided further that no notice shall be sent to an intermediary:
Provided also that when the intermediary is the only internet website
where the statement is published, notice shall be sent to the author, editor or
publisher and not to the intermediary.
5. (1) A person who has received a notice under section 4 may offer to make amends in
relation to the statement complained to be defamatory and any such offer to make amends
shall be—
(a) made within a period of two weeks from the date of receipt of the notice under
sub-section (4) of section 4;
(b) made in writing;
(c) expressed to be an offer to make amends; and
(d) clearly stated whether it is a qualified offer and, if so, set out the defamatory
meaning in relation to which it is made.
(2) An offer to make amends under sub-section (1) may include any of the following
offers—
(a) to make a suitable correction of the statement complained of and sufficient
apology to the aggrieved party;
(b) to publish the correction and apology in a manner that is reasonable and
practicable to the aggrieved party; and
(c) to pay the aggrieved party such compensation, if any, and such costs, as may
be agreed or determined to be payable.
(3) An offer to make amends under sub-section ( 1) of section 5 may be withdrawn
before it is accepted and a renewal of an offer which has been withdrawn shall be treated as
a new offer.
6. (1) An aggrieved party that has sent a notice under section 4 may accept an offer to
make amends made under section 5.
(2) Where an aggrieved party has accepted an offer to make amends under section 5,
it shall not be entitled to institute or continue proceedings in respect of the statement
concerned against the person making the offer, but shall be entitled to enforce the offer to
make amends through legal proceedings.
7. (1) When an offer to make amends under section 5 is rejected by the aggrieved party,
such offer shall not—
(a) constitute an expression or implied admission of fault or liability by the
person in connection with that matter; and
Response to
notice of a
suit for
defamation.
Acceptance of
an offer to
make amends.
Rejection of
an offer to
make amends.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
(b) be considered relevant to the determination of fault or liability in
connection with that matter.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, any offer
to make amends under section  5 shall not  be admissible in proceedings as evidence of the
fault of the person making it.
Illustration: X is aggrieved by certain statements issued by Y in a press conference
and X complains of defamation. Y offers to make amends. However this written proposal
offered by Y is not found satisfactory by X. Y's offer to make amends and the written
proposal for the same shall not be considered to be an admission of Y's guilt and used
against Y in evidence during court proceedings.
CHAPTER III
I
NSTITUTION AND PARTIES TO A SUIT FOR DEFAMATION
8. After a person has complied with the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 4, he
may institute a suit for defamation in the following manner—
(a) No suit for defamation shall be instituted by any person other than the
person who has suffered serious harm by a false statement:
Provided that where such person is under the age of eighteen years, or is
of unsound mind, or is suffering from sickness or infirmity and is unable to make
a complaint, or is a woman who, according to the local customs and manners, is
restrained from appearing in public, some other person may institute the suit on
their behalf:
Provided further that when a person institutes a suit on behalf of another
person, such person shall do so by taking leave of the court which shall consider
it and pass an order prior to issuing summons to a defendant; and
(b) An aggrieved party may institute a suit for defamation being a member of a
readily identifiable association or group of person if—
(i) the statement is made against an identifiable association or group of
persons;
(ii) the statement has caused serious harm to the identifiable association
or group of persons;
(iii) the aggrieved party is a natural person; and
(iv) the aggrieved party is  a member of such identifiable association or
group of persons:
Provided that when a natural person institutes a suit as a member of a readily
identifiable association or group of persons, it shall be by taking leave of the court
which shall consider it and pass an order prior to issuing summons to a defendant.
9. (1) A Government agency or any local authority or institution performing government
or statutory functions shall not be entitled to institute suits for defamation under this Act.
(2) No suit for defamation shall be instituted or held maintainable when the statement
is made against a public servant with respect to his acts and conduct relating to the discharge
of his official or public duties:
Provided that a suit for damages by a public official seeking damages for
defamatory statement be deemed to be maintainable if it is proved that the statement
was made with reckless disregard for truth:
Provided further that when a public servant institutes a suit for defamation, it
shall be by taking leave of the court which shall consider it and pass an order prior to
issuing summons to a defendant.
Institution of
a suit for
defamation.
Suits by
Government
and public
servants.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
Illustration: A is the chief minister of the State of X. Y is a journalist who authors an
article which alleges an abuse of power by A which A claims contains defamatory statements.
The State of X cannot file a suit for defamation on behalf of A. However, A can file a
suit as A is a public official.
Since the statement which has been alleged by A to be defamatory relates to the
discharge of official or public duties by A, in order that suit for defamation is maintainable, A
has to first establish serious harm to his reputation and that it was made with reckless
disregard for the truth.
Establishing that the statement made against A by Y is false shall not by itself constitute
a reckless disregard for truth but it shall also  require extreme negligence, malice, ill-will or bad
faith.
10. (1) Any suit for defamation shall proceed only against the author, editor or publisher
of the statement and shall contain particulars identifying each defendant under the category
of an author, editor or a publisher.
(2) In the case of statement made in any book, newspaper or paper, the plaintiff shall
identify the author, editor or publisher as per the declarations contained under the Press and
Registration of Books Act, 1867:
Provided that where the statement is not governed by the provisions of the
Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867, the plaintiff shall make reasonable efforts to
ascertain the author, editor or publisher and the explanation of such effort should be
contained in the particulars of the plaint.
(3) An intermediary shall not be considered the author, editor or publisher of any
statement and shall not to be made party to any suit for defamation.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section—
(1) an intermediary shall comply with the order and judgment of a court without
being a party to the proceedings therein;
(2) any defendant may claim the status of an intermediary even if such a person
is alleged to be the author, editor or publisher of the statement by the plaintiff in a suit
for defamation.
CHAPTER IV
L
IMITA TION ON CAUSE OF ACTION IN A SUIT FOR DEFAMATION
11. (1) No person (including the legal heirs and descendants of a deceased person)
shall institute, continue or enforce a cause of action for defamation in relation to—
(a) a statement about a deceased person, irrespective of whether such statement
is published before or after the death of such person; or
(b) a statement made by a person who has died since it was published,
notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Succession Act, 1925:
Provided that a cause of action for a suit for defamation shall exist, when a
statement is not limited to a deceased person and extends to any other person who has
suffered direct, serious harm as a consequence of it.
(2) For the purposes of this section, a body corporate shall be considered a deceased
person from the date a court passes an order for its dessolution or declaration of insolvency.
12. A person shall have a single cause of action for defamation in relation to the
publication of a defamatory statement about the person even if more than one defamatory
statement about the person is carried in the same matter.
Defendant to
a suit for
defamation.
No cause of
action for
defamation of,
or against,
deceased
persons.
Single cause of
action for
multiple
defamatory
statements in
the same
matter.
25 of 1867.
25 of 1867.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
13. (1) For the purpose of counting time from which period begins to run in suits for
compensation for libel under the Limitation Act, 1963 in case of subsequent statements of
substantially same form as first, after being published in the cause of action against the
author, editor or publisher in respect of the subsequent statement shall be deemed to have
accrued on the date of the first publication.
(2) For the purpose of counting time from which period begins to run in suits for
compensation for slander under the Limitation Act, 1963 in case of subsequent spoken
statements of substantially same form as first spoken statement, the cause of action as well
as special damage against the author, editor or publisher shall be deemed to have accrued on
the date of the first spoken statement.
(3) The provision of this section shall not apply to the subsequent statement if the
matter of the subsequent statement is materially different from the matter of the first statement.
CHAPTER V
D
EFENCES TO A SUIT FOR DEFAMATION
14. (1) A defendant shall not be deemed to have committed defamation if the statement
alleged to be defamatory or the imputation coveyed by it is substantially true.
(2) In a suit for defamation in which a statement is alleged to be defamatory, the
defendant shall not be held liable merely because one or more statements are shown to be
materially false unless such statement also causes serious harm to the reputation of the
plaintiff.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, in cases
involving statements on matters of public concern, the plaintiff shall bear the burden of
proving the falsehood of any statement or imputation of fact alleged to be defamatory.
15. (1) In a suit for defamation, a defendant shall not be deemed to have committed
defamation if the statement alleged to be defamatory is a statement of opinion or a factual
inference and the conditions laid down in sub-section (2) are satisfied.
(2) The following conditions must be satisfied by a defendant to avail the defence of
opinion and inference-
(a)  the statement complained of is a statement of opinion or a factual inference;
(b) in case the statement complained of is a statement of opinion, the statement
complained of shall indicate, whether in general or specific terms, the basis of the
opinion;
(c) in case the statement complained of is a statement of factual inference, the
statement complained of shall reasonably summarise the matters from which the
inference has been or may be drawn including any such matters militating against the
inference; and
(d) a reasonable person must be able to hold the opinion or draw the inference
on the basis of any relevant facts known to the author of the statement at the time the
statement complained of was published.
(3) The defence of opinion and factual inference shall not apply if it is proved that the
defendant did not hold the opinion and in respect of a factual inference, the defendant was
malicious.
16. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the publication of following
statements, which shall be protected by absolute privilege, shall not constitute defamation—
(a) a statement made in proceedings of any meeting or sitting of:
(i) the Council of States or the House of the People;
(ii) the Legislative Council or the Legislative Assembly;
Single cause of
action for
subsequent
publication.
Defence of
truth.
Defence of
opinion and
inference.
Certain
statements
not to
constitute
defamation.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

8
(iii) any local authority or committee of a local authority;
(iv) any commission, tribunal, committee or inquiry by a person appointed
for the purposes under the Central Government or the State Act by the appropriate
Government;
(v) any local inquiry by a person appointed by a local authority in pursuance
of any of the Central or the State Act;
(vi) any other tribunal, committee or board constituted and exercising
functions by or under the Central Government or the State Act; and
(b) Statements contained in reports written in any of the bodies mentioned in
this section;
(c) statements made—
(i) in proceedings before a court, tribunal or authority that has the power
to act judicially or exercising judicial or quasi-judicial functions;
(ii) in communications between any person and an advocate or legal
counsel for the purpose of obtaining or rendering legal advice; and
(iii) under the penalty of perjury or under an oath.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, any fair and accurate publication
of the following statements shall be protected by conditional privilege and shall not constitute
defamation unless made with malice—
(a) proceedings of a Legislature of any foreign country or of a committee of
any such Legislature, or an International Organisation of which India is a member, or
of organisations recognised by the United  Nations, or of any international conference
to which the Government of India sends a representative;
(b) findings or decisions of associations or any committee or governing body in relation
to a person who is a member of or is subject, by virtue of any contract, to its control;
(3) The proceedings at a general meeting of any company or association constituted,
registered or certified by or under a Central or State Act.
CHAPTER VI
P
ROCEDURE
17. (1) No suit for defamation under this Act shall be instituted in any court inferior
to a district court having jurisdiction to try the suit.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, a suit
for defamation shall be instituted within the local limits of a district court where the
defendant resides, or carries on business, or personally works for gain:
Provided that where the address of the defendant is unavailable or exists beyond
the territorial extent of India the aggrieved party may institute a suit for defamation at
a place where the publiction containing the statement is first made available to the
public:
Provided further that in instance when the address of the defendant is unavailable
or exists beyond the territorial extent of India and the publication containing the
statement is made on the internet, then the aggrieved party may institute a suit for
defamaton in a district court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction, at the time of
the institution of the suit or other proceeding, the person instituting the suit or other
proceeding or, where there are more than one such person, any of them actually and
voluntarily resides or carries on business or personally works for gain.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

9
(1) A suit for defamation shall only be filed under this Act in a court  as has been stated
in the notice for defamation; however, the statement of a specific court in a notice does not
confer jurisdiction to a district court which otherwise does not have jurisdiction as per the
provisions of this Act.
18. (1) Whenever it is made to appear to the Supreme Court that an order under this
section is expedient for the ends of justice, it may direct that any particular case(s) or
appeal be transferred from one High Court to another High Court or from a Civil Court
subordinate to one High Court to another Civil Court of equal or superior jurisdiction
subordinate to another High Court.
(2) The Supreme Court may act under this section only on the application of the
Attorney General of India or of a party interested, and every such application shall be made
by motion, which shall, except when the applicant is the Attorney-General of India or the
Advocate-General of the State, be supported by affidavit or affirmation.
19. (1) The relief which a court may grant in any suit for defamation includes injunction
(subject to such terms, if any, as the court thinks fit) at the option of the plaintiff and damages.
(2) The order of injunction under sub-section ( 1) may include any of the following
reliefs, namely:
(a) a suitable correction of the statement found to be defamatory and sufficient
apology to the aggrieved party;
(b) to publish the correction and apology in a manner that is reasonable and
practicable to the aggrieved party;
(c) to pay the aggrieved party such compensation by way of damages (if any).
(3) The costs of all parties shall be as per the discretion of the court and the Court shall
take into account the travel and business costs incurred by the parties while assigning
costs.
20. (1) An aggrieved party shall not be awarded exemplary or punitive damages in a
suit for defamation.
(2) In determining the amount of damages to be awarded in any defamation proceedings,
the court is to ensure that there is an appropriate and rational relationship between the harm
sustained by the aggrieved party and the amount of damages awarded.
(3) The court may determine the appropriate and rational relationship between the
harm sustained by the aggrieved party and the amount of damages based on the following
factors—
(a) the proportionality of the harm with direct financial loss subsequent to the
publication of the statement which is defamatory; or
(b) repeated defamatory statements by the defendant against the aggrieved
party in separate publications which may evidence a presence of malice; or
(c) flagrant disregard for the truth through willful recklessness which gives rise
to the defamatory statement.
(4) The court may also consider the following factors in mitigating damages which may
be awarded-
(a) the potential of a chilling effect caused which may limit the ability of the
publication or any of the defendants to ordinarily conduct business;
(b) the publication of any correction, retraction, or apology published by the
defendant, and the nature, extent, form, manner, and time of that publication;
Power to
transfer and
consolidate
cases.
Relief in suits
for
defamation.
Quantification
of damages.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

10
(c) any statement of explanation or rebuttal, or of both explanation and rebuttal,
in relation to the matter that is the subject of the proceedings, and the nature, extent,
form, manner, and time of that publication; and
(d) delay between the publication of the matter in respect of which the
proceedings are brought and the decision of the court in those proceedings, being
delay for which the plaintiff was responsible.
(5) In cases of damages which are claimed without specific evidence which is proved
on direct and actual financial loss there shall be a limitation on damages in the following
manner-
(a) the maximum amount of damages for such non-economic loss that may be
awarded in defamation proceedings shall be such as may prescribed by the Central
Government by notification in the Official Gazette that is applicable at the time damages
are awarded.
21. (1) When a person, by means of a notice or other mediums such as circulars,
advertisements or by any other means threatens a person with an action or proceedings for
defamation the recipient may institute suit against such person praying for the following
reliefs:
(a) a declaration to the effect that the threats are unjustifiable;
(b) an injunction against the continuance of such threats; and
(c) such damages, if any, as may have been sustained thereby.
(2) A defendant in a suit under this section may prefer a counterclaim for defamation
for any of the reliefs as provided under section 19 of this Act.
(3) Nothing in this section shall render an advocate or a legal practitioner liable to an
action under this section in respect of an act done by him in his professional capacity on
behalf of the client.
(4) A suit under this section shall not be instituted in any court inferior to a district
court within whose local limits the notice or other mediums such as circulars, advertisements
or through such other means the threats were received.
CHAPTER VII
M
ISCELLANEOUS P ROVISIONS
22. An agreement indemnifying any person against civil liability for defamation in
respect of the publication of any statement shall not be unlawful unless at the time of making
the statement that person knows that the matter is defamatory and does not reasonably
belive there is a good defence to any action brought upon it.
23. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force,
any suit having a cause of action for defamation or praying for reliefs seeking monetary
damages, declaration or injunction for defamation, with or without any connected and
ancillary reliefs, shall be heard and decided in accor dance with the provisions of this Act.
(2) In any suit for defamation there shall be no distinction between statements which
are considered to be slander and liabel, which shall only and exclusively be governed by
the provisions of this Act.
24. (1) The enactments specific in the Schedule are hereby amended to the extent
and the manner mentioned in the fourth column thereof.
(2) The amendment of enactments shall not affect continuation of any legal proceeding
pending in a court at the commencement of this Act and the proceedings may be continued
in that court as if this Act had not been passed.
Groundless
threats of
legal
proceedings.
Agreements
for indemnity.
Overriding
effect.
Amendment
of certain
enactments.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

11
25. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more  succsessive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
succssive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
Power to
make rules.
5
10

THE SCHEDULE
[See Section 24]
Y ear No. Short title Extent of repeal
1860 45 The Indian Penal Code, 1860 Sections 499 to 502
1974 2 The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 Section 199
12

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The right to free speech, which is guaranteed under article 19(1)(a) of our
Constitution, is an important aspect that ensures our democracy remains vibrant and ever
evolving. However, it is important to also ensure that this right is not misused to damage
the reputation of a person or entity. To ensure the existence of a healty social environment,
there needs to be a fine legislative balance between free speech and the right to reputation.
The Protection of Speech and Reputation Bill attempts to repeal the substantive
offence of defamation and its punishments. The larger aim of this Bill is to consolidate
the common law relating to civil defamation and to comprehensively provide for the
protection of speech and reputation as per the Constitution.
This Bill seeks to bring in simplified procedure to redress defamation complaints.
Efforts are to make trial by subordinate judiciary as easy and simple as such a complex law
could possibly be. It proposes to create a mandatory notice process, before a case is filed
in court. This will ensure that the person who complains and the person against whom the
complaint is made, can find ways of avoiding litigation. This would be one step towards
promoting ease of doing business as companies would have an effective, quick remedy to
protect their reputation on showing serious harm. The Bill also tries to address important
issues with respect to territorial jurisdiction and damages awarded taking into consideration
global best practices on defamation laws. The Bill proposes that all changes in defamation
law, including the proposal for the decriminalization of defamation, should be applicable
prospectively and should not apply to any pending proceedings.
The Indian Penal Code, 1860 states that defamation is a criminal offense. Criminal
defamation is a law made one hundred and fifty years ago and preserved without substantial
legislative change till date. This colonial enactment had the clear intent to curb liberty of a
subject nation. A change in times should, ideally, lead to a change in law. There are frequent
debates whether these restrictions are relevant in modern age. It is a lack of clarity on this
that often leads to misuse of defamation laws by using them as a harassment tool. The
ultimate result is that this restricts speech.
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights, adopted and proclaimed by United Nations
General Assembly on 10th December,1948, guarantees the right to freedom of expression
under article 19. If we look around the world, there is an emerging global trend to abolish
criminal defamation. United Kingdom, the country that gave us the Indian Penal Code in
its original form, has repealed criminality in its defamation law in 1996 and, in its place,
passed a reasonable law in the year 2013.
India must march in tandem with the world and make an effort to keep up with times.
There is an urgent need to reform our defamation law to ensure India has the required social
environment for democracy and the economy to flourish.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; TATHAGATA SATPATHY
October 27, 2016.
13

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 25 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
14

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to balance the right to personal reputation within the right to free speech by providing for
repeal of substantive offence of defamation and its punishments; consolidate the common
law relating to civil defamation; comprehensively provide for the protection of speech and
reputation and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Tathagata Satpathy, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3100LS(S3)—23.11.2016.