                                                            Bill No. 293 of 2022
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2022
By
DR. KRISHNAPAL SINGH YADA V, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of
India as follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
 AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
Substitution of
new article for
article 343.
2. For article 343 of the Constitution, the following article shall be
substituted, namely:–
“343. The National language of the Union shall be Hindi in Devanagari
Script.
The form of numerals to be used for the official purposes of the Union
shall be the international form of Indian numerals.’’.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Hindi is the language that unites India into one fabric and the promotion
of Hindi as the national language shall help the Indian identity develop.
Roughly forty-five per cent. of Indians speak Hindi as their first language
and fifty seven per cent. People are fluent in Hindi as their second and third
language. No other language in India has more speakers and most regional
language have less than 10 per cent. of the total population speaking it.
So, it must be our aim to be seen as a land of Hindi the same way China
united its population with a single dialect Mandarin. Use of Hindi as our
national language would help us move away from the clutches of colonial
mind-set and also help establish Hindi as an international language by
promoting it in forums like UN and other world bodies.
Currently Indians speak many languages unlike many other countries
which speaks only one language. India has many languages and every language
has its importance. But it is absolutely necessary that the entire country should
have one language that becomes India’s identity globally. Further, it has been
a dream of our forefathers to make Hindi in Devanagari as National language
of India and for that the time period of fifteen year has been given to the
Government of India to get rid of the colonizer’s mind-set.
However, even after 75 years of Independence of this nation, the language
which acted as a channel of unity in the country is not declared as the national
language of India. Moreover, recently the committee headed by the Hon’ble
Home Minister in the report also suggest that the language used for
communication in the administration should be Hindi and efforts should be
made to teach the curriculum in Hindi. And all work must be done for the
active promotion of Hindi language. Various committees earlier have also
recommended promotion of Hindi so that it gives a sense of unity. This bill is
in furtherance to the dream of our forefathers had enrich this through their
blood. It is thus absolutely necessary to redeem the pledge and to make Hindi
as National Language of India.
Hence this Bill.
   NEW DELHI;                              KRISHNAPAL SINGH YADA V
November 22, 2022.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * *
PART XVII
OFFICIAL LANGUAGE
CHAPTER I.–LANGUAGE OF THE UNION
    343. (1) The official language of the Union shall be Hindi in Devanagari
script.
The form of numerals to be used for the official purposes of the Union
shall be the international form of Indian numerals.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in clause (1), for a period of fifteen
years from the commencement of this Constitution, the English language
shall continue to be used for all the official purposes of the Union for which
it was being used immediately before such commencement:
Provided that the President may, during the said period, by order
authorise the use of the Hindi language in addition to the English language
and of the Devanagari form of numerals in addition to the international form
of Indian numerals for any of the official purposes of the Union.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in this article, Parliament may by law
provide for the use, after the said period of fifteen years, of—
(a) the English language, or
(b) the Devanagari form of numerals,
for such purposes as may be specified in the law.
* * * * * *
4
Official
language of
the Union.

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Dr. Krishnapal Singh Yadav, M.P .)