1
Bill No. 293 of  2016
THE TREATMENT OF TERMINALLY-ILL PATIENTS
BILL, 2016
By
SHRI BAIJAY ANT PANDA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the protection of patients and medical practitioners from
criminal offences arising from withdrawing life-saving procedures or
 assisting for the right of a dignified death.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Treatment of Terminally-ill Patients Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “adult"means an individual who is of eighteen years of age or more;
(b) “advance medical directive" (called living will) means a directive given by a
person that he shall or shall not be given medical treatment in future when he becomes
terminally-ill;
Short title and
commencement.
Definitions.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(c) "attending medical practitioner" means a physician who has primary
responsibility for care of the patient and treatment of the patient's terminal disease;
(d) "competent patient" means a patient who is not an incompetent patient;
(e) "incompetent patient" means a patient who is a minor below the age of
sixteen years or a person of unsound mind or a patient who is unable to—
(i) understand the information relevant to an informed decision about his
medical treatment;
(ii) retain that information;
(iii) use or weigh that information as part of the process of making his
informed decision;
(iv) make an informed decision because of impairment of or a disturbance
in the functioning of his mind or brain; or
(v) communicate his informed decision (whether by speech, language or
any other mode) as to medical treatment.
(f) "independent medical practitioner"means a physician who has been consulted
about the attending medical practitioner's intention to terminate life on request or to
provide assistance with suicide;
(g) "informed decision" means a decision by a competent patient, to request and
obtain a prescription to end his life in a humane and dignified manner, that is based on
an appreciation of the relevant facts and after being fully informed by the attending
medical practitioner of—
(i) his medical diagnosis;
(ii) his prognosis;
(iii) the consequences of remaining untreated;
(iv) the potential risks associated with taking the medication to be
prescribed;
(v) the probable result of taking the medication to be prescribed; and
(vi) the feasible alternatives, including, but not limited to, palliative care,
hospice care and pain control.
(h) "medical power-of-attorney"means a document of decisions in future as to
medical treatment which has to be given or not to be given to a person if he becomes
terminally-ill and becomes an incompetent patient;
(i) "medical practitioner" means a medical practitioner who possesses any
'recognized medical qualification' as defined in clause (h) of section 2 of the Indian
Medical Council Act, 1956 and who is enrolled on a 'State Medical Register' as defined
in clause (k) of that section;
(j) "medical treatment" means treatment intended to sustain, restore or replace
vital functions which, when applied to a patient suffering from terminal illness, would
serve only to prolong the process of dying and includes—
(i) life-sustaining treatment by way of surgical operation or the
administration of medicine or the carrying out of any other medical procedure;
and
(ii) use of mechanical or artificial means such as ventilation, artificial
nutrition and hydration and cardiopulmonary resuscitation.
102 of 1956
 5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(k) "medically confirmed" means the medical opinion of the attending medical
practitioner has been confirmed by an independent medical practitioner who has
examined the patient and the patient's relevant medical records;
(l) "minor" means a person who, under the provisions of the Indian Majority
Act, 1875 is to be deemed not to have attained majority;
(m) "palliative care" includes—
(i) the provision of reasonable medical and nursing procedures for the
relief of physical pain, suffering, discomfort or emotional and psycho-social
suffering; and
(ii) the reasonable provision for food and water.
(n) "patient" means a patient who is suffering from terminal illness; and
(o) "terminal illness" means—
(i) an incurable and irreversible disease that has been medically confirmed
and will, within reasonable medical judgement, cause death within six months; or
(ii) which has caused a persistent and irreversible vegetative condition
under which no meaningful existence of life is possible for the patient
3. (1) Every patient including minor aged above sixteen years shall have the right to
take a decision and express his desire to the attending medical practitioner attending to
him—
(i) for withholding or withdrawing of medical treatment to himself; or
(ii) to intentionally assist him to commit suicide by providing him with the means
to do so.
(2) When a patient referred to in sub-section (1) communicates his decision to the
attending medical practitioner, such a decision shall be binding on the medical practitioner if
the following conditions are fulfilled:—
(i) the attending medical practitioner is satisfied that the patient is a competent
patient and that the patient has taken an informed decision based upon a free exercise
of his free will;
(ii) the medical opinion of the attending medical practitioner has been confirmed
by a panel of three independent medical practitioners who have examined the patient
and the patient's past medical records:
Provided that if there is difference in the opinion of the three independent medical
practitioners, the majority opinion shall prevail; and
(iii) in the case of a minor above sixteen years of age, the consent has also been
given by his parents.
(3) In the case of an incompetent patient or a competent patient who has not taken an
informed decision, the attending medical practitioner may take a decision referred to in
clause (i) or (ii) of sub-section (1) provided—
(i) the attending medical practitioner is of the opinion that the medical treatment
to a patient should be withheld or withdrawn; or
(ii) the attending medical practitioner in his medical opinion suggests assisted-
suicide for the patient with a humane and dignified death;
and the medical opinion of the attending medical practitioner is backed by a panel of three
independent medical practitioners who have examined the patient and the patient's past
medical records:
4 of 1875
Refusal of
medical
treatment by
competent
patient or
physician-
assisted
suicide.
 5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
Provided that if there is difference in the opinion of the three independent medical
practitioners, the majority opinion shall prevail; and
(iii) the High Court having territorial jurisdiction has granted permission in
accordance with section 6.
(4) The attending medical practitioner shall, while taking a decision under sub-section
(3),—
(i) adhere to guidelines as may have been issued by the Medical Council of India
in this regard; and
(ii) consult the parents or relatives, if any, of patient but shall not be bound by
their views.
(5) Before proceeding further to give effect to the request of the patient, the attending
medical practitioner must inform the patient that he may rescind the request at any time and
in any manner.
4. Every advance medical directive (called living will) or medical power-of-attorney
executed by a person shall be binding on the attending medical practitioner during the
course of medical treatment of the patient.
5. (1) On completion of conditions laid down in section 3, the attending medical
practitioner shall—
(i) complete the medical record documentation requirements stipulated by the
Medical Council of India;
(ii) begin the process of getting clearance from the Medical Council of India for
actions under clause (i) or (ii), as the case may be, of sub-section (1) of section 3; and
(iii) ensure confidentiality of all documents and medical records of the patient.
(2) Upon receipt of clearance for action under clause (i) of sub-section (1) of section 3
from the Medical Council of India, the attending medical practitioner shall withhold or withdraw
medical treatment to a patient to end his life in a humane and dignified manner.
(3) Upon receipt of clearance for action under clause (ii) of sub-section (1) of section 3
from the Medical Council of India, the attending medical practitioner shall—
(i) prescribe the medication that would end the life of the patient in a humane and
dignified manner; and
(ii) ensure that the patient commits suicide in the presence of a witness other
than the attending medical practitioner himself.
6. (1) On completion of conditions laid down in section 3, any near relative, next friend,
legal guardian of patient, the attending medical practitioner or any other person may apply to
the High Court having territorial jurisdiction for granting permission to the attending medical
practitioner for withholding or withdrawing of medical treatment to the patient or assist in
suicide of an incompetent patient or a competent patient who has not taken an informed
decision.
(2) The application under sub-section (1) shall be treated as original petition and the
Chief Justice of the High Court shall assign the same to a Division Bench without any loss of
time for disposal within fifteen days.
(3) For the purpose of deciding on the application, the Division Bench shall appoint an
Expert Committee of three members comprising a medical practitioner, a legal expert and
an expert on moral or ethical issues in such manner as may be prescribed.
Advance
medical
directives and
medical
power-of-
attorney.
Role of the
attending
medical
practitioner.
Procedure for
permission
from the High
Court.
 5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

5
(4) The Expert Committee shall give its recommendations within one week of its
constitution.
(5) The Division Bench of the High Court shall, having due regard to the
recommendations of the expert Committee and the wishes of close relations, namely, spouse,
parents, major children or in their absence, such other persons as the High Court deems fit to
put on notice and on consideration of the best interests of the patient, pass orders granting
or refusing to grant permission or granting permission subject to any condition.
7. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code, 1860, a patient seeking
action under section 3 shall not be deemed to be guilty of any offence under the Indian Penal
Code or any other law for the time being in force.
8. Any action of the attending medical practitioner or any other person acting under
the direction of the attending medical practitioner on the express desire of a patient under
section 3, shall be deemed to be a lawful action.
9. (1) For the purposes of this Act, the Medical Council of India shall, from time to
time,—
(i) prepare and issue guidelines for the use of medical practitioners; and
(ii) issue documentation requirements to be followed by medical practitioners.
(2) The guidelines and documentation requirements under sub-section ( 1), shall be
published in the Gazette of India and on the website of the Medical Council of India.
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Protection of
competent
patients from
criminal
action.
Protection of
attending
medical
practitioner
from criminal
action.
Guidelines by
Medical
Council of
India.
Power to
make rules.
45 of 1860
 5
10
15
20
25

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In a 2015 report by the Economist Intelligence Unit, it was found that India was one of
the worst 15 countries in the world to die in, coming 67th out of 80 in "quality of death". We
have treated persons with terminally-ill diseases, less as human beings that afford a humane
and dignified death, but as innate objects that must be treated despite irreversible or incurable
medical conditions.
This Bill hopes to allow a terminally-ill individual a dignity even in his last months,
when one should be with his or her family, rather than be isolated from their loved ones in an
intensive care unit. The Bill codifies passive euthanasia in a more or less similar manner as
the Hon'ble Supreme Court in its 2011 judgement in the case of Aruna Ramachandra Shanbaug
vs. Union of India.  Moreover, this Bill recognizes Living Wills and medical power-of-attorney,
measures that allow a patient to make decisions before the consequences of severe health
conditions kick in.
Lastly, the Bill lays down a careful procedure for allowing for assisted suicide in the
case of terminally-ill patients. This Bill incorporates safeguards that will protect both the
patient and the medical practitioner and preserve the essential right to a dignified death.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.
N
EW DELHI; BAIJAYANT PANDA
July 25, 2016
6

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 6 of the Bill provides that for the purpose of deciding on the application
seeking death for terminally ill patient, the Division Bench of the High Court concerned
shall appoint an Expert Committee of three members comprising a medical practitioner, a
legal expert and an expert on moral or ethical issues. The expenditure in this regard shall be
met out of the budgetary grants of the concerned High Court. In the case of Union territories,
the Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. At this stage, it is not possible to give the exact amount of expenditure that would be
involved as it would depend on number of applications under section 6. However, a recurring
expenditure of about rupees ten crores per annum would be involved from the Consolidated
Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
7

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of  a normal character.
8

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the protection of patients and medical practitioners from
criminal offences arising from withdrawing life-saving procedures or
 assisting for the right of a dignified death.
————
(Shri Baijayant Panda, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2656LS(S3)—24-11-2016.