                                                            Bill No. 294 of 2022
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2022
By
SHRI P.P . CHAUDHARY, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of
India as follows:–
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022.Short title.
 TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
5
Amendment of
the Seventh
Schedule.
2. In the Seventh Schedule to Constitution,—
(i) in List II - State list, entry 17 shall be omitted; and
(ii) in List III - Concurrent List, after entry 32, the following entry
shall be inserted, namely:—
“32A. Water, that is to say, water supplies, irrigation and canals,
drainage and embankments, water storage and water power
subject to the provisions of entry 56 of list I.”.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Life is impossible without water. All living beings including human,
animals and plants need water for their survival. Therefore, it is desirable
that requisite amount of water is available without any hindrance for
drinking and irrigation.
Around ninety-seven per cent of the water on the Earth is salty water and
only three per cent is fresh water; slightly over two-thirds of this fresh water
is frozen in the form of glaciers and polar ice caps. The remaining unfrozen
fresh water is found mainly as ground water.
Ground water is a renewable resource, yet the world’s supply of ground
water is steadily decreasing with the depletion of water table, most prominently
in Asia and North America. It is still not clear that how much natural renewal
balance of fresh water is available or whether ecosystem will be threatened
for want of fresh water in near future. The framework for allocating water
resources to water users where such a framework exists is known as water
rights.
At present, water is a State subject and is considered as primary
responsibility of the State Governments.
The Bill seeks to amend that Seventh Schedule to the Constitution with a
view to transfer entry 17 of List II - State List pertaining to ‘Water’, to List
III-Concurrent List so that the Parliament and the Central Government can
also play their due role for conservation and sustainable use of water to meet
the growing needs of the society.
Hence this Bill.
   NEW DELHI;                                           P.P. CHAUDHARY
November 23, 2022.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * *
List II – State List
* * * * * *
17. Water, that is to say, water supplies, irrigation and canals, drainage
and embankments, water storage and water power subject to the provisions
of entry 56 of List I.
* * * * * *
4

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri P .P . Chaudhary, M.P .)