1
THE  CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI ARJUN MEGHWAL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2015.
2. In article 312 of the Constitution,—
(i) in clause ( 1), the words "including an all-India judicial service" shall be
omitted; and
(ii) after clause (1), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(1A) Notwithstanding anything in Chapter VI of Part VI or Part XI, the
Parliament shall, within one year of the coming into force of this Act, by law,
provide for the creation of an all-India judicial service common to the Union and
the States, and, subject to the other provisions of this Chapter, which shall also
apply mutatis mutandis to all-India judicial service, regulate the recruitment, and
the conditions of service of persons appointed to all-India judicial service.".
Short title.
Bill No. 294 of  2015
Amendment
of article
312.
AS  INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
There is a provision in the Constitution under article 312 for creation of All-India
Services. Under this article, the Indian Administrative Service, the Indian Police Service, the
Indian Foreign Service and the Indian Forest Service have been created by law, from time to
time, but the creation of all-India judicial service is still awaited. In 1976, necessary amendments
in the Constitution were made to create all-India judicial service but still the same has not
been created.
Now, it is felt by the civil society and citizens that proper representation of all sections
of the society be made in the judicial service. Therefore, the Bill seeks to amend the
Constitution with a view to provide that the Parliament shall, within one year of the coming
into force of this Act, by law, provide for creation of an all-India judicial service common to
the Union and the States.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; ARJUN MEGHWAL
November 18, 2015.
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * *
312 (1) Notwithstanding anything in Chapter VI of Part VI or Part XI, if the Council of
States has declared by resolution supported by not less than two-thirds of the members
present and voting that it is necessary or expedient in the national interest so to do, Parliament
may by law provide for the creation of one or more all-India services (including an all-India
judicial service) common to the Union and the States and, subject to the other provisions of
this Chapter, regulate the recruitment, and the conditions of service of persons appointed, to
any such service.
* * * * * *
3
All-India
Services.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Arjun Meghwal, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2967LS(S3)—04-12-2015.