1
Short title.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 295 of  2019
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
By
DR. M.K. VISHNU PRASAD, M.P .
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2019.
2. After article 47 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
"47A. The State shall take steps to ensure access of safe potable water to
every household of the country.".
State to provide
access to safe
potable water to
every
household.
Insertion of new
article 47A.
5

2
Amendment of
the seventh
Schedule.
3. In the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution,—
(i) in List II-State List, entry 17 shall be omitted;
(ii) in List III-Concurrent List, after entry 47, the following entry shall be inserted,
namely:—
"48. Water, that is to say, water supplies, irrigation and canals, drainage and
embankments, water storage and water power subject to the provisions of entry 56 of
list 1.".
5

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Water is the essential need and it remains the basic necessity of human life. However,
the per capita availability of water is continuing to decline and the nation is heading towards
water scarcity. More than 70 per cent. of India's rural households are dependent on ground
water for drinking but the country's water body is under tremendous stress and the quality is
going from bad to worse.
India has the highest number of people in the world without access to safe potable
water. The contamination of water with fluoride, iron, nitrate, arsenic and other heavy metals
has not only adversely affected health and environment but it is posing a major public health
issue in the country. The World Health Organisation estimates that in India, about 38 million
people are affected by waterborne diseases each year, out of which more than three quarters
are children.
Water is, at present, as State subject and is considered as the primary responsibility of
the State Government. However, the State Governments are facing resource crunch to make
proper arrangements for piped and potable water, particularly in rural areas.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Constitution with a view to—
(a) put an obligation on the State to ensure access to safe potable water to every
household; and
(b) transfer entry 17 of List-II in State List pertaining to 'Water' to List-III concurrent
List so that the Central Government along with the respective State Governments can play
an effective role providing access to safe drinking water to meet the growing needs of the
society.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; M. K. VISHNU PRASAD
October 25, 2019

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to provide for the State to take steps to ensure access to safe
potable water to every household of the country. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure
of about rupees five hundred crore will be involved per annum from the Consolidated Fund
of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
4

5
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
SEVENTH SCHEDULE
* * * *
LIST II-STATE LIST
* * * *
17. Water, that is to say, water supplies, irrigation and canals, drainage and
embankments, water storage and water power subject to the provisions of entry 56 of
List I.
* * * *
LIST III-STATE  LIST
* * * *
47. Fees in respect of any of the matters in this List, but not including fees taken in
any court.
* * * *

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India
————
(Dr. M.K. Vishnu Prasad, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—3126LS(S3)—01-02-2020.