1
Bill No. 296 of  2019
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE ARTISTS WELFARE BILL, 2019
By
DR. T. SUMATHY (a) THAMIZHACHI THANGAPANDIAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for measures for the welfare of cinema artists and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Artists Welfare Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "artist" means any person engaged in cinema industry and performing either
as an actor, dancer, singer, producer, photographer, editor or any work connected with
Definitions.5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
the production, editing and distribution of films or in theatre like drama or promotion
of local culture like folk dance or song and includes casual workers employed from
time to time on contract basis.
(b) "cinema" means a feature film or a documentary or a short film;
(c) "fund" means the Artists Welfare Fund constituted under section 3;
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under the Act.
(e) "theatre" means a place where drama is performed or any event held to
promote and propagate local culture like folk song and dance.
3. (1) The Central Government shall set up a Fund to be known as the Artists
Welfare Fund.
(2) The Fund shall consist of contributions made by Central Government, film
producers and donations received from individuals or organisations.
(3) The Fund shall be administered by a Board consisting of—
(i) the Minister of Information and Broadcasting, Chairman ex-officio;
(ii) two representatives of film or theatre producers, as members to be nominated
in such manner as may be prescribed; and
(iii) two representatives of cinema or theatre artists as members to be nominated
in such manner as may be prescribed.
(4) The details regarding conditions of service and terms of appointment of members
of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed by rules to be made under this Act.
(5) The Artists Welfare Fund shall be utilized for the following purposes—
(i) payment of compensation in case of death or accident of an artist while
performing the job;
(ii) payment of premium of life insurance of artists;
(iii) payment of old age pension after an artist has attained the age of sixty years
and is not gainfully employed;
(iv) payment of disability assistance in case any artist is disabled due to any
reason while working in cinema industry;
(v) free health care and education facilities for the artists and their family
members;
(vi) housing facilities to the artists at subsidized rate; and
(vii) sustenance allowance at such rate as may be prescribed for those days
when they are not gainfully employed.
4. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Artists Welfare
Fund.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Artist engaged in film or theatre industry fall in the category of unorganized workers
and face a lot of problems. They entertain the people but a great deal of personal risk is
involved in their work. Accidents occur frequently during shooting of the films and as a
result many artists sustain injuries while performing. They get a meagre amount as
compensation for the loss or injury suffered by them. They do not have proper facilities like
health care, education for their children, etc. They do not have regular employment. They
get employment only for few days in a month. They are exploited in many ways by
unscrupulous persons.
Today, the cinema industry generates considerable revenue for the country but nothing
is being done by the Government for the welfare of persons engaged in this profession.
Therefore, it becomes necessary to provide certain measures for welfare of the persons
engaged in the cinema industry.
The Bill seeks to provide for setting up of the Artists Welfare Fund providing for
insurance cover, educational facilities for the children of cinema workers, old age pension,
free health care and housing facilities to the workers engaged in the cinema industry.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; T. SUMATHY (a) THAMIZHACHI THANGAPANDIAN
November 6, 2019.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for setting up of the Artists Welfare Fund by the Central
Government for the welfare of workers engaged in cinema or theatre industry. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 4 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Act. Since the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for measures for the welfare of cinema artists and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. T. Sumathy (a) Thamizhachi Thangapandian, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—3127LS(S3)—15-11-2019.