1
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 297 of  2019
THE CENTRAL UNIVERSITIES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
By
DR. SUJAY RADHAKRISHNA VIKHE PA TIL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Central Universities Act, 2009.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Central Universities (Amendment) Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.5

2
2. After section 3D of the Central Universities Act, 2009 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
"3E. There shall be established a University, which shall be a body corporate,
to be known as the Central University of Maharashtra, having its territorial
jurisdiction extending to the whole of the State of Maharashtra, as specified in
the First Schedule to this Act.".
3. In the First Schedule to the principal Act, after entry 12, the following entry shall be
inserted, namely:—
"12A. Maharashtra Central University of Whole of the
Maharashtra State of
Maharashtra."
Insertion of new
section 3E.
Establishment
of Central
University of
Maharashtra.
Amendment of
the First
Schedule.
25 of 2009.
5
10

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India currently has forty-nine Central Universities out of which forty are centrally
funded through University Grants Commission (UGC), under the purview of Ministry of
Human Resource Development (MHRD) and another nine enjoy the autonomous status,
directly funded by the Government of India (GoI). The enactment of the Central Universities
Act, 2009 was done with the aim to establish and incorporate universities for teaching and
research in various States. Currently there are sixteen Universities under this Act for different
States but there is no university for the State of Maharashtra.
The need is to establish a Central University of Maharashtra to encourage multi-
disciplinary learning by promoting creative and critical thinking for holistic development
and self-sustenance for the people of India. Establishment of such University will foster
excellence in teaching, research and innovation in pure and applied areas of learning. The
establishment of a University in Maharashtra shall be meaningful addition to the existing
educational institutions. Maharashtra is known across the world for its educational institutions
like IIT, GLC, Armed Forces Medical College, IHM and several colleges of international
repute.
As the Central Universities are funded it will assist in promoting innovations in teaching-
learning process and inter-disciplinary studies and research. The establishment of a Central
University will also generate direct and indirect employment and will be helpful in educating
and training manpower for the development of the Country. The Central Universities are
autonomous and have access to several resources which enable them be centers of excellence
and work towards the improvement of the social and economic conditions and welfare of the
people, their intellectual, academic and cultural development. A Central University as
proposed in the State of Maharashtra will increase access to higher education and set
exemplary standards for other universities to emulate and will help in minimizing the regional
imbalances in educational facilities.
The State of Maharashtra being one of the most developed States of India and also an
educational hub has been devoid of a Central University and this Act shall be a right direction
in achieving that goal in order to provide better opportunities of learning and research in
higher education through a full-fledged university which will not only provide education but
also aid in creating human capital.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Central Universities Act, 2009 with a view to
provide for the establishment of a Central University in the State of Maharashtra.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SUJAY RADHAKRISHNA VIKHE PATIL
November 6, 2019.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to insert the new section 3E in the Central Universities Act,
2009 so that a new Central University, namely "Central University of Maharashtra" can be
established which shall be the body corporate, whose jurisdiction extends to whole of the
State of Maharashtra. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. At this stage, it is not possible to give exact estimate of
expenditure, both recurring and non-recurring, which will be involved from the Consolidated
Fund of India, if the Bill is enacted into a law. However, it is estimated that a recurring
expenditure of about rupees twenty crore will be involved per annum from the Consolidated
Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

5
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CENTRAL UNIVERSITIES ACT, 2009
(25 oF 2009)
* * * * *
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
[See Section 3(4)]
Serial Name of the Name of the University Territorial
No. State jurisdiction
(1) (2) (3) (4)
1. Andhra Pradesh Central University of Whole of the
Andhra Pradesh State of Andhra Pradesh.
** * *
12. Kerala Kerala Central Unviersity Whole of the
State of Kerala.
13. Odisha Central Unviersity of Odisha Whole of the
State of Odisha.
** * *

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Central Universities Act, 2009.
————
(Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhe Patil, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—3128LS(S3)—15-11-2019.