Bill No. 298 of 2015
THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2015
By
SHRI BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Amendment) Act,
2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
5
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. For section 28 of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960, the following
section shall be substituted, namely,—
"28. (1) The Central Government shall, in consultation with State Governments,
within a period of one year from the coming into force of the Prevention of Cruelty to
Animals (Amendment) Act, 2015, notify the religious occasions on which it is customary
to sacrifice animals.
(2) Nothing contained in this Act shall render it an offence to kill any animal in a
manner required by the religion of any community on any religious occasion notified under
sub-section (1).
(3) During religious occasions notified under sub-section (1), every act of killing of an
animal for sacrificial purposes under sub-section (2), shall be carried out in isolation where it
is not within the view of other sacrificial animals.
(4) Every act of killing of an animal for sacrificial purposes during a religious occasion
shall be carried out by trained persons and using such methods, as may be prescribed by the
Central Government, to ensure minimum pain and trauma to the sacrificial animal."
Substitution
of new
section for
section 28.
Provisions as
to sacrificial
killing of
animals during
religious
occasions.
5
10
15

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Animal sacrifice is a very common ritual that exists in many religious communities. The
reason cited to justify it is to seek divine favor, both individual such as good health and
fortune; and collective such as rain and good harvest. Since, these rituals have continued for
centuries, it is difficult to question the relevance of such rituals. However, the manner in
which animal sacrifices are carried out has often been criticized for being too cruel.
One major concern in brutality of animal sacrifice lies in the methods used for killing
animals. Often the weapon used for animal sacrifice is not appropriate for the purpose.
Moreover, animals sacrifice is usually carried out by untrained persons. As a result, animals
are not only injured during sacrifice but are then left to die, thus prolonging their suffering.
Another disturbing aspect of animal sacrifice is that often animals are sacrificed in full
view of other sacrificial animals. This causes severe mental trauma to animals awaiting
sacrifice.
In order to address the above issues and to ensure that minimum trauma is caused to
an animal during sacrifice, the Bill seeks to amend the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act,
1960 with a view to provide that—
(i) Central Government shall, in consultation with the State Governments, notify
the religious occasions on which it is customary to sacrifice animal; and
(ii) animal sacrifices on religious occasions shall be carried out in isolation and
by trained persons and using such methods as may be prescribed to ensure minimum
pain and trauma to the sacrificial animal.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB
November 13, 2015.

4
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 2(4) of the Bill empowers the Central Government to prescribe by rules the
methods of animal sacrifice to ensure minimum pain and trauma to the sacrificial animal.
As the rules to be framed relates to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative
power is of a normal character.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960
* * * * * *
CHAPTER VI
MISCELLANEOUS
28. Nothing contained in this Act shall render it an offence to kill any animal in a
manner required by the religion of any community.
* * * * * * *
Saving as
respects
manner of
killing
prescribed by
religion.
5

GMGIPMRND—2879LS(S3)—04.12.2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960.
————
(Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab, M.P .)