1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 298  of  2016
THE PREVENTION OF ATROCITIES ON WOMEN BILL, 2016
By
SHRI OM PRAKASH YADAV, M.P.
A
BILL
to prevent atrocities against women in the country, to specify Special Courts
for the trial of offences committed against women and for the relief and
rehabilitation of the victims of such offences and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Atrocities on Women  Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases the Central Government;
(b) "atrocity" means an offence punishable under section 3;
(c) "Code" means the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973;
(d) "employer" means,—
(i) in relation to an establishment under the control of the appropriate
Government, the head of the Department or Ministry, as the case may be;
(ii) in relation to an establishment under any local authority or Local Self
Government, the Chief Executive Officer by whatever designation called; and
(iii) in relation to other cases, the person or the authority who has the
ultimate control over the affairs of the work place.
(e) "Special Court"means a Court of Session specified as a Special Court under
section 7; and
(f) words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in Code
or the Indian Penal Code shall have the meanings assigned to them respectively in the
Code, or, in the Indian Penal Code, 1980, as the case may be.
3. (1) Whoever,—
(i) makes any lewd remarks, gestures, signs or insinuations against a woman in
office or in any public place;
(ii) assaults or uses force against any woman with intent to dishonour or outrage
her modesty;
(iii) forcibly removes clothes from the person of a woman or parades her naked
or with painted face or body or commits any similar act which is derogatory to human
dignity;
(iv) compels or entices a woman to do 'begar' or other similar forms of forced or
bonded labour;
(v) being in a position to dominate the will of a woman and uses that position to
harass or exploit her sexually, to which she would not have otherwise agreed;
(vi) intentionally insults or intimidates with intent to humiliate a woman in any
place within public view;
(vii) institutes false, malicious or vexatious suit or criminal or other legal
proceedings against a woman;
(viii) takes pictures or video of a woman without her consent or knowledge,
violating her privacy;
(ix) forces or compels any woman into prostitution;
(x) declares any woman witch or daiyan or by any other name called;
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
two years but which may extend upto five years and with fine which may extend upto
twenty-five thousand rupees.
(2) Whoever, being a public servant, commits any offence punishable under this
section, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three
years but which may extend upto the maximum punishment provided for that offence.
Punishment for
Offences of
atrocities.
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
4. Whoever, being a public servant, willfully neglects his duties required to be performed
by him under this Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be
less than six months but which may extend upto one year.
5. For the purposes of providing speedy trial, the appropriate Government shall, with
the concurrence of the Chief Justice of High Court, by notification in the Official Gazette,
specify for each district a Court of Sessions to be a Special Court to try offences under this
Act.
6. (1) Where the Special Court is satisfied, upon a compliant or a police report that a
person is likely to commit an offence under this Act, it may, by order in writing, direct such
person to remove himself beyond the limits of such area, within such time as may be specified
in the order, and not to return to that area from which he was directed to remove himself for
such period, not exceeding one year, as may be specified in the order.
(2) The Special Court shall, along with the order under sub-section (1), communicate
to the person directed under that sub-section the grounds on which such order has been
made.
(3) The Special Court may revoke or modify the order made under sub-section (1), for
the reasons to be recorded, on the representation made by the person against whom such
order hass been made or by any other person on his behalf within thirty days from the date
of the order.
7. Whoever, contravenes an order of the Special Court made under section 6 shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years and with fine which
may extend upto ten thousand rupees.
8. A District Magistrate or a Sub-divisional Magistrate or any other Executive Magistrate
or any police officer not below the rank of a Deputy Superintendent of Police may, on
receiving information and after such inquiry as he may think necessary, has reason to believe
that a person or a group of persons, residing in or frequenting any place within the local
limits of his jurisdiction is likely to commit an offence or has threatened to commit any
offence under this Act and is of the opinion that there is sufficient ground for proceeding,
declare such an area to be an area prone to atrocities and take preventive action in such
manner as may be prescribed.
9. (1) The appropriate Government shall provide such relief and rehabilitation to the
victims of the atrocities under this Act by framing schemes as may be notified, from time to
time.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the aforesaid provision, the appropriate
Government shall provide free board and lodging and medical facilities to the severely
affected victims of atrocities under this Act.
10. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, provide requisite funds for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.
11. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this  Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of three
years from the date of commencement of this Act.
12. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central
Government or against the State Government or any officer or authority of Government or
any other persons for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this
Act.
Punishment for
neglect of
duties.
Special Court.
Procedure to
be followed by
Special Court.
Declaration of
area prone to
atrocities.
Appropriate
Government
to frame
scheme.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Protection of
action taken in
good faith.
Punishment for
contravention
of Order of
Special Court.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
13. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of this Act shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force or any custom or usage or any instrument having effect by virtue of any other
law.
14. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in this Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and if before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or successive sessions aforesaid
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule shall thereafter have effect only in
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to make
rules.
5
10

5
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Women are the most vulnerable lot of our society. Every now and then, women are
subjected to atrocities and violence in one form or the other. They are subjected to all kinds
of torture which more often than not go unreported. At times, the administration does not
respond with the kind of agility that is required on the incidents of atrocities on women.
There is no dearth of incidents when women are paraded naked in many places in our
country and, at time, also declared as witches or daiyans. This is the worst kind of treatment
given to women without any fault. They are left at the mercy of their fate and no one comes
to their rescue. Further, sexual harassment of women in work place is also very common and
frequent. The Supreme Court of India has taken this issue very seriously. In the case of
Vishaka and Others vs. State of Rajasthan and others [1997 (7) Sec. 323] the Supreme Court
has laid down norms and guidelines to be followed by employers or other responsible
persons in the work places or other institutions to prevent or deter the commission of acts of
sexual harassment and also to provide the procedures for resolution, settlement or prosecution
of acts of sexual harassment by taking all steps required including setting up of Complaints
Committees for redressal of the complaint made by the victim pending the enactment of
suitable legislative. The National Commission for Women had also taken up this issue very
seriously. It was, however been found that the Compliant Committees were not formed in a
number of cases. Women are continued to be mentally and sexually exploited and pushed
into flesh trade. In, 2013, the Government enacted a legislation namely the Sexual  Harassment
of  Women at Work Place (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013 in order to
provide protection against Sexual Harassment of Woman at Work Place and for the prevention
and redressal of complaint of sexual harassment etc. There is however, a need for strict
punishment which will serve as deterrent for others and also special courts for expeditious
trial of those accused of offences committed against women.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; OM PRAKASH Y ADA V
November 3, 2016.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 9 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall  provide relief and
rehabilitation including free boarding, lodging and medical facilities to the women and children
who are victims of atrocities. Clause 10 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall
provide requisite funds for the purposes of this Bill. The expenditure relating to States shall
be borne out of the Consolidated Funds of the State Government concerned. The expenditure
relating to Union territories shall be borne out of the Consolidated Fund of  India. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees twenty crore per annum would involve from
the Consolidated Fund of India.  A Non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees one crore
is also likely to be involved.
6

7
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this  Bill. As the rules will relate to the matters of detail only, the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to prevent atrocities against women in the country, to specify Special Courts
for the trial of offences committed against women and for the relief and
rehabilitation of the victims of such offences and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Om Prakash Yadav, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3273LS(S3)—29-11-2016.