1
THE WILDLIFE CORRIDORS BILL, 2019
By
SHRI RAHUL SHEWALE, M.P.
A
BILL
to constitute a Board to identify areas for developing exclusive wildlife
corridors and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Wildlife Corridors Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 298 of  2019
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, "wildlife corridors" means a
habitat linkage that joins two or more areas of wildlife habitat allowing movement of wildlife
from one area to another.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Board to be known as the Wildlife Corridors Identification Board to identify areas in
every State, which shall be developed as exclusive Wildlife Corridors.
(2) The Board shall, while identifying areas for Wildlife Corridors, ensure that the
areas to be developed as Wildlife Corridors are located at a distance of at least ten kilometers
from areas inhabited by human beings.
4. The Central Government shall, within one year of the identification of areas, take
steps to develop such areas as exclusive wildlife corridors.
5. No person shall—
(i) use the wildlife corridors;
(ii) construct any building in or near the wildlife corridors;
(iii) cut any tree in the wildlife corridors;
(iv) ride any vehicle within one kilometer on either side of the wildlife corridors;
(v) set fire or use any fire cracker in or near the wildlife corridors; and
(vi) use of any fire arms in or near the wildlife corridors.
6. If any wild animal during movement strays outside the wildlife corridors or enters
human inhabitation, the Forest Officer concerned shall take steps to send back such animal
to wildlife corridors.
7. Whoever violates the provisions of this Act shall be punished with fine which may
extended upto rupees one lakh.
8. Notwithstanding anything in this Act, the wildlife corridors may be used for—
(i) transportation of human beings in case of medical emergency;
(ii) transportation of sick wild animals for medical treatment; and
(iii) putting off fire in forest areas.
9. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law, for the time being in force.
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Offical Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Definition.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law
for the time
being in force.
Central
Government
to develop
wildlife
corridors.
Strayed
animals to be
sent back to
Wildlife
Corridors.
Constitution
of the
Wildlife
Corridors
Identification
Board.
Prohibition
on certain
activities in
Wildlife
Corridors.
Penalty.
Use of
Wildlife
Corridors for
specific
purposes.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
In the recent years, there has been gross interference in the ecosystem both by
wild animals and human beings. As a result, the ecosystem has not only been destroyed but
also there has been a considerable loss to human life, property and economy of the country.
Incidents of wild animals straying into human inhabitation and destroying the crops are not
uncommon. Likewise human beings have extensively damaged the forests forcing the
wild animals coming into conflict with human beings.
Therefore, in order to have a proper balance, it is proposed to set up designated
corridors for wildlife.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAHUL SHEWALE
October 25, 2019

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of the Wildlife Identification Board to
identify areas in every State for development of wildlife corridors. Clause 4 provides that
the Central Government shall take steps to develop wildlife corridors. The Bill, therefore, if
enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that
a recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore per annum would be involved
from the Consolidated Fund of India for maintenance of wildlife corridors.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is likely to be involved.

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to constitute a Board to identify areas for developing exclusive wildlife
corridors and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto
————
(Shri Rahul Shewale, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—3020LS(S3)—15-11-2019.