1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
By
DR. SHRIKANT EKNATH SHINDE, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2019.
2. In the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution,—
(i) in List II-State List, entry 6, shall be omitted; and
(ii) in List III-Concurrent List, offordable 47, the following entry shall be added,
namely:—
"47A. Public health, affordable healthcare and sanitation; hospitals and
dispensaries.".
Bill No. 299 of  2019
Short title.
Amendment
of the Seventh
Schedule.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The healthcare market in India is expected to increase three fold to rupees 8.6 trillion
(US$ 133.44 billion)  by 2022 as we record 22-25 per cent growth in medical tourism. The
Government's expenditure on the health sector has grown to 1.4 per cent in 2018-19 from 1.2
per cent in 2014. Under the National Health Policy, the Government of India is planning to
increase public health spending to 2.5 per cent of the country's GDP by 2025. The hospitals
and diagnostic centers attracted Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) worth US$ 6.09 billion
between April 2000 and March 2019, according to data released by the Department of Industrial
Policy and Promotion (DIPP).
A High-level Group (HLG) on health sector constituted by the Fifteenth Finance
Commission has recommended that the Constitution be amended to shift the subject of
health from the State List to the Concurrent List. Recommendations made by the Finance
Commission of declaring healthcare a right and shifting health to the Concurrent List are
inherently linked and are favorable to the success of revolutionary public health schemes
like Ayushman Bharat. These recommendations are also in line with the National Health
Policy 2017, which aims at regulation, public sector strengthening, and adopting a rights-
based approach to healthcare.
On 2nd September 1949 during the framing of the Constitution, Sir K. V. Kamath had
also moved an amendment to transfer Public Health from State to Concurrent List, which was
subsequently negated by the Assembly. In the current Scheme of things, the Central
Government spends under one-third of the total Government expenditure on health and in
order to improve the dismal state of spending on public health, the Centre has to set up, both
financially and programmatically which will require an enhanced role of the Centre. The same
cannot be done until health is still a State subject.
With the expansion of schemes like Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana and increase
on healthcare spending it is the need of the hour to accept the recommendations of Finance
Commission for shifting health to the Concurrent List to ensure that along with more funds
to be efficiently disbursed to the private sector, the Centre has some regulatory teeth as well.
Considering that it is the Union that makes important contributions to the health sector,
including framing of policy, health should be included in the Concurrent List of the Constitution
for ensuring right to healthcare, on the lines of right to education, with major focus on
primary and rural healthcare.
The Bill proposes to make an amendment to the seventh Schedule to the Constitution
List II-State List and List III-Concurrent List in order to transfer Public Health to the Concurrent
List in view of the major role played by Central Government in matters of healthcare in India
which is expected to be a booming market and will witness several disruptions on account of
innovation and use of technology. Through inclusion in Concurrent List, it will be easier for
both Central and the State Governments to administer public health programs more effectively.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SHRIKANT EKNATH SHINDE
November  6, 2019
2

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
Seventh Schedule
(Article 246)
List III-Concurrent List
* * * * * *
47. Fees in respect of any of the matters in this List, but not including fees taken in any
court.
* * * * * *

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—3139LS(S3)—15.11.2019.