1
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR BACKWARD CLASSES
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI P.P. CHAUDHARY, M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the National Commission for Backward Classes Act,1993.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Commission for Backward Classes
(Amendment) Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 1 of the National Commission for Backward Classes Act, 1993 (hereinafter
referred to as the principal Act), in clause ( 1), for the words "National Commission for
Backward Classes", the words "National Commission for Welfare of Backward Classes"
shall be substituted.
Bill No. 299 of  2015
5
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Amendment of
section 1.
Short title and
commencement.
27 of  1993.
10

2
3. In section 2 of the principal Act,—
(i) after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(aa) "appropriate Government" means the Government of a State in case
of a State and in all other cases the Union Government;"
(ii) for clause (c), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
"(c) "lists" means lists prepared by the Government of India from time to
time for article 16(4) of the Constitution and making provision for the reservation
of appointments or posts in favour of backward classes of citizens which, in the
opinion of that Government, are not adequately represented in the services
under the Government of India and any local or other authority within the territory
of India or under the control of the Government of India and also includes those
that deal with the making of any special provisions for the advancement of any
socially and educationally backward classes of citizens for article 15(4) of the
constitution or relating to the advancement of such classes of citizens in their
admission to educational institutions, including private educational institutions,
whether aided or unaided by the State, other than the minority educational
institutions referred to in clause (1) of article 30 of the Constitution for article
15(5) of the Constitution  and such lists scope is to be limited by the applicability
of articles 15(4) and (5) and 16(4) of the Constitution.".
4. In section 3 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 2), for clauses ( b) and ( c), the
following clauses shall be substituted, namely:—
"(b) two social scientists;
(c) three persons, who have special knowledge in matters relating to backward
classes; and".
5. In section 8 of the principal Act, for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall
be substituted, namely:—
"(2) The Commission shall follow at its sittings such procedure as may be
prescribed by the Central Government.".
6. For section 9 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
"9. (1) The Commission shall examine requests for inclusion of any class of
citizens as a backward class in the lists and hear complaints of the exclusion or against
the inclusion of any backward class in such lists and tender such advice to the Central
Government as it deems appropriate.
(2) The recommendations of the Commission shall ordinarily be binding upon
the Central Government:
Provided that it shall not be necessary to consult the Commission if a
community/class of citizens has already been declared as "Backward" by the
appropriate Government and the Central or State Government may declare such
declared community/class of citizen as "Backward" and include it in its list of
Backward Classes which in the opinion of the appropriate Government is not
adequately represented in the services under it, for the purpose of article 16(4)
of the Constitution:
Provided further that the appropriate Government may also make provisions
for the advancement of socially and educationally Backward Classes or for the
admission of socially and educationally Backward Classes to educational
institutions in line with existing limitations without necessary consulting the
Commission if the Central or State Government has already included the group
of citizens in its list of Backward Classes in line with article 15(4) and (5) of the
Constitution.".
Amendment of
section 2.
Amendment of
section 3.
Amendment of
section 8.
Substitution of
new section
for section 9.
Functions of
the
Commission.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The National Commission for Backward Classes (NCBC) was constituted as a permanent
body for entertaining, examining and making recommendations with regards to claims against
the exclusion or against the inclusion of classes in the list of OBCs for the purpose of
article 16(4) of the Constitution. The NCBC was constituted by the NCBC Act, 1993 which
was legislated after the Supreme Court of India's Judgment, dated 16/11/1992 in the Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 930 of 1990—Indira Sawhney and Others Vs Union of India and Others. In
light of changes in the socio-economic conditions in the nation and the reading of the Act
with the Constitution, the NCBC Act, 1993 requires a relook and hence the above mentioned
amendments have been proposed for the Act.
Article 15(4) of the Constitution of India as an enabling provision allows the State, as
defined by the Constitution, to make special provisions for the advancement of any 'socially
and educationally' backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes. Article 15(5) allows the State to make special provisions in relation to their admission
to educational institutions, including private and aided or unaided institutions other than
minority institutions as referred to in article 30(1).
Article 16(4), allows the State to make any provisions for the reservation of appointments
or posts in favour of any backward class of the citizens, which in the opinion of the State, is
not adequately represented in the services under the State.
The Constitution while allowing the State these special provisions makes a distinction
by including only socially and educationally backward classes under article 15( 4), while
allowing all classes of backward classes under article 16( 4), making article 16(4) 
broader
constitutional provision for the representation of backward classes. However, article 16(4)
deals with the question of  representation of backward classes in the services of the State
with the additional caveat of  'adequate representation'. Hence, meaning that a class of
citizens may be categorised as a backward class under article 15( 4), however it may be
adequately represented in the 'State services' even though it is socially and educationally
backward and is hence ineligible for reservation under article 16(4).
Article 340 provides for the appointment of a commission to investigate the conditions
of backward classes in the country. The commission so appointed by the order of the
President is constituted to investigate the conditions of socially and educationally backward
classes and the difficulties under which they labour and 'to make recommendations as to the
steps that should be taken by the Union or any State' to remove such difficulties and to
improve their condition.
The National Commission for Backward Classes Act, 1993 does not reflect the principles
of welfare on which its creation was intended by the Parliament. Hence the provision to
amend the name of the Act to represent the same is pertinent to reflect the true intentions of
the Act and the Commission that it establishes.
The Parent Act mentions the requirement of only one social scientist in the composition
of the NCBC, while allowing two positions to persons, who have special knowledge in
matters relating to backward classes. The Commission while dealing with the topic of Backward
Classes must have adequate representation of people with an academic and profession
background in the field of demographic studies regarding such classes. In the case of the
vacancy or absence of a member from the meetings of the commission, required and fruitful
discussions will not be attainable. Hence, it is imperative to increase the representation of
Social Scientists in the NCBC as they have domain specific knowledge of the subject matter,
leading to better deliberation and recommendations from the commission to the Government.

4
Furthermore, the addition of a new member having specialised knowledge in matters
relating to backward classes, from eminent persons, will enhance the strength of the NCBC,
leading to a larger and more wholesome bench for deliberations and rendering fruitful
recommendations to the Government. Such an increase in the strength of the NCBC will lead
to an increase in the quorum requirements for the meetings of the NCBC, further lifting the
quality of deliberations as the number of members required per meeting increases.
The Act confers upon the commission the power to hear complaints and make
recommendations to the Government against the over-inclusion or under-inclusion of any
backward class in the lists established from time to time for the reservation of appointments
or posts where such citizens are not adequately represented in the services under the
Government of India and any local or other authority within the territory of India or under the
control of the Government of India. However the commission's domain is to ascertain the
classes to be benefited and not the quantum for each class' representation. Hence the
commission's jurisdiction to hear such complaints should be restricted to those that deal
with the inclusion or against the exclusion of any backward class in such lists only. This is in
consonance with section 9( 1) of the Act that deals with the examination of requests for
inclusion of any class of citizens as a backward class.
As stated above, Article 340 of the Constitution of India provides for the Commission
to make 'recommendations' as to the steps that should be taken by the Union or any State to
remove difficulties faced by the Backward Classes and to improve their condition. Hence, to
make the advice of the commission ordinarily binding on the Central Government is an
aberration and is vide for being in conflict with Article 340 of the Constitution and hence
should be repealed. Moreover article 16(4) of  the Constitution is framed with the caveat of
'in the opinion of the State' and hence with respect to the Article decisions regarding
reservation as espoused by article 16( 4) for adequate representation in the services under
the State are in the sole domain of the Government and no other subsidiary or constitutional
body (NCBC). This is due to the fact that in such matters the decision of the State is material
and not that of any other body that makes recommendations to the Government on such
matters. Hence meaning that the NCBC can only make recommendations and that the
Government is supreme in the decisions that are taken with regards to reservations.
The framers of the Constitution while deliberating on the Constitution did not intend
to delegate any decision making power in this matter from the President. They intended that
the powers of the President were to be exercised by the President only and not be delegated
to be exercised by the NCBC or any other such body in this regard. Article 15(4) however
does not have this additional caveat and has no overriding effect of Government decisions
being supreme over the recommendations of constitutional bodies such as the NCBC with
regards to its provisions.
The combined reading of  articles 16(4) and 340 of the Constitution hence lay down the
principle that the Government should be free to make policies and decisions in the interests
of the nation, wherein bodies such as the NCBC may make recommendations to the
Government but not bind the Government to implement such recommendations in its decision
making.
The basis of equality established as a fundamental right under articles 14-18 of the
Constitution implies that if a class of citizens has been determined to be falling under the
tests of a Backward Class and a particular Government either at the State or Central Level has
notified it as a Backward Class then it follows that all such classes of citizens can be placed
in the Lists of the Central and State Governments for Backward Classes as the Government
so deems it to be fit and proper, following from the Principle of  Equality. Hence, allowing for
the recommendations of the NCBC to be overruled or ignored due to strong and compelling
reasons as established by the Government at the State or Central levels about the inadequate
representation of such classes of citizens in the services under the Government of India and
any local or other authority within the territory of India or under the control of the Government
of India. This principle is also applicable for the purposes of making provisions for the

5
advancement of socially and educationally Backward Classes or for the admission of socially
and educationally Backward Classes to educational institutions in line with the existing
limitations without necessarily consulting the Commission if the Central or State Government
has already included the group of citizens in its list of Backward Classes in line with articles
15(4) and 15(5) of the Constitution.
As stated above the intent and extent of the applicability of articles 15(4), (5) and
article 16(4) of the Constitution differ. Hence, it is imperative that any recommendations that
are made with respect to these Articles by the Commission to the Government of India be in
light of respecting these Constitutional distinctions, while benefiting the intended beneficiaries
of the recommendations as they belong to different backgrounds and require reservation for
different purposes.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; P.P.  CHAUDHARY
November 13, 2015.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 5 of the Bill provides that the Commission shall follow such procedure as may
be prescribed by the Central Government.
As the procedure to be prescribed will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR BACKWARD CLASSES ACT, 1993
(27 OF 1993)
* * * * * * *
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Commission for Backward Classes Act, 1993.
* * * * *
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "backward classes" means such backward classes of citizens other than the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes as may be specified by the Central
Government in the lists;
* * * * *
(c) "lists" means lists prepared by the Government of India from time to time for
purposes of making provision for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour
of backward classes of citizens which, in the opinion of that Government, are not
adequately represented in the services under the Government of India and any local or
other authority within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of
India;
* * * * *
3. * * * * *
(1) * * * *
(2) * * * *
(a) * * *
(b) a social scientist;
(c) two persons, who have special knowledge in matters relating to backward classes;
* * * * *
8. (1) * * * *
(2) The Commission shall regulate its own procedure.
* * * * *
9. (1) The Commission shall examine requests for inclusion of any class of citizens as
a backward class in the lists and hear complaints of over-inclusion or under-inclusion of any
backward class in such lists and tender such advice to the Central Government as it deems
appropriate.
(2) The advice of the Commission shall ordinarily be binding upon the Central
Government.
* * * * *
7
Short title and
commencement.
Definitions.
Functions of
the
Commission.
Procedure to
be regulated by
the
Commission.
Constitution
of the
National
Commission
for Backward
Classes.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the National Commission for Backward Classes Act, 1993
————
(Shri P.P. Chaudhary,  M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3049LS(S3)—08-12-2015.