BUI No. 29 of It56 • 
. 
THE CONSTITUTION (NINTH 
AMENDMENT) BILL, 1956 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
it 

THE CONSTITUTION' (NINTH AMENDMENT) 
" •• 1 
BILL,'i95 6 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
I 
'A ' ... 
BILL 
further to amend, the Constitution of India. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Ninth Amend- Short titl.: 
mt!nt) Act, 1956. and com-mencement. 
5 'j (2) It shall come into force o~ the ist day of October, 1956. 
10 
~.' (~) In art~cle 1 of.t~ ·Constitlltion,.,...-, Amendment 
. .• • .' . I . , of article I 
,(a) for clause (2), the fo~~wing clause shall be substituted, ~edufe~8t 
namely:- . 
I' 
"(2) The States and the territories thereof shall be as 
specified in the First, Schedule" and 
• '!OJ 
. (b) in clause (3), for sub-clause (b), the following sub:clause 
shall be substituted, namely:-
"(b) the Union territories specified in the First 
Schedule; and", 

~ 
(2) For the First Schedule to the Constitution, the following 
Schedule shall be substituted, namely:-
Name 
I. Andhra-Te1angana 
2. Assam 
3 Bihar 
4. Gujarat 
5. Kerala 
6. Madhya Pradesh . 
7. Madras 
I 
8. Mabarashtra 
"FIRST SCHEDULE 
[Articles I and 4 ] 
I. THE STATES 
T erritoriss 
5 
The territories specified in sub-section (1) 
of section 3 of the Andhra State Act, 
1953 and the territories specified in sub-
section (1) of section 3 of the States 10 
Reorganisation Act, 1956. 
The territories which immediately before the 
commencement of this Constitution were 
comprised in the Province of Assam, the 
Khasi States and the Assam Tribal Areas, IS 
but excluding the territories specified in 
the Schedule to the Assam (Alteration of· 
Boundaries) Act, 1951. 
The territories which immediately before the 
commencement of this Constitution were 20 
either comprised in the Province of 
Bihar or were being administered as if they 
formed part of that Province. 
The territories specified in sub-section (1) 
of section 10 of the States Reorganisation 2S 
Act, 1956. 
• The territories specified in sub-section (1) 
of section 5 of the States Reorganisation 
Act, 1956. 
The territories specified in sub-section (1) of 30 
section I I of the States Reorganisation 
Act, 1956. 
The territories which immediately before 
the commencement of this Constitution 
were either comprised in the Province of 3.5 
Madras or were being administered as if 
they formed part of that Province and the 
territories specified in section 4 of the 
States Reorganisation Act, 1956, but ex-
cluding the territories specified in sub- 40 
section (1) of section 3 and sub-section (1) 
of section 4 of the Andhra State Act, I9~3 
and - the territories specified in clause (b) 
of sub-set..1:ion (1) of section 5, section 6 
and clause Cd) of sub-section (1) of section 45 
7 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956. 
The territories specified in sub-section (.1) 
of section 9 of the States Reorganisation 
, Act, 1956. 

Nan. 
9. Mysore 
S 10. Orissa 
10 II. Punjab 
12. Rajasthan . 
13. Uttar Prades,h 
IS 
20 14. West Bengal 
2S 
IS. Jammu and Kashmir 
30 
Nom. 
I. Bombay 
3S 
2. Delhi 
40 3. Himachal Pradesh 
4S 
.'\ 
Tsmtories 
fne territories specified in sub-section (1) of 
section 7 of the States Reorganisation Act, 
1956. 
The territories which immediately before 
the commencement of this Constitution 
were either comprised in the Province 
of Orissa or were being administered as 
if they formed part of that Province. 
The territories specified in section 13 of the 
States Reorganisation Act, 1956. 
The territories specified in section 12 of the 
States Reorganisation Act, 1956. 
The territories which immediately before 
the commencement of this Constitution 
were either comprised in the Province 
known as the United Provinces or were 
being administered as if they formed part 
of that Province. 
• The territories which immediately before the 
commencement of this Constitution were 
either comprised in the Province of West 
fiengal or were being administered as if 
they formed part of that Province and the 
territory of Chandernagore as defined in 
clause (0) of section 2 of the Chander-
nagore (Merger) Act, 1954. 
The territory which immediately before the 
commencement of this Constitution was 
comprised in the Indian State of Jammu 
and Kashmir. 
II. THE UNION TERRITORIES 
Extent 
. - The territory specified in section 8 of the 
States Reorganisation Act, 1956. 
The territory which immediately before the 
commencement of this Constitution was 
comprised in the Chief Commissioner's 
Province of Delhi. 
The territories which immediately before 
the commencement of this Constitution 
were being administered as if they were 
Chief Commissioners' Provinces under 
the names of Himachal Pradesh and 
Bilaspur. 

Amendment 
of article 80 
and Fourth 
Schedule. 
Name 
4. Manipur 
5. Tripura 
6. The Andaman and 
Nicobar Islands. 
4 
Ezttmt 
The territory which immediately before the 
commencement of this Constitution was 
being administered as if it were a Chief 
Commissioner's Province under the name 5 
of Manipur. 
The territory which immediately before the 
commencement of this Constitution was 
being administered as if it were a Chief 
Commissioner's Province under the name 10 
of Tripura. . 
The territory which immediately before the 
commencement of this Constitution was 
comprised in the Chief Commissioner's 
Province of the Andaman and Nicobar IS 
Islands. 
7· The Laccadive, Minicoy The territory specified in 'section 6 of the 
and Amindivi Islands. States Reorganisation Act, 1956." 
3. (1) In article 80 of the Constitution,-
(a) in sub-clause (I» of clause (1), after the word "States", 20 
the words "and of the Union territories" shall be added; 
(I» in clause (2), after the wotds "of the States", the words 
"and of the Union territories" shall be inserted; 
(c) in clause (4), the words and letters "specified in Part 
A or Part B of the First Schedule" shall be omitted; and 25 
(d) in clause (5), for the words and letter "States specified 
in Part C of the First Schedule", the words "Union territories" 
shall be substituted. 
(2) For the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution, the following 
Schedule shall be substituted, namely: - 30 
"FOURTH SCHEDULE 
[Articles 4 (1) and 80(2) ] 
Allocation of seats In the Council of States 
To each State or Union territory specified in the first column of 
1he following table, there shall be allotted the number of seats 35 
specified in the second column thereof opposite to that State or that 
Union territory, as the case may be. 
TABLE 
1. Andhra-Telangana, , 
2. Assam 
18 
7 40 

• 
3. Bihar 23 
4. Gujarat 11 
5. Kerala 9 
6. Madhya Pradesh 16 
; 7. Madras 
8.Maharashtra 
17 
17 
9. Mysore 12 
10. Orissa 10 
11. Punjab 11 
to 12. Rajasthan 10 
13. Uttar Pradesh 34 
14. West Bengal 15 
15. Jammu and Kashmir 4 
16. Bombay 3 
IS 17. Delhi 2 
18. Himachal Pradesh 1 
19. Manipur 1 
20. Tripura 1 
TOTAL 222" 
20 4. For articles 81 and 82 of the Constitution, the following articles Substitutio~ 
h b b 't t d I . of new arta-
25 
30 
8 all e su stl u e , name y . - . cles for 
articles 81 
and 82. 
"81. (1) Subject to the provisions of article 331, the House Composition 
of the People shall consist of- of the House 
of the 
People. 
(a) not more than five hundred members chosen by 
direct election from territorial constituencies in the States, 
and 
(b) not more than twenty members to represent the 
Union territories, chosen in such manner as Parliament may 
by law provide. 
(2) For the purposes of sub-clause (a) of clause (1),-
(a) there shall be allotted to each State a number of 
seats in the House of the People in such manner that the 
ratio between that number and the population of the State 
is, so far as practicable, the same for all States'; and 

1tead;ust-
ment after 
each census. 
g 
(b) each State shall be divided into territoriai consti-
tuencies in such manner that the ratio between the popula-
tion of each cOllStituency and the number of seats allotted 
to it is, so far as practicable, the ·same throughout the State. 
(3) In this article, the expression "population" means the 
population as ascertained at the last preceding census of which S 
the relevant figures have been published. 
82. Upon the completion of each census, the allocation of 
seats in the House of the People to the States and the division 
of each State into territorial constituencies shall be readjusted 10 
by such authority and in such manner as Parliament may by 
law determine: 
Provided that such readjustment shall not affect represen-
tation in the House of the People until the dissolution of the 
then existing House.". IS 
Amen!'meat 5. In article 131 of the ConstitUtion, for the proviso, the following 
ofarncle 131. proviso shall be substituted. namely:-
"Provided that the said jurisdiction shall not extend to a 
dispute arising out of an~ treaty, agreement, covenant, engage-
ment, sanad or other similar instrument which, having been 20 
entered into or executed before the commencement of this 
Constitution, continues in operation after such commencement or 
which provides that the said jurisdiction shall not extend to 
such a dispute.". 
Amendment, 6. To article 153 of the Constitution, the following proviso shall 2S 
of article be added, namely:-IS3· 
Amendment 
of article 
168. 
"Provided that nothing in this article shall prevent the 
aPROintment .of the same person as Governor for two or more 
States.". 
7. (1) In clause (1) of article 168 of the Constitution, in sub- 30 
clause (a), the word "Bombay" shall be omitted and after the word 
"Madras", the word "Mysore" shall be inserted. 
(2) In the said sub-clause, as from such date as the President may, 
by public notification appoint, after the word "Bihar", the words 
"Madhya Pradesh" shall be inserted. 3S 
Substitution 8. For article 170 of the Constitution, the following article shall 
of new arti- be substituted, namely:-de {or arti-
cle 170. "170. (1) Subject to the provisions of article 333, the Legisla-
Composition 
of the Lcgis-
lative 
Assemblies. 
tive Assembly of each State shall consist of not more than five 
hundied, and not less than sixty, members chosen by direct. 40 
election from territorial constituencies in the State. 

1 
(2) For the purposes of clause (1), each State shall be 
divided into territorial constituencies in such manner that the 
ratio between the popule.if;ion of each constituency and the 
number of seats allotted to it shall, so far as Nacticable, be the 
S same throughout the States. 
EzpZanation.-In this clause, the expression "population" 
means the population as ascertained at the last preceding census 
of which the relevant, figures have been published. 
(3) Upon the completion of each census, the total numbeJ 
10 of seats in the Legislative Assembly of each State and the divi-
sion of each State -into territorial constituencie~ shall be 
readjusted by such authority and in such manner as ParHa 
ment may by law determine: 
Provided that such readjustment shall not affect represen-
IS tation in the Legislative Assembly until the dissolution of the 
then existing Assembly." 
9. In clause (1) of article 171 of the Constitution, for the word ~end:ti~! 
"one-fourth", the word "one-third" shall be substituted. 171. 
10. In article 216 of the Constitution, .. the proviso shall be l\J11endmcnt of article 
20 omitted. 216. 
11. In article 217 of the Constitution, in clause (1), for the words ~~d.m~l 
".hall hold office until he attains the age of sixty years", the follow- ~11.· artl e 
ing words and figures shall be su~stituted, namely:-
"shall hold office, in the caSe of an additional or acting 
2S Judge, as provided in article 224, and in any other case, until he 
attains the age of sixty years". 
12. For article 220 of the Constitution, the following article shall Substitution 
b · d I . of new article be su sbtute , name y.- for article 
220-
"220. No person who, after the commencement of this Constitu- Restriction 
30 tion, has held office as a permanent Judge of a High Court 'shall ~P~1co 
plead or Eoct in any court or before any authority in India except a ~n~t 
the Supreme Court and the other High Courts.... Judge. 
13. In article 222 of the Constitution,- Amendment of article 2220 
(a) in clause (1), the words "within the territory of Ind~a" . 
35 shall be omitted; and . 
(b) clause (2) shall be Qmitted •. 

8 
Substitution . 
of new~cle 14. For artIcle 224 of the Constitution, the following article shall 
~~. article be substituted, namely:-
Appointment 
of additional 
and ac:tina 
JudICs. 
"224. (11 If hy reason of any temporary increase in the 
business of a High Court or by reason of arrears of work there-
in. it appears to the President that the number of the Judges of S 
that Court should be for the time being increased, the President 
may appoint duly qualified persons to be additional Judges of 
the Court for such period not exceeding two years as he may 
. specify. 
(2) When any Judge of a High Court other than the Chief IC' 
Justice is by reason of absence or for any other reason unable 
to perform the duties of his office or is appointed to act tempo-
rarily as Chief Justice, the President may appoint a duly quali-
fied person to act as a Judge of that Court until the permanent 
Judge has resumed his duties.". IS 
SfUhstituti0~ 15. For articles 230, 231 and 232 of the Constitution, the follo\';~ o new arti-
cles for arti- ing articles shall be substituted, namely:-
c:1es 230, 231 
and 232. 
E::tension of 
jurisdic:tion 
of High 
Couns to 
Union terri-
tories. 
Establish-
ment of a 
common 
High Court 
for two or 
more States. 
"230. (1) Parliament may by law extend the jurisdiction of 
a High Court to, or exclude the jurisdiction of a High Court 
from, any Union territory. 
(2) Where the High Court of a State exercises jurisdiction 
in relation to a Union territory,-
(a) nothing in this Constitution shall be construed as 
empowering the Legislature of the State to increase, restrict 
or abolish that jurisdiction; and 2S 
(b) the reference in article 227 to the Governor shall, in 
relation to any rules, forms or tables for subordinate courts 
in that territory, be construed as a reference to the 
President. 
231. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the preced- 30 
ing provisions of this Chapter, Parliament may by law establish 
a common High Court for two or more 'Stales or for two or more 
States and a Union terntory. 
(2) In relation to any such High Court,-
(a) the reference in article 217 to the Governor of the 35 
State shall be construed as a reference to the Governors 
of all the States -in relation to which the High Court 
exercises jurisdiction'; 

5 
)0 
15 
20 
25 
9 
(b) the reference in article 227 to the Governor shall, in 
relation to any rules, forms or tables for subordinate coutts 
be construed as a reference to the Governor of the State in 
which the sl1bordinat~ courts are situate; and • 
(c) the references in articles 219 and 229 to the State 
shall be construed as a reference to the State in which the 
High Court has its principal seat: . 
Provided that if such principal seat is in a Union terri-
tory, the references in articles 219 and 229 to the Governor, 
Public Service Commission, Legislature and Consolidated 
Fund of the State shall be construed respectively as refer-
ences to the President. Union Public Service Commission, 
Parliament and Consolidated Fund of India.". 
16. In Part VITI, of the Constitution.- Amendment 
(a) for the heading "THE STATES IN PART C OF THE 
FIRST SCHEDULE", the heading "THE UNION TERRITO-
RIES" .shall be substituted; and -
(b) for articles 239 and 240, the following articles shall be 
substituted, namely:-
of PartVIII. 
"239. Every Union telTitory shall be administrated by ~dmini.tra­
the President acting, to such extent as he thinks fit, through t°r!ilO~ 
a Chief Commissioner or other authority to be appointed by territolics. 
him: 
Provided that the President. may by regulation made 
under article 240 constitute for any· such territory a council 
of advisers to the Chief Commissioner or other authority 
with sUch functions as may be specified ill the regulation. 
240. The President may make regulations for the peace Pow~r of 
and good government of any Union territory and any regu- :::::~d:e~~_ 
lation so made may repeal or amend any 'law made by Par- ti"~ for . 
liament or any existing law which is for the time being ~~~~ tern-
applicable to any such territory and, when promulgated by 
the President shall have the same force and effect as an Act 
of Parliament which applies to such territory.". 
35 17. After article 258 of the Constitution, the following article Insertion of 
shall be inserted, namely:- new article 
258A. 
40 
"258A. Notwithstandin.g anything in this Constitution, the Power of 
Governor of a State may, with the consent of the Government ~~e e~~~~~~ 
of India entrust either conditionally or unconditionally to that functions to 
Govern~ent or to its officers functions in relation to any matter the Union. 
to which the executive power of the State extends.". 

10 
Insertion of 18. After article 290 of the Constitution, the following article new article 
2C}OA. shall be inserted, namely:-
Annual pay-
ment to the • "290A. A sum of forty-six lakhs and fifty thousand rupees 
J::::!~:e shall be charged on, and paid out of, the Consolidated Fund of 
Board. the State of Kerala every year to the Travancore Devaswom 5 
Board.". • 
Substitution. 19. For article 298 of the Constitution, of new anl- the following article 
de for article shall be substituted, namely:-
298: 
Power to 
carryon 
trade etc. 
Insertion of 
IICW article 
3SoA. 
Faci1ities for 
iDstruction 
in mother-
tonauc: at 
primary 
sraac. 
"298. The executive power of the Union and of each State 
shall extend to the carrying on of any trade or business and 10 
to the acquisition, holding and disposal of property and the 
making ·of contracts for any purpese: 
Provided that-
(a) the said executive power of the lJ'nion shall, in so 
far as such, trade or business or such purpose is not one I 5 
with respect to which Parliament may make laws, be sub-
ject in each State to legislation by the State; and 
(b) the said executive power of each State shall, in so 
far as such trade or business or such purpose is not one 
with respect to which the State Legislature may make 20 
laws. be subject to legislation by Parliament.". 
20. After article 350 of the Constitution, the following article 
shall' be inserted, namely:-
"350A. It shall be the endeavour of every State and of 
every local authority within the State to provide adequate 2S 
facilities for instruction in the mother-tongue at the primary 
stage of education to children belonging to linguistic minorit} 
groups; and the President may issue such directions to any 
State as he considers necessary or proper for securing the 
provision of such facilities.", 30 
Substitution '!1. For article 371 of the Constitution, the following article 
o"new~dc shall be substituted namely:-for anlde ' 
371. 
Special 
proviaiclll 
witb respect 
to die S"tatca 
of Andbra-
Telanpna 
and. Punjab. 
"371. Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, . the 
President may, by order mllde with respect to the State of 
Andhra-Telangana or Punjab. provide for the constitution and 35 
functions of regional committees of the Legislative Assembly 
of the State, for the modifications to be made in the rules of 
busines~ of the Government' and in the rules of procedure of the 

5 
JO 
II 
Legislative Assembly of the State and for any special responsi-
bilityof the Governor in order to securp the proper functioning 
of the regional committees.". 
~2. In the ~econd Schedule to the Constitution,- AmendmeDt 
of the Second 
(a) in the heading of Part 0, the words and letter "in Schedule. 
States in Part A of the First Schedule" shall he omitted; and 
(b) in paragraph 10,-
(i) for sub-paragraph (1). the following sub-para~aph 
shall be substituted, namely:-
(1) There shall be paid to the Judges of High 
Courts, in respect of time spent on actual service. 
salary at the following rates per mensem, that is to 
sty,-
A. In the case of any High Court other than the High Court 
I 5 of Kerala, Mysore or Rajasthan-
20 
25 
30 
The Chief Justice 
Any other Judge 
Rs. 
B. In the case of the High Courts o· Kcrdla, l"lysore or Rajasthan-
The Chief Justice 3,')00 
Any other Judge 2,500 : 
• Provided that if a Judge of any such High Court 
at the time of his appointment is in receipt of a pension 
(other than a disability or wound pension) in respect of 
any previous service under the Government of India 
or any of its predecessor Governments or under the 
Government of a State or any of iis predecessor 
Governments, his salary in respect of service in the 
High Court shall be reduced by the amount of that 
pension. "; 
(ii) sub-paragraphs (3) and (4) shall be omitted. 
(I 
. "" 
!!3 In the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, entry 33 of the ModificBtiOll, 
trnion List and entry 36 of the State List shall be omitted and for ~ cL!sries t: 
entry 42 of the Concurrent List, the following entrv shall be sub- ~u:, to t!C:ui: 
35 stituted namely: - . . 8it~~ ,a~ n;-
, • qW81tJOnang 
of rroperty. 
"42. Acquisition and requisitioning of property." 

12 
Amendment U. In each of the following provwQns of the Constitution, 
of~ pro- namely:-VISIons rda-
tingto.aDci~t (i) entry 67 of the Union List and rustoncal ' 
monuments, 
etc .. (ii) entry 12 of the State List, 
I, iii) entry 40 of the Concurrent List, and 
liv) article 49, 
for the words "declared by Parliament by law", the words "declared 
by or under law made by Parliament" shall be substituted. 
5 
~~m::~f 2i. In he Seventh Schedule to the CoastitutiQn. in entry 24 of 
State List. the State List, for the word and figures "entry 52", the words and 10 
figures "entries 7 and 52" shall be substituted. 
Consequential 26. (1) The consequential and minor amendments and' repeals 
~s .directed in the Schedule shall be made in the Constitution and in the 
and repeals Constitution (Removal of Difficulties) Order, No. VIII, made under 
and savings. article 392 of the Constitution. 
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of article 243 of the Constitution 
by the said Schedule, all regulations made by the President under 
bat article and in force immediately before the commencement of 
this Act shall continue in force until altered or repealed or amended 
by a competent Legislature or other competent authority_ 
THE SCHEDULE 
(See section 26) 
CoNSEQUENTIAL AND MINOR AMENDMENTS AND 
CONSTIroTIOH 
REPEALS IN THE 
• 
IS 
20 
Article 3.--In the proviso, omit "specified in Part A Or Part B 2S 
.of the First Schedule". 
Article 31A.-In sub-clause (a) of clause (2), for "Travancore-
Cochin" substitute "Kerala". 
Article 58.-In the Explanation, omit "or Rajpramukh or Uparaj-
pramukh". 30 
ArtiC'le 66.-In the E.rptanati~n, omit "or Rajpramukh or 
U parajpramukh '-. 
• I\·rticle 72.-In claus~ (3), omit "or Rajpramukh". 
A,·ticle 73.-In the proviso to clause (1), omit "specifi~ in Part 
A or Part B of the First Schedule". 3S 
Article 101.-In clause (2), omit "specified in Part A ~r Part B 
of the First Schedule", and for usuch a State" substitute "a State". 

13 
Article 112.-In sub-clause (d) (iii) of clause (3), for "a Province 
corresponding to a State specified in Part A of the First Schedule", 
substitute "a Governor's Province of the Pominion of India". 
Article 151.-In clause (2), omit "or Rajpramukh". 
5 Part VI.-In the heading, omit "IN PART A OF THE FIRST 
SCImDULE". 
Article 152.-For "means a State specified in Part A of the First 
, Schedule" substitute "does not include the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir". 
10 Article 20B.-Omit clause (2) and renumber clause (3) as clause 
(2). 
Article ~09.-omit "or with any rule or standing order having 
effect in relation to the Legislature of the State under clause (2) of 
that article". 
15 Article 214.-Omit "(1)" and clauses (2) and (3). 
Article 219.-0mit "in a State". 
Article 229.-In the proviso to clause (1) and in the proviso to 
clause (2), oInit "in which the High Court has its principal seat". 
Omit Part VII. 
20 Article 241.-(a) In clause (1), for "State specified in Part C of 
the First Schedule", substitute "Union territory", and far "such 
State", substitute "such territory". 
(b) For clauses (3) and (4), substitute-
"(3) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and -to the 
25 provision~ of any law of the appropriate Legislature made by 
virtue at powers conferred on that Legislature by or under this 
Constitution, every High Court exercising jurisdiction imme-
diately before the commencement of the Constitution (Sixth 
Amendment) Act, 1956, in relation to any Union territor1 shall 
30 continue to exercise such jurisdiction in relation to that territory 
after such commencement. 
(4) Nothing in this article derogates from, the power of 
Parliament to extend or exclude the jurisdiction of a High Court 
for a State to, or from, any Union territory or part thereof.". 
3S Omit article 242. 
Omit Part IX. 
Article 244.-Qmit "specified in Part A or Part B of the First 
Schedule". 

14 
Article 246.-In clauses (2) and (3), omit "specified in Part A or 
Part B of the First Schedule" and in clause (4), for "in· Part A or 
Part B of the First Schedule" substitute "in a State". 
Article 254.-In clause (2), omit "specified in Part A or Part B 
of the First Schedule". 6 
Article 255.-Qmit "specified in Part A or Part B of the First 
Schedule". 
Omit article 259. 
Article 264.-For article 264, substitute-
IDtClTtctadon. 264. In this Part, 'Finance Commission' means a Finance 10 
Commission constituted under article 280.". 
Article 267.-In clause (2), omit "or Rajpramukh". 
Article 268.-In clause (1), for "State specified in Part C of the 
First Schedule" substitute "Union. territory". 
Article 269.-In clause (2), for "States specified in Part C of the IS 
First Schedule" substitute "Union territories". 
Article 270.-In clauses (2) and (3), for "States specified in Part 
C of the First Schedule" substitute "Union territories". 
Omit article 278. 
Article 280.-In clause (3), omit sub-claus'e (c) and re-Ietter sub- 20 
cla~ (d) as sub-clause (c). 
Article 283.-In clause (2), omit "or Rajpramukh". 
Article 29I.~it "(1)" and clause (2). 
Article 299.-In clause (1), omit "or the Rajpramukh", and in 
clause (2), omit "nor the Rajpramukh". 2S 
Omit article 306. 
Article 30B.-For "means a State specified in Part A or Part B 
of the First $chedule" substitute "does not include the State of 
Jammu and Kashmir". 
Article 309.-Dmit "or Rajpramukh". 30 
Article 310.-In clause (1), omit "or, as the case may be, the 
Rajpramukh", and in clause (2), omit "or Rajpramukh" and "or the 
Rajpramukh". 
Article 3I1.-In clause (2), omit "or Rajpramukh". 

15 
ArticZe 315.-ln clause (4), omit "or Rajapramllkh". 
ArticZe 316.-ln clauses (1) and (2), omit "or Rajpramukh". 
ArticZe 317.-1n clause (2), omit "or Raj pramukh ". 
Article 318.-Omit "or Rajpramukh". 
5 Article 320.-10 clause (3), omit "or Rajpramukh" and "or Raj-
pramukh, as the case may 'be", and in clause (5), omit "or Rajpra-
mukh". 
Article 323.-ln clause (2), omit "or Rajpramukh" and "or 
Rajpramukh, as the case may be". 
10 Article 324.-ln clause (6), omit "or Rajpramukh". 
Article 332.-ln clause (1), omit "specified in Part A or Part B 
of the First Schedule". 
Article 333.-Omit "or Rajpramukh". 
Ar.ticle 337.-0mit "specified in Part A or Part B of the First 
15 Schedule". 
Article 339.-In clause (1), omit "specified in Part A and Part 
B of the First Schedule" and in clause (2), for "any such State" 
substitute "a State". 
Article 341.-ln clause (1), after "any State" insert "or Union 
ao territory", omit "specified in Part A or Part B of the_Fiist Schedule", 
omit "or Rajpramukh" and after "that State~' insert "or Union 
teITitory, as the case may be". 
Article 342.-ln clause (1), after "any State" insert "or Union 
territory", omit "specified in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule", 
2$ omit "or Rajpramukh" and after "that State" insert "or Union 
territory, as the case may be"_ 
Article 348.-Omit "or Rajpramukh". 
Article 356.-ln clause (1), omit "or Rajpramukh" and "or 
Rajpramukh, as the case may be". 
30 Article 361.-1n clauses (2), (3) and (4), omit "or ~jpramukh" 
and in clause (4), omit "or the Rajpramukh". 
Article 366.-0mit clause (21), Iil,ld for clause (30), substitute-
"(30) 'Union territory' means any Union territory specified 
in the First Schedule and includes an,. other teITitory comprised 
35 within the territory of Iridia but not specified in that Schedule". 

16 
Article 367.-In clause (2), omit "specified in Part A or Part B 
of the First Schedule" and "or Rajpramukh". 
Article 368.-0mit "specified in Parts A and B of the First 
Schedule" . 
Omit articles 379 to 391, both i'nclurive. 
Second Schedule.-(a) In the heading of Part A and in paragraph 
1, omit "specified in Part A of the First Schedule"; 
(b) in paragraph 2, omit "so specified"; 
(c) in paragraph 3, for "such States" substitute "the States"; 
(d) in the heading of Part B, omit "in Part A and Part B of the 10 
First Schedule"; 
(e) in paragraph 6, omit "specified in Part A or Part B of the 
First Schedule"; 
(f) in the heading of Part C, omit "of a State in Part A of the 
First Schedule", and for "any such State" substitute "a State"; and IS 
(g) in paragraph 8, omit "of a State specified in Part -A of the 
First Schedule", and for "such State" substitute "a State". 
Fifth Schedule.-(a) In paragraph 1, omit "means a State speci-
fied in Part A' or Part B of the First Schedule but"; 
(b) in paragraph 3, omit "or Rajpramukh"; 
(c) in paragraph 4, in sub-paragraph l2), omit "or Rajpramukh, as 
the case may be" and in sub-paragraph (3), omit "or Rajpramukh". 
(d) in paragraph 5, in sub-paragraphs (1) and (2), omit "or 
Rajpramukh, as the case may be", in sub-paragraph (3), omit "or 
Rajpramukh" and in sub-paragraph (5), omit "or the Rajpramukh". 2$ 
S~venth Schedule.-In List 1,-
(a) in entry 32, omit "specified in Part A or Part B of the 
First Schedule"; and 
(b) for entry 79, substitute,-
"79. Extension of. the jurisdiction of a High Court to, and 30 
exclusion of the jurisdictiop of a High Court from, any Union 
territory. " 

17 
CONSEQUENTIAL AMENDMENTS IN THE CONSTITUTION (REMOVAL OF 
DIFFICULTIES) ORDER No. VIII 
in the Constitution (Removal of Difficulties) Order No. VIII, for 
sub-paragraphs (1), (2) and (3) of paragraph 2, substitute-
S "(1) In article 81,-
(a) in sub-clause (b) of clause (1), after the words 
"Union territories", the words, letter and figures "and the 
tribal areas specified in Part B of the Table appended to 
paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule" shall be inserted; and 
10 (b) to clause (2), the following proviso shall be added 
namely:-
"Provided that the constituencies into which the 
State of Assam is divided shall not comprise the tribal 
areas specified in Part B of the Table appended to 
15 paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule." 
ao 
(2) In clause (2) of article 170, after the words "throughout 
the State", the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:-
"Provided that the constituencies into which the State 
of Assam Is divided shall not comprise the tribal areas speci-
fied in Part B of the Table appended to paragraph 20 of the 
Sixth Schedule!'." 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In order to implement the scheme of States reorganisation, it 
is necessary to make numerous amendments in the Constitution 
with effect from the 1st October, 1956. This Bill seeks to make 
these amendments and also some other amendments to certain 
provisions of the Constitution relating to the High Courts and High 
Court Judges, the executive power of the Union and the States, 
and a few entries in the legislative lists. The reasons for making 
the amendments are indicated below. 
Clause 2.-The reorganisation scheme involves not only the 
establishment of new States and alterations in the arEa and bounda-
ries of the existing States, but also the abolition of the three cate-
gOries of States (Put A, Part B and Part C States) and the classi-
fication of certain areas as Union territories. Article 1 has to be 
suitably amended for this purpose and the First Schedule completely 
revised. 
Clause 3.-The amendments proposed in article 80 are formal 
and consequential. The territorial changes and the formation of 
new States and Union territories as proposed in Part II of the 
States Reorganisation Bill, 1956, involve a complete revision of the 
Fourth Schedule to the Constitution by which the seats in the 
Council of States are allocated to the existing States. The present 
allocation is made on the basis of the population of each State as 
ascertained at the census of 1941 and the number of seats allotted 
.to each Part A and Part B State is according to the formula, one 
seat per million for the first five millions and one seat for every 
addi tional two millions or part thereof exceeding one million. It 
is proposed to revise the allocation of seats on the basis of the 
latest census figures, but according to the same formula as before. 
Clause 4.-The abolition of Part C States as such and the estab· 
lishment of Union territories make extensive amendment of articles 
81 and 82 inevitable. The provision in article 81 (1) (b) that "too 
States shall be divided, grouped or formed into territorial consti-
tuencies" will no longer be appropriate, since after reorganisation 
.each of the States will be large enough to be divided into a number 
of constituencies and will not permit of being grouped together 
with other States for this purpose or being "formed" into a single 
territorial constituency. Clause (2) of article 81 .and article 82 
will require to be combined and revised in order to make suitable 
provision for Union territories. Instead of amending the articles 
18 

19 
piecemeal, it is proposed to revise and simplify them. Incidentally, 
it is proposed in clause (1) (b) of the reviaed article 81 to fix a 
maximum for the total number of representatives that may be 
assigned to the Union territories by Parliament. 
Clause 5.-The proposed revision of the proviso to article 131 is 
consequential on the disappearance of Part B States as such. The 
.two parts of the existing proviso have been combined. 
Clause B.-Article 153 provides that there shall be a Governor 
,for each State. Since it may be desirable in certain circumstances 
to appoint a Governor for two or more States, it is proposed to add 
a proviso to this article to remove any possib1e technical bar to such 
an appointment. 
Clause 7.-Sub-clause (a) of clause (1) of article 168 provides 
for bi-cameral legislatures in certain States. It is proposed that, 
among the reorganised States, Punjab and Mysore should continue 
to have such a legislature, and that the enlarged Madhya Pradesh 
should also be provided with one. Since the constitution of a 
Legislative Council for Madhya Pradesh will necessarily take time, 
it is proposed to bring the relevant amendment of article 168 (1) (a) 
into force from a future date by means of a public notification of 
the President. 
Clause 8.-This seeks to revise article 170 mainly with a view to 
bringing it into line with articles 81 and 82 as revised by clause 4. 
Clause 9.-Under clause (1) of article 171, the maximum strength 
of the Legislative Council of a State is fixed at one-fourth of the 
strength of the Legislative Assembly of that State. Although in 
the larger States, like Uttar Pradesh and Bihar, this maximum is 
adequate, it leads to Clifficulties in the case of the smaller' States. 
It is, therefore, proposed to alter the maximum to one-third of the 
strength of the Legislative Assembly. 
Clause 10.-Article 216 empowers the President to appoint to a 
High Court as many judges as he may from time to time deem it 
necessary and also to fix the maximum number of judges for each 
High Court by a separa~ order. The proviso is of little significance 
from the practical point of 'view. since the order fixing the maximum 
may be changed by the' President whenever necessary. The appoint-
ment of additional and acting judges for which providon is sought 
to be made in clause 14 will also involve either frequent modifica-
tions in the order or a fiXation of the maximum number at a high 
figure. It is, therefore, proposed to omit the proviso to article 216. 
Clause n.-The amendment of clause (1) of article 2\7 proposed 
in this clause is consequential on the proposal to provide for the 
appointment of additional and acting judgleS for limited peripds. 

20 
Clause 12.-An important factor affecting the selection of High 
Court judges from the bar is the total prohibition contained in 
article 220 on practice after their retirement from the bench. It 
is proposed to revise the article so as to relax this complete ban 
and permit a retired judge to practise in the Supreme Court and in 
any High Court other than the one in which he was a permanent 
judge. ' 
Clause 13.-Article 222 empowers the President to transfer' 
judges from one High Court to another. Clause (2) of this article 
goes on to provide that when a judge is so transferred he shall be 
entltled to receive in addition to his salSifY a compensatory allow· . 
ance. It is felt that there is no real justification for granting such 
an allowance and it is accordingly proposed to omit clause (2). 
Clause H.-The provision in slfticle 224 for recalling retired 
judges to function on the bench of a High Court for short periods 
has been found to be neither adequate nor satisfactory. It is, there-
fore, proposed to replace this article by a provision for the appoint-
ment of additional judges to clear off arrears and for the appoint-
ment of acting judges in temporary vacancies. 
Clause 15.-It is proposed to revise and simplify articles 230, 231 
and 232 having regard to the constitutional position of States and 
Union territories after reorganisation. While under artIcle 214 
there will normally be a separate High Court for each State, power 
will be required to establish commol! High Courts for two or more 
States. Power will also be required to extend the jurisdiction of 
a High Court to a Union territory, wherever nece6S8ry, and to 
exclude the jurisdiction of a High Court from such territory. The 
revised articles 230 and 231 are designed to make these provisions. 
Clause 16.-Part VIII of the Constitution provides for the ad-
ministration of Part C States and Part IX for the administration 
of Part D territories. It is proposed to amend Part VIll to provide 
for the administration of Union territories and to repeal Part IX. 
Clause 17.-While the President is empowered by article 258 (1) 
to entrust Union functions to a State Government or its officers, 
there is no corresponding provision enabling the Governor of a 
State to entrust State functions to the Central Government or its 
officers. This lacuna has been found to be of practical consequence 
in connection with the execution of certain development projects in 
the States. It is proposed to fill the lacuna by a new articLe 258A. 
Clause 18.- Article VIII of the Covenant entered into by the 
Rulers of Travancore and Cochin in May, 1949, for the formation of 
the United State of Travancore and Cochin provided that Travan-
core's obligation to contribute annually a sum of Rs. 51 lakhs to 

21 
the Travancore Devaswom Fund should continue as an obligation 
of the United State. This arrangement was confirmed by article 
238(10) (iii) of the Constitution. It is proposed that the existing 
arrangement should be continued even after the formation of the 
new State of Kerala, but the contribution to the Travancore 
Devaswom Board from the Consolidated- Fund of that State should, 
in view of the transfer of territory from Travancore-Cochin to 
Madras, be reduced from Rs. 51 lakhs to Rs. 46·5 lakhs. 
Clause 19.-ln this clause it~is proposed to revise and amplify the 
scope of article 298, mainly to make it clear that the Union Gov-
ernment, as well as the State Governments, are competent to 
carry on any commercial or industrial undertaking, whether or not 
it is related to a matter within the legislative competence of the 
Union, or, as the case may be, of the State. Similarly, the hold-
ing, acquisition and disposal of property and the making of con-
tracts by the Union or a State could be for any purpose without 
constitutional impropriety. At the same time, the revised article 
provides that this extended executive power of the Union and of 
the States will be subject, in the former case, to legislation by the 
State, and in the latter case, to legislation by Parliament. 
Clause 20.-The new article 350A proposed in this clause is 
designed to implement one of the States Reorganisation Commis-
sion's important recommendations regarding safeguards for lin-
guistic minorities in the States after reorganisation. 
Clause 21.-lt is proposed to replace atticle 371 by another article 
making a special provision with respect to the States of Andhra 
and Punjab. This article will enable the President to constitute 
regional committees of the State Legislative Assembly and secure 
their proper functioning by directing suitable modifications to be 
made in the rules of business of Government and in the rules of 
procedure of the Assembly. 
Clause 22.-The High Court of Travancore-Cochin will, as from 
the appointed day, become the High Court for the new State of 
Kerala and the High Courts of Mysore and Rajasthan will continue, 
respectively, as the High Courts for the enlarged "new" States with 
the same names. Taking into account the level of income at the 
bar and salaries payable to the judicial services in these States, it 
is considered that there is no need to increase the salaries payable 
to the Judges of the~e High Courts to the level of the other High 
Courts. It is proposed to amend sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 10 
of the Second Schedule to the Constitution providing for a salary of 
B.s. 3,000 to the Chief Justices, and Rs. 2,500 to the other Judges, of 
these three High Courts. 

• 
Sometimes it becomes necessary to appoint a retired district 
judge as a judge of a High Court. In the absence of a legal provi-
sion for withholding the pension due to such a judge, it has been 
the practice to obtain from him an undertaking that he would not 
claim the pension for the period for which he serves as a High 
Court judge. Since this is ·obviously unsatisfactory, it is proposed 
to add a proviso to paragraph 10(1) of the Second Schedule on the 
same lines as the proviso to paragraph 9(1) thereof regulating the 
salary of a judge of the Supreme Court in similar circumstances. 
Sub-paragraphs (3) and (4) of paragraph 10 are no longer 
required, since appropriate provision has been made in the High 
Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Act, 1954. 
Clause 23.-The existence of three entries in the legislative lists 
(33 of List I, 36 of List II and 42 of List III) relating to the essen-
tially single subject of acquisition and requisitioning of property 
by the Government gives rise to unnecessary technical difficultLas 
in legislation. In order to avoid these difficulties and simplify the 
constitutional position, it is proposed to omit the entries in the 
Union and State List and replace the entry in the Concurrent List 
by a comprehensive entry covering the whole subject. 
Clause 24.-Entry 67 of the Un!on List refers to ":ancient and 
historical monuments and records, and archllwlogical sites and 
remains, declared by Parliament by law to be of national importan-
ce". A large number of ancient monuments, archeological sites, 
etc., have been declared to be of national importance by an Act of 
Parliament. It requires another Act of Parliament to make the· 
sUghtest alteration in, or addition to, the lists in that Act, which 
seems to be an unduly cumbrous procedure. It is, therefore, pro-
posed to amend the entry substituting for the words "declared by 
Parliament by law", the words "declared by or under law made by 
Parliament". The same amendment is also proposed to be made in 
the connected provisions, entry 12 of the State List, entry 40 of the 
Concurrent List and article 49. 
Clause 25.-Although the Union List has two entries 7 and 52, 
relating to industries, the latter alone is referred to in entry 24 of 
List II. The omission of entry 7 of List I appears to be due to an 
oversight and is sought to be rectified in this clause. 
Clause 26 and the Schedule.-Tbese contain the consequential 
and minor amendments and repeals proposed to be made in the 
Constitution and in the Constitution (Removal of Difficulties) 
Order No.· VllI pertaining to the Assam tribal areas. 
NEW DEuu; 
GOVIND BALLABH PANif. 
The 14th April, 1956. 

• 
23 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
.. • • 
PART I 
THE UNION AND ITS TERRITORY 
• 
1. (1) India, that is Bharat, shall be a Union of States. Name and 
territory of 
(2) The States and the territories thereof shall be the States and the Union. 
their territories specified in Parts A, Band C of the First Schedule. 
(3) The territory of India shall comprise-
(a) the territories of the States; 
(b) the territories specified in Part D of the First Schedule; 
and 
(c) such other territories as may be acquired. 
• • • • • 
49. It shall be the obligation of the State to protect every Promotion 01 
monument or place or object of artistic or historic interest declared monuments 
by Parliament by law to be of national importrnce, from spoliation, pJ.ce-:W- and 
disfigurement, destruction, removal, disposal or export as the case Obj~ctnal' • of natto 1Dl-
may be. portance._ 
... ... • ... 
80. (1) The Council of States shall consist of-
• • ... •• 
• 
• 
<Ampoeition 
of the Coun· 
. ell of Scam. 
(b) not more than two hundred and thirty-eight representa-
tives of the States. 
(2) The allocation of seats in the Council of States to be ftlled 
by representatives of' the States' shall be in accordance with the 
provisions in that behalf contained in the Fourth Schedule . 
• • • • ... 
(4) The representatives of each State specified in Part A or 
Part B of the First Schedule in the Council of States shall be 
elected by the elected members of the Legislative Assembly of the 
State in accordance with the system of proportional representation 
by means of the single transferable vote. 
(5) The representatives of the States specified in Part C of the 
First Schedule in the Council of States shall be chosen in such 
manner as Parliament may by law prescribe . 
... ... ... ... • 

24 
Compoaition 81. (1) (4) Subject to the provisions of clause (2) and of articles 
:l::eer~~: 82 and 331, the House of the People shall consist of not more than 
five hundred members directly elected by the voters in the States. 
(b) For the purpose of sub-clause (4), the States· shall be 
divided, grouped or formed into territorial constituencies and the 
number of members to be allotted to each such constituency shall 
be so determined as to ensure that there shall be not more than one 
member for every 500,000 of the population. 
(c) The ratio between the number of members allotted to each 
territorial constituency and the population of that constituency as 
'ascertained at the last preceding census of which the . relevant 
figures have been published shaU, so far as practicable, be the same 
throughout the territory of India. 
(2) The representation in the House of the People of the terri-
tories comprised within the territory of India but not included with-
in any State shall be such as Parliament may by law provide. 
(3) Upon the completion of each census, the representation of 
the several territorial constituencies in the House of the People 
shall be readjusted by such authority, in such manner and with 
effect from such date as Parliament may by law de~rmine: 
Provided that such readjustment shall not affect representatioft 
in the House of the People until the dissolution of the then exist-
ing House. 
= pro- 82. Notwithstanding anything in clause (1) of article 81, Parlia-
iCPt:e:.to ! ment may by law provide for the representation in the House of 
t" of 8~tea the People of any State specified in Part C of the First Schedule 
and ~:nto- or of any territories comprised within the territory of India but 
1: cter not included within any State on a basis or in a manner other than 
t tates. that provided in that clause. 
Original 
juriadicdoo 
ofthcSup-
rcme Court. 
• • • • • 
131. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Supreme 
Court shall, to the exclusion of any other court, have original 
jurisdiction in any dispute--
(4) between the Government of India and one or more 
States; or 
(b) between the Government of India and any State or 
States on one side and one or more other States on the 
other; or 
. (c) between two or more States, 
if and in So far as the dispute involves any question (whether 
of law or fact) on which the existence or extent of a 
legal right depends: 

Provided tRat the said jurisdiction shall not extend ~ 
(i) a cUspute to which a State specified in Par~ B of the 
First Schedule is a party, if the dispute arises out of any 
provision of a treaty, agreement, covenant, engagement, 
sanad or other similar instrument which was entered 
into or executed before the commencement of this Con-
stitution and has, Of has been, continued in operation 
after IUCh co~encementj 
(ii) a dispute to which any State is a party, if the dispute 
arises out of any provision of a treaty, agreement, coven-
nant, engagement, sanad or other similar instrument 
which provides that the said jurisdiction shall not extend 
to such a dft;pute . 
• • • • • 
PART VI 
THE STATES IN PART A OF THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
CHAPTER 11.- THE EXECUTIVE 
The Governor 
153. There shall be a Governor for each ·State. 
'" • • • 
CHAPTER III.-THE STATE LEGISLATURE 
General 
• 
Governor. 
of Statca . 
168. (1) For every State there shall be 
consist of the Governor, and 
a Legislature which shall Constitution 
of Leliala-
(a) in the States of Bihar, Bombay, Madras, Punjab, 
Pradesh and West Bengal, t}Vo Housesj 
(b) in other States, one House. 
tures in 
Uttar States. 
(2) Where there are two Houses of the Legislature of a State, 
one shall be known as the Legislative Council and the other as the 
Legislative Assembly, and where there is only one House. it shall be 
known as the Legislative Assembly. 
170. (1) Subject to the provisions of article 333, the Legislative 
Assembly of ec-ch. State shall be composed of members chosen by 
direct election. . 
. 
(2) The representation of each territorial const:tuency in the 
Legislative Assembly of a State shall be on the basis of the popu· 
lation of that constituency as ascertained at the Irst preceding 
census of which the relevant figurteS have beeR published and shall. 
save in the case of the autonomous districts of Assam end the con-
-' 

26 
stituency comprising the cantonment and municipality of Shlllong, 
be on a scale of not more than one member for every seventy-fl\!t 
thousand of the population : 
Provided that the total number of members in the Legislative 
Assembly of a State shall in no case be more than five hundred or 
less than sixty. . 
(3) The ratio between the numbe; of members to 'be allotted 
to each territorial constituency in a State and the population of 
that constituency as ascertained at the last preceding census of 
which the relevant figures have been published shall, so far as 
practicable, be the same throughout the State. 
(4) Upon the completion of each census, the representation of 
the several territorid constituencies in th~ Legislative Assembly I 
of each State shan be readjusted by such authority, in such manner 
and with effect from such date as Parliament may by la1w deter-
mine: 
Provided that such readjustment shall not affect represE.'ntation 
in the Legislative Assembly until the dissolution of the then existing 
Assembly. 
Composition 171. (1) The total number of members in the Legislative Council 
~~~~~- of a State having such a Council shall not exceed one· fourth of the 
cils. total number of members in the Legislative Assembly of that 
State: 
Provided that the total number of members in the Legislative 
Council of a State shall in no caSe be less than forty. 
• ... ... * ... 
ConstiMion '216. Every High Court shall consist of a Chief Justice and such 
of High other JudgpsFs the President may from 'time to time deem it Courts. 
necessary to appoint: 
Provided that the Judges so appointed shall at no time exceed 
in number such maximum number as the President mily,- from 
time to time, by order fix in relation to that Court. 
Appointment 217. (1) Every Judge of a High Court shall be e,'ppointed by th.e 
~0ftI C:O:c President by warrant under his hand and seal after consultation 
the office of with the Chief Justice of India, the Governor of the State, and, in 
H!~~~~ the case of C'ppointment of a Judge other than the Chief Justice, 
the Chief Justice of the High Court, and shall hold office until he 
attains the age of sixty years: 
... ... • * .' 
Prohi~ition ~f 220. No person who has held office as a Judge of a High Court 
=:::m g ~~ after tHe commencement of this Constitution shall ple£d or act 
before any in anv court or before any au.thority within the territory of India. 
authority by • • . (: ' .~, t) (, 
Judges. 

Tranafer of 
. 222. (1) The Pr.esident may, after consultation with the Chief a .1udge from 
Justice of India,' transfer a Judge from one High Court to any C~~l(t Hie 
27 
other High Court witbin the territory of India. another . 
. (2) When a Judge is so transferred, he shall, during the period 
he serves as a Judge of the. other Court, be entitled to receive in 
addition to his salary such compensatory allowance as may be 
determined by P~,r1iament by law and, until so determined, such 
compensatory allowance as the President may by order fix. 
• • • • • Attendance of 
. 224. Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter, the Chief retirc:d 
Justice of a High Court for any State may at my time, with the ~~~i~~~ ~} 
previous consent of the President, request any person who has held ~igh 
the office of a Judge of that Court or of any other High Court to ourls. 
sit and act as £, Judge of the High Court for that State, and every 
such person so requested shall, while so sitt:ng and acting, be en· 
titled to such allowances as the President may by order determine 
and have all the jurisdiction, powers and privileges of, but shall 
not otherwise be deemed to be, a Judge of that High Court: 
Provided that nothing in this article shall be deemed to require 
any such person as. aforesaid to sit and act 'as a Judge ~f that 
High Court unless he consents so to do . 
• • • 
230. Parliament may by law-
(a) extend the jurisdiction of a High Court to, or 
(bj exclude the jurisdiction of a High Court from, 
any Stde specified in the First Schedule other than, or any area 
:Qot within, the State in which the High Court has its principal 
seat. 
Extension of 
or exdu-
sion from 
the juris-
dictionof 
High Courts. 
231, Where a High Court exercises jurisdiction in relation to Restrictions 
al1Y .area outside the State in which it has its principal seat, noth· ~~s t~ ~h; 
ing.in this Constitution shall be construed- Legislatures 
. of States 
(a) as empowering the Legislature of the State in which the to. make la~ 
C h · ., Itt ' t ' t b I' h wlth respect ourt as ·lts prmclpa se~ 0 Increase, res rIc or a 0 IS to iurisdic-
that jurisdiction' tion of a , High Court 
(b) as empowering the Legislature of a State specified in in ~ .S~te 
. P B f h F' t S h d I' h' h hanng )unl-Part A or art 0 t e Irs c e u e m w lC any diction out-
such area is situate, to abolish that jurisdiction; or side thlt State, 
(e) as preventing the Legislature having power to make laws 
in that behalf for any such area. from p~ssing, subject. 
to the provisions of clause (b), such laws with respect to 
the jurisdiction of the Court in relation to that area as 
it would be competent to pass if the principd seat of thp. 
Court were in that area, 

Jntcrprc~ 
don. 
28 
232. Where a High Court exercises jurisdiction in relation to 
more than one State specified in the First Schedule or in relaboa 
.0 a State and III area Dot forming part of the State-
(a) references in this Chapter to the Governor in relation 
to the Judges of a High Court shall be construed as re.-
ferences to the Governor of the State in which the COUrt 
has its principal se£Jt:; 
(b) the reference to the approval by the Governor of rules, 
forms and tables for subordinate COurts shall be con-
strued as a reference to the approval thereof by the 
Governor or the Rajpn:mukh of the State in which the 
subordinate court is situate, or if it is situate in an area 
not forming part of any State specified in Part A or 
Part B of the First Schedule, by the President; and 
(c) references to the Consolidated Fund of the State shall be 
construed as references to the Consolidated Fund of the 
State in which the Court has its principal seat. 
PART VDI • 
THE STATES IN PART C OF THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
Administra- 239. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Part, a State 
~~ b! Part specified in Part C of the First Schedule shall be administered by 
c c:r the the President acting, to such extent ~s he thinks fit, through a 
FdirBl t Schc-. Chief Commissioner or a Lieutenant-Governor to be appointed by uc. him or through the Government of a neighbouring State: 
Provided that the Prealdent shall not act through the Gov-
ernment of a neighbouring State 88IVe after-
(a) consulting the Government concerned; and 
(b) ascertaining in such manner as the President considers 
most appropriate the views of the people of tlie State to 
be so administered. . 
(2) In this article, references to EJ State shall include references 
to a part of a State. 
Creation or 240. (1) Parliament may by law create or continue for any 
~tin= State specified in Part C of the First Schedule md administered 
l.eIiatatare. through a Chief Commissioner or Lieutenant-Governor-
or Council 
~~ M1~~~~ (a) a body, whethe~ nominated, elected or partly nom:nated 
and partly elected, to function as a Legisldure for the 
State; or 

29 
(b) a Council of Advisers or Ministers, or both with such 
constitution, powers and functions, in each case, as may 
be specified in the law. 
(2) Any such law £5 is referred to in clause (1) shall not be 
deemed to be an amendment of this Constitution for the purposes 
of article 368 notwithstanding that it contains any provision which 
amends or has the effect of amending the Constitution . 
• • • • • 
298. (1) The executive power of the Union and of each State Power to 
shall extend, subject to any law made~ by the appropriate Legis- ~=Y' 
lature, to the grant, sale, disposition or mortgage of any property 
held for the purposes of the Union or of such StElte, as the case 
may be, and to the purchase or acquisition of property for those 
purposes respectively, and to the making of contracts. 
(2) All property acquired for the purposes of the Union or of 
a State shall vest in the Union or in such State, as the CElSe may 
be. 
371. Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, during a Tem'p~rary proVISIons 
period of ten years from the commencement thereof, or during with respec 
such longer or shorter period as Parl;ament may by IEIW provide ~art Sta~s ~ 
in respect of any State, the Government of every State specified in the Firs 
Part B of the First Schedule shall be under the general control of, Schedule. 
and comply with such particular directions, if £Illy, as may from 
time to time be given by, the President: 
Provided that the President may by order direct that the pro-
vision!:' of this article shall not apply to any State specified in the 
order. .. • • 
FIRST SCHEDULE 
(Articles 1, 4 and 391) 
• • 
The States and the territories of India 
Names of States 
1. Andhra 
2. Assam 
3. Bihar 
4. Bombay 
5. Madhya Pradesh 
PART A 
Names of corresponding Provinces 
Assam 
Bihar 
Bombay 
The Central Provinces 
and Berar 

N ames of States 
6. Madras 
7. Orissa 
8. Punjab 
9. Uttar Pradesh 
10. West Bengal. 
30 
Names of corresponding Provinces 
Madras 
Orissa 
East Punjab 
The United Provinces 
West Bengal 
TERRITORIES OF STATES 
.. 
The territory of the State of Andhra shall comprise the terri-
tories specified in sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Andhra State 
Act, 1953. 
The territory of the State of Assam shall comprise the territories 
which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution 
were comprised in the Province of Assam, the Khasi States and 
the Assam Tribal Areas but shall not include the territories 
specified in the Schedule to the Assam (Alteration of Boundaries) 
Act, 1951. 
The territory of each of the other States in this Part shall 
comprise the territories which immed)ately before the commence-
ment of this Constitution were comprised in the corresponding pro-
vince and the territories which, by virtue of an order made under 
section 290A of the Government of India Act, 1935, were immediate-
ly before such commencement being administered as if they formed 
part of that Province and in the case of the State of West Bengal 
shall also comprise the territory of Chandernagore as defined in 
clause (c) of section 2 of the Chandernagore (Merger) Act, 1954, 
but in the case of the State of Madras shall not include the 
territories specified in sub-section (1) of section 3 and sub-section 
(1) of section 4 of the Andhra State Act, 1953. 
PART B 
NAMES OF STA'lT.8 
1. Hyderabad. 
2. Jammu and Kashmir, 
3. Madhya Bharat. 
4. Mysore. 

Jf 
5. Patiala and East Punjab States Union. 
6. Rajasthan. 
7. Saurashtra. 
8. Travancore-Cochin. 
TERRITORIES OF STATES 
The territory of each of the States in this Part shall comprise 
the territory which, immediately before the commencement of this 
Constitution, was comprised iIlt or administered by the Govern-
ment of, the corresponding Indian State, and in the case of the 
State of Madhya Bharat, shall also comprise the territory which, 
immediately before such commencement, was comprtsed in the 
Chief Commissioner's Province of Panth Piploda and in the case 
of the State of Mysore shall also comprise the territory specified 
in sub~ection (1) of section 4 of the Andhra State Act, 1953. 
PART C 
NAMES OF STATES 
1. Ajmer. 
2. Bhopal. 
3. Coorg. 
4. Delhi. 
5. Himachal Pradesh. 
6. Kutch. 
7. Manipur. 
8. Tripura. 
9. Vidhya Pradesh. 
TERRITORIES OF STATES 
The territory of each of the States of Ajmer, Coorg and Delhi 
shall comprise the territory which immediately before the com-
mencement of this Constitution was comprised in the Chief Com-
missioners' Provinces of Ajmer-Merwara, Coorg and Delhi, respec-
tively. 
The territory of the State of Himachal Pradesh shall comprise 
the territories which immediately before the commencement of the 
Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New State) Act, 1954, were com-
prised in the States of Bilaspur and Himachal Pradesh. 

3~ 
The territory of each of the other States in this Part shall 
comprise the territories which, by virtue of an order made under 
section 290A of the Government of India Act, 1935, were imme-' 
'(iiately before the commencement of this Constitution being ad-
'ministered as if they were a Chief Commissioner's Province of the 
:same name. 
PARTD 
'the Ande.man and ~icobar Islands. 
SECOND SCHEDULE 
[Articles 59(3), 65(3), 75(6), 97, 125, 148(3), 158(3),164(5),186 
and 221.]: 
PART Ai 
PROVISIONS AS TO THE PRESIDENT AND THE GOVERNORS OF STATES 
SPECIFIED IN PART A OF THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
PART D 
PROVISIONS AS TO THE JUDGES OF THE SUPREME COURT AND OF THE 
HIGH COURTS IN STATES IN, PART A OF THE FIRST ScHEDULE 
10. (1) There shall be paid to the Judges of the High Court of 
each State specified in Part A of the First Schedule, in respect of 
time spent on actual service, salary SIt the following rates per 
mensem, that is to say:-
The Chief Justice 
Any other Judge 
4,000 rupees 
3,500 rupees 
(3) Every Judge of a High Court shall receive such reasonable 
allowances to reimburse him for expenses incurred in travelling on 
duty within the territory of India and shall be afforded such rea-
sonable facilities in connection with travelling as the President may 
from time to time prescribe, 
(4) The rights in respect of leave of absence (including leave 
allowances)md pension of the Judges of the High Court of any 
State shall be governed by the provisions which, immediately be-
fore the commencement of .this Constitution, were appl~cable to the 
.J udges of the High Court in the corresponding Province . 
• • • • • 

33 
FOURTH SCHEDULE 
[Articles 4(1), 80(2) and 391] 
Allocation of seats in the Council of States 
To each State or group of States specified in the first column 
of the table of seats appended to this Schedule there shall be 
allotted the number of seats specified in the second column of the 
said table opposite to that State of group of States, as the case 
may be. 
TABLE OF SEATS 
THE COUNCIL OF STATES 
Representatives of States specified in Part A of the First Schedule 
I 2 
States Total Seats 
I. Andhra 12 
2. Assam 6 
3· Bihar 21 
4· Bombay . 17 
5· Madhya Pradesh 12 
6. Madras 18 
7· Orissa 9 
8 Punjab • . 8 
9· Uttar Pradesh 31 
10. West Bengal 14 
TOTAL 148 
. Representatives of States specified in Part B of the First Schedule 
2 
--- States Total Seats 
I. Hyderabad . II 
2. Jammu and Kashmir 4 
3· Madhya Bharat 6 
4· Mysore. • . 6 
5· Patiala and East Punjab 
States Union 3 
6. Rajasthan . . 9 
7· Saurashtra 4 
8. Travancore ·Cochin 6 
--- -----------_._-.-
TOTAL 0' 49 
• 

34 
Representatives of States spedfted in Part C of the First Schedule 
States and Groups of States Total Seats 
I. 
2. 
3· 
4· 
S· 
6, 
7· 8. 
9· 
Ajmer 
Coorg 
Bhopal 
Himachal 
Delhi 
Kutch 
Manipur 
Tripura 
Vindhya 
} 
Pradesh 
" 
} 
Pradesh 
TOTAL 
I 
I 
I 
·1 
I 
4 
10 
TOTAL OF J\L.L SEATS 207 
• 
• 
• • • 
SEVENTH SCHEDULE 
l Article 246] 
List I-Union List 
• • • 
• 
.. 
33. Acquisition or requisitioning of property for the purposes of 
the Union. 
• • • .. • 
List II-State List 
.. .. • • • 
36, Acquisition or requisitioning of property. except for the 
purposes of the Union. subject to the provisions of entry 42 of List 
III. I 
• • • .. • 
List Ill-Concurrent List 
• .. • .. .. 
42. Principles on which comPensation for property acquired or 
requisitioned for the purposes of the Union or of a State or for 
any other'public purpose is to' be determined. £'lld the form and 
the manner jn which such compensation is to be given. 
c 

~3 
List I-UDion List 
• • • • • 
67. Ancient and historical monuments and records, and archaeo-
logical sites and remains. declared by Psll"liament by law to be of 
national importance. • 
• • • • • 
List D-State List 
• • • • • 
12. Libraries. museums and other similar institutions controlled 
or financed by the State; ~'llcient and historical monuments and 
records other than those declared by Parliament by law to be of 
national importance. 
• • • • • 
List m-Concurrent List 
40. Archaeological sites and remc:ins other than those declared 
by Parliament by law ,to be of national importance. 
• • • • • 
List I-Union List 
• • • • • 
List II-State List 
• • • * • 
24. Industries subject to the provisions of entry 52 of List I. 
• • • * • 
THE CONSTITUTION (REMOVAL OF DIFFICULTIES) ORDER 
NO. VIII 
In exercise of. the powers conferred by clause (1) of Article 392 
of the Constitution of India, the President is pleased to make the 
following Order, namely:-
1. (1) This Order may be called the Constitution (Removal of 
Difficulties) Order No. VIII. 
(2) It shall come into force at once. 
2. For the period during which the .tribe11 areas specified in Part 
B of the table appended to paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule to 
the Constitution or any parts thereof are administered by the Presi-
dent by virtue of sub-paragr2ph (2) of paragraph 18 of the said 

36 
Schedule, the Constitution of India shall have effect subject to the 
following adaptations: - . 
(1) In article 81,-
(a) .to sub-clause (b) of clause (1), ~he following proviso shall 
be added:-
"Provided that the constituencies into which the State 
of Assam is divided shall not comprise the Tribal Areas 
specified in Part B of the' table apended to paragraph 20 of 
the Sixth Schedule"; and 
(b) in clause (2), after the words "not included within any 
State" the words, letter and figure "and of the Tribal 
Areas specified in Part B of the tc.'"Ible appended to 
paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule" shdl be inserted. 
(2) In Article 82, after the words "not included within any State" 
the words, letter and figure "and of the Tribal Areas specified 
in Part B of the table appended to paragraph 20 of the Sixth 
Schedule" shall be inserted. 
(3) In Article 170, after clause (1), the following clause shall be 
inserted:-
' .. 
'.' 
" , 
"(lA) The co~tituencies *nto which the State of Assam is 
divided for the purposes of clause (1) shall not comprise 
the Tribal Areas specified in Part B of the table appended 
to paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule". 
, 1..'1 
. ' II . ' . " 
" 
I' ~.' J 
h , , r 
I I. 
I' .~ .. 
~, 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Consvtution of India. 
l. 
(Shn' Gooind Ballabh Pat, 
Minister of Home Affair ) 