BUI NO.2, of 1,61 
THE COAL MINES (CONSERVATION AND 
SAFETY) AMENDMENT BILL, 1961 
.. (As INTRODUCED IN LoIC SABHA 
ON 28TH APRIL, 1961) 

LO~ SABllA 
coamCDIDA 
110 
COAL MINES (CONSEnVA'I10N AND SAFEn') 
AMENDMENT BILL, 1961 
(To brl .. h "ulOtlucetl JIJ Lo" Sabha) 
L Page 4, Uae lL-
lor 'Rupee Ii ollr' read 'Rupees Four' 
2. p .. 4, line 14,-
lor "appnudmately' read 'apPlQzimately' 
s. p .. 4, line 35,-
for "Re. ') read'R .. '1 
4. P8tJe 4, lIae 81,-
/or'TGTAL' reoJ. 'TOTAL' 
Netw lWJai, 
April 27. 1961 
VGi.akJaa 7. lBB3(Saka) 
198.··LSRP .-17-4-61/ 1140. 

12 of 1952. 5 
10 
IS 
20 
8m No .. , , of ,1,,1 
THE COAL MINES (CONSERVATION AND SAFETY) 
AMENDMENT BILL, 1961 
(As DlTRODUCED IN Lox SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Coal Mines (Conservation and Safety) Act, 1952. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twelfth Year of tlle Be,tublic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Coal Mines (Conserwtion and Short dt1e. 
Safety) Amendment Act, 1961. 
2. In section 3 of the Coal Mines (Conservation and Safety) Act, :r-: t 
1952 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), after clause (h), Met 3. 
the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:-
I (hh) "railway" shall have the meaning assigned to it in the 
Indian Railways Act, 1890; 
(hhh) "safety in coal mines" includes the safety of any 
railway situated on the surface above a coal mine;'. 
3. In section 8 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1) ,- Amandmellt 
oflec:doD L 
(a) in clause (a), for the words "not exceeding one rupee 
per ton", the words "not exceeding four rupees per ton" shall 
be substituted; and 
(b) for the Explanation to clause (b) , the following 
Explanation shall be substituted, namely:-
"Explanation.-Coal of Selected Grade A, Selected 
Grade B and Grade I means coal graded as sueh by the' 
Board in accordance with the specifications laid down by the 
Central Government from time to time." • 
• 

2. 
A_dmeat 4. In section 13 of the principal Act, in clause (4) of sub-section 
ofeecdoa 130 (3), after the words "or the mine", the words "or a railway" shall 
be inserted. 
~;. 5. In section 17 of the principal Act, for sub-section (4), the fol-
lowing sub-section shall be substituted, namely.: - 5 
" (4) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parlia-
ment whlle it is in session for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions, 
and, if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or 10 
the session immediately following, both Hcmses agree in making 
any modiftcation in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule 
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have eff~ only 
in such modifted form or be of no effect, as the case may he; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be J S 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
A considerable portion of the additional production oi coal during 
the Third Five Year Plan has to be found by extractmg the high 
quality coal which is standing on pillars in the Jharia and Raniganj 
coalfields. As depillaring has to be accompanied by stowing in the 
interest of safety of life and. property and for the cODSeIvation of Lhe 
coal resources, it is necessary to ensure an uninterrupted supply of 
sand to the collieries. The Coal Board, which is the statutory au-
thority for promoting measures relating to safety in mines and COD-
servation of coal, proposes to erect aerial ropeways in tne Jharia and 
Raniganj coalfields to facilitate the transport of several milhon tons 
of sand per annum from the river beds to collieries. ThE: tlnancial re-
sources of the Coal Board are not sufficient to meet the costs of the 
ropeway scheme. 
2. To meet the increasing requirements of coal, it has become 
necesS8l'Y to increase the movement of coal by sea to the coastal sUites 
in the South and the West. The cost of transport by sea is likely to 
be higher as compared to that on movement by the all rail rou~. It 
may be necessary to pay an element of subsidy in respect. of the coal 
moved by sea and this may necessitate an increase in excise duty. 
3. The objects mentioned in paragraphs 1 and 2 above cannot be 
achieved within the ceiling prescribed in the Coal Minea. (Conserva-
tion and Safeiy) Act, 1952 and it has therefore become necessary to 
raise the limit of excise duty to rupees four per ton. 
4. The Act, as it stands at present, does not enable the Chief lns-
pector of Mines to pass orders for the compulsory execution of pl'ot~ 
tive measures where the working of a mine endangers the safety of 
the railway property situated on the surface above ft, DOl dOt!S it en-
able the Coal Board to grant assistance in such cases. Opportunity 
has been taken to make provision in this regard also. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 25th April, 1961. 
SWARAN SINGH. 
3 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM. 
the financial implications of the Bill are contained in section 3. 
2. The excise duty mentioned in the Coal Mines (Collservation and 
safety) Act is subject to a ceilmg of Rupee One per ton of coal/coke. 
The.'cutrent rates of levy are Rs. 0.88 per ton of coal and soft coke and 
as. 0.94 per ton of hard coke. The estimated net pro~eed .. of this levy 
which are proposed to be paid! to the Coal Board during 1961-62 are 
RI. 380 lakhs. A statement showing the budget estimates or the Coal 
Board under broad headings is attached. 
3. The present bill proposes to enhance the limit for excise duty 
frOm·Rttpee'One per ton to Rupee Four per ton. The actual increase in 
the existing rate of the said duty will be so determined. as to yield an 
additional revenue of approximately Rs. 700 lakhs per yes:.. Out of 
this adctitional revenue, approximate!v Rs. 300 lakhs will De paid into 
the Coal Mines Safety and Conservation Fund. so as to enable the 
Coal Board. to meet expenditure connected with t}1e opention and 
maintenance of the Central Ropeways project. The remaining Rs. 400 
18.khs will be utilised by Government to subsi'1ise the mOVE'ment of 
cbal by sea to the coastal states in the South and in the West. 
4. The amendment to extend the scope of the Coal Mines (Conser-
vation and Safety) Act to cover the safety of railwa",' pr'>perty would 
not mean any additional expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of 
Illdia. The expenditure on this account will be met by the Coal 
Board from the normal net proceeds of excise duty which are trans-
ferred 10 the Coal Mines Safety and Conservation Fund during each 
financial year. 
Bud,.t EmPlllll.s 1961-62 of tIN up.nditur, of tIN Coal Board. 
A. AclmiDistration of the Board Rs. 16,00.000 
B. GnDt of stowiDa materials and other assistance 
for stowillg operatiOllR to oWners, agents or 
Dlldlllell of coa1min~B. 
C. Other meaBUreS connected with the administra-
tion of the Act. 
D. Other mealures taken ill connection with the 
funherance of the objects 0' the Act. 
Eo MisceIJaneoul. 
TOTAL 
Rs. 2,66,00,000 
RI. 2,00,000 
Re. 1,20,00,000 
RI. 3.75,000 
lb. 4,0'/.75,000 
, 

ANNEXURE 
,:" 
EXTRACTS FROM THE COAL MINES (CONSERVATION AND SAFF.TY) ACT, 
1952 (ACT No. 12 OF 1952) 
• • • • 
8. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government Impos.itioD 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, there snaIl be ~~:~~8C 
levied and collected-
(a) on all coal raised and despatched, and on all coke manu-
factured and despatched, from the collieries in India, such duty 
of excise not exceeding one rupee per ton as may be fixed from 
time to time by the Central Government by notification in the 
Official Gazette, and different rates of duty may be levit!d on 
different grades or descriptions of coal or coke: 
Provided that the Central Government may, by general or 
special order, exempt any special grade or grades or description 
of coal or coke from the levy of such duty of excise; 
(b) • • • 
Explanation.-Coal of Selected Grade A, Selected Grade B 
and GNde I means coal graded as such under the Colliery Con-
trol Order, 1945 . 
• • • • 
13. • • • 
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 19 of the Powers of 
Indian Mines Act, 1923, the Chief Inspector or any Inspector may, by IDlpeClOri • 
.. of 1923. order in writing addressed to the owner, agent or manager of a coal 
mine, require him to take such protective measures, including stow-
mg, in the mine as the Chief Inspector or the Inspector may think 
necessary, if in the opinion of the Chief Inspector or Inspector-
(a) the extraction or reduction of pillars in any part of the 
mine is likely to cause the crushing of pillars or the pre-mature 
collapse of any part of the workings or otherwise endanger 
human life or the mine, or 
• • • • 
• 

17. ••• . 
Power to 
make ruJ-. (4) All rules made under the provisions of this Act shall be laid, 
as soon as may be, before Parliament . 
• • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Coal Mines (Conservation and Satety) Act, 1952 . 
The President bas, jn pursuance of clauses (1) and (3) of 
article 117 of the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok 
Sabha the introduction and consideratjon of the Bill 
M.N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Sardar SfDQTan Singh, 
Minister of Steel, Mines and Fuel.) 
• 