a Bill No. 29 of 1998
_THE COTTON GROWERS (BENEFIT) BILL, 1998 के
og By हि
Suri R. Sampasiva Rao, M.P.
A °

BILL
“10 provide for the protection and welfare of cotton growers.
‘enacted by Parliament in the Forty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as

1) This Act may be called the Cotton Growers (Benefit) Act, 1998. Short title,

धर पर extent and
extends to the whole of India. ‘commencement.
all come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
Gazette, appoint.
n this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — Definitions.

(a) “cotton grower” means any person who cultivates cotton;


Central
Governinent
to\procure

cotton and fix

remunerative
price thereof

Export of
excess cotton,

Insurance.

Establishment
of Cotion
Growers
Benefit Pund.

Power to make
rules,

3. The Central Government shall procure through the Cotton :
Tndia all the cotton produced in the country and shall also ax remunerative price

cotton every year after taking into consideration the increase in Prices of cotton se
Pesticides and fertilizers, total investment capacity of cotton growers and such oth
factors, as may be prescribed,

4. The Central Governnient

॥ shall endeavour to export all the excess cotton prodi
in the country. during a year. =

rginal cotton growers shall

Government against natu
7 produced, fall in prices of cotton and such of

calamities, decline in yields of cotto
eventualities, as ntay be Prescribed.

6. (/) The Central Government shall estab!

lish a Fund to be known as
Cotton Growers Benefit Fund.

(2) The Central Government and State Gove

rnments shall contribute to
Fund in such ratio, as may be prescribed.

(3) The Fund shall be utilized for the following purposes:—

(a) to extend financial help to the small and marginal farmers in such cases,
may be prescribed:

(0) giving financial assisiatice to cotton growers for purchasing cotton seeds,
Pesticides and fertilizers and in ८

‘ases of low yields or fall in prices of cotton
destruction of their crops due to 1:

ins, cy¢lones and floods
7. The Central Government may, by notification in the Offic

el Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The market fluctuations, nature's fury:qnd Government’s negleét’haveidriven the
है into a crisis. Declining yields.and falling pricet-are making the lives of the
rmers miserable.The agony that gripped the cotton growers in Prakasham district”
Pradesh had even caused suicides in:1987u Andhra Pradesh is one of the three
ton producing States alongwith Gujarat and Maharashtra. Cotton’ is’ mainly
Guntur, Prakasham, Kumool, Mahabub Nagar, Warangal and Adilabad districts
Pradesh. The costs of cotton inputs have shot up increasing the total capital
nt of the farmers. The peasant organisations are demanding remunerative prices
for cotton growers. But instead of getting remunerative prices, the cotton growers
ie shocking experiences as prices in different markets in the State have generally
| 0) 20 per cent. as compared to the previous year, हे

main reason behind the cotton growers getting non-remunerative prices is
of excess stock of cotton in the market. There is, therefore, an urgent need to
W assuring the cotton growers of Government's help in the event of excess
or fall in prices and also to ensure that their minimum needs are looked after

vernment. The creation of a fund and a provision of insurance cover for cotton
il help them iminensely,

ence this Bill.

R. SAMBASIVA RAO


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the purchase of cotton from cotton growers by the
Central Government through the Cotton Corporation of India. Clause 5 provides that the
entire cotton grown by small and marginal cotton growers shall be compulsorily insured
free of cost by the Central Government against natural calamities, etc. Clause 6 provides
for the establishment of a Cotton Growers Benefit Fund to which the Central Government
and State Governments shall contribute in such ratio, as may be prescribed. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from. the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
likely to involve a recutring expenditure of rupees two hundred crore per annum.

‘A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees three hundred crore is also likely
to be involved. ; ‘


| REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
s of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only. The delegation
ive power is of a normal character,


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the protection and welfare of cotton growers.

(Shri R. Sambasiva Rao, M.P)
MGIP(PLU)MRND—106LS—22-4-98.