THE ESSENTIAL GOODS (DECLARATION AND REGULA-
TION OF TAX ON SALE OR PURCHASE) BILL, 1952 
,AI nC'l'lWDUCED IN THE HOUSE OF THe PtorLE) 
I 
BILL 
to declare, in pursuanoe of clause (8) of art~c'e 286 of the OO!latitution, 
certain goods to be eBsential for the hIe of the communaty. 
Bs it enacted by Parlil:lment as follows:-
1. Shan tlt1e.-This Act may be called the Essential Goods (Decla-
ration and Regll18tiol of Ta.x on Sa.le or Purchase) Act, 1952. 
2. DeclaratiOn of cartalD. goods to be 8I8entlal for the We of the 
commUDltf.-The goods specified in the ISchedule are hereby declared to be 6 
eSI)';lntia.l for the life of the community. 
S. JtepJatlon of tu OD sale or purchue of a_Dttal goods.-No law 
maue Rfter the commencement of this Act by the legislature of a State 
imposing, or a.uthorising the imposition of, a tax on the sale or Ilurchase 
of any goods deolared by this Act to be essential for the life of the 10 
community shall have effect unless it has been reserved for the C'onsidllration 
of the President and has received his assent. 
THE SCHEDULE 
(See seotion 2) 
Goods dedaTed 6ss6xtial lOT th.e lile of the community 16. 
1. Cereals and pulses in all forms, including bread and flour, including 
atta, ma.ida, suji and bran (except when any such article is sold in sealed 
containers). 
2. Grepn or dried vegetables and flower seeds, bulbs and plants and fresh 
and dried fruits, other than medical preparations (except when any sllch 20 
article is sold in sealed containers). 
n. Fresh milk, whole or separate, and milk products . 
. 4. Salt. 
5. Coarse and medium handloom and mill-made cotton cloth and hand-
loom woollen cloth. 
6. FertilizerB and agricultural machinery and implements. 
7. Raw cotton, including ginned and un-ginned. cotton or kapaB or cotton 
thread, ('otto'l seed, l'aw jute and sugar-cane. 
. 8. Coal, including coke and other derivativeB, petroleum and l)etroleum 
products, includin~ motor spirit and electrioal energy, except energy 80 
Intended for domestfo use. 
9. Iron and deal. 

2 
STATE~T 0]' OBJECTS AND ;a;EA~O~S 
Article 286(3) 01 the Constitution provides tha~ 
"No law mad~ by .the Legislature of a State imposing, or authoris-
ing the imposition of. a tax on the sale c:r purchase of any 
such goods as have been declared by Parliament. by law 
to be essential for the life of the community shall have eftect 
unless it has been reserved for the consideration of ilhe Presi-
dent and haH received his 88sent;." • 
A list of goods essential for the life of the community for the purpOSI' of 
the abovementioned provisions has accordingly been drawn up and the 
Bill provides that the imposition, after the enactment of the Bill, of a 
sales or purchase tax on these goods should be reserved for the considerlltion 
of the President. The Bill, if enacted, may help to achieve a certain 
measure of uniformity in the taxes, and also prevent essential goods being 
unduly taxed. 
The Bill was introduced in the Provisional Parliament on the 7th June, 
1961, but could not be passed owing to want of time. 
D. D. DESRMUKH 
NBW Da.m: 
The 18th MtJy, 19ft. 

HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE 
A 
BILL 
to declare, in pursuanoe of olause (3) ~of artiole 286 of the Con-
stitution, oertain goods to be essential for the 'life of the 
community...· 
(8""i O. D. Dei/vm'Ukh 
M iniBter for Finance.) 