1
THE  FREE AND COMPULSORY EDUCATION FOR DISABLED AND
NEEDY CHILDREN BILL, 2015
By
SHRI GOPAL CHINAYYA SHETTY, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for free and compulsory education from primary to intermediate level to
disabled and needy children and for matter connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Free and Compulsory Education for Disabled and
Needy Children Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 29 of  2015
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ‘‘appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases the Central Government;
(b) ‘‘child" means a male or a female who has not attained the age of eighteen
years;
(c) ‘‘disabled and needy child" means a child who requires special treatment or
attention because of physical impairment or monetary constraints;
(d) ‘‘education" means the education from primary level to the intermediate
level; and
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. The appropriate Government shall provide free and compulsory education to every
disabled and needy child.
Explanation.— For the purpose of this section ‘‘free education" includes:—
(a) any fee including admission and tuition fee;
(b) books, note-books and stationery materials free of cost;
(c) free hostel facility wherever necessary; and
(d) scholarships, in such cases, as may be prescribed.
4. The appropriate Government shall establish at least one school in each area having
a population of one thousand people.
5. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament, by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Governments for effective implementation
of the provisions of this Act.
6. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Definitions.
Free and
compulsory
education to
disabled and
needy child.
Appropriate
Government
to establish
schools.
Central
Government
to provide
adequate
funds to the
State
Governments.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
According to article 45 of the Constitution, it is the duty of the State Government to
provide free and compulsory education to every child till he attains the age of fourteen years.
Even though the Government has taken many steps in this direction, yet, they are insufficient.
Even after sixty-seven years of independence, we are not able to provide education to all
children. Moreover, our education system is too costly for the disabled and needy children.
Hence, it is necessary to provide free and compulsory education upto the intermediate
level including free meal, uniform, books and scholarships to the disabled, poor and needy
children in order to encourage their parents to send their children to the schools.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; GOPAL CHINAYYA  SHETTY
December 18, 2014.
3

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for free and compulsory education to every disabled and
needy child. Clause 4 provides for establishment of a school in each area having a population
of one thousand people. Clause 5 provides for providing of adequate funds to the State
Governments for effective implementation of the provisions of the Act. The expenditure in
respect of schools to be established in the States will be met from the Consolidated Funds of
the respective States. However, some financial assistance may have to be provided to the
State Governments by the Central Government in this regard. The expenditure to be incurred
in respect of schools to be established in Union territories will be borne by the Central
Government. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees twenty-five crore would be involved as
recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees thirty-five crore is also likely to be
involved.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. Since the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for free and compulsory education from primary to intermediate level to
disabled and needy children and for matter connected therewith.
————
(Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4372LS(S3)—20-02-2015.