     AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
                                                              Bill No. 29 of 2021
THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2021
By
SHRI ANUBHA V MOHANTY, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
       BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second  Year of the Republic of
India as follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment)
Act, 2021.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In section 41 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter referred
to as the Code), after sub-section (2), the following sub-sections shall be inserted,
namely:–
“(3) No arrest under this section shall be made unless the police Officer
has–
Short title
and
commencement.
Amendment of
section 41.
2 of 1974
5
10

(a) made the relevant entry including reasons of arrest in the case
diary and the daily diary register;
(b) obtained written approval of the officer in charge of the police
station; and
(c) provided the information regarding bailable or non-bailable nature
of offence to the person against whom complaint has been made.”.
3. In section 309 of the Code, in sub-section (2), for the words “and may by
a warrant remand the accused if in custody:”, the words “and shall, upon such
postponement or adjournment, release the accused on bail if in custody or, for
reasons to be recorded in writing, remand such accused to further custody:” shall
be substituted.
Amendment
of section
309.
5
10
2

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The right to life and liberty is a sacred and fundamental right mentioned in
article 21 of the Constitution but it has been hampered by the police while
exercising vast powers under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. A widely
discussed and contentious issue has been constant abuse of personal liberty and
constitutional rights by the law enforcing agencies of the Government in the name
‘protection of the public’.
The Supreme Court has laid down several guidelines in various cases
regarding arrest. In Arnesh Kumar vs State of Bihar and Anr. (Cr. Appeal No. 1277
of 2014), the Court has said that arrest should not be made as matter of course and
laid down several guidelines to ensure the same. In order to safeguard against the
arbitrary exercise of power to arrest under section 41 of Code of Criminal
Procedure, it is desirable that an addition be made to that effect and checks and
balances be ensured under the Code.
With regard to remands, it has come to the notice that, in practice, Magistrates
authorize detention in a routine and casual manner. With regard to section 309(2)
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, this provision deals with remand of an person
accused of an offence after cognizance of the offence has been taken by the court.
Where the trial is postponed or adjourned, the Court may remand such accused if
he is in custody. The provision does not mention that the Magistrate may also
release the person from custody. As a result, the section appears to suggest that
remand under the provision is the only outcome.
To ensure that remand does not take place in a mechanical manner and the
court should consider both the continuing need, if any, for the person to remain in
custody, as well as the length of under trial incarceration undergone by him, in
determining whether the person should be released or sent to remand.  An
amendment to this effect is required to be provided in section 309(2) of the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
Hence this Bill.
  NEW DELHI; ANUBHA V MOHANTY
January 22, 2021.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973
* * * * *
41. (1) Any police officer may without an order from a Magistrate and
without a warrant, arrest any person—
(a) who commits, in the presence of a police officer, a cognizable
offence;
(b) against whom a reasonable complaint has been made, or credible
information has been received, or a reasonable suspicion exists that he has
committed a cognizable offence punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may be less than seven years or which may extend to seven years
whether with or without fine, if the following conditions are satisfied,
namely:—
 (i) the police officer has reason to believe on the basis of such
complaint, information, or suspicion that such person has committed the
said offence;
(ii) the police officer is satisfied that such arrest is necessary—
(a) to prevent such person from committing any further offence;
or
(b) for proper investigation of the offence; or
(c) to prevent such person from causing the evidence of the
offence to disappear or tampering with such evidence in any
manner; or
(d) to prevent such person from making any inducement, threat
or promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the case so
as to dissuade him from disclosing such facts to the Court or to the
police officer; or
(e) as unless such person is arrested, his presence in the Court
whenever required cannot be ensured,
and the police officer shall record while making such arrest, his
reasons in writing:
Provided that a police officer shall, in all cases where the arrest
of a person is not required under the provisions of this sub-section,
record the reasons in writing for not making the arrest.
(ba) against whom credible information has been received that he has
committed a cognizable offence punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to more than seven years whether with or without fine or
with death sentence and the police officer has reason to believe on the basis
of that information that such person has committed the said offence;
(c) who has been proclaimed as an offender either under this Code or
by order of the State Government; or
(d) in whose possession anything is found which may reasonably be
suspected to be stolen property and who may reasonably be suspected of
having committed an offence with reference to such thing; or
When police
may arrest
without
warrant.
4

(e) who obstructs a police officer while in the execution of his duty, or
who has escaped, or attempts to escape, from lawful custody; or
(f) who is reasonably suspected of being a deserter from any of the
Armed Forces of the Union; or
(g) who has been concerned in, or against whom a reasonable complaint
has been made, or credible information has been received, or a reasonable
suspicion exists, of his having been concerned in, any act committed at any
place out of India which, if committed in India, would have been punishable
as an offence, and for which he is, under any law relating to extradition, or
otherwise, liable to be apprehended or detained in custody in India; or
(h) who, being a released convict, commits a breach of any rule made
under sub-section (5) of section 356; or
(i) for whose arrest any requisition, whether written or oral, has been
received from another police officer, provided that the requisition specifies
the person to be arrested and the offence or other cause for which the arrest
is to be made and it appears therefrom that the person might lawfully be
arrested without a warrant by the officer who issued the requisition.
(2) Subject to the provisions of section 42, no person concerned in a non-
cognizable offence or against whom a complaint has been made or credible
information has been received or reasonable suspicion exists of his having so
concerned, shall be arrested except under a warrant or order of a Magistrate.
* * * * *
309. (1) In every inquiry or trial the proceedings shall be continued from day-
to-day until all the witnesses in attendance have been examined, unless the Court
finds the adjournment of the same beyond the following day to be necessary for
reasons to be recorded:
Provided that when the inquiry or trial relates to an offence under section 376,
section 376A, section 376B, section 376C or section 376D of the Indian Penal
Code (45 of 1860), the inquiry or trial shall, as far as possible be completed within
a period of two months from the date of filing of the charge sheet.
(2) If the Court, after taking cognizance of an offence, or commencement of
trial, finds it necessary or advisable to postpone the commencement of, or adjourn,
any inquiry or trial, it may, from time to time, for reasons to be recorded, postpone
or adjourn the same on such terms as it thinks fit, for such time as it considers
reasonable, and may by a warrant remand the accused if in custody:
Provided that no Magistrate shall remand an accused person to custody under
this section for a term exceeding fifteen days at a time:
Provided further that when witnesses are in attendance, no adjournment or
postponement shall be granted, without examining them, except for special reasons
to be recorded in writing:
Provided also that no adjournment shall be granted for the purpose only of
enabling the accused person to show cause against the sentence proposed to be
imposed on him.
Provided also that—
(a) no adjournment shall be granted at the request of a party, except where
the circumstances are beyond the control of that party;
Power to
postpone or
adjourn
proceedings.
5

(b) the fact that the pleader of a party is engaged in another Court, shall
not be a ground for adjournment;
(c) where a witness is present in Court but a party or his pleader is not
present or the party or his pleader though present in Court, is not ready to
examine or cross-examine the witness, the Court may, if thinks fit, record the
statement of the witness and pass such orders as it thinks fit dispensing with
the examination-in-chief or cross-examination of the witness, as the case may
be.
Explanation 1.—If sufficient evidence has been obtained to raise a
suspicion that the accused may have committed an offence, and it appears
likely that further evidence may be obtained by a remand, this is a reasonable
cause for a remand.
Explanation 2.—The terms on which an adjournment or postponement
may be granted include, in appropriate cases, the payment of costs by the
prosecution or the accused.
* * * * *
6

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
————
(Shri Anubhav Mohanty, M.P .)