As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA.

SS MAY 207
i
Bill No, 29 of 2002
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2002
By
‘Suri Kopixunnit Suress, M. P.
A
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1, This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2002. Short title.
2. In article 124 of the Constitution, in clause (1), the following proviso shall be Amendment
§ added at the end, namely:— of article 124,

“Provided that one-third of such Judges shall be appointed from amongst persons
belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes”.
3. In article 216 of the Constitution, the following proviso shall be added at the end, Amendment
namely:— of article 216,
10 “Provided that one-third of such Judges shall be appointed from amongst persons
belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes”.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes have been considered as the weakest s
of the society for ages. They have been ill treated, insulted and ignored.

Many steps taken by the Government to improve their standard of living have
some results. Provision has been made for reservation in their favour in Government.
and also in educational institutions. However, their representation is limited. D
have been made from several quarters for reservation in favour of Scheduled Castes
Scheduled Tribes in judiciary also. As such it is proposed to amend the Constitution
view to making provision for reservation in their favour in Supreme Court and in

Courts.

New DELHI;
March 14, 2002


ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

* * * * * * *

124. (1) There shall be a Supreme Court of India consisting of a Chief Justice of India
and, until Parliament by law prescribes a large number, of not more than seven other Judges.

* * * * * * *

216. Every High Court shall consist of a Chief Justice and such other Judges as the
President may from time to time deem it necessary to appoint.

* * * * * * *

Establishment
and Constitu-
tion of
Supreme
Court.

Constitution
of High
Courts.


A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Kodikunnil Suresh, M.P.) 1

MGIP(PLU)MRND—5843LS—21.03.2002.