As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

9 JUL 2004

Bill No. 29 of 2004

THE ABOLITION OF CHILD LABOUR IN HAZARDOUS
EMPLOYMENT BILL, 2004
By
‘Suri Bacut Sich Rawat, M.P.
A
BILL

to provide for the abolition of child labour in hazardous employment and for matters
connected therewith.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1. (J) This Act may be called the Abolition of Child Labour in Hazardous Employment — Short title,
Act, 2004. extent and

commencement.
(2) Itextends to the whole of India.
(3) Itshall come into force immediately.



Definitions.

Abolition of
child Labour
in hazardous
employment.

Punishment.

Punishment
in case of not
registering
cases,

Publication
of lists of
hazardous
employments,

‘Act to be in
addition to,
and not in
derogation of
any other
law.

Power to
make
rules.

2

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —

(a) appropriate Government’ means the Central Government or a State Government
as the case may be;

(b) ‘child’ means 3 person who has not completed his fifteenth year of age;

(c) ‘employer’ means a person who engages a child in a hazardous job or
employment or who has the ultimate control over the affairs of an establishment where
work, hazardous in nature, is carried out;

(d) hazardous employment’ means an employment or a job or occupation in an
enterprise or an establishment or any place where the worker is exposed to hazards to
life or such exposure which results in accident, chronic diseases, grievous hurt,
depravity or degeneration of life including immoral or criminal acts and includes any
other such establishment as specified in the Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation)
Act, 1986.

3. Child labour in any form in a hazardous employment is hereby abolished.

4. Whoever engages a child in any hazardous employment shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years or with fine which shall not be
less than fifty thousand rupees :

Provided that if'a child is engaged—
(i) in jobs involving any moral turpitude; or
jobs having direct impact on the morality of the child; or

in begging:
Provided further that iff girl child is engaged in flesh trade:

such employer shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
ten years and with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to
two lakh rupees in case of an employer in flesh trade.

5. If any police officer responsible for registering cases for violation of provisions of
this Act, refuses to register a case or otherwise aids or abgts the commission of an offence
under this Act, he shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
three years and with fine which shall not be less than twenty-five thousand rupees.

6. The appropriate Government shall piblish a list of hazardous employments within
its jurisdiction within six months of the coming into force of the Abolition of Child Labour
Hazardous Employment Act, 2004.

7. The provisions of this Act, or the rules made thereunder shall be in addition to, and
not in derogation of any other law for the time being in force or any rules, order or any
instructions issued thereunder, enacted for the prohibition and regulation of child labour.

8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.

(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive


3

sessions, and if, before the expiry of this session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect as the case may be; so, however, that any such
‘modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Article 24 of the Constitution prohibits the employment of children below 14 years of
‘age in any factory or mine or in any other hazardous employment. Every child has a right
against exploitation. The very fact that the child is kept away from school and is made to
work for earning bread itself speaks that the child is being exploited. In a welfare State like
‘ours, it is the duty of the Government to provide education to the children and ensure that
they are not exploited in any manner,

‘The fact that a high percentage of our population continues to live below the poverty
line explains the inevitability of huge work force comprising of children. The children are sent
to work by the parents for earning the livelihood. In most of the cases the children are forced
to work in jobs and employment which are hazardous in nature, including those involving
moral turpitude and sexual abuse. Despite the constitutional provisions prohibiting
employment of children in hazardous jobs, millions of children continue to work in fireworks
and match factories, glass and bangle factories and carpet factories and mines, etc.

It is a matter of grave concern that children are forced into begging by their parents,
guardians, gang leaders and others. Children are engaged in immoral and illegal activities.
Several children are engaged as carriers of drugs by smugglers and others. Reports of minor
girls finding their way into flesh trade are rampant.

An effort was made in the year 1986 to prohibit and regulate employment of children in
hazardous jobs. However, ‘hazardous employment’ has not been defined till date. An attempt
has been made to define hazardous employment as an employment which is hazardous not
only physical in nature but also a threat to moral character and even life of children.

The 1986 Act has failed to provide any deterrent punishment for employment of
children in hazardous jobs and as such the number of child workers in various hazardous
jobs has continued to increase during the last ten years. The definition of what is called
‘hazardous-job’ is to be provided, The recently enacted Constitution (86th Amendment) Act,
2002 inserted, inter alia, a new article 214 in the Chapter on Fundamental Rights with a view
to providing that the State shall provide free and compulsory education to all children of the
age of six to fourteen years in such manner as the State may by law, determine. However, in
order to ensure proper implementation of this laudable Statute, it is necessary to free the
children from the clutches of bonded and hazardous employment,

Therefore, it is proposed to make stringent provisions not only for employment of
children in hazardous jobs but also in illegal and immoral activities.

Hence this Bill.

New Deni; BACHI SINGH RAWAT
June 21,2004.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of this Bill. Since the matters for which the rules will be made are matters of
detail only, the delegation of legislative powers is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the abolition of child labour in hazardous employment and for
matters connected therewith,

(Shri Bachi Singh Rawat, M.P.)

MGIPMRND—82S1S—01.07.2004.