                                                            Bill No. 29 of 2023
THE MAHATMA GANDHI NATIONAL RURAL EMPLOYMENT
GUARANTEE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023
By
ADV. DEAN KURIAKOSE, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment
Guarantee Act, 2005.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of
India as follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
Employment Guarantee (Amendment) Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government,
may by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title
and
commencement.
 AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In section 22 of the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment
Guarantee Act, 2005 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),–
(a) in sub-section (1), the following provisos shall be inserted,
namely:–
Provided that the Central Government shall provide the funds to States
in advance to meet the estimated cost under sub-section (1), to ensure
that payment of wages to every unskilled, skilled and semi-skilled worker
is made within five days of completion of work:
Provided further that if the Central Government fails to release funds
for three months due to any reason, the State Government shall be eligible
for a penalty of three per cent of amount outstanding per month:
Provided also that the funds allocated by the Central Government to
the scheme shall be calculated keeping in view the prevailing inflation
rates, aspirations of the people and projected demand for work.
3. After section 22 of the principal Act, the following section shall be
inserted, namely:–
“22A. The State Government shall ensure that,–
(a)  it has sufficient funds for payment of wages to skilled and
semi-skilled and cost of unemployment allowances for at least one month
based on projected number of workers for ensuing month;
(b) the payment of wages to skilled and semi-skilled are made
within five days of the completion of the work;
(c) if any worker files a complaint regarding non-payment of wages
with the Programme Officer, the complaint shall be settled and wages
paid, if any, within a period of fifteen days:
Provided that if the Programme Officer fails to settle the complaint,
the District Programme Coordinator shall settle the case and wages shall
be paid within a period of ten days from the expiry of fifteen days allotted
to the Programme Officer.”.
Amendment of
section 22.
Insertion of new
section 22A.
State
Government
to ensure
payment of
wages.
5
10
15
20
25
42 of 2005

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Mahatma Gandhi Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005
(MGNREGA) is a seminal legislation that has been designed to improve
the situation of rural poor. Not only it acts as a poverty alleviation measure,
but it also improves the spending capacity of the rural population. Various
studies have shown that it has contributed to a healthy demand pull
inflation rate, which has improved the economic health of the country. The
transfer of cash in lieu of self-selected work is correlated with improvement
in social indicators while boosting the dignity of the rural worker.
      There has been many international studies that prove the efficacy of the
programme. It has been a corner stone that improved the lives of rural poor as
the country navigated many challenges. During those times, for instance during
the COVID induced slowdown, the rural poor depended upon the work
guaranteed through MGNREGA to sustain themselves. However, there has
been no proportionate increase in funds allocated in tune with the demand of
work. Also, many States have been complaining about the centre not releasing
funds due to them on time. Such a situation has arisen because there if no
legal compulsion forced upon the Central Government to do so. If the act is
amended to ensure that such provisions are added, it leads to a situation where
the issue is depoliticised and the centre will have no option but release the
amount due in time so that the ordinary worker is not denied timely payment
of his hard labour.
      The bill also seeks to address this moral issue of the State reneging on its
duty of paying the wages on time to the citizen who take up work under
MGNREGA. It is necessary to alleviate rural poverty and also keep up the
trust that a prestigious Central Government scheme like MGNREGA enjoys.
This has to be legally ensured by the Parliament.
NEW DELHI;                                         DEAN KURIAKOSE
January 16, 2023.
3

4
ANNEXURE
MAHA TMA GANDHI NA TIONAL RURAL EMPLOYMENT
GUARANTEE ACT, 2005
* * * * *
22.(1) Subject to the rules as may be made by the Central Government in
this behalf, the Central Government shall meet the cost of the following,
namely:—
(a) the amount required for payment of wages for unskilled manual
work under the Scheme;
(b) up to three-fourths of the material cost of the Scheme including
payment of wages to skilled and semi-skilled workers subject to the
provisions of Schedule II;
(c) such percentage of the total cost of the Scheme as may be
determined by the Central Government towards the administrative
expenses, which may include the salary and allowances of the Programme
Officers and his supporting staff, the administrative expenses of the Central
Council, facilities to be provided under Schedule II and such other item
as may be decided by the Central Government.
(2) The State Government shall meet the cost of the following,
namely:—
(a) the cost of unemployment allowance payable under the Scheme;
(b) one-fourth of the material cost of the Scheme including payment
of wages to skilled and semi-skilled workers subject to the provisions of
Schedule II;
(c) the administrative expenses of the State Council.
* * * * *
Funding
Pattern.

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
further to amend the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment
Guarantee Act, 2005.
————
(Adv. Dean Kuriakose, M.P .)