1
THE FREE AND COMPULSORY EDUCATION BILL, 2009
By
SHRI J.P. AGARWAL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for free and compulsory education to all children upto intermediate level.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Free and Compulsory Education  Act, 2009.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by
notification in the official Gazette appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, "appropriate Government" means
in the case of a State, the Government of that State and in other cases, the Central Government.
3. The appropriate Government, under the provisions of this Act, shall provide free
and compulsory education to every student upto the intermediate level.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
Bill No. 29 of  2009
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Free and
compulsory
education.
5

2
Explanation:—For the purpose of this section, "free education" includes:—
(a) all fees including admission and tuition fee;
(b) books, note books and stationery materials;
(c) free hostel facility, wherever necessary; and
(d) scholarships in such cases, as may be prescribed.
4. The appropriate Government shall establish at least one school in every area
having a population of one thousand people.
5. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force regulating any of the subject matters dealt with in this Act.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) (2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of any thing previously done under that rule.
Establishment
of  one school
for a
population of
one thousand.
Provisions of
the Act not to
be in deroga-
tion of any
other law for
the time being
in force.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Article 45 of the Constitution provides that it is the responsibility of the State to
provide free and compulsory education to all children until they complete the age of fourteen
years. Although, Government has taken many steps in this regard but they are inadequate.
We have not been able to provide education to all children even after sixty-two years of
independence. Our education system is very expensive and all citizens cannot afford it. Poor
parents with meagre incomes are unable to send their children to school.
Therefore, it is necessary to provide textbooks, scholarships, hostel facilities, etc. to
the poor students so that their parents are encouraged to send them to school. Therefore, it
is necessary to provide for free and compulsory education upto higher secondary level and
for scholarships to meritorious students.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; J.P. AGARW AL
June 17, 2009.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for free and compulsory education to all children upto
higher secondary level. Clause 5 provides that the appropriate Government shall establish
one school each for a population of one thousand. The exact number of schools required for
this purpose is not known. The expenditure in respect of the schools being set up in the
States will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Funds of respective States. However,
some aid may have to be provided by the  Central Government in this regard. The expenditure
to be incurred in respect of the schools in Union territories will be incurred from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees
fifteen crore is likely to be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty five crore is also likely to be
involved.
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of  this Bill. Since, the rules will relate to matters of  detail only, the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for free and compulsory education to all children upto intermediate level.
————
(Shri J.P. Agarwal, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2318LS(S5)—26.06.2009.