AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
Bill No. 29 of  2025 
THE ELECTRICITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2025 
BY 
SHRI HANUMAN BENIWAL, M.P. 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Electricity Act, 2003. 
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-Sixth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:- 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Electricity (Amendment) Act, 2025.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Short title and 
commencement. 

 
-2- 
 
2. After section 126 of the Electricity Act, 2003, the following section 
shall be inserted, namely:- 
“ 126A. Notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, 
decree or order of any Court or any law for the time being in force, 
any consumer supplied with electricity for his domestic or agricultural 
use, as the case may be, who is aggrieved by the assessment made by 
the assessing officer in cases relating to Vigilance Checking Report 
(VCR) or audit under section 126, may file a complaint before the 
concerned consumer forums under the provisions of the Consumer 
Protection Act, 2019 in such manner as may be prescribed.". 
 
Insertion of new 
section 126A.  
 
Rights of consumer 
to file complaints 
before Consumer 
Forums in cases 
relating to Vigilance 
Checking Report and 
audit report by the 
assessing Officer. 
  
 

 
 
 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 
 
 Section 126 of the Electricity Act, 2003 empowers the officials of the Power 
Companies to inspect the premises of the consumer and make provisional assessment of 
electricity charges against the consumer if unauthorized use of electricity is noticed.After 
determining the amount against the consumer by the officer or engineer of the power 
companies, the final assessment order of electricity charge is made after giving notice to 
the consumer regarding depositing the amount. 
 Against the said final assessment order passed under section 126, there are 
provisions to appeal before the appellate authority under section 127 and the order passed 
by the appellate authority is final and no appeal lie against it. 
 In practice, many complaints are being received about the misuse of the above 
authority given to the officers of the power companies. In order to increase the revenue 
income of the Power Companies, officers, employees and engineers wrongly and 
illegitimately inspect and pass assessment orders arbitrarily and they misuse their powers 
to increase the income of the companies and to harass the consumers. There is also 
complaint from the consumers that the engineers and employees of the companies 
demand illegitimate amount from them. On not paying the said amount, they also make 
false inquiry report and fix the outstanding amount in lakhs of rupees and pressurize 
lodging the police case or to disconnect the power connection. 
 Under  section 126, where the power to inspect and determine the amount has 
been given to the junior officers, junior engineers and assistant engineers, etc. of the 
power companies, the appeal against their order lies with the  the appellate authority 
under section 127 which are also heard by the senior officers of the same power 
companies. Both the officers are employees of the same power companies and they get 
their salary from the power companies and of course their intention and motive is 
inclined more towards the interests and benefits of the power companies than the 
consumers. It is natural for the said appellate authority to protect and justify the 
proceedings of the officers subordinate to it. In such a situation, the consumer aggrieved 
by the subordinate officers cannot justice from the higher appellate authorities. Justice, 
therefore,  cannot be expected from such higher officials. 
 
 

-2- 
 Provisions of section 126 and 127 of the Electricity Act, 2003 are also completely 
contrary to the principles of natural justice. Adjudication of the proceedings of the 
subordinate officers of the electricity company by other officers of the same company is 
completely contrary to the well established legal principle that no person can be the judge 
of his own case. 
 It is necessary, according to law, to test the validity and correctness of the powers 
of the administrative officers under judicial proceedings, but according to the above 
provisions of the Electricity Act, 2003, the doors of the courts have been closed in 
relation to the scrutiny or examination of the said powers conferred on the administrative 
officers which is very unfortunate situation for the democratic system. 
 Under section 145 of the Electricity Act, the jurisdiction of the Civil Court has 
been barred in relation to the action taken by the Assessing Officer under section 126 and 
the Appellate Authority under section 127.  
 Although Consumer Protection Act, 2003 is applicable in respect of other disputes 
between consumers and Power Companies under the Electricity Act, however  according 
to the judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court in UP Power Corporation Vs. Anis Ahmed 
dated 01.07.2013, consumer’s right to take action under the Consumer Protection Act 
against assessment orders under section 126 and 127 has been exhausted. In such a 
situation, the aggrieved, helpless consumer has no way to get justice from the power 
companies, which  tantamount to violation of the fundamental rights provided under the 
constitution. 
  Therefore, this is necessary to bring amendment in Electricity Act, 2003 so that any 
consumer who is dissatisfied with the proceedings under section 126 can approach the 
Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission under the Consumer Protection Act, 2019 . 
 
 Hence this Bill. 
 
New Delhi;                                                                             HANUMAN BENIWAL 
 
   February 19, 2025.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
———— 
 
 
A 
 
 
 
 
BILL 
 
 
 
further to amend the Electricity Act, 2003. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
——— 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Shri Hanuman Beniwal, M.P.) 