Bill No. 29 of  2022
THE  CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED TRIBES) ORDER
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
 DR. DNV SENTHIL KUMAR S., M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic
of India as follows:–
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order
(Amendment) Act, 2022.
2.  In the Schedule to the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950,
in Part XIV.— Tamil Nadu, for entry 18, the following entry shall be
substituted, namely:–
“18. Kuruma, Kuruman, Kurumans, Kurumba, Kuruman
Goundar, Kurumban and Kurumbar.”.
5
Short title.
Amendment
of   the
Schedule.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Tribal communities of this country have undergone many sufferings
due to historical reasons like socio-economic exploitation, deprivation,
isolation, inequalities and discrimination which pushed them backward and
vulnerable. Citing historical injustice, our forefathers of the Constitution
incorporated several provisions which aspired to promote education and
economic interest of weaker sections particularly Scheduled Castes or
Scheduled Tribes.
Article 366 (25) of the Constitution refers to Scheduled Tribes (STs)
as those communities who are scheduled with article 342 of the Constitution.
To carry out social justice measures for the tribal communities the list for
Scheduled Tribe was declared by the President through initial public
notification. Many communities are demanding to be included in Scheduled
Tribe list which mainly falls in three categories such as (i) new entry, (ii) sub-
tribes/sections, synonyms, and (iii) phonetic variations. The demands of
“Kurumans synonyms” in State of Tamil Nadu also has characteristics of
phonetic variation where the issue is pending for many decades. At present in
the Schedule to the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950, in Part
XIV .—Tamil Nadu, for entry 18 which mentions a tribe name “Kurumans”.
The Director, Tribal Research Centre, Ooty was entrusted with the task of
taking up the ethnological study on the communities. The study reveals that
on the basis of social structure, clan organization and the cycle rituals, all
these names like Kurumba, Kurumbar and Kurumans are one and the same
community. The study also substantiates that with ‘the present study of
Anthropological conclusions and the observations of earlier writers like
Thurston, A. Aiyappan, K.S.Singh, etc., discloses the same. It further reveals
that the communities like Kuruma, Kuruman, Kurumba, Kurumban, Kurumbar
etc. are identical to each other and these names are synonym names to the
community of KURUMANS and the same are eligible to get Scheduled Tribes
status under the name KURUMANS. As per recent ethnographic study on
Kurumans by Dr. K M Metry (Head of Department of Tribal at Kannada
University, Hampi) where he says that even if Kurumans tribe is called, spelled,
pronounced by different synonym names, according to the places, languages,
pronunciation and it denotes Kurumans tribal shepherd community and its
synonyms names. The illiteracy and ignorance prevailed among the tribal
people where they mentioned their tribe’s name in the incorrect spelling,
their tribe claim should not be denied because of simple correction in the
spelling mistake.
The report of the Advisory Committee on the Revision of the Lists of
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (popularly known as Lokhur
Committee Report) have advised that where a caste or a tribe is mentioned in
the lists by its generic name, it should be deemed to include all its synonyms,
phonetic variations, sub-castes or sub-tribes, as the case may be. Here
Kurumans is a generic name and it should include its entire synonyms name.
2

The Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe Order Amendment Bill 2002 which
was referred to the Standing Committee on Labour and Welfare , where in its
report opined that “ The Committee are of the opinion that if a community
have the similar characteristics, their claims should not be rejected on the
flimsy grounds like involving correction in the spelling of certain tribe”. Based
on the Tribal Research Centre, Ooty director’s report the State
Government had sent recommendation to the Union Government for  inclusion
of  KURUMANS synonyms names in  the S.T. List  vide TN. Govt  Letter
No.  13194/CV 1/2007-22 dated 19.7.2014. Moreover in V . Manickam vs
Union of India (dated 23.01.2017) where hon’ble Madras High Court
divisional bench directed the Union Government to consider the matter
expeditiously for an independent analysis that can be made on the basis of
the materials already supplied for the inclusion of Kurumans synonyms name.
In order to render the social justice and affirmative action without further
loss of time, this Bill will be much needed corrective measures.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend  the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes)
Orders, 1950 with a view to include ‘’Kuruma, Kuruman, Kurumba, Kuruman
Goundar, Kurumban, and Kurumbar as synonyms of Kurumans tribes in the
list of Scheduled Tribes of the State of Tamil Nadu.
      NEW DELHI;       Dr.  DNV SENTHIL KUMAR S.
 22 December, 2021.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
The Bill seeks to include Kuruma, Kuruman, Kurumba, Kuruman
Goundar, Kurumban and Kurumbar as the synonym name of Kurumans to
the list of Scheduled Tribes with respect to the State of Tamil Nadu by way
of amending the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950. The Bill, if
enacted, would involve recurring and non-recurring expenditure on account
of the benefits to be given under the schemes and programmes of the
Government meant for social, educational and economic development of
the Scheduled Tribes. At this stage, it is not possible to mention the exact
amount which may be incurred on this account. However, it is estimated
that a sum of approximately rupees thirty-five crore is likely to be involved
as a recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees seventy crore is also likely
to be involved.
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED TRIBES) ORDER, 1950.
C.O. 22
          * * * * *       *
(P ART III— Rules and Orders under the Constitution)
          * * * * *      *
PART XIV . — Tamil Nadu
          * * * * *      *
18.   Kurumans
          * * * * *       *
5

LOK SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950
(Dr. DNV Senthil Kumar S., M.P .)