As mmropucen फ Lox SABHA

20 APR am

Bill No. 29 of 2000
—_——

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
Br
‘Suet RASHTRAPAL PRAVINCHANDRA ‘Sosapnat, MP.
A
BEL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as

1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2000.
2. In article 16 of the Constitution, clause (4A) shall be omitted.

| crn the Scheduled Tribes which, i the opinion ofthe States, are not अप previo
p Tepreseated in the services under the State. orp
services


Insertion of
new article
298.

Reservation
for the
Scheduled
Castes and the
Scheduled
Tribes in all
educational
institutions.

2

(2) A person belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, as the
case may be, and who has been promoted to any post in connection with the affairs of
the State shall be entitled to count his seniority in that post from the date of such
promotion.

(3) Nothing in this Constitution shall prevent the State from making any provision
in favour of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, which prescribes for
relaxation in qualifications or qualifying marks in any examination or lowering the
standards of evaluation for reservation in matters of recruitment or promotion to any
class or classes of posts or services in connection with the affairs of the State.

(4) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the State may by law provide
reservation to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in private sector, subject
to such conditions as may be specified in the law made in this regard.

(5) Nothing in this Constitution shall prohibit the State from reserving more than
fifty percent. of the posts or vacancies in a recruitment year and from conducting
special recruitment drive in order to fill up backlog posts or vacancies for appointment
or promotion or appointment by transfer or upgradation in a service in an establishment
under the State.

(6) Nothing in this Constitution shall prevent the State from making provision
for clubbing the posts carrying equal scale of pay, duties or responsibility and to
provide reservation in favour of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.

(7) The provisions of this article shall have effect notwithstanding anything
contained in any judgement or decree or order or direction of a Court of Law or

Tribunal or Authority having judicial powers to the contrary".

4. After article 29 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely,—

"29A. (1) There shall be reservation in favour of the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes in all educational institutions in all courses of study including
advanced courses of study and professional courses in all categories or disciplines,
subject to any law that may be made specifying the qualifications and eligibility
norms including the percentage of reservation or relaxation to ensure filling up of all
seats.

(2) The provisions of the article shall have effect notwithstanding anything
contained in any judgement or decree or order or direction of any Court of Law or
Tribunal or Authority having judicial powers to the contrary.”.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Preamble of the Constitution assures every citizen equality of status and of
opportunity and secures justice—social and economic which has been declared in S.R.
Bommai's case as basic structure of the Constitution,

Article 46 enjoins that the State shall promote with special care the educational and
economic interests of the weaker sections of the people and, in particular, of the Scheduled
Castes and Scheduled Tribes, and shall protect them from social injustice.

Article 38 directs that the State to secure social order for promotion of the Welfare of
the people by securing and protecting an effective social order in which social, economic
and political justice shall inform all the institutions of national life and that the State, in
Particular, shall strive to minimise the inequalities in income and endeavour to eliminate
inequalities in status, facilities and opportunities among individuals as well as groups of
the people.

Article 51-A imposes fundamental duty on every citizen to strive towards excellence
in all spheres of individual and collective activity so that the nation constantly rises to
higher levels of endeavour and achievement.

‘The persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes are the most
disadvantaged and deprived weaker sections of the society. It is the duty of the State to take
; to minimise the inequalities in status, facilities and opportunities by effectively
implementing the directives in the Constitution to enable them to reap social and economic
justice, sécure equality of opportunity and of status and to enjoy dignity.

To increase the chances/avenues of appointmen/promotion in posts and services
under the State and in Public Sector to the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes it is necessary
to make an express provision in the Constitution itself,

Even after 50 years since Constitution came into force, the Scheduled Castes/
Scheduled Tribes did not have proper representation for variegated reasons in various posts
or classes of post or appointments in connection with the affairs of the State

Due to social, educational and economic backwardness and other disadvantages and
‘disabilities, the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes are not able to compete on
equal merit with the general category candidates.

The recent judgement of the Supreme Court in Indira Sawheny versus Union of India
1992 Supplement 3 SCC 217, Dr. Preeti Srivastava versus State of Madhya Pradesh 1999, 7
(page 120), and Ajit Singh and Others (II) versus State of Punjab IA 1-3 in Civil Appeal
lo. 3782-94 of 1999 etc. dated September 16, 1999 caused hindrance to the Government

effectively implementing the policy of reservation in imparting of education in all
ourses of study, in particular, at the stages of higher learning, speci: i
nical, scientific courses, etc.

Therefore, with a view to give effect to the constitutional objectives referred to
it has become a necessity to suitably amend the Constitution in order to implement
reservation policy effectively.

RASHTRAPAL PRAVINCHANDRA SOMABHAI


a=

=

eae

* * * . .

Equality of 16(4A) "Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provisions for
opportuaity reservation in matters of promotign to amy class or classes of posts in services under the
कि mancs of State in favour of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes which, in the opinion of
vewlcymeat, the States, are not adequatcly represented in the services under the State.”

* . . * *

* * * * *


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
= further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Rashtrapal Pravinchandra Somabhai, M.P)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—3260LS—23-02-2000.