1
Short title and
commencement.
THE PLASTIC RECYCLING BILL, 2017
By
SHRI AJAY MISRA 'TENI', M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the segregation and recycling of plastic item; use of re-cyclable plastic
in recycle units and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Y ear of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Plastic Recycling Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 29 of  2017
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government.
(b) "large manufacturing facility" means any manufacturing facility with an
investment of more than rupees thirty crores;
(c) "municipal authority" means Municipal Corporation, Municipality, Nagar
Palika, Nagar Nigam, Nagar Panchayat, Municipal Council including Notified Area
Committee (NAC) or any other local body constituted under the relevant statutes and
entrusted with the responsibility of management and handling of municipal solid waste;
(d) "plastic" means any material which contains artificial resins (polymers)
extracted from petroleum products and includes plastic monomer prepared with
ammonia, chlorine, plutons, carbon, hydrogen, oxygen and sulpher molecules.
(e) "plastic generating unit" means any entity, household or a large manufacturing
facility where plastic waste, which is recyclable, is generated;
(f) "plastic item" means any item or product which is made of plastic and used for
storing food, liquid or any consumable or such other product as the Central Government
may, by notification in Official Gazette, specify;
(g) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(h) "recycle unit" means a unit where recyclable plastic items are treated using
different techniques to produce re-usable plastic items or any form of energy; and
(i) "segregation" means separation of plastic items into re-cyclable and non-
re-cyclable plastic items.
3. The appropriate Government shall, in consultation with the Central Pollution Control
Board prescribe the compliance criteria and procedure for recycling of plastic items in such
manner as may be prescribed.
4. It shall be the duty of the municipal authority to—
(a) ensure collection of segregated plastic items from the plastic generating
units; and
(b) ensure that the segregated plastic items collected and transported are not
mixed with any other waste or any material, to the extent the mixing would hamper its
re-use, re-cycle, further treatment or its use in re-cycle unit.
5. Whoever violates the provisions of this Act shall be punished with imprisonment
for a term which may extend up to six months and fine which may extend up to fifty thousand
rupees.
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite sums to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
7. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law, for the time being in force.
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive  sessions, and if, before the
Definitions.
Compliance
criteria and
procedure for
recycling of
plastic items.
Duty of the
municipal
authority.
Penalty.
Central
Government
to provide
requisite sums.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Each and every form of plastic item is hazardous to our environment. At present,
accelerated production of plastic items and slow pace of their recycling is hazardous to our
environment and human beings as well. Plastic items are being produced and used
indiscriminately. While the recycling process of used plastic is very slow and the burden of
waste plastic is constantly increasing on earth. At present, there is a large gap between the
ratio of production of new plastic items and the collection and recycling of waste plastic.
Therefore, the entire ecological system should be saved by ensuring management of
plastic waste and setting up of plastic waste recycling unit in each State. There is a need to
maintain environmental balance by slowing down the production of new plastic item and
acceleration of the pace of renewal of waste plastic.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; AJAY MISRA 'TENI'
January 1, 2017.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 6 of the Bill provides that Central Government shall provide funds to the State
Governments for carrying out the purposes of the Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring
expenditure of about three thousand crores per annum would be involved from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about two hundred crore is also likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the segregation and recycling of plastic item; use of re-cyclable plastic in
recycle units and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Ajay Misra 'Teni', M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4240LS(S3)—17-02-2017.