1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
By
SHRI GAURAV GOGOI, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2018.
2. In article 85 of the Constitution, in clause (I), the following proviso shall be added at
the end, namely:—
"Provided that the number of sittings of each House of Parliament in all sessions
in a calendar year shall not be less than one hundred and twenty days."
Bill No. 29 of  2018
Short title.
Amendment
of article 85.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Constitution has vested the power of the 'purse' in the hands of chosen
representatives of the people, thus sanctifying the principle of 'no taxation without
representation'. This accountability of the Government to citizens is implemented through
scrutiny of its work by the Parliament.
From the citizen's point of view, parliamentary oversight inquiries offer an avenue to
express views about the Government's management of public affairs. This direct citizen
testimony is a valuable way to 'humanize' national Governance.
There are several points of overlap between Parliament's two most crucial functions—
that of law making and oversight. Statutory lawmaking remains almost universally the preserve
of Parliament. While most countries across the globe have specified a calendar of sitting
days for their Parliament functioning, the makers of our Constitution left the power to the
decision-makers of the day.
The highest institution of a democratic set up is the Parliament. It represents the will of
the people and therefore the Parliament as an institution of accountability needs to be
strengthened for a parliamentary democracy to prosper. The Bill seeks to ensure a minimum
number of sitting days to ensure that there is Constitutional sanction and thus greater
accountability for the Parliament to convene for a specific period of time.
During the first two decades of Parliament, Lok Sabha met for an average of a little more
than one hundred twenty days a year. This has come down to approximately seventy days in
the last decade. To ensure that our Parliament functions in the spirit and resolve that it was
meant to, we need to have structural safeguards that strengthen the Parliament as an institution
and not let it remain solely at the bidding of the Executive.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; GAURA V  GOGOI
December 1, 2017.
2

Sessions of
Parliament,
prorogation
and
dissolution.
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * *
85. (1) The President shall from time to time summon each House of Parliament to meet
at such time and place as he thinks fit, but six months shall not intervene between its last
sitting in one session and the date appointed for its first sitting in the next session.
(2) The President from time to time—
(a) prorogue the Houses or either House;
(b) dissolve the House of People.
* * * *
3

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of  India.
————
(Shri Gaurav Gogoi, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—3660LS(S3)—01.02.2018.