As INTRODUCED IN LoK SURA ON 
J 8 - 3 8ii· 
IIUI No. I .f .", 
THE REPl<ESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE 
(AWlNDMENT) BILL, I rj,7 
A , 
DILL .. 
further to amend the Representation bf the People 'Act, 1"1. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Representation of the People Short 
(Amendment) Act, 1967. title. 
of 1951, S 2. In section 73 of the Representation of the People Act, 19151 Amend-
.! 
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) ,_ meat of aectlon T:'. 
(a) for the words, brackets, letter and figures "the datE' 
originally fixed for the completion of the election under 
clause (e) of section 30, the names of the members elected for 

Repeal 
and 
saving. 
the various constituencies by that date". the following shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"the results of the elections in all the constituencies 
[other than those in which the poll could not be taken for 
any reason on the date originally fixed under clause (d) of 5 
section 30 or for which the time for completion of the election 
has been extended under the provisions of section 153] have 
been declared by the returning officer under the provisions 
of section 53 Of, as the case may be, section 66, the names of 
the members elected for those constituencies"; 10 
(b) for clause (a) of the proviso, the following clause shall 
be substituted, namely:-
II (a) to preclude-
(i) the taking of the poll and the completion of the 
election in any Parliamentary or Assembly constituency IS 
or constituencies in which the poll could not be taken for 
any reason on the date originally fixed under clause (d) 
of section 36; or 
(ti) the completion of the election in any Parlia-
mentary or Aaaembly constituency or constituencies for .20 
which time has been extended under the provisions of 
seet19n 163; or". 
3· (1) The Representation of the People (Amendment) Ordinance, 2 of 1967. 
196'7, is hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repe8I, anything done or any action ~.s 
taken under the prinCipal Act as amended by the said Ordinance 
shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act 
8' amended by thi8 Act as if this Act had come into torce on the 28th 
day of February, 188'1. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
A lame duck session of Parliament with the old Lok Sabha sum-
moned on the 13th or March, 1967 following the precedents of 1957 
and 1962 was considered an anachronism in several quarters in view 
• of the fact that declaration of results of elections from practically 
all the parliamentary constituencies barring a very few for the pur-
pose of constituting the new Lok Sabha had already been made. It 
was felt that it wpuld be more appropriate to hold a session of Parlia-
ment with the new Lok Sabha in place of the lame duck session. As 
Parliament was not in session and immedfateaction was called for. 
the President promulgated on the 28th February, 1967 the Represen-
tation of the People (Amendment) Ordinance, 1967 to amend suit-
ably section 73 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, thus 
paving the way for the Election Commission for the immediate issue 
of the due constitution notification under the said section as so 
amended. 
The Bill seeks to replace the Ordinance. 
Nr:w DI:LIu; P. GOVINDA MENON. 
The 14th March, 1967. '. ., . 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE REPusENTATION OF THE PEOPLE AcT, 1951 
(43 or 1951) 
• • • • • 
Publica- 73. Where a general election is held for the pW'pose of conautut-
Hon. of ing a new House of the People or a new State Leplattve Assembly, 
~:~~l::l of there shan be uottfted by the Eleetioo CoDllJlitsion in the omelal 
elections Gazette, as soon as may be after the date originally fixed for the com_ 
to the pletion of the election under clause (e) of section 30, the names of 
House of the membera elected for the various conatttuencies by that date and 
the People upon the issue of such notiflcatton that House or Assembly shall tK> and the State deemed to be duly constituted: 
Legisla-
tive 
Assemb-
lie!!. 
Provided that the il8ue of such notification shall not be deemed-
(0) to preclude the completion of the election in any Parlia-
mentary or any Aaembly constituency or constituencies for 
which time has been extended under the provisions of section 
153; or 
(b) to affect the duration of the House of the People or the 
State Legislative Assembly, if any, functioning immediately be-
fore the 1 .. ..te of the Aid notifteatlon. 
• • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the RepresentatiOll of the People Act, 1951. 
(Shri P. GOfJinda Menon, 
Minin6r of LtaD.) 