am No. 2 of ."1 
THE INSURANCE (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1961 
( As INTRODUCID IN Lo1t SABRA 
ON 14TH FEBRUARY, Ig6I) 

Bill No, 2 of 1"1 
THE INSURANCE (AMENDMENT) BILL, l¢I 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SAIIHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Insurance Act, 1938. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twelfth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1961. SOOlt tide. 
4 of 1938. 2. After Part IV of the Insurance Act, 1938 (hereinafter referred InlCltion of 
S to as the principal Act), the following Part shall be inserted,· new Part. 
namely:-
• 
TO 
IS 
• 
20 
'PART IVA 
RE-INSURANCE 
lOlA. (1) Every insurer shall re-insure with Indian re-insur- Rc-insutancc 
ers such percentage of the sum assured on each policy as may wit~ Indian re-Insurers. 
be specified by the Central Government under sub-section (2). 
(2) For the purposes of !,ub-section (1), the Central Gov-
ernment may, by notification in the Official Gazette,-
(a) specify the percentage cf the sum assured on each 
policy to be re-insured and different percentages may be 
specified for different classes of insurance: 
Provided that no percentage so specified shall exceed 
thirty per cent. of the sum assured on such policy; and 
(b) also specify the proportions in which the said per-
centale shall be allocated among the Indian re-insurers. 

• 
AdVilOfY 
Committcc. 
(3) No notification under sub-section (2) shall be issued 
except after consultation with the Advisory Committee consti-
tuted under section 101B. 
(4) Every notification issued under this section shall be 
laid before each House of Parliament, as soon as may be, after 5 
it is made. 
(5) For ~he removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that 
nothing in sub-section (1) shall be construed as preventing an 
insurer from re-insuring with any Indian re-insurer or other 
insurer the entire sum assured on any policy or any portion 10 
thereof in excess of the percentage specified under sub-section 
(2). 
(6) In this section,-
(i) "policy"· means a policy issued or renewed on or 
after the 1st day of April, 1961, in respect of general insur- J S 
ance business transacted in India and does not include a 
re-insurance policy; and 
(ii) "Indian re-insu.rer" means an insurer specified in 
sub-clause (b) of clause (9) of section 2 who carries on 
exclusively re-insurance business and is approved in this 20 
behalf by the Central Government. 
1018, (1) The Central Government shall, for the purposes 
of section lOlA, constitute an Advisory Committee cODSistin~ 0" 
not more than five persons havin, special knowled,e and ex-
perience of the business of insurance, 
(2) The tenn of office of, and the allowances payable to, 
members of the Advisory Committee, the procedure to be f.,l-
lowed by, and the quorum necessary for the transaction of 
business of, the Committee and the manner of filling casual 
vacancies therein shall be such as may be prescribed.' 
3. In section 114 of the principal Act,-
(i) in sub-section (2), after clause (1), the following clause 
shall be inserted, namely:-
"(ll) the term of office of, and the allowances payable 
30 
to, members of the Advisory Committee constituted under 3S 
section 10tB, the procedure to be followed by, and the 
quorum necessary for the transaction of business of, the-
Committee and the manner of filling casual vacancies there-
in;"; 

3 
(ii) for sub-aection (3), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
•• (3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid 
as soon as may be after ~t is made, before each House of 
Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two 
successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the session. 
in which it is so laid or the session immediately followin.g, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
10 both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the 
rule shall, thereafter, Pave effect only in such modified fo~, 
or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any 
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice 
to th~ validity of anything previously done under that l'\11~:·. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Re-insurance is an essential part of general insurance business. 
At present insurance companies operating in India are dependent 
on companies outside India for a very large part of their require-
ments in this connection and more often than not enter into dis-
advantageous arrangements. Moreover re-insurance with companies 
outside India results in the loss of foreign exchange. The present 
Bill is intended to foster the growth of Indian re-insurance compa-
nies and also to save foreign exchange. 
2. The Bill seeks to provide that every insurance company 
operating in India must re-insure a certain percentage of its business 
with Indian re-insurance companies approved in this behalf by the 
Central Government. Power is being conferred on the Central 
Government to fix this percentage but this power will be exercise-
able only after consultation with the Advisory Committee constitut-
ed of five persons having specialised knowledge and experience in 
insurance business. Power is also being conferred on the Central 
Government to allocate the percentage so fixed amongst the a.pprov-
eel Indian re-insurance companies. 
NEW DELHI; MORARJI DESAI. 
TJt.e 3rd February, 1961. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUl4 
The proposed Jection 101B (1) sought to be inserteclby clause 2 of 
the Bill contemplates the constitution of an Advisory Committee 
consisting of not more than five persons. Travelling allowance and 
daiJy allowance will have to be paid to the members of the Com. 
mittee for purpcses of attending the meetings of the Committee. 
It is not possible to indicate the exact amoUnt of expenditure in-
volved but it is not expected to exceed Rs. 4,000, per year. 

MEMORANDUM R"lGARDING' DELEGATED· LEGISLA nON 
.. Clauae··3 am~ ~ 114 of the IDIUl'8De8.~t, 1838 10 .as·to 
enable the' Central Government to make rules regarding the terms 
of~ office of the members of the Advisory Committee to be constituted. 
under clause 2 of the Bill. 'the procedure of its meetings, the manner 
of Alling·casual .vacancies, the quorum necessary for a meetlrlg and 
a11owan~ payable to its members. All theae matters are matters 
of procedure .Ql" "tail . .. 
The delegation of power is thus of a normal character. 
• 
• 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRAtT nOM THII\ INSURANCI ACT, lln8 (4: OF 1938) 
• '" '" '" '" • 
114. • • • '" • • • • • • '" • 
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as lOOn as 
may be after it is made before the House of the People, while it is 
in session, f,or 8 total period of one month which may be comprised 
in one session or in two or more sessions, and if before the expiry 
of that period the House of the People makes any modification in 
the rule or directs that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, 
8S the case may be. 
'" '" '" '" '" '" 
• 
Pvwcr of 
Ceaml GoY-
Cl'RmaJl to 
make rules . 

,mn antr yrrs'!'t'UT'Ssn _ 
LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the InsUlance Act, 1938. 
The President has. in pursuance of clause (3) of aItlclc 117 of 
the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha the 
consideration of the Bill. 
• 
M. N. KAUL. 
Secretary. 
(Shri Morarji Desai, . 
.. \!Uris'er oj Fim",ce.) 
• 