• 
~: 1,.7j4/61,-
... . ~ . 
. ~ .~ 
THE GOA, DAMAN AND DIU (ADMINISTRATION) .. ,~. 
BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA 
ON 12TH MARCH, 1962) 

• 
Bill No. ! of t_ 
o. ( 
THE GOA, DAMAN AND DIU (ADMINISTRATION) 
BILL, 1962 
[As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA] 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the administration of the Union territory Qf Goa, 
Daman and Diu. and for matters connected therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
L (l) This Act may be called the Goa, Daman and Diu (Ad- S~rt title 
ministration) Act, 1962. =encemCC:~ 
S (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 5th day of 
March, 1962. 
2. In this' Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "Administrator" means the Administrator of Goa, Daman 
and Diu appointed by the President under article 239 of the 
10 Constitution; 
(b) "appointed day" means the twentieth day of December, 
1961j 
(c) "Goa, Daman and Diu" means the Union territory of Gal, 
Daman and Diu. 
. ... 
IS 3. (1) There shall be allotted two seats to the Union t.erritory of ::~~enr:be 
Goa, Daman and Diu in the House of the People. HOUle of me 
People. 
(2) In the Representation of the People Act. 1950,-
(a) in section 4, in sub-section (1). after the words Clto 
Dadra and Nagar Haveli", the words "to Goa, Daman and Diu" 
20 .shall be insertedj 

2 
(b) in the First Schedule,-
(i) after entry 22, the following entry shall be inserted, 
, namely:-
"23· Goa, Daman and Diu ............ 2"; 
(ii) entries 23 and 24 shall be re-numbered as entries 24 
and 25 respectively. 5 
(3) In the Representation of the People Act, 1951, in section 4, ·0 of 19SI • 
after the words "to Dadra and Nagar Haveli", the words "to Goa, 
Daman and Diu" shall be inserted. 
=-.~ 4. Without prejudice to the powers of the Central Government to 10 
in relat: appoint from time to time such officers and authorities as may he 
~~ necessary for the administration of Goa, Daman and Diu, all judges, 
Diu. magistrates and other officers and authorities who, immediately be-
fore the commencement of this Act, were exercising lawful function!i 
in t'lODDeetion with the administration of Goa, Daman and Diu or' 15 
any part thereof, shall, unless otherwise directed at any time by the 
Central Government in relation to any such judge, magistrate or 
other officer or authcrity, or until other provision is made by law, 
eontinue to exercise in connection with such administration their 
respective functions in the same manner and to the same extent as 20 
before such commencement with such altered designation, if any, as 
that Government may determine. 
Comima"CC 5. (1) All laws in force immediately before the appointed d.1V in of .. . 
.... ~ Goa, Daman and Diu or any part thereof shall continue to be in force 
.::: .pta- therein until amended or repealed by a competent Legislature or 25 
other competent authority. 
(2) For the purpose of facilitating the application of any such law 
in relation to the administration of Goa, Daman and Diu as a Union 
terri~ory and for the purpose of bringing the provisions of any such 
law into accord with the provisions of the Constitution, the Central 30 
Government may, within two years from the appointed day, by 
order, make such adaptations and modifications, whether by 
way of repeal or amendment, as may be necessary or expedient and 
'thereupon, every such law shall have effect subject' to the adaptations 
and modifications so made. 35 
Power to 6. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
extend en- Gazette, extend with such restrictions or modifications as it thinks 
~er,~~ fit, to Goa, Daman and Diu any enactment which is in forte in a State 
pi Diu. at the date of the notification. • 

:& of 1962. 
3 
7. As from such date as the Central Government may, by noti- &tenlif:l.ol 
fication in the Official Gazette, specify, the jurisdiction of the High ~ ~'fac:: 
Court at Bombay shall extend to Goa, Daman and Diu. bay ~ Courtto_ v .. 
DIDWS aad 
Diu. 
8. For the purpose of facilitating the application of any law in Power to 
S relation to Goa, Daman and Diu, any court or other authority may ;:~e 
construe any such law in such manner not affecting the substance, 
as may be necessary or proper to adapt it to the matter before the 
court or other authority. 
9. (1) All things done and all action taken (including any acts of Validation of 
10 executive authority, proceedings, decrees and sentences) in or with certain ac-
respect to Goa, Daman and Diu on or after the appointed day and :::= ~ 
before the commencement of this Act, by the Administrator or any ofticen for 
other officer, whether civil or military, or by any: other certain actI. 
person acting under the orders of the Administrator or such 
15 officer, which have been done or taken in good faith and in a reason-
able belief that they were necessary for the peace and good govern-
ment of Goa, Daman and Diu shall be as valid and operative as if 
they had been done or taken in accordance with law. 
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding whatsoever, whether civil 
20 or criminal, shall lie in any court of law against the Administrator 
or any other officer of Government, whether civil or military, or 
against any other person acting under the orders of the AdIninistrator 
or such other officer for, or on account of, or in ~espect of, anything 
done or any action taken in Goa, Daman and Diu or any part thereat 
25 on or after the appointed day and before the commencement of this 
Act which has been done or taken in good faith and in a reasonable 
belief that it was necessary for the peace and good government of 
Goa, Daman and Diu: 
Provided that if any such ~uit or other legal proceeding has been 
30 instituted before the commencement of this Act, it shall, on such 
commencement, abate. 
10. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of Power to re-
this Act 9r in connection with the administration of Goa, Daman and =ti:.~ 
Diu, the Central Government may, by order, make such further pro-
35 vision as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for removing 
the difficulty. 
(2) Any order under sub-section (1) may be made so as to be 
retrospective to any date not earlier than the appointed day. 
11. (1) The Goa, Daman and Diu (Administration) Ordinance'Repeal IJId 
40 1982, is hereby repealed. aVlDl. 

.. 
(2) NotwitMtaftding such repeal, anything done or any action 
taken. in exercise of any of the powers conferred by or under the Baid 
Ordinance shull be deemed to have been done or teken in exercise 
of the powers conferred by or under this Act. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND ,REASONS ,,'''',:;;., '>: . 
• I .• ~: I .:. I 
On 'the acquisition of the territories of Goa, Daman 'and Diu 'with 
effect from the 20th December, 1961, these 'territOries have, 'b1~ VtM.e 
of sub-clause (c) of clause (3) of 1Il1:icle 1 of t~ Cenftftutioni'lMan 
comprised within the territory of India from that date -ana ~ei1".-t'e 
being administered as a Union telritary by the President ,through 
an Administrator in accordance with article 239 of, the COnStit,ii~f~' 
2. It was necessary to take immediately eertain ~ 
measures in regard to the administration of Goa, Deman &Ad Diu~Jas 
for example, continuance of existing laws and provision·of indemaJty 
to the Administrator and his subordinates against· action' takan:by 
-them in good faith. These proposals have to be givenetfecfto b¥ II 
law of Parliament. As Parliament was 'not ih·session '8Jld M it 'was 
considered necessary to take immediate action, the ·Goa, ·Daman·\;and 
Diu (Administration) Ordinance, 1962 (No.2 of 1962.) was prQ~ulgat-
ed to provide for these administrative measures.' ,., 
3. The present Bill seeks to replace the Ordinance by a& Actt of 
Parliament. It seeks to make provisions relating to the appointment 
of officers, continuance of existing laws until amended or repealed, 
extension of enactments in force in a State to Goa, Daman and Diu 
and also to make provisions for indemnity to the Administrator and 
his officers against action taken by them in good faith. The Bill fur-
ther provides for the representation of the Union territory of Goa, 
Daman and Diu in the Lok Sabha and for the extension of the jurisdic-
tion of the High Court at Bombay to that Union territory. 
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
On the acquisition of the territories 01 Goa, Daman and Diu with • 
effect from the 20th December, 1961, these territories have, by virtue 
of sub-clause 4<:) of clause (3) of article 1 of the Constitution, been 
comprised within the territory of India from that date. The Bill pro-
vic;iing for the administration of the Union territory of Goa, lJaman 
and Diu seeks to make necessary provisions relating to the appoint-
ment of officers, the continuance of existing laws and their modi-
ftcation, the extension of Indian laws to Goa, Daman and Diu, ~tc. 
2. As a result of the reunion of Goa, Daman and Diu with India, 
the receipts and expenditure of the areas in question have been 
amalgamated with the Consolidated Fund of India. Estimates for 
the year 1961.&2 and 1962-63 have been prepared. It is expected that 
an expenditure of Rs. l' 58 crores would be incurred during the period 
20th December, 1961 to 31st March, 1962 and an expenditure of 
Rs. 5'28 crores would be incurred during the year 1962-63. Receipts 
have been estimated 18t Rs. l' 39 crores for the period 20th December, 
1961 to 31st March, 1962 and Rs. 5'01 crores for the year 1962-63. 
3. It has not been possible so far to ascertain the assets and liabi-
lities left by the Portuguese Administration. These are being work-
ed out. 

,. 
LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the administration of the Union territory of 
Goa, Daman and Diu and . for matters connected 
therewith. 
(Shri JafJ}(Jharlal Nehru, Minister oj External Affairs.) 