Short title.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008
By
SHRI C.K. CHANDRAPPAN, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2008.
2.  In the Eleventh Schedule to the Constitution, entries 27 to 29 shall be renumbered
as entries 28 to 30 and before entry 28 as so renumbered, the following entry shall be
inserted, namely:—
‘‘27. Maintenance and welfare of senior citizens, including the running of senior
citizens' homes and day care centres for senior citizens.’’.
T
O BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No.  2  of  2008.
5
Amendment
of the
Eleventh
Schedule.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Parliament has recently enacted a well intentioned legislation namely, ‘the
Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007’. The enactment provides
for entitlement of maintenance to a senior citizen including parent who is unable to maintain
himself from his own earning or out of the property owned by him against one or more of his
children not being a minor, and in the case of a childless senior citizen against his relatives
who would inherit his property. Failure in fulfilling this responsibility by the children or
relatives would attract punishment. Neglected parents have been given the right to get legal
remedy.
One of the glaring shortcomings in this enactment is that it would only benefit the
senior citizens who are rich enough to own property. For the poor, who own no property, the
enactment provides that the States may establish old age homes in a phased manner, at least
one such old age home in each district, to accommodate senior citizens who are indigent.
There is a large number of poverty stricken people in our society whose income is so
small that they are not in a position to take care of their own minimum needs. In such a
situation, it is not reasonable or realistic to expect that they would take care of their old
parents.
It would be proper if the Gram Panchayats are constitutionally empowered to take care
of the welfare of the senior citizens. If that is done, the Centre and State Governments would
be responsible to extend financial support to the scheme of building old age homes and to
provide sufficient infrastructure to meet this stupendous task.
The Bill seeks to provide that the task of maintenance and welfare of senior citizens
including running of ‘senior citizens homes’ and ‘day care centres’ for senior citizens be
handed over to Gram Panchayats.
It would provide an opportunity for senior citizens to live together, enjoy the facilities
for recreation, food and medical care at one place. It would help our society to be more
humane towards the senior citizens.
The Bill, if enacted, will go a long way to strengthen the institution of local self
Government and meet the aspirations of the people at village level.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI;
December 6, 2007 C.K. CHANDRAPPAN.
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA.
* * * * * * *
ELEVENTH  SCHEDULE
(Article 243G)
* * * * * * *
26. Social welfare, including welfare of the handicapped and mentally retarded.
27. Welfare of the weaker sections, and in particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes.
* * * * * * *
3

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri C.K. Chandrappan, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—155LS(S5)—06-02-2008.