1
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI RABINDRA KUMAR JENA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment)  Act,
2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as  Central Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different States.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 2 of  2016
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2.  In section 33 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, in sub-section (7),—
(i) in clause (a), for the words "from more than two Parliamentary constituencies",
the words "from more than one Parliamentary constituency" shall be substituted;
(ii) in clause (b), for the words "from more than two Assembly constituencies",
the words "from more than one Assembly constituency" shall be substituted;
(iii) in clause (c), for the words "from more than two Council constituencies",
the words "from more than one Council constituency" shall be substituted;
(iv) in clause (d), for the words "for  filling more than two such seats", the words
"for filling more than one such seat" shall be substituted;
(v) in clause ( e), for the words "from more than two such Parliamentary
constituencies", the words "from more than one such Parliamentary constituency",
shall be substituted;
(vi) in clause ( f), for the words "from more than two such Assembly
constituencies", the words "from more than one such Assembly constituency" shall
be substituted;
(vii) in clause ( g), for the words  "for  filling more than two such seats", the
words "for filling more than one such seat" shall be substituted; and
(viii ) in clause ( h), for the words "from more than two such Council
constituencies", the words "from more than one such Council constituency" shall be
substituted.
Amendment of
section 33.
43 of 1951.
5
20
15
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Under section 33 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, a person is allowed to
contest polls from a maximum of two seats. When a candidate wins both the seats, he or she
must vacate one within a specified number of days, triggering a bye-election, as stated under
section 70 of the Act. Allowing candidates to contest from more than one constituency is a
drain on the exchequer and also compels the voters to participate in an unwarranted
bye-election.
The Background Paper on Electoral Reforms (December, 2010), prepared by the Core
Committee on Electoral Reforms and co-sponsored by the Election Commission of India had
observed that in situations where a person contests elections from two constituencies and
wins from both, a bye-election is required from one constituency, which necessarily involve
avoidable labour and expenditure on the conduct of that bye-election. It has also
recommended an amendment to the Representation of the People Act, 1951 to provide that a
person cannot contest from more than one constituency at a time.
It is believed that allowing candidates to contest elections from two seats allows them
to cover political risks. The Bill seeks to ensure that a person do not contest from more than
one seat at a time, thereby increasing the commitment of candidates towards the electorate
he or she claims to want to serve and furthering India's democratic evolution.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951 in order
to achieve the above objective.
Hence, this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RABINDRA KUMAR JENA
December 21, 2015.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE ACT, 1951
No. 43 of 1951
* * * * *
33. (7) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (6) or in any other provi-
sions of this Act, a person shall not be nominated as a candidate for election,—
(a) In case of a general election to the House of the People (whether or not held
simultaneously from all Parliamentary constituencies), from more than two Parliamentary
constituencies;
(b) In case of a general election to the Legislative Assembly of a State (whether or not
held simultaneously from all Assembly constituencies), from more than two Assembly
constituencies in that State;
(c) in the case of a biennial election to the Legislative Council of a State having two or
more seats allotted to a State, for filling more than two such seats;
(d) in the case of a biennial election to the Council of States for filling two or more seats
allotted to a State, for filling more than two such seats;
(e) in case of bye-elections to the House of the People from two or more Parliamentary
constituencies which are held simultaneously from more than two such Parliamentary
constituencies;
(f ) in the case of bye-election to the Legislative Assembly of a State from two or more
Assembly constituencies which are held simultaneously, for filling more than two such
seats;
(g) in the case of bye-election to the Council of States for filling two or more seats
allotted to a State, which are held simultaneously, from more than two such Council
constituencies.
* * * * *
4
Presentation of
nomination
paper and
requirements
for a valid
nomination.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
————
(Shri Rabindra Kumar Jena, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4103L(S3)—09.02.2016.