AS INTRODUCED IN Lox SABHA

251६8 2009

Bill No. 2 of 2000
—_——

THE CINEMATOGRAPH (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000

By
Suri ViLas Murtenwar, M.P.
। A
BILL
Further to amend the Cinematograph Act, 1952,
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-tirst Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 2000, Short title.
| 2. For section 3 of the Cinematograph Act, 1952, (hereinafter to be referred to asthe Substitution of
5 principle Act), the following section shall be substituted, namely:— poids कटण

“3. (1) For the purposes of. sanctioning films for public exhibition, the Central Board of Film
Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a Board to be Censors.
called the Board of Film Certification which shall consist of a Chairman, who shall
be a woman, and not less than twelve and not more than twenty-five other members
10 appointed by the Central Government:
Provided that the Board

shall consist of atleast two women members and two
members who are experts in tl rs

he field of film, arts or culture
(2) The term of the Board shall be five years:


Substitution of
1ew section for
‘ection 58.

| Ainciples for
uuidance in

ertifying

ims.

2

Provided that a minimum of one-third of the members of the Board shall not be

\ Teappointed in the Board to be reconstituted after every five years,

(3) The Chairman of the Board shall receive such salary and allowances as may
lctermined by the Central Government, and the other members shall receive such

allowances or fees for attending the meetings of the Board as may be prescribed. 5

(4) The other terms and conditions of service of the members of the Board shall

be such as may be prescribed.”

3. For section SB of the principle Act, the following section shall be substituted,

namely:—
“SB. (1) A film shall not be certified for public exhibition if, in the opinion of the 19
authority competent to grant the certificate, the film or any part of it—
(@) is against the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India;
(0) is against the security of the State;
(O18 against interests of the sevular character of the country;
(4) is against the friendly relations with the foreign State; 15

(० degrades the image of the country in comparison to other counti

(0 is against the religious faith of any religion or proaches communalism or

shows any religious faith with contempt in any manner,

(2) is against public order, decency or morality;
(A) depicts excess sex or vulgarity and projects women in an indecent manner; 20
(7 contains violence or incites acts of violence; and

(0 involves defamation or contempt of court or is likely to incite the commission

of any offence.

(2) Subject to the provisions contained in sub-section (1), the Central Government may

issue such direction as it may think fit setting out the Principles which shall guide the authority 25
competent to grant certificates under this Act in sanctioning films for public exhibition.”


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS,
Since the past few years, films in our cou

intry depict excess sex, vulgarity and violence

are corroding the moral values of the people and thereby Creating a negative impact
e minds of the people, especially the youth. As a result, many crimes are committed,
try to perform the scenes which they witness in films

moral and traditional values. If this
ety will be corupted. Although there is a
exhibition, yet the scope
result many films escape trom the
2n films also add fuel to the fire,

The scope of the Censor Board s|
ct a film which ia their pinion woul
omen members in the Censor Board .
le strength of women members in the Censor Board so that they ¢:

epict Women in an indecent manner. C rtain guidelines have been
He the Censor Board to function effectively.

hould be widened very much 10
id spoil the minds of the youth. ‘Th

event films which
propel in the Bill to

The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.

VILAS MUTTEMWAR


Board of Film
Censors.

Principles for
guidance in
certifying fitms,

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CINEMATOGRAPH ACT, 1952
(37 oF 1952)
‘ * * * * *
PART IT
CERTIFICATION OF FILMS FOR PUBLIC EXHIBITION

* * * * * *

3. (1) For the purpose of sanctioning films for public exhibition, the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a Board to be called
the Board of film Certification which shall consist of a Chairman and not less than twelve
and not more than twenty-five other members appointed by the Central Government.

(2) The Chairman of the Board shall receive such salary and allowances as may be
determined by the Central Government, and’ the other members shall received such
allowances or fees for attending the meetings of the Board as may be prescribed,

(3) The other terms and conditions of service of the members of the Board shall be
such as may be prescribed.

क्र * * * * *

SB. (1) A film shall not be certified for public exhibition, if, in the opinion of the
authority competent to grant the certificate, the film or any part of it is against the interests
of the sovereignty and integrity of India the security of the State, friendly relations with
foreign States, public order, decency or morality, or involves defamation or contempt of
court or is likely to incite the commission of any offence.

(2) Subject to the provisions contained in sub-section ( 1), the Central Government
may issue such directions as it may think fit setting out the principles which shall guide

_ the authority, competent to grant certificates under this Act in sanctioning films for public

exhibition,

* + * * * *


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Cinematograph Act, 1952

(Shri Vilas Muttemwar, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—3226LS1—18-1-2000,