ee हल मल पलक

8 Au ००८

Bill No. 2 of 2002

THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED CASTES) ORDER
| (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2002

By
‘Suri K. Francis Georce, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution (Scheduled Castes ) Order, 1950,
Beit enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1. (7) This Act may be called the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order (Amendment) Short title and
2002. ‘commencement.

(2) It shall come into force at once.

2, In the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950, in paragraph 3, for the Amendment of
“or the Buddhist” the words “the Buddhist or the Christian” shall be substituted. Ps"#eraph 3.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

For centuries, the Dalit Christians have been undergoing oppression in common with
other dalts in our country. Rights and privileges given to Dalits in other religions are denied

but the Government has shown no'interest to include Dalit Christians in the list of Scheduled
Castes. Dalit Christians are being denied their basic rights guaranteed in the Constitution.

The change of religion does not change the socio-economic status of a Dalit.
‘The social and economical condition of Dalit Christians is no better than persons belonging
to Scheduled Castes professing Hindu, Sikh or Buddhist religion. Persons belonging to
‘Scheduled Castes professing Hindu, Sikh or Buddhist religion have been included in the list
of Scheduled Castes but Dalit Christians have, for no reasons, been left out from the list.

‘There is an urgent need to confer reservation and other privileges to over sixteen
million Dalit Christians in our country.

The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.

New DELHI; हू. FRANCIS GEORGE
September 10, 2001.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM.

Clause 2 of the Bill, seeks to amend the paragraph 3 of the Constitution (Scheduled
Castes) Order, 1950 with a view to extend the benefits, at present enjoyed by Scheduled
Castes belonging to Hindu, Sikh and Buddhist religion, to all Scheduled Castes professing
Christianity. As a result, many more persons will also be entitled to the benefits and facili-
ties provided by the Government.

The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred crore is
likely to be involved. A non-recurring expenditure of about Tupees one hundred crore is
also likely to be involved.


ANNEXURE

EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED Castes) OnpER, 1950
(0.0. oF 19)

. . . . 4 .

3. Notwithstanding anything contained in paragraph 2, no person who professes 8

religion different from the Hindu, the Sikh or the Buddhist religion shall be deemed to be a
member of a Scheduled Caste.

. * . . .



LOK SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950.

(Shri K. Francis George, MP,)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—4646LS—4-02-2002,