1
THE  CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
BY
SHRI JANARDAN SINGH 'SIGRIWAL', M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2015.
2. In the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution,—
(i) existing entries 3 to 9 shall be re-numbered as entries 4 to 10, respectively, and
before entry 4 as so re-numbered, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:—
"3. Bhojpuri.";
Short title.
Bill No. 2 of  2015
Amendment
of the Eighth
Schedule.
5
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(ii) after entry 10 as so re-numbered, the following entry shall be inserted,
namely:—
"11. Magahi.";
(iii) entries 10 to 22 shall be re-numbered as entries 12 to 24, respectively.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Language is not only a medium of communication but also a sign of respect. Language
also reflects on the history, culture, people, system of governance, ecology, politics, etc.
'Bhojpuri' language is also known as Bhojpuri, Bihari, Deswali and Khotla and is a member of
the Bihari group of the Indo-Aryan branch of the Indo-European language family and is
closely related to Magahi and Maithili languages.
Bhojpuri language is spoken in many parts of north-central and eastern regions of this
country. It is particularly spoken in the western part of the State of Bihar, north-western part
of Jharkhand and the Purvanchal region of Uttar Pradesh. Many Bhojpuri magazine and
newspapers are published in the States of Bihar and Uttar Pradesh. Bhojpuri language is
spoken by over 40 million people in the country. As per the Census 2001, a total of 3,30,99,497
persons in the country have mentioned Bhojpuri as their Mother Tongue.
The prosperity of a society is earmarked by its linguistic heritage. If one goes through
the history of Bhojpuri language, it dates back to seventh century. Due to a long history of
emigration from the Bhojpuri regions, this language has spread over all continents of the
world. It is also one of the national languages of Fiji spoken as 'Fiji Hindi'.
Bhojpuri culture is popular even in countries like Nepal, Mauritius, Sri Lanka, Thailand,
England and Greece. In about twenty countries across the world, fifteen to sixty-five per
cent. of the population is Bhojpuri speaking. In Nepal, Bhojpuri is spoken by over two million
people. Bhojpuri is also spoken by over four lakh people in Mauritius.
V ariants of Bhojpuri are spoken by descendants of Bhojpuri-speaking plantation
workers in several countries like Guyana, Suriname, Fiji, Trinidad and Tobago.
In addition to Bhojpuri, 'Magahi' is one of the prominent language spoken by millions
in the eastern part of India specially in various districts of the States of Bihar, Jharkhand,
Odisha and West Bengal. The language carries the rich cultural heritage and traditions of the
people residing in these areas. Research has shown that it is being spoken since Mauryan
era. Because of onslaught of English and Khari Boli, the future of this language appears to
be flattened. It is, therefore, the duty of the Government to protect this language, being an
important part of our heritage.
In view of above, in order to promote, integrate and empower 'Bhojpuri' and 'Magahi'
languages and to protect the culture and traditions of the speakers of these languages and
also taking into consideration importance of these languages, it is necessary that these
languages be given their due recognition by including them in the Eighth Schedule to the
Constitution.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; JANARDAN SINGH 'SIGRIWAL'
December 17, 2014.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
EIGHTH SCHEDULE
[Articles 344(1) and 351]
Languages
1. Assamese.
2. Bengali.
3. Bodo.
4. Dogri.
5. Gujarati.
6. Hindi.
7. Kannada.
8. Kashmiri.
9. Konkani.
10. Maithili.
11. Malayalam.
12. Manipuri.
13. Marathi.
14. Nepali.
15. Oriya.
16. Punjabi.
17. Sanskrit.
18. Santhali.
19. Sindhi.
20. Tamil.
21. Telugu.
22. Urdu.
* * * * * *
4

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Janardan Singh 'Sigriwal', M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4150LS(S3)—04-02-2015.