1
THE SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO THE STATE OF
PUNJAB (FOR THE WELFARE OF FARMERS) BILL, 2017
By
SHRI RA VNEET SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Punjab for overcoming the
current agrarian crisis in State caused by the unseasonal rains, hailstorms, deficit
rainfall, whitefly attack and consistently rising input prices forcing farmers into debt trap;
 for providing relief and loan waivers to farmers, compensation for failed
crops, promotion of sustainable farming, rainwater harvesting,
creation of grain and fodder banks, skill development, research
and  development  and  welfare  schemes  for  farmers,
agricultural labourers and other marginalized
sections of society in State of Punjab and
for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance to the State of Punjab
(For the Welfare of Farmers) Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 2 of 2017
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, there shall be paid such sums of money out of the Consolidated Fund of India,
every year, which shall not be less than seventy thousand crore rupees, as Parliament
may by due appropriation by law provide, as special financial assistance to the State
of Punjab to meet the cost of such schemes and works aimed at overcoming the ongoing
agrarian crises and welfare of farmers, as may be undertaken by the State with the
approval of Union Government for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Without prejudice to generality of the provisions of sub-section ( 1), the
schemes and works to overcome the agrarian crisis may include,—
(i) settling the debt of farmers;
(ii) providing compensation and relief to farmers and agricultural labourers
for any damage to crops caused due to rainfall deficit, pest attack, flood, hailstorm
or any other natural calamity;
(iii) providing assistance to small and marginal farmers;
(iv) encouraging and providing modern irrigation facilities like drip
irrigation and sprinklers to farmers;
(v) promotion of rainwater harvesting and conserving the groundwater;
(vi) promoting less water intensive crops like pigeon pea or tur, urad,
mustard, sunflower and jawar bajra;
(vii) promotion of growing fodder and establishing fodder banks;
(viii) establishment of grain banks;
(ix) establishment of warehouses and cold storages;
(x) promotion of research and development for better and inexpensive inputs
like seeds, fertilizers and pesticides;
(xi) training of farmers in new crops and new agricultural techniques;
(xii) introducing agricultural education in school curriculum;
(xiii) afforestation of barren and waste land;
(xiv) promoting food processing industries based on local agricultural
products;
(xv) providing skill development and training to youth particularly the
unemployed ones; and
(xvi) such other provisions as the State Government of Punjab may deem
necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
3. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order, make such provisions not inconsistent with provisions of this
Act, which appear to it to be neccessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of three years from the date
of commencement of this Act.
4. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition and not in derogation of any other law
for the time being in force dealing with the subject matter of this Act.
Special
Financial
Assistance to
the State of
Punjab for the
welfare of
farmers.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Act not in
derogation of
other laws.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

S-3\F\BILL 2016\LS\3369LS
3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The State of Punjab has been at the forefront of the green revolution in the country and
has been pioneer in country's journey to achieve food security. Hard work of Punjab's farmers
has made it the bread basket of the nation. But in last decade, stagnation of growth in
agricultural sector has adversely affected the whole State. Farmers, who form the backbone
of State's economy have suffered the most, alongwith agricultural labourers who belong to
the Dalit and marginalized sections of society. Prices of inputs like seeds, fertilizers, pesticides
etc. have skyrocketed in recent years but prices of their agricultural produce have not increased
proportionately. This has made farming a non-remunerative and non-viable profession,
pushing the farmers into borrowing for day to day expenses, eventually falling in debt trap.
It is a saddening situation that the State that was once known for prosperity of farmers now
ranks third in the nation in the number of farmer suicides. Above mentioned problems have
been exacerbated in recent years by the unseasonal hailstorm destroying the crops, whitefly
attack on cotton crop and impending water crisis as the ground water levels continue to
plummet. There has been no worthwhile research in the agricultural universities in Punjab
that can help the farmers mitigate these crises. State has not invested enough to provide
modern facilities like drip irrigation, sprinklers that can help farmers improve their
productivity. Lack of modern supply chain like cold storage prevents farmers from getting
fair price for their produce. There is also a need to promote diversity in agriculture and
incentivize farmers to grow new crops that can help them generate additional income.
Desertification is another threat that makes hard working farmers of the Punjab vulnerable
and the State needs to combat it.
All the above mentioned interventions cannot be implemented without cooperation of
farmers, therefore there is an urgent need to train farmers in the newer and productive ways
of agriculture and allied activities so that it can generate more income and employment.
Unfortunately, mismanagement of State finances by the Government has resulted in a
massive public debt over the State. Through its own ill devised policies, State Government
has hamstrung itself and is not able to take up the schemes for welfare of farmers, agricultural
labourers and develop agriculture sector in State.
In such a situation, most marginalized and most vulnerable farmers of Punjab, that are
the Annadata (food provider) of the nation, need an immediate help from the Union
Government to alleviate their distress. The Bill seeks to ensure that appropriate financial
resources are allocated to farmers of the State of Punjab and would go a long way in building
a more powerful nation.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAVNEET SINGH
November 11, 2016.

S-3\F\BILL 2016\LS\3369LS
4
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that there shall be paid such sum of money out of the
Consolidated Fund of India, every year which shall not be less than seventy thousand crore
rupees, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as special financial assistance to
the State of Punjab to meet the cost of schemes and works aimed at overcoming  the ongoing
agrarion crises and welfare of farmers in the State. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would
involve recurring expenditure of a minimum rupees seventy thousand crores per annum
from the Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of
India.

LOK   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Punjab for overcoming the
current agrarian crisis in State caused by the unseasonal rains, hailstorms, deficit
rainfall, whitefly attack and consistently rising input prices forcing farmers into debt
trap; for providing relief and loan waivers to farmers, compensation for
failed crops, promotion of sustainable farming, rainwater harvesting,
creation of grain and fodder banks, skill development, research
and development and welfare schemes for farmers,
agricultural labourers and other marginalized
sections of society in State of Punjab
and for matters connected  therewith
or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Ravneet Singh, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3369LS(S3)—10-01-2017.