5
As introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 2 of 2025
THE MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS (REMUNERATIVE 
SUPPORT PRICE) BILL, 2025
By
Shri Lumba Ram, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for fixation of minimum remunerative support price of  
milk and milk products and for matters connected therewith.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy- sixth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Milk and Milk Products (Remunerative Support Price) 
Act, 2025. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
Short title and 
extent.

2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
 ( a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of that 
State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
 ( b) “milk product” means a product obtained by processing of milk, which may 
contain food additives and other ingredients functionally necessary for the milk product, 
and shall include the following, namely:–
 ( i) cheese;
 ( ii) chhana, skimmed-milk chhana, paneer;
 ( iii) condensed milk-sweetened and unsweetened;
 ( iv) condensed skimmed milk-sweetened and unsweetened;
 ( v) cream;
 ( vi) curd, skimmed milk curd, dahi;
 ( vii) ghee, butter oil;
 ( viii) ice-cream;
 ( ix) infant milk food;
 ( x) khoa;
 ( xi) malai;
 ( xii) milk derivatives such as whey proteins, casein, lactose etc.;
 ( xiii) milk ices, milk lollies, kulfi;
 ( xiv) milk powder, skimmed milk powder, partly skimmed milk powder;
 ( xv) processed cheese;
 ( xvi) table butter and white butter;
 ( xvii) yoghurt; and
 ( c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act by the Central 
Government or the State Government, as the case may be. 
3. The appropriate Government shall announce minimum remunerative support price of 
milk and milk products in such manner and at such intervals, as may be prescribed. 
4. The appropriate Government shall, while announcing the minimum remunerative 
support price of milk and milk products, take into account all relevant factors, which shall 
include,— 
 ( i) interest payable to banks on loans taken for dairy; 
 ( ii) electricity and water charges; 
 ( iii) average labour charges; 
 ( iv) availability of land and pasture; 
 ( v) expenditure on collection, preservation and packaging of milk and milk products; 
 ( vi) expenditure incurred on transportation of milk and milk products to market; and
 ( vii) expenditure incurred on ailment and care of milch animals.
5. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament, by 
law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Government for carrying out 
the purposes of this Act.
2
Definitions.
Fixation of  
minimum remu -
nerative support 
price of milk and 
milk products.
Factors for 
determination 
of minimum 
remunerative 
support price of 
milk and milk 
products.
Central 
Government to 
provide funds.
10
5
30
40
35
25
20
15

6. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule. 
(3) Every rule made under this Act by the State Government shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.
5
10
3
Power to make 
rules.

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is the largest producer of milk in the world with 10.2 crore ton of annual 
production of milk.  This production is much more than crop and it is an important source of 
income of the farmers. Milk production has played a remarkable role in providing security 
to the farmers affected by adverse weather and damage of crops.  According to the report 
of National Sample Survey Organisation (NSSO), the incidents of suicide by farmers are 
less in those areas, where milk production is a source of regular income in generating 
employment. Approximately seven crore rural families are engaged in milk production.  
Approximately seventy per cent. cattle are with small, medium and marginal farmers, who 
get major portion of their family income through selling of milk. Mostly the small and 
landless farmers are engaged in milk production and women play a very important role in it.  
There are a few shortcomings in the milk production business which make it less attractive.  
The first drawback is the price of the milk and the farmers do not get the actual benefit.  The 
milk producers get only rupees fifteen to twenty per litre, while the milk is sold at the rate 
of rupees thirty-eight to forty-eight per litre in the towns and metropolitan cities.  Prices of 
milk have increased recently and cow milk is being sold at the rate of rupees thirty-eight per 
litre and buffalo milk is at rupees forty-eight per litre in Delhi. According to dairy officials, 
there has been an increase in the cost of collection, warehousing, processing, marketing, 
management and transportation of milk which has necessitated the increase in the prices of 
milk.  Farmers spent more than twenty per cent. of their income from milk on is spent on 
fodder and cattle food, treatment of cattle diseases and rearing of cattle, etc. Co operative 
Committees and dairies refuse to buy milk from farmers during the winter season due to 
over-production of milk. It results in decreasing of the profit of both the parties, which 
adversely affects dairy business.  Small and medium farmers are facing a lot of difficulties 
due to lack of land, lack of facilities for water bodies, shade construction, processing of 
milk, lack of better facilities for godowns, transportation and continuous fluctuation in the 
prices of milk in carrying out dairy business. A large number of farmers engaged in dairy 
business as also the cattle rearers are not taking interest in this business, because the pasture 
land is diminishing which is creating shortage of fodder and they are being forced to wind 
up their dairy business.
The need is, therefore, to fix minimum remunerative support prices of milk and milk 
products so as to ensure effective livelihood to the persons involved in dairy.
Hence this Bill.
New Delhi;                                   L U M B A  R A M  
November 7, 2024

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
 Clause 5 of the Bill provides for payment of adequate funds to the States for carrying 
out the purposes of this Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees 
five thousand crore per annum. 
 No recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
 Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation 
of legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
a
BILL
to provide for fixation of minimum remunerative support price of  
milk and milk products and for matters connected therewith.
(Shri Lumba Ram, M.P .) 