1
THE TRADE UNIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
A
BILL
further to amend the Trade Unions Act, 1926.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Trade Unions (Amendment) Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Trade Unions Act, 1926 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), after
section 10, the following section shall be inserted, namely:––
"10A. (1) Where the Central Government is of the opinion that it is necessary or
expedient to recognise a Trade Union or a federation of Trade Unions as Central Trade
Union at the Central level, it may recognise such Trade Union or a federation of Trade
Short title and
commencement.
Insertion of
new section
10A.
16 of 1926.
Recognition of
Trade Unions
at Central and
State level.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 2 of 2019
5
10

2
Unions as the Central Trade Union in such manner and for such purposes as may be
prescribed and if any dispute arises in relation to such recognition, it shall be decided
by such authority in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
(2) Where the State Government is of the opinion that it is necessary or expedient
to recognise a Trade Union or a federation of Trade Unions as the State Trade Union
at the State level, it may recognise such Trade Union or a federation of Trade Unions
as the State Trade Union in such manner and for such purposes as may be prescribed
and if any dispute arises in relation to such recognition, it shall be decided by such
authority in such manner as may be prescribed by the State Government.".
3.  In section 29 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after clause (b), the following
clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(ba) the manner and purposes for recognition of Trade Union or federation of
Trade Unions as Central Trade Union or, as the case may be, State Trade Union and the
authority to decide disputes arising out of such recognition including the manner of
deciding such disputes;".
Amendment of
section 29.
5
10
15

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Trade Unions Act, 1926 (the said Act) has been enacted to provide for registration of
Trade Unions and in certain respects to define the law relating to registered Trade Unions.
2. Being a pre-independence legislation, the said Act provides only for registration of
Trade Unions. There is no provision for recognition of Trade Unions in the Act. However,
presently recognition of Trade Union is governed by instructions and guidelines in the Code
of Discipline evolved in 1958 as voluntarily accepted by employers and employees.
3. Since there are demands from various quarters for providing statutory force to the
recognition of Trade Unions so that their role will become more important in maintaining
harmonious industrial relations in the country, the Government proposes to amend the said
Act to make provisions for recognition of Trade Unions or federation of Trade Unions at
Central and State level. It is also proposed to empower the appropriate Government to make
regulations to facilitate the manner and purposes of such recognition.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; SANTOSH KUMAR GANGWAR
The 3rd January, 2019.
3

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLATION
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to insert clause (ba) in sub-section (2) of section 29 of the Trade
Unions Act, 1926 so as to empower the appropriate Government to make regulations to
provide the manner and purposes for recognition of Trade Unions or federation of Trade
Unions as Central Trade Union or, as the case may be, State Trade Union and the authority
to decide disputes arising out of such recognition including the manner of deciding such
disputes.
2. The matters in respect of which rules may be made by the appropriate Government are
matters of procedure and administrative details and it is not practicable to provide for them
in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
4

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Trade Unions Act, 1926.
————
(Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar, Minister of State for Labour and Employment)
MGIPMRND—3080LS(S3)—04-01-2019.