                                                            Bill No. 2 of 2023
THE CHIT FUNDS (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2023
By
DR. SUKANTA MAJUMDAR, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Chit Funds Act, 1982.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of
India as follows:–
1. This Act may be called the Chit Funds (Amendment) Act, 2023.
2. In section 2 of the Chit Funds Act, 1982 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), in clause (b), after the words “fraternity fund”, the words
“Money Growing Scheme” shall be inserted.
Short title.
5
 AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Amendment of
section 2.
49 of 1982

2
3. In section 4 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in the proviso,—
(i) for the words “within twelve months”, the words “within three
months” shall be substituted; and
(ii) for the words “six months”, the words “three months” shall be
substituted. 5
Amendment of
section 4.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Chit Funds Act, 1982 was enacted to provide for the regulation of
chit funds  which are indigenous business in India and have conventionally
satisfied the financial needs of the low-income households. The chit is a
mechanism which combines credit and savings in a scheme, in which a
group of individuals come together for a pre-determined duration and
subscribe a certain sum of money by way of periodical installments and
each such subscriber, in his term as determined by lot or by auction or by
tender or any other specified manner, gets the collected sum. In this way,
people who are in need of funds and those who want to save are able to
meet their requirements simultaneously.
Chit Funds frauds have become day to day affair. There is an immediate
need to check the increasing number of chit funds frauds in order to save the
hard earned money invested in such chit funds by the common man.
At present chit funds can be floated without prior approval of the State
Government concerned. A chit fund is required to get registered within a
period of twelve months from the date of its sanction or within such further
period or periods not exceeding six months in the aggregate as the State
Government may allow as specified in the section 4 of the Chit Funds Act,
1982. In order to facilitate orderly growth of the chit fund sector, to remove
bottlenecks being faced by the chit fund industry and to enable greater financial
access to people, the Chit Funds (Amendment) Bill, 2023, inter alia, proposes
the following, namely:–
(a) insertion of the words “Money Growing Scheme”, in clause (b)
of section 2 which defines “chit”;
(b) to cut short the registration period to three months from the date
of sanction, so that the persons responsible for the conduct of a chit fund
do not prolong the registration of chit to commit fraud with the public.
Hence this Bill.
   NEW DELHI;                                    SUKANTA MAJUMDAR
December 20, 2022.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CHIT FUNDS ACT, 1982
[40 OF 1982]
* * * * *
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(b) “chit” means a transaction whether called chit, chit fund, chitty,
kuri or by any other name by or under which a person enters into an
agreement with a specified number of persons that everyone of them shall
subscribe a certain sum of money (or a certain quantity of grain instead)
by way of periodical installments over a definite period and that each
such subscriber shall, in this turn, as determined by lot or by auction or by
tender or in such other manner as may be specified in the chit agreement,
be entitled to the prize amount.
* * * * *
CHAPTER II
REGISTRA TION OF CHITS, COMMENCEMENT AND CONDUCT
OF CHIT BUSINESS
4. (1) No chit shall be commenced or conducted without obtaining the
previous sanction of the State Government within whose jurisdiction the chit
is to be commenced or conducted or of such officer as may be empowered by
that Government in this behalf, and unless the chit is registered in that State
in accordance with the provisions of this Act:
Provided that a sanction obtained under this sub-section shall lapse if the
chit is not registered within twelve months from the date of such sanction or
within such further period or periods not exceeding six months in the aggregate
as the State Government may, on application made to it in this behalf, allow.
* * * * *
* * * * *
Definitions.
Prohibition of
chits not
sanctioned or
registered
under the Act.
4

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
further to amend the Chit Funds Act, 1982.
————
(Dr. Sukanta Majumdar, M.P .)