As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

1007ि शहर

Bill No. 2 of 2003

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2003 ©
3 By | a
SHRI PRIYA RANJAN Dasmuns!, M.P.
द 258 3
BILL

_ further to amend the Constitution of India

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as —

follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2003

. 2. After article 21 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted
5 namely:— 3

210. (/) Every citizen shall be provided protection of life, property and
business against the ethnic and social violence, communal and political
disturbances, by the State | ह

| (2) In case any citizen is deprived of his life, property and business due to any _
| 10 reasons mentioned in clause (/), the State shall ensure that adequate compensation, |
_ rehabilitation and proper arrangement of livelihood is provided to the victim as

- soon as possible but in any case within sixty days of the date of occurrence of the
incident."

iy

Short title.

Insertion of
new article
21A.

Protection

from ethnic

and social |
violence,
communal |
and political
disturbances —

_and provision

of relief.


STATEMENT OF OBJE CTSAND REASONS

Article 21 of the Constitution provides that no person shall be deprived of his life and
personal liberty except according to the procedure established by law. Of late, it has been
observed that in various parts of the country, incidents of ethnic violence and communal
and political disturbances are on the increase leading to a considerable loss of life, property
and business of the common citizens. It has been observed that sometimes the victims are
not provided with adequate relief in the matter of compensation and rehabilitation measures

_and they are deprived of even reasonable livelihood. It is the duty of the State to protect the

citizens from violence and disturbances which result in human loss, loss to property and
business. Therefore, the Bill seeks to amend the Constitution with a view to mandating on
the State to protect the citizens from such violent incidents and also to ensure rehabilitation
measures and compensation to the affected victims within a stipulated time frame.

Hence this Bill.

New DELHI; PRIYA RANJAN DASMUNSI
December 16, 2002.

—— = न a


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill, if enacted, envisages that the State shall ensure that compensation
and rehabilitation measures are provided to the victims of ethnic and social violence and
communal! and political disturbances in the country within the stipulated time frame. As it
is very difficult to anticipate such events and also the extent of damages caused due to such
incidents, no exact estimate of the expenditure can be made at this stage. However, it is
estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore per annum may be
required to meet such relief from Consolidated Fund of India.

No non-recurring expenditure, however, is likely to be involved.



LOK SABHA.

BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

| |
है

(कक Priya Ranjan Dasmunsi, M.P)

es

SE es os 5

MGIPMRND—7382LS—14-02-2003.

eg ee