THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR SMALL AND TINY INDUSTRIES
BILL, 2007
BY
SHRI K.S. RAO, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the setting up of a National Commission for Small and Tiny Industries and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Commission for Small and Tiny Industries
Act, 2007.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Definitions.
Bill No.  2 of  2007
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK  SABHA
5

2
(b) "small and tiny industry" means any industry involved in the manufacturing
or processing of consumer or household products such as, bread, biscuit, and other
confectionery items, fast food or other food products, detergents, soaps, kitchen
items, shoe and leather goods, cosmetics and skin care products, herbal products for
medicinal and other purposes, stationery and electrical items, hardware and
sanitary ware items or any other item which may be prescribed and where the total
capital invested in running the business does not exceed rupees ten lakh.
3. (1) The Central Government shall set up a National Commission for Small and
Tiny Industries.
(2) The Commission shall consist of  a Chairman and four other members possessing
such qualifications as may be prescribed.
(3) The salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the Chairman
and other Members, shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
4. (1) Every State Government and Union territory Administration shall constitute a
Commission for small and tiny industries to be known as the State or Union territory
Commission for Small and Tiny Industries.
(2) The Commission shall consist of a Chairman and four other Members representing
such disciplines as may be determined by the State Government or Union territory
Administration.
(3) The salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the Chairman
and other Members shall be such as may be prescribed by the State Government or Union
territory Administration.
5. The National Commission shall perform the following functions, namely:—
(i) formulation of policy for the development of small and tiny industries;
(ii) coordination with the State/Union territory Commissions regarding
development of small and tiny industries;
(iii) formulation of guidelines regarding financial assistance or loans by banks
or financial institutions to small and tiny industries;
(iv) recommend to the Central Government steps to be taken for the welfare of
persons engaged in small and tiny industries; and
(v) such other functions, as may be assigned to it by the Central Government.
6. The State/Union territory Commissions shall perform the following functions,—
(i) provide assistance to the small and tiny industries  in matters such as acquiring
license, building of infrastructure, from the State Governments or Union territory
Administrations concerned;
(ii) provide assistance to the small and tiny industries in obtaining loans from
commercial banks and other financial institutions;
(iii) implement the national policy for the development of small and tiny industries
in respect of the State/Union territory;
(iv) advise the respective Sate Government/Union territory Administration
regarding any matter relating to development of small and tiny industries  in the state/
Union territory;
(v) send regular report or information, as the case may be, to the National
Commission from time to time; and
(vi) such other  functions as may be assigned to it by the State Government or
the Union territory Administration.
7. The Central Government may, by notification in  the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of the Act.
National
Commission
for Small and
Tiny Indus-
tries.
State Commis-
sion for Small
and Tiny
Industries.
Functions of
the National
Commission.
Functions of
the State
Commissions.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The small and tiny industries are very important for our economy as they prevent
concentration of wealth in few hands, decentralize the manufacturing processes and provide
employment on large scale. It simultaneously provides choice to the consumers and a source
of revenue to the State by way of payment of taxes. But, as yet, there is no clear-cut policy for
the development of small and tiny industries in the country. Earlier, certain categories of
industries were reserved exclusively for the small scale sector, but now it has been dispensed
with. Now big industrial houses and even multinational companies are penetrating the small
scale sector as well as the retail sector, thereby becoming a threat to the existence of small
and tiny industries, as they are not in a position to compete with the former. Further, the small
scale entrepreneurs have to run from pillar to post in order to obtain loan, license and other
infrastructural facilities. There is no proper authority to assist them and address their
grievances. It is proposed to set up a National Commission for Small and Tiny Industries and
similar commission at State level to help in their all round development.
Hence this Bill.
New Delhi; K.S. RAO
November 9, 2006.
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the setting up of a National Commission for Small and
Tiny Industries consisting of a Chairman and four other members. Clause 4 provides for
setting up of Commissions for small and tiny industries in every State and Union territories.
The Central Government has to meet expenditure for the Union territories and may also have
to provide funds to the State Governments for the Commissions. The Bill, therefore, if enacted,
will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring
expenditure of about rupees ten crore per annum. It is also likely to involve a non-recurring
expenditure of rupees two crore.
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to frame rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for setting up of a National Commission for Small and Tiny Industries  and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
—————
(Shri K.S. Rao, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—45LS(S-5)—06-02-2007.