1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
By
SHRI DHAIRY ASHEEL SAMBHAJIRAO MANE, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth  Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2019.
2. In the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, in List III-Concurrent List, after entry
47, the following entry shall be inserted namely:—
"48. Management of Disasters and Emergencies whether natural or man-
made.".
Bill No. 300 of  2019
Short title.
Amendment
of the Seventh
Schedule.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The monsoon season of 2019 wreaked havoc across the country and one of the most
badly affected areas falls under the Parliamentary constituency of Hatkanangle which
witnessed huge damage to property and life. The Geo-climatic conditions and socio-economic
vulnerability of India makes it one of the most disaster-prone countries. A report by National
Institute of Disaster Management (NIDM) and Forest Research Institute (FRI) states that
59 per cent area is prone to earthquakes, 28 per cent to droughts, 25 per cent to landslides,
12 per cent to floods, 8 per cent to cyclones and 50 per cent of the forest area is prone to
forest fires. A World Bank report released in 2017 noted that the impact of extreme natural
disasters was equivalent to $520 billion of global loss in annual consumption and forces
some 26 million people into poverty each year.
Due to the magnitude of losses as a result of man-made or natural disasters it is
extremely important to step-up appropriate disaster mitigation measures to minimize the loss
of property and life. India has a dedicated disaster management force at Central and State
levels, as well as effective disaster management policies. However, due to delayed response,
inappropriate implementation of the plans and policies, and inadequate technological capacity
for accurate forecast, any disaster results in large scale damage.
In the current scheme of things, Disaster management doesn't figure in any of the
3 lists of the Constitution and hence under article 248, the Parliament has the competence to
legislate on this subject. The Disaster Management Act, 2005 was enacted by invoking
entry 23 namely 'Social security and social insurance, employment and unemployment' in the
Concurrent List even though all aspects of crisis management cannot be said to be covered
by this entry.
By practice and convention the primary responsibility for managing disasters rests
with the State Governments. Due to the cross cutting nature of activities that constitute
disaster management and linkages required which involve co-ordination between the Union,
State and local Governments on the one hand and a host of Government departments and
agencies on the other; setting up of a broadly uniform institutional framework at all levels is
of paramount importance. The imminent need is to ensure congruence and coherence with
regard to the division of labour among the agencies at the Union, State and other levels. This
could best be achieved if the subject of Disaster Management is placed in the Concurrent
List of the Constitution.
The Bill proposes to add disaster management whether natural or man-made in the
Concurrent List as it would be expedient if certain functions of disaster management are
centralized while others are decentralized down to the lowest level. Through addition of
disaster management in Concurrent List it will enable both Centre and State to legislate and
frame policies according to their requirements. National level planning and adoption of best
practices, development of standard operating procedures administration of early warning
systems and formulating policy on disaster management are best entrusted to a national
body whereas local planning and the actual work of implementation are better left with
State Governments.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; DHAIRYASHEEL  SAMBHAJIRAO  MANE
November 6, 2019.
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
SEVENTH SCHEDULE
(Article 246)
* * * * * * *
List III-Concurrent List
* * * * * * *
47. Fee in respect of any of the matters in this List, but not including fees taken in any
court.
3

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Dhairyasheel Sambhajirao Mane, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—3090LS(S-3)—15.11.2019.