1
THE ARTISANS (WELFARE AND PROMOTION) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI MAHEISH GIRRI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a Board for the welfare and promotion of cultural
and traditional handicraft in the country and further to provide institutional
and financial assistance to the artisans living in rural areas and for
matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Artisans (Welfare and Promotion) Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) "Board" means the Artisans (Welfare and Promotion) Board established
under section 3;
(b) "artisan" means any person engaged in  handicraft manufacturing in rural
areas in any sector;
Short title
and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. 300 of 2015
As  INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Definitions.5

2
(c) "Fund" means the Artisans (Welfare and Promotion) Fund constituted under
section 5; and
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Board to be known as the Artisans (Welfare and Promotion) Board for the welfare and
promotion of cultural and traditional handicraft art and to provide institutional and financial
assistance to artisans to get better price of their art products and deeper market exposure.
(2) The Board shall consist of a Chairperson and such other members to be appointed
by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The headquarters of the Board shall be at New Delhi.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service
of Chairperson and members shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. The Board shall—
(i) carry out, from time to time, extensive studies and analysis about the art
works being produced and traditional arts practices carried out in rural areas;
(ii) set up art centres on the basis of studies carried out;
(iii) provide better opportunity to the artisans for marketing and ensuring
fare price for their art works;
(iv) organise art exhibitions at regular intervals; and
(v) facilitate online portal of art works to enable artisans to avail better prices
of their art products.
5. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Fund to be known as the Artisans (Welfare and Promotion) Fund to provide financial
assistance for welfare of artisans and promotion of cultural and traditional handicraft art.
(2) The State Governments shall contribute to the Fund in such ratio as may be
prescribed.
(3) Any sum received by way of donation, contribution or grant shall be credited into
the Fund.
(4) The Fund shall be administered by the Board for carrying out the purposes of the
Act.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purpose of this Act.
(2) Every rule under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as may
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in
such modified form or be of no effect as the case may be so, however that any such
modifications or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
Constitution
of Artisans
Welfare
Board.
Functions of
the Board.
Constitution
of Artisans
(Welfare and
Promotion)
Fund.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In rural areas, we find many talented people who create extremely creative and
productive products through their art. But unfortunately due to non-availability of resources,
low market exposure, lack of awareness, financial disability and no institutionalization
support, these artisans face significant problems as they neither get fair price for their
products nor they are able to show case their artwork at a broader prospect.
The Bill seeks to provide for welfare and promotion of traditional and cultural art of
the country and to provide for institutional and financial support to the artisans to improve
their social status in such a way that more employment and economic activities can be
carried out in rural areas.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MAHEISH GIRRI
November 11, 2015.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to provide for constitution of a Artisans (Welfare and
Promotion) Board for the Welfare of artisans in rural areas. Clause 4 provides for setting up
of art centres and other facilities to artisans. Clause 5 provides for constitution of Artisans
(Welfare and Promotion) Fund. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that annual recurring expenditure of about
rupees one hundred crore is likely to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

5
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a Board for the welfare and promotion of cultural and
traditional handicraft in the country and further to provide institutional and
financial assistance to the artisans living in rural areas and for matters
connected therewith.
————
(Shri Maheish Girri, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2861LS(S3)—08-12-2015.