1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 301 of  2016
THE COMPULSORY MENTAL HEALTHCARE COUNSELLING
FACILITIES IN GOVERNMENT SCHOOLS BILL, 2016
By
DR. KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide compulsory mental healthcare counselling facilities in
Government schools and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Mental Healthcare Counselling Facilities
in Government Schools  Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
 5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government; and
(b) "counselling" means a process by which a psychiatrist addresses the mental
healthcare of a child;
(c) "mental healthcare" includes analysis and diagnosis of a person's mental
condition and treatment as well as care and rehabilitation of such person for his mental
illness or suspected mental illness;
(d) "mental illness" means a substantial disorder of thinking mood, perception,
orientation or memory that grossly impairs judgement, behaviour capacity to recognise
reality or ability to meet the ordinary demands of life, mental conditions associated
with the abuse of alcohol and drugs, but does not include mental retardation which is
a condition of arrested or incomplete development of mind of a person, specially
characterised by subnormality of intelligence;
(e) "psychiatrist" means a medical practitioner possessing a post-graduate dgree
or diploma in psychiatry awarded by a university recognised by the University Grants
Commission established under the University Grants Commission Act, 1956, or awarded
or recognised by the National Board of Examinations and included in the First  Schedule
of Indian Medical Council Act, 1956, or recognised by the Medical Council of India,
constituted under the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956, and includes, in relation to
any State, any medical officer who having regard to his knowledge and experience in
psychiatry, has been declared by the Government of that State to be a psychiatrist for
the purposes of this Act; and
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. The appropriate Government shall provide mental healthcare counselling in every
Government school in such manner, as may be prescribed.
4. The appropriate Government shall  appoint adequate number of psychiatrist to
provide mental healthcare counselling in Government schools in such manner, as may be
prescribed.
5. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 3, the appropriate Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, specify the circumstances and technical grounds under
which exemptions may be granted to any Government school from the provisions of this Act.
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite sums to the appropriate Governments for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
7. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after expiry of two years from the date
of commencement of this act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid
before each House of Parliament.
Compulsory
mental
healthcare
counselling in
Government
schools.
3 of 1956.
102 of 1956.
102 of 1956.
Appropriate
Government
to appoint
psychiatrist in
Government
schools.
Exemptions.
Central
Government
to provide
requisite funds.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
 5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
8. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law, for the time being in force.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law.
Power to
make rules.
 5
10

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
A number of children, especially in the rural and remote areas undergo some kind of
violence at home or oustide, be it sexual or domestic. Apart from sexual abuse and rape,
pushing, slapping, punching, stalking and emotional abuse are other forms of domestic
violence against children Girls are more susceptible to such violence.
These experiences lead to mental health issues such as depression and anxiety amongst
the children. If left untreated, these mental health issues can have a direct impact on child's
learning, academic performance and overall personality development. It is comparatively
easy for children in the cities too open about such instances and seek help. However,
children in the villages tend to be unaware at times about what actually happened to them.
Furthermore, due to lack of education and advancement in some cases, they do not feel
comfortable talking to anyone about the violence either. Stigma attached to such instances
is another reason for children not seeking help.
Mental health counselling by professionals like psychiatrist will help the children to
speak up about the problems they face. Seeking help will prevent further mental issues that
these children could face. Professionals know the appropriate way to deal with such issues
and thus, help these children overcome the trauma and lead a normal childhood.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KIRIT PREMJIBHAI  SOLANKI
November 9, 2016.

5
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that appropriate Government shall provide mental
healthcare counselling in Government schools. Clause 4 provides for appointment of
psychiatrist in Government schools. clause 6 provides that the Central Government shall
provide adequate funds to  the State Government for carrying out the purposes of this Bill.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of rupees fifty crore is likely to be
incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

6
MEMORANDUM   REGARDING   DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide compulsory mental healthcare counselling facilities in
Government schools and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3364LS(S3)—29-11-2016.