THE FREE AND COMPULSORY SECONDARY AND
SENIOR SECONDARY EDUCATION  BILL,  2016
By
SHRIMATI SUPRIYA SULE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide free and compulsory secondary and senior secondary education
to all children and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Free and Compulsory Secondary and Senior Secondary
Education Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 302 of 2016
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Definitions
5
10
15
20
25
Appropriate
Government
to provide
free and
compulsory
secondary and
senior
secondary
education.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the State Government
in the case of a Union territory with Legislature, the Government of the Union territory
and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "local authority" means the Municipal Corporation or Municipal Council or
Nagar Panchayat or Zila Parishad or any Urban Local Body or authority empowered by
or under any law for the time being in force to function as a local authority in any city,
town or village having administrative control over the school;
(c) "child" means male or female who has not attained the age of eighteen years;
(d) "secondary education" means education in ninth and tenth classes;
(e) "senior secondary education" means education in eleventh and twelfth
classes;
(f) "parent" means biological or adoptive mother or father of a child;
(g) "guardian" means a person having custody of the child;
(h) "school" means any recognised institution imparting secondary or senior
secondary education, and includes schools aided or unaided by the appropriate
Government and minority schools;
(i) "prescribed" means as prescribed by the rules made under this Act; and
(j) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette.
3. The appropriate Government shall provide free and compulsory secondary and
senior secondary education to every child.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, "free education" includes:—
(a) school fees and admission charges, if any;
(b) textbooks and stationery materials free of cost;
(c) mid-day meal to secondary and senior secondary students; and
(d) free hostel facilities wherever necessary.
4. The appropriate Government shall establish adequate number of schools within its
territorial jurisdiction for imparting free secondary and senior secondary education to
every child.
5. (1) Notwithstanding any custom, usage or belief of any section of the society, every
parent or guardian shall compulsorily admit his child in a school.
(2) No person including a parent or guardian shall prevent a child from completing his
secondary and senior secondary education:
Provided that in case a child either due to late admission in a school or slow learning
capabilities does not complete senior secondary education by eighteen years of age, the
appropriate Government shall provide free education to such child, even after he attains the
age of eighteen years.
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
7. Any person including parent or guardian who violates the provisions of this Act,
shall be punished with an imprisonment for a term which may extend upto one year and shall
also be liable to fine.
Appropriate
Government
to establish
schools.
Responsibility
of the parent
and guardian.
Central
Government
to provide
requisite
funds.
Penalty.
30
35
40

3
8. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force, or in any instrument having
effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.
9. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Act to be in
addition to
other laws.
Power to
make rules.
 5
10
15

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Education is instrumental for child's overall development. Social welfare of a child also
depends on the early school level education one receives.
Besides educating the child, the education also promotes the economic welfare of a
nation as it makes the future workforce of the nation more productive. Economic theory
predicts that India is experiencing demographic dividend, a phenomenon where proportion
of working population (aged between eighteen and sixty years) to total population is more
than that of the dependent population (age groups of below eighteen and above sixty years).
India can reap benefits from this relatively younger workforce, if it educates and skills them
to be more productive.
Recognising the importance of education to children, Central Government enacted
Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act in 2009, which made elementary
education (class I to class VIII) free and compulsory to all children below 14 years of age.
Though this Act is laudable, it fails to address the issue of continuation of a child's education
beyond the elementary level.
To improve the access to secondary and senior secondary education, the Central
Government introduced various schemes. Rashtriya Madhyamika Siksha Abhiyan was
introduced in 2009 with the objective of achieving full enrolment in secondary education by
2017 and full retention of the children thus enrolled, by 2020.
But there is no legal framework in India that guarantees secondary and senior secondary
education. The Bill, therefore, aims to fill this policy gap and extend free and compulsory
secondary and senior secondary education to all children below eighteen years of age.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SUPRIYA SULE
November 4, 2016.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for free and compulsory secondary and senior secondary
education to all children. Clause 4 provides for establishment of adequate number of schools
for imparting secondary and senior secondary education. Clause 6 provides that Central
Government shall provide adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out the
purposes of this Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees five thousand crore would be
involved as recurring expenditure per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
Non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide free and compulsory secondary and senior secondary education
to all children and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shrimati Supriya Sule, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3317LS(S3)—29-11-2016.