1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI NISHIKANT  DUBEY, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In article 341 of the Constitution, for clause ( 1), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:—
"(1) The President may, by public notification, specify the castes, races or
tribes or parts of or groups within castes, races or tribes which shall for the purposes
of this Constitution be deemed to be Scheduled Castes in relation to the whole of the
territory of India.".
Bill No.  302 of  2015
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of article 341.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
3.  In article 342 of the Constitution, for clause ( 1), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:—
"(1) The President may, by public notification, specify the tribes or tribal Communities
or parts of or groups within tribes or tribal communities which shall for the purposes of
this Constitution be deemed to be Scheduled Tribes in relation to the whole of the territory
of India.".
Amendment
of article 342.
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes are still under
privileged and are a neglected lot. There have been constant efforts to provide concessions
and facilities to these persons by successive Governments. But still much is required to be
done for improving their condition and for bringing them into the mainstream of the society.
At present, the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes
are facing some practical and genuine difficulties which need immediate solution. In every
State, caste certificates are issued by the district authority. These certificates are recognised
for the purpose of extending reservation benefits by the State Government concerned
throughout the State. The Union Government also recognizes the certificates issued by the
State Government for the purpose of jobs or appointments in service under the Union
Government. However, if a person belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled
Tribes moves out and settles in another State the Caste certificate issued by the parent State
is not recognised for the purposes of giving benefits of reservation by State in which he has
settled down, despite the fact that the same caste or tribe has been included in the list of the
Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes in that State.
Due to lack of employment opportunities, people migrate to other States in search of
employment and settle down there permanently. However, they become ineligible to enjoy
the benefits of reservation in the State they have settled down for the reason that they have
been issued certificates by the State from where they have migrated.
It is, therefore, necessary to amend the Constitution with a view to make provision that
a member of the Scheduled Caste or the Scheduled Tribe in one State shall be treated as the
Scheduled Caste or the Scheduled Tribe, as the case may be, for the purpose of availing
benefits of reservation in whole of India.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; NISHIKANT  DUBEY
November 13, 2015.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill empowers the President to specify the castes, races or tribes or
parts of or groups within castes, races or tribes as the Scheduled Castes for the purpose of
whole of India. Clause 3 empowers the President to specify the tribes or tribal communities or
parts of or groups within tribes or tribal communities as Scheduled Tribes for the purpose of
whole of India. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India on account of benefits to be provided to the persons belonging to castes,
races or tribes under the ongoing Central Schemes meant for development of the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.
At this stage, it is not possible to give the exact amount to be incurred on this account.
However, it is expected that a recurring expenditure of about five hundred crore will be
involved annually.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * *
341. (1) The President may with respect to any State or Union territory, and where it is
a State, after consultation with the Governor thereof, by public notification, specify the
castes, races or tribes or parts of or groups within castes, races or tribes which shall for the
purposes of this Constitution be deemed to be Scheduled Castes in relation to that State or
Union territory, as the case may be.
(2)* * * *
342. (1) The President may with respect to any State or Union territory, and where it is
a State, after consultation with the Governor thereof, by public notification, specify the
tribes or tribal communities or parts of or groups within tribes or tribal communities which
shall for the purposes of this Constitution be deemed to be Scheduled Tribes in relation to
that State or Union territory, as the case may be.
(2) * * * *
5
Scheduled
Castes.
Scheduled
Tribes.

GMGIPMRND—2818LS(S-3)—08.12.2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Nishikant Dubey, M.P.)