1
THE SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO SANTHAL PARGANA
REGION OF THE STATE OF JHARKHAND BILL, 2015
By
SHRI NISHIKANT DUBEY, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the Santhal Pargana region of the State of
Jharkhand for the purpose of promoting the welfare of the Scheduled Castes, the
Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward Classes of the persons and for the
development, exploitation and proper utilization of its resources.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance to the Santhal Pargana
Region of the State of Jharkhand Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 303 of  2015
Short title and
commencement.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. There shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India,
every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as special financial assistance
to the Santhal Pargana region of the State of Jharkhand to meet the costs of such schemes
of development, as may be undertaken by the State with the approval of the Union Government
for the purpose of promoting the welfare of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and
Other Backward Classes of persons or for the development, proper utilization and
exploitation of the resources in the State.
3. The provision of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law to be made by Parliament or for the time being in force.
Special
financial
assistance to
the Santhal
Pargana of
Jharkhand.
Act not in
derogation
of other law.
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Santhal Pargana region of the State of Jharkhand is socially and economically
backward. The problems of poverty, unemployment, illiteracy as well as measures for proper
utilization of resources, welfare of weaker sections in the region are required to be addressed
urgently by initiating new development schemes in a time-bound manner. Being a border
area, Santhal Pargana of Jharkhand is strategically located and it is in the nation's interest
that its development needs are addressed. It is, therefore, necessary that the Central
Government should provide special financial assistance to the region of Santhal Pargana of
Jharkhand for its all-round development including the welfare of weaker sections and for the
development and exploitation of its vast resources. Such a step of providing financial
assistance to this region would go a long way in building this nation more and more strong.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; NISHIKANT  DUBEY
November 13, 2015.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that there shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the
Consolidated Fund of India, every year, as Parliament may, by due appropriation, provide as
special financial assistance to the region of Santhal Pargana of Jharkhand to meet the costs
of such schemes of development, as may be undertaken by the State with the approval of the
Central Government.
The Bill, therefore, on enactment will involve expenditure out of the Consolidated
Fund of India for providing special financial assistance to the region of Santhal Pargana of
the State of Jharkhand. As the sums of moneys which will be given to the region of Santhal
Pargana of Jharkhand as special financial assistance by appropriation by law made by
Parliament will be known only after the welfare schemes to be implemented by the State
Government with the approval of the Government of India are identified. It is not possible to
give the estimates of recurring expenditure, which would be involved out of the Consolidated
Fund of India at this stage.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of
India.
4

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the Santhal Pargana region of the State of
Jharkhand for the purpose of promoting the welfare of the Scheduled Castes, the
Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward Classes of the persons and for the
development, exploitation and proper utilization of its resources.
————
(Shri Nishikant Dubey, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2857LS(S3)—08.12.2015.