Short title and
commencement.
THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
SHRIMATI SUPRIYA SULE, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,  by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 292 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter referred to as the Code), in
sub-section (2), for the words, "shall be punished on first conviction with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to two years, and with fine which may extend
to two thousand rupees, and in the event of a second or subsequent conviction, with
Bill No. 303 of  2016
Amendment
of section
292.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
45 of 1860.
5

2
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five years and also with
fine which may extend to five thousand rupees", the words "shall be punished on first
conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five years,
and with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, and in the event of a second or
subsequent conviction, with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to seven years and also with fine which may extend to  ten thousand rupees" shall be
substituted.
3. In section 354 of the Code, for the words "shall be punished with imprisonment of
either disruption for a term which shall not be less than one year but which may extend to five
years, and shall also be liable to fine”, the words "shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine" shall be substituted.
4. In section 354A of the Code,—
(a) in sub-section ( 2), for the words "shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both",
the words "shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend
to ten years and shall also be liable to fine” shall be substituted; and
(b) in sub-section ( 3), for the words "shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both",
the words "shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to seven years and shall also be liable to fine" shall be substituted.
5. In section 354B of the Code, for the words "shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which shall not be less than three years but which may extend to
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine", the words "shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which shall not be less than eight years but which may extend
to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine" shall be substituted.
6. In section 354C of the Code, for the words "shall be punished on first conviction
with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than one year, but
which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine, and be punished on a second
or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not
be less than three years, but which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to
fine", the words "shall be punished on first conviction with imprisonment of either description
for a term which shall not be less than three years, but which may extend to five years, and
shall also be liable to fine, and be punished on a second or subsequent conviction, with
imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than six years, but which
may extend to eight years, and shall also be liable to fine" shall be substituted.
7. In section 354D of the Code, for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be
substituted, namely:—
"(2) Whoever commits the offence of stalking shall be punished on first
conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine; and be punished on a second or subsequent
conviction, with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten
years, and shall also be liable to fine.".
8. After section 354D of the Code, the following section shall be inserted, namely:
"354E. Any act punishable under sections 292, 354, 354A, 354B, 354C, 354D or
509 shall be deemed to be an offence of eve teasing and punished accordingly.".
Amendment
of section
354.
Amendment
of section
354A.
Amendment
of section
354B.
Amendment
of section
354C.
Amendment
of section
354D.
Insertion of
new section
354E.
Eve teasing.
 5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
9. In section 376 of the Code,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1), for the words " shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than seven years,
but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine", the
words "shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for fourteen years or with death
and shall also be liable to fine" shall be substituted; and
(b) in sub-section ( 2), for the words "shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten years, but which may extend
to imprisonment for life, which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that
person's natural life, and shall also be liable to fine", the words "shall be punished with
rigorous imprisonment for life, or with death, and shall also be liable to fine" shall be
substituted.
10. In section 376A of the Code, for the words "shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than twenty years, but which may extend to
imprisonment for life, which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that person's
natural life, or with death", the words "shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for life,
or with death" shall be substituted.".
11. In section 376B of the Code, for the words "shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which shall not be less than two years but which may extend to
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine", the words "shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which shall not be less than seven years but which may extend
to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine" shall be substituted.
12. In section 376C of the Code, for the words "shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than five years, but
which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liableto fine", the words "shall be punished
with rigorous imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than eight
years, but which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine" shall be substituted.
13. In section 376D of the Code, for the words "shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than twenty years, but which may extend to
life which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that person's natural life, and with
fine", the words "shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for life, or with death and
with fine" shall be substituted.
14. In section 376E of the Code, for the words "shall be punished with imprisonment
for life which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that person's natural life, or with
death", the words "shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for life or with death and
with fine" shall be substituted.".
15. In section 509 of the Code, for the words "shall be punished with simple imprisonment
for a term which may extend to three years, and also with fine", the words "shall be punished
with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years, and with fine" shall be
substituted.
Amendment
of section
376.
Amendment
of section
376A.
Amendment
of section
376B.
Amendment
of section
376C.
Amendment
of section
376D.
Amendment
of section
376E.
Amendment
of section
509.
 5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In the Indian Penal Code (IPC), 1860 in its current form, eve-teasing of women is not
concretely defined. Eve-teasing, as it is understood by the Indian courts, is dispersed across
various sections under Indian Penal Code. In addition, the offences under these varied
Sections relating to eve-teasing are bailable and non-cognisable. These laws have failed to
check the rise in cases of eve-teasing in India. As per the National Crime Records Bureau
(NCRB) data, offences against women under section 354 of Indian Panel Code have increased
from 70,739 to 82,235,  at 16.3% between 2013 and 2014.
According to the data collected by the National Crime Records Bureau, as many as
3,37,922 cases of crimes against women were registered in 2014. This is an increase of 9.2%
from the registered crimes against women in 2013. Crimes committed under Indian Penal
Code against women, as proportion of total Indian Penal Code crimes have increased to
11.4% in 2014.
The Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2013 did widen the definition of most acts of
harassment aimed against women. But the crimes registered against women continue to rise.
Thus the possibility exists that the current form and term of punishments are not
sufficient to deter the individuals from committing the crime. Evidence from the United States
during 1980's points to increased sentence for a crime or making it harsher, having a positive
impact on reducing the crime rate and overall incidence of crime in US. It is true that the
effectiveness of the deterrence principle is much debated in the Criminal Justice system. The
need is to provide harsher punishments in the Indian context.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860 with a view to make
eve-teasing an offence punishable under the Code and also to increase the penalties for
various crimes committed against women.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SUPRIYA  SULE
November 4, 2016.

5
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE,1860
(NO. 45 OF 1860)
* * * * *
292. * * * * *
(2) Whoever,
* * * * *
(e) * * * * *
shall be punished on first conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to two years, and with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, and,
in the event of a second or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to five years, and also with fine which may extend to five
thousand rupees.
* * * * *
354. Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any woman, intending to outrage or
knowing it to be likely that he will thereby outrage her modesty, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than one year but which
may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine.
* * * * *
354A. 1. A man committing any of the following acts—
i. physical contact and advances involving unwelcome and explicit sexual
overtures; or
ii. a demand or request for sexual favours; or
iii. showing pornography against the will of a woman; or
iv. making sexually coloured remarks, shall be guilty of the offence of sexual
harassment.
2. Any man who commits the offence specified in clause (i) or clause (ii) or clause (iii)
of sub-Section (1) shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend
to three years, or with fine, or with both.
3. Any man who commits the offence specified in clause (iv) of sub-Section (1) shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or
with fine, or with both.
* * * * *
354B. Any man who assaults or uses criminal force to any woman or abets such act
with the intention of disrobing or compelling her to be naked, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than three years but
which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
* * * * *
354C. Any man who watches, or captures the image of awoman engaging in a private
act in circumstances where she would usually have the expectation of not being observed
either by the perpetrator or by any other person at the behest of  the perpetrator or disseminates
such image shall be punished  on first conviction with imprisonment of either description for
Sale of
obscene
pictures.
Assault or
criminal force
to woman with
intent to
outrage her
modesty.
Sexual
harassment.
Assault or use
of criminal
force to
woman with
intent to
disrobe.
Voyeurism.

6
a term which shall not be less than one year, but which may extend to three years, and shall
also be liable to fine, and be punished on a second or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment
of either description for a term which shall not be less than three years, but which may extend
to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanations—
1. For the purpose of this Section, "private act" includes an act of watching carried out
in a place which, in the circumstances, would reasonably be expected to provide privacy and
where the victim's genitals, posterior or breasts are exposed or covered only in underwear; or
the victim is using a lavatory; or the victim is doing a sexual act that is not of a kind ordinarily
done in public.
Where the victim consents to the capture of the images or any act, but not to their
dissemination to third persons and where such image or act is disseminated, such
dissemination shall be considered an offence under this Section.
* * * * *
354D. (1) Any man who—
i. follows a woman and contacts, or attempts to contact such woman to foster
personal interaction repeatedly despite a clear indication of disinterest by such woman;
or
ii. monitors the use by a woman of the internet, email or any other form of
electronic communication,
iii. commits the offence of stalking:
Provided that such conduct shall not amount to stalking if the man who pursued
it proves that—
i. it was pursued for the purpose of preventing or detecting crime and the
man accused of stalking had been entrusted with the responsibility of prevention
and detection of crime by the State; or
ii. it was pursued under any law or to comply with any condition or
requirement imposed by any person under any law; or
iii. in the particular circumstances such conduct was reasonable and
justified.
(2) Whoever commits the offence of stalking shall be punished on first conviction with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also
be liable to fine; and be punished on a second or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine.
* * * * *
376. (1) Whoever, except in the cases provided for in sub-Section (2), commits rape,
shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not
be less than seven years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be
liable to fine.
(2) Whoever—
(a) being a police officer, commits rape,
i. within the limits of the police station to which such police officer is
appointed; or
ii. in the premises of any station house; or
iii. on a woman in such police officer's custody or in the custody of a
police officer subordinate to such police officer; or
Stalking.
Punishment
for Rape.

7
(b) being a public servant, commits rape on a woman in such public servant's
custody or in the custody of a public servant subordinate to such public servant; or
(c) being a member of the armed forces deployed in an area by the Central or a
State Government commits rape in such area; or
(d) being on the management or on the staff of a jail, remand home or other place
of custody established by or under any law for the time being in force or of a women's
or children's institution, commits rape on any inmate of such jail, remand home, place
or institution; or
(e) being on the management or on the staff of a hospital, commits rape on a
woman in that hospital; or
(f) being a relative, guardian or teacher of, or a person in a position of trust or
authority towards the woman, commits rape on such woman; or
(g) commits rape during communal or sectarian violence; or
commits rape on a woman knowing her to be pregnant; or
commits rape on a woman when she is under sixteen years of age; or
(h) commits rape, on a woman incapable of giving consent; or
being in a position of control or dominance over a woman, commits rape on such
woman; or
(i) commits rape on a woman suffering from mental or physical disability; or
(j) while committing rape causes grievous bodily harm or maims or disfigures or
endangers the life of a woman; or
commits rape repeatedly on the same woman,
shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less
than ten years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life, which shall mean
imprisonment for the remainder of that person's natural life, and shall also be liable to
fine.
* * * * *
376A. Whoever, commits an offence punishable under sub-Section (1) or sub-Section
(2) of Section 376 and in the course of such commission inflicts an injury which causes the
death of the woman or causes the woman to be in a persistent vegetative state, shall be
punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than twenty years,
but which may extend to imprisonment for life, which shall mean imprisonment for the
remainder of that person's natural life, or with death.
* * * * *
376B. Whoever has sexual intercourse with his own wife, who is living separately,
whether under a decree of separation or otherwise, without her consent, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than two years but
which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
* * * * *
376C. Whoever, being—
a. in a position of authority or in a fiduciary relationship; or
b. a public servant; or
c. superintendent or manager of a jail, remand home or other place of custody
established by or under any law for the time being in force, or a women's or children's
institution; or
Punishment
for causing
death or
resulting in
persistent
vegetative
state of the
victim.
Sexual
intercourse by
husband upon
his wife during
separation.
Sexual
intercourse by
person in
authority.

8
d. on the management of a hospital or being on the staff of a hospital, abuses
such position or fiduciary relationship to induce or seduce any woman either in his
custody or under his charge or present in the premises to have sexual intercourse with
him, such sexual intercourse not amounting to the offence of rape,
shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment of either description for a term
which shall not be less than 5 years, but which may extend to ten years, and shall also
be liable to fine.
* * * * *
376D.Where a woman is raped by one or more persons constituting a group or acting
in furtherance of a common intention, each of those persons shall be deemed to have  committed
the offence of rape and shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall
not be less than twenty years, but which may extend to life which shall mean imprisonment
for the remainder of that person's natural life,  and with fine:
Provided that such fine shall be just and reasonable to meet the medical expenses and
rehabilitation of the victim:
Provided further that any fine imposed under this Section shall be paid to the victim.
* * * * *
376E. Whoever has been previously convicted of an offence punishable under Section
376 or Section 376A or Section 376D and is subsequently convicted of an offence punishable
under any of the said Sections shall be punished with imprisonment for life which shall mean
imprisonment for the remainder of that person's natural life, or with death.
* * * * *
509. Whoever, intending to insult the modesty of any woman, utters any word, makes
any sound or gesture, or exhibits any object, intending that such word or sound shall be
heard, or that such gesture or object shall be seen, by such woman, or intrudes upon the
privacy of such woman, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may
extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
* * * * *
Gang Rape.
Punishment
for repeat
offenders.
Word, gesture
or act intended
to insult the
modesty of a
woman.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
————
(Shrimati Supriya Sule, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3316LS(S3)—29-11-2016.