Bill No.  304 of 2015
THE TRADITIONAL FISHERMEN (SOCIO-ECONOMIC
PROTECTION AND WELFARE) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI VINAYAK BHAURAO RAUT, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the socio-economic protection and welfare of the traditional fishermen in
the country by establishing a Welfare Fund for their benefit and for providing adequate
life insurance cover against accidents, medical care, financial assistance for fishing
nets, boats and other necessities, unemployment allowance during lean periods,
 free education including vocational education and training to their children
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Traditional Fishermen (Socio-Economic Protection
and Welfare) Act, 2015.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Definitions.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "accident" means an accident caused during the course of fishing including
drowning;
(b) "administrator" means an administrator appointed under section 5;
(c) "appropriate Government" means in the case of  State, the Government of
that State and in other cases the Central Government;
(d) "fisherman" means a person who earns his livelihood by catching fish from
the fisheries and whose only source of income is the money he earns from selling such
fish;
(e) "partial disablement" means such disablement which has reduced the working
capacity of a fisherman temporarily which he was capable of having before the accident;
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(g) "total disablement" includes any disablement which incapacitates a fisherman
for all work which he was capable of performing prior to the accident; and
(h) "Welfare Fund" means the Traditional Fishermen Welfare Fund established
under section 4.
3. The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but within one year from the
commencement of this Act, formulate, in consultation with the Government of the States
having substantial population of fishermen, a long term national policy for the welfare of
traditional fishermen and their families and protect their fishing rights and interests against
the onslaught of big fishing companies including the multinationals.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish
a Traditional Fishermen Welfare Fund for the purpose of this Act.
(2) The initial corpus fund of the Welfare Fund shall be two thousand crore rupees
which shall be provided by the Central Government after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf.
(3) After the establishment of the Fund, money to the Fund shall be provided by the
Central and the concerned State Governments in such proportion as may be agreed to from
year to year and the money received by way of donations from individuals, body corporates,
financial and other institutions shall also form the corpus money of the Fund.
(4) The Fund shall be administered by the Central Government in such manner as
may be prescribed.
5. The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint such
number of Administrators who shall entertain the claims for payment of compensation and
other facilities under this Act.
6. The Fund established under this Act shall be utilised for,—
(a) life insurance cover to the traditional fishermen and their families;
(b) free medical care to the traditional fishermen and their family members;
(c) financial assistance to the traditional fishermen for the purchase and repair of
fishing nets, boats and other equipments required for fishing;
(d) unemployment allowance during illness or financial crisis during lean periods;
Long term
National
Policy for the
welfare of
traditional
fishermen.
Establishment
of Traditional
Fishermen
Welfare Fund.
Appointment
of
Administrators.
Utilisation of
the Fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(e) free education including technical and vocational education to the children
of traditional fishermen; and
(f) such other purposes as may be prescribed.
7. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the amount of compensation payable to a
traditional fisherman sustaining injury resulting in his death or partial or total disablement or
in case of his drowning or sweeping away by the water currents or in his disappearance in a
storm or cyclone or tsunami, shall be such as may be specified by the Central Government
from time to time by notification in the Official Gazette.
(2) In case of death of a traditional fisherman, the compensation fixed under
sub-section (1) shall be paid to the spouse of the deceased or to his legal heir or to the
children, as the case may be, and in case the deceased being unmarried the compensation
shall be paid to his parents.
(3) Every claimant for payment of compensation under this Act shall apply to the
Administrator in prescribed format giving details as may be prescribed.
(4) Every claim for compensation under this Act shall be finalized by the Administrator
and payment shall be made within thirty days of the claim.
8. The appropriate Government shall,—
(a) establish adequate number of schools and vocational training institutes and
healthcare centres in and around the  areas inhabitated by traditional fishermen for
their benefit including their families and children;
(b) provide adequate and hygienic marketing facilities to the fishermen for their
catch;
(c) provide subsidy on kerosene and petrol;
(d) protect the fishing rights and interests of the traditional fishermen by
preventing national and multinational companies from fishing in the fisheries within
the jurisdiction of traditional fishermen as may be determined by the Central Government
from time to time;
(e) through the Coast Guard and Navy, prevent the trespassing by fishermen of
other countries into the fisheries of Indian waters;
(f) take up issue with neighbouring countries through diplomatic channels
whenever the Indian fishermen are detained with their boats and nets by such countries
so as to ensure their timely release; and
(g) take such other measures as it may deem necessary for the protection and
welfare of traditional fishermen.
9. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the
provisions of any other law applicable to fishermen for the time being in force.
10. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the States for carrying out the purposes of this
Act.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
Fixation of
compensation
and payment
thereof.
Miscellaneous
provisions.
Application
of other laws
not barred.
Central
Government
to provide
requisite
funds.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
40

4
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
There are millions of traditional fishermen and their families spread over thousand of
kilometers of coast line of our country. Their main occupation and means of livelihood is
catching fish and selling it in the market and they are doing this for generations. However,
the fishermen and their families live in abject poverty nearly hand to mouth whereas the
middlemen, wholesalers and retail traders of fish flourish at their cost as the sea food is
becoming popular not only in the country but worldwide. Sea products are very much in
demand but the status of traditional fishermen has remained the same. Many of the fishermen
are carried away by water currents particularly during storms, cyclones and tsunami, etc. and
lose their lives. Similarly, they get drowned while fishing or receive injuries leading to partial
or total disablement. But there is nobody to look after them except their hapless poor families.
In fact, the disablement or death of a fisherman ruins his family who remain at the mercy of
fate alone.
Since the poor fishermen are part and parcel of our society and ours being a welfare
State, it is necessary that the fisherman too are provided with adequate insurance cover
against accidents, healthcare, financial assistance in case of need, educational, vocational
facilities for their children, etc. They should also get subsidy on kerosene and petrol and
cold storage and marketing facilities for their catch. They are also needed to be protected
from the onslaught of big national and multinational companies. Often fishermen from
neighbouring countries trespass into Indian waters for illegal fishing which needs to be
stopped. Traditional fishermen of our country are, therefore, required to be given maximum
security and facilities.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; VINAY AK BHAURAO RAUT
November 16 , 2015.
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Traditional Fishermen Welfare
Fund. Clause 5 provides for the appointment of Administrators. Clause 10 provides that the
Central Government shall provide adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees three thousand crore may
involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees two thousand crore may also involve.
6

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 11 gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the
purposes of the Bill. As the rules relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative
power is of normal character.
7

GMGIPMRND—2936LS(S3)—08.12.2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the socio-economic protection and welfare of the traditional fishermen in
the country by establishing a Welfare Fund for their benefit and for providing
adequate life insurance cover against accidents, medical care, financial
assistance for fishing nets, boats and other necessities,
 unemployment allowance during lean periods, free
education including vocational education and
training to their children and for matters
 connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
————
 (Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut, M.P .)