1
THE MARRIAGES (COMPULSORY REGISTRATION AND
PREVENTION OF WASTEFUL EXPENDITURE) BILL, 2016
By
SHRIMATI RANJEET RANJAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the simple solemnisation of marriages by prohibiting extravagant
and wasteful expenditure and show of wealth on marriages for the compulsory
registration of all marriages solemnised in the country, and for prevention
of wastage of food items during marriage functions and for matters
connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Marriages (Compulsory Registration and Prevention
of  Wasteful Expenditure) Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
Short title, and
extent.
Bill No.  304  of  2016
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State, and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "designated Authority" means an authority or an officer designated for the
purpose of registration of marriages under this Act;
(c) "expenditure on marriage" includes expenditure incurred by either bridegroom's
side or by bride's side, as the case may be, on marriage celebrations such as on
invitation cards, decoration, tented pandals, illumination, fireworks, luncheon, dinner,
clothes, ornaments, gifts, hiring of a barat ghar, community centre, banquet hall, or
gated or ordinary hotel, farm house, parks and such other places, band, musical groups
and dancers, jockeys film and television stars, helicopter or aircraft, cars and other
vehicles, flower and other decorations, horse driven chariots, anything considered as
dowry or Streedhan and any other expenditure incurred during the celebration of
marriage or during hosting of reception thereof; and
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force or
in any custom or ritual, all marriages shall be solemnised in a simple manner without incurring
extravagant and wasteful expenditure and show of wealth and lavish spending thereon.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in sub-section (1),
the solemnisation of simple marriage shall include the limit of expenditure of marriage to the
tune of twenty five per-cent of the annual income of the family subject to a ceiling of rupees
five lakhs:
Provided that if any family intends to spend more than rupees five lakhs towards
expenditure on marriage, such family shall declare the amount proposed to be spent in
advance to the appropriate Government and contribute ten per cent of such amount in a
Welfare Fund which shall be established by the appropriate Government to assist the poor
and Below Poverty Line families for the marriage of their daughters in such manner as
may be prescribed.
(3) The appropriate Government shall issue necessary guidelines to be followed for
carrying out the provisions of this Act.
4. (1) Notwithstanding any custom or ritual of any community, religion, tribe, or caste,
the wastage of food items served during the celebration of a marriage or  reception thereof is
hereby prohibited.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the  appropriate
Government may fix the limit of guests and relatives and number of dishes to be served to the
guests and relatives for the solemnisation of marriage or for the reception held thereafter as
it may deem necessary or expedient to prevent the wastage of food items.
5. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force
or in any custom or usage to the contrary, all the marriages solemnised in the country after
the commencement of this Act shall be registered within sixty days of the solemnisation of
marriage in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section ( 1), the appropriate Government shall, by
notification in the Official Gazette, designate an authority or an officer for registration of
marriage in each district within its territorial jurisdiction.
(3) The designated authority shall maintain a register of marriage containing such
particulars and details as may be prescribed and shall also keep the same in electronic form.
(4) The appropriate Government shall prescribe the documents relating to solemnisation
of marriage which shall be furnished for the registration of marriage.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Definitions.
Compulsory
solemnisation
of simple
marriage.
Prevention of
wastage of food
items during
marriage
functions.
Compulsory
registration of
marriages.
45

3
(5) After the registration of marriage under this section, a Marriage Certificate shall be
issued to the married couple giving such details as may be prescribed.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force or
any custom, the marriage solemnised after the commencement of this Act shall be null and
void, if not registered within sixty days of solemnisation of such marriage.
6. Whoever,—
(a) contravenes the provisions of section 3 shall be punishable with simple
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and also with fine which may
extend up to five lakh rupees; and
(b) contravenes the provisions of section 4 shall be punishable with simple
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month and also with a fine which may
extend up to fifty thousand rupees; and
(c) fails to register his marriage within the prescribed period or gives false
information in registering his marriage shall be punishable with simple imprisonment
for a term which may extend to six months and also with a fine which my extend up to
two lakh rupees.
7. The Central  Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
8. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act. the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry or the period of three years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
9. The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force but save as aforesaid the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not
in derogation of any other law for the time being applicable to marriages.
10.  (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of not effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
 Penalty.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Our nation is known for unity in diversity because people of different religions, groups,
castes, communities live together, who have their own or different cultures, customs, traditions
to follow. But one thing is perhaps common and that is marriage which is treated as an
institution. Great importance is assigned  to the solemnisation of marriage between two
individuals—male and female. But unfortunately, these days a tendency of celebrating
marriages with pomp and show and spending lavishly is growing in the country. Millions of
rupees are spent on decorated shamianas or banquet halls followed by sumptuous feasts
with musical groups performing in the backdrop, video Jockeys doing anchoring. Some
people even spend crores and crores of rupees on solemnisation of marriage in five or seven
Star hotels where thousands of baraatis attend the ceremony who come by helicopters.
Substantial cash and gifts, sometimes even costly cars and other valuable items, are given as
shagun. Many people use this occasion to spend their balck money. Media gives wide
publicity in page three to such marriages. This trend or craze is getting momentum. The poor
people who are in majority, cannot afford to arrange money for such a luxury and despite that
take loans on very high rate of interest and become indebted. This tendency needs to be
checked through  law by minimizing the role of money on an auspicious occasion like
marriage.
Another tendency that is also noticed during the marriage ceremonies is wastage of
food items on a large scale. In one marriage tonnes of food is wasted which could fill the
bellies of many poor people. In a poor country like ours where nearly half of its population
does not get two square meals a day, wastage of food may certainly be treated as a crime. In
Pakistan, in marriage parties, one can serve only four dishes to the guests and wastage of
dishes is treated as criminal wastage. The number of guests too are restricted. Similar action
needs to be taken in our Country also.
Recently, the Supreme Court of India, moved by the plight of women fighting for their
right under wedlock, ruled that all marriages should be registered. This ruling of the apex
court is yet to be implemented.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RANJEET RANJAN
November 15, 2016.

5
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the appropriate  Government shall establish a welfare
Fund to assist the poor and Below Poverty Line families for the marriage of their daughter.
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for appointment of the designated authority or officer in every
district of the country. Clause 7 makes it mandatory for the Central Government to provide
requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would
involve expediture from the Consolidated Fund of India. At this stage, it is not possible to
estimate the expenditure likely to be incurred. However, it is estimated that a sum of rupee
two hundred crore would involve as recurring expenditure per annum from the Consolidated
Fund of India.  A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is also likely
to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Billl empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of  normal character.

LOK   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the simple solemnisation of marriages by prohibiting extravagant
and wasteful expenditure and show of wealth on marriages for the compulsory
registration of all marriages solemnised in the country and for prevention
of wastage of food items during marriage functions and for matters
connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
————
(Shrimati Ranjeet Ranjan, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3319LS(S3)—30-11-2016.