1
Short title,
and
commence-
ment.
THE  REPRESENTATION OF PEOPLE (AMENDMENT)  BILL, 2019
By
SHRI SUSHIL KUMAR SINGH, M.P .
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of People Act, 1951.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Representation of People (Amendment) Bill, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In Section 62, of the Representation of  People Act, 1951, for sub-section (5), the
following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
"(5) No person shall vote at any election if he is confined in a prison under a
sentence of imprisonment or transportation after being convicted:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to a person subjected to
preventive detention under any law for the time being in force or is in prison in police
custody but has not yet been convicted.".
Bill  No. 304 of  2019
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Amendments
of section 62.
543 of 1951.
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
V oting has been defined as a "medium of expression" by the Supreme Court in PUCL
& Ors. vs. Union of India (2013). The judgement suggests "The right to vote at the elections
to the House of the People or Legislative Assembly is a constitutional right but not merely
a statutory right; freedom of voting as distinct from right to vote is a facet of the fundamental
right enshrined in article 19(1)(a)". Thus, denying a person a right to vote amounts to
curtailing his/her freedom of expression.
The Section 62(5) of Representation of People's Act, 1951 infringes upon the
fundamental rights of every person who is lodged in a jail. It keeps convicts, undertrials and
those in temporary police custody on the same pedestal. It is totally against the important
tenet of the criminal justice system: "innocent until proven guilty". Consequently, even the
persons who are still undergoing trial (more than sixty percent of those who are lodged in a
prison) are denied their right to vote. Not allowing an undertrial to cast vote defeats the
very freedom of expression and the right ensured in article 21 i.e., the right to liberty.
Depriving a person who has not been found guilty  from expressing his views through
voting is a violation of the spirit and soul of the Constitution as well as the basic principle
of equality, Ironically, those who are in jail are allowed to contest elections but they are not
allowed to vote.
Several countries, including Australia, Bulgaria, Costa Rica, France and South Africa
allow undertrials and even some convicts (based on the seriousness of crime). India could
also figure in this list of countries with progressive criminal justice laws, by providing
voting rights to undertrials.
A blanket ban on voting of every prisoner is extremely regressive. Being able to vote
is a part of one's identity as an equal citizen. Stripping an 'ínnocent' person of this right is
both constitutionally and morally wrong. The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the
Representation of People Act, 1951 with a view to recognize the right to vote for every
undertrial prisoners who has not been convicted by any court.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SUSHIL KUMAR SINGH
November 6, 2019.
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE REPRESNTATION OF PEOPLE ACT, 1951
(No. 43 of  1951)
****
62. (5)  No person shall vote at any election if he otherwise, or is confined in a prison,
whether under a sentence of imprisonment or transportation or otherwise, or is in the lawful
custody of the police:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to a person subjected to preventive
detention under any law for the time being in force.
****
Right to vote.
3

LOK  SABHAL
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of People Act, 1951.
————
(Shri Sushil Kumar Singh, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—3144LS(S3)—15-11-2019.