1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI VINOD KUMAR BOIANAPALLI, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. For article 130 of the Constitution, the following article shall be substituted, namely:—
"130. The Supreme Court shall sit in Delhi and, if necessity arises, constitute permanent
Bench or Benches at such other place or places, as the President of India may, with consultation
of the Chief Justice of India, appoint so as to facilitate early disposal of cases.".
Bill No. 305 of  2015
Short title and
commencement.
Substitution
of new article
for article
130.
Seat of the
Supreme
Court.
5
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The number of pending court cases in the country has crossed the three crore mark.
Figures on the chronic backlog of court cases are an indictment of the country's beleaguered
legal system. The plight of persons awaiting trail needs to be understood and addressed.
The appellants are already burdened and further have to face the ordeal of travelling thousands
of kilometers to the Supreme Court in Delhi for their trial and the consequent follow up. It is
not just the wastage of time, but also an increased financial burden that makes the process
inconvenient, cumbersome and expensive. It is for this reason the language of article 130
clearly indicates that there was an intention of the founding fathers of the Constitution to
have more than one seat of the Supreme Court.
The need become pronounced and the recommendation that new benches of the
Supreme Court be created was made by the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs in 56th, 61st and 72nd reports, the Committee on Law and Justice in its 2nd, 6th, 15th,
20th, 26th and 28th reports and the Law Commission in its 95th, 125th and 229th reports.
They have asked for the creation of three new "Cassation Benches" of the Court which
would be in the North-Eastern, Western and Southern regions of the country. These could
handle civil and criminal appeals arising out of the orders/judgments of the High Courts and
the main bench in Delhi could focus solely on constitutional matters. This way the workload
would be better divided, case disposal rates would increase and there would be better
geographical access for citizens to the Supreme Court.
It is, however, highly unfortunate that the Full Court of the Supreme Court has
persistently opposed this reform through resolutions in 1999, 2001, 2004, 2006 and 2010. The
most recent opposition was in 2010 when a Full Court of 27 judges headed by the
Chief Justice of India passed a resolution that reiterated the position that dividing the Court
would undermine the country's unitary character and would destabilise the country's integrity.
This is an assertion and not an argument. The Full Court has never explained to the
Government exactly how such a move would undermine the country's unitary character or
destabilise the Supreme Court. It is in fact a fallacious and misleading argument. Creating
new benches will only strengthen the Court's functioning and will in no way weaken it or the
country's integrity.
Unfortunately as the Court has made its opposition to reform absolutely clear, there is
no other alternative but to amend article 130 of the Constitution and give the power to
appoint benches to the President instead of the Chief Justice. This will finally enable this
long-pending demand to be carried out.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; VINOD  KUMAR  BOIANAPALLI
November 17, 2015.
2

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * *
130. The Supreme Court shall sit in Delhi or in such other place or places, as the
Chief Justice of India may, with the approval of the President, from time to time, appoint.
* * * *
Seat of the
Supreme
Court.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Vinod Kumar Boianapalli, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2858LS(S3)—08.12.2015.