Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE INCLUSION OF THE SCHEDULED CASTES AND THE
SCHEDULED TRIBES IN PERSONS LIVING BELOW POVERTY
LINE CATEGORY BILL, 2016
By
DR. KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI,  M.P.
A
BILL
to include the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the below poverty line
category.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Inclusion of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes in Below Poverty Line Category Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
Bill  No. 305 of  2016
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Definitions.
5

(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “persons living below poverty line” means such persons who according to
norms fixed by the Central Government, from time to time, are placed in the persons
living below the poverty line category; and
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3.  The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, frame
policy for inclusion of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes residing within its
territorial jurisdiction in the persons living below poverty line category:
Provided that persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes
who are income tax payee in Government service  shall not be included in the persons
living below poverty line Category.
4. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite sums to the appropriate Governments for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
5. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient
for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after expiry of two years from the date of
commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be
laid before each House of Parliament.
6.  The provisions of this Act shall  be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law, for the time begin in force.
7.  (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under his Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before
each House of the State Legislature while it is in session for a total period of thirty days
which may be Comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and if, before
the expiry of the session immediately following the session or successive sessions aforesaid
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under such rule.
Inclusion of the
Scheduled
Castes and the
Scheduled
Tribes under
the persons
living below
poverty line.
Central
Government to
provide
requisite funds.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Act not be in
derogation of
other laws.
2
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND REASONS
Even today a substantial portion of the Scheduled Caste’ and the Scheduled Tribes’
population still lives in underprivileged conditions. Despite the reservations, a considerable
section of this population has not been able to achieve equal status.
Furthermore, even though  many socio economic actions are taken for the upliftment
of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes population, they still remain vulnerable.
They are subjected to violence, inequality and unequal opportunities to grow and flourish.
Thus, to eradicate this discrimination, inclusion of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes population in the BPL category is important.
It would be naive to assume that this inclusion will lead to a casteless society and
change the status of the population overnight, however, this would be small but definite
step towards eradicating caste from this society and giving everyone an equal chance to
grow.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI
November 9, 2016.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 6 provides that the Central Government shall provide adequate funds for
carrying out the purposes of this Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of
rupees fifty crore is likely to be incurred.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to include the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the below poverty line
category.
————
(Dr . Kirit Premjibhai Solanki, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3372LS(S3)—29-11-2016.
————