1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 306 of  2019
THE FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO STATE GOVERNMENTS FOR
DEVELOPMENT OF SLUMS AND JHUGGI-JHOPRI
AREAS BILL, 2019
 By
DR. T. SUMATHY (a) THAMIZHACHI THANGAPANDIAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for financial assistance to the State Governments for providing basic
amenities and clearance of Jhuggi-Jhopri areas and slum areas and for
 matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. ( I) This Act may be called The Financial Assistance to State Governments for
Development of Slums and Jhuggi-Jhopri Areas Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.

2
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "building" includes any structure or erection or any part of a building but
does not include a plant or machinery comprised in a building;
(b) "competent authority" means such  officer or authority as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint as the competent
authority for the purpose of this Act;
(c) “jhuggi-jhopri”  means a small roughly built house or shelter usually made
of mud, wood or metal having thatched or tin sheet roof covering;
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(e)  "slum" means an area consisting of jhuggi-jhopri areas, badly built and
overcrowded houses and buildings; and
(f) "slum clearance" means the clearance of any slum area by demolition and
removal of buildings therefrom.
3. The Central Government shall provide financial assistance to every State
Government for implementation of the provisions of this Act.
4. (1) Every State Government shall prepare a list of slums and jhuggi-jhopri in every
district of the State and forward the same to the Central Government.
(2) The Central Government shall on receipt of list under section 4 and after such
enquiry as it may deem fit, release the fund to the State Government.
5. The State Government may, from time to time, by notification in the Official Gazette,
declare any area to be a slum area within the meaning of this Act.
6. For the purpose of effective implementation of this Act, the State Government
shall, through the competent authority,—
(i)  carry out the work of improvement in slums and jhuggi-jhopri areas
from time to time in such manner as may be prescribed;
(ii) provide all basic amenities in slums and jhuggi-jhopri areas;
(iii) extend financial assistance or vocational training to the inhabitants of
slums and jhuggi-jhopri areas for their self-employment; and
(iv) construct and allot dwelling units to the inhabitants of slums and jhuggi-
jhopri areas where such areas have been declared as slum clearance areas.
7. (1) Where the competent authority is satisfied that most satisfactory method of
dealing with conditions  in a slum area is the demolition of all the buildings in the area, the
authority shall by an order notified in the Official Gazette declare the area to be a slum
clearance area, that is to say, an area to be cleared of all buildings  in accordance with
provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder.
(2) The competent authority shall give adequate notice to the inhabitants of slums and
jhuggi-jhopri areas before demolition of house, shelters or buildings.
(3)  The competent authority shall not remove or demolish any jhuggi-jhopri areas till
all residents of the area have been evacuated and allotted alternative dwelling units with all
basic amenities at convenient locations.
8. On and from the date of commencement of the Act, no person shall be allowed to
set up any jhuggi-jhopri in any area.
Definitions.
Financial
Assistance to
the State
Governments.
Preparation of
list of slums.
Declaration of
slum area.
Works of
improvement,
etc. in slum
areas.
Competent
authority to
declare a slum
area to be a
clearance area.
Ban on setting
up of Jhuggi-
Jhopri areas.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or  more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the  validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to make
rules.
5
10

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Under inhuman conditions. There are no basic facilities of potable water, electricity,
sanitation and health services in these areas. However, people have no other option but to
live in such slums and jhuggi-jhopri areas under inhuman conditions. The problem is more
appaling in metropolitan cities and other big cities where people migrate in large numbers
in search of employment. Poverty forces them to find shelter in slums and jhuggi-jhopri
areas. However, there is no policy to deal with the problems of slums and jhuggi-jhopri
areas.
Being a welfare state, it is the duty of the Government to provide alternate houses
with basic facilities to persons who are living in slum areas. The Government should also
see that slum areas do not come up and those which are already there should be cleared.
However, the State Government do not have enough funds to take corrective action.
Therefore, it is the duty of the Central  Government to provide full financial assistance to
the State Government  for aforesaid purpose.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; T. SUMATHY (a) THAMIZHACHI THANGAPANDIAN
November 4, 2019.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall provide financial
assistance to the State Government for carrying out the purpose of the Bill. Clause 6 provide
for basic facilities to those who are living in slum areas. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will
involve expenditure from  the  Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual
recurring expenditure of rupees one thousand five hundred crore will be involved from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is also likely be
involved.

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matter of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for financial assistance to the State Governments for providing basic
amenities and clearance of jhuggi-jhopri areas and slum areas and for
matters connected therewith.
————
(Dr. T. Sumathy (a) Thamizhachi Thangapandian, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—3136LS(S3)—15-11-2019.