1
THE SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO THE BACKWARD
REGION OF BUNDELKHAND BILL, 2015
By
SHRI KUNWAR PUSHPENDRA SINGH CHANDEL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the backward region of Bundelkhand for
the purpose of ensuring the welfare of farmers, agricultural labourers, landless
labourers, poor women, old aged persons and the unemployed youth and for
the development, exploitation and proper utilization of its resources.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance to the Backward Region
of Bundelkhand Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. There shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India,
every year, as Parliament may, by due appropriation provide, as special financial assistance
to the backward region of Bundelkhand to meet the costs of such schemes of development,
as may be undertaken by the States of Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh with the approval
of the Government of India for the purpose of ensuring the welfare of farmers, farming
Bill No. 306 of  2015
5
Special
financial
assistance to
backward
region of
Bundelkhand.
Short title and
commencement.
10
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Act not in
derogation of
other laws.
labourers, landless labourers, poor women, the old and the unemployed youth and for the
development, proper utilization and exploitation of the resources in the State.
3. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Bundelkhand region has been subjected to economic, social backwardness other than
being riddled with the lack of water resources. There is an urgent need to address the issues
of pitiable condition of farmers and agricultural labourers, potable water, water for irrigation,
waiver of interest on agricultural loan, poverty, illiteracy and unemployment in the
Bundelkhand region. There is a need to introduce planned financial management, planned
monitoring, optimal utilization of resources and launching of new schemes for welfare of
farmers, farm labourers, women, the old aged, the unemployed youth and overcome the
problem of backwardness of the region. Therefore, it is necessary that the Central Government
should provide financial assistance to the State Governments of Uttar Pradesh and Madhya
Pradesh for the overall development of Bundelkand region. Financial assistance to the
Bundelkhand region shall prove to be a milestone to reinforce the availability of equal
opportunity and prevalence of Justice and national unity in the backward areas.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KUNWAR PUSHPENDRA SINGH CHANDEL
November 18, 2015.
3

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that there shall be paid such sums of money out the
Consolidated Fund of India as Parliament may, by due appropriation provide as special
financial assistance to Bundelkhand region to meet the costs of such schemes of development
as may be undertaken by the States of Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh with the approval
of the Government of India.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. As the amount to be disbursed as special financial assistance to Bundelkhand region
by due appropriation of law by Parliament shall be determined after the schemes to be
implemented by the State Government with the approval of the Central Government. At this
stage, it is not possible to estimate the recurring expenditure to be incurred from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved in this behalf.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the backward region of Bundelkhand for the
purpose of ensuring the welfare of farmers, agricultural labourers, landless
labourers, poor women, old aged persons and the unemployed youth
and for the development, exploitation and proper
utilization of its resources.
————
(Shri Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel,  M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3045LS(S3)—08-12-2015.