1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
Bill No. 307 of 2016
5
THE GIRL CHILD AND ADOLESCENT GIRLS (WELFARE) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI A.T. NANA PA TIL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the  protection of girl child and  adolescent girls  from malnutrition,
anaemia and various diseases afflicting them and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh  year of the Republic of India as
follows :—
1. (i) This Act may be called the Girl Child and Adolescent Girls (Welfare) Act, 2016.
(ii) It extends to the whole of India.
(iii) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ‘‘adolescent girl’’ means a female  who has attained puberty and is below the
age of eighteen years;
(b) “appropriate Government’’ means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
10

2
(c) ‘‘girl child’’ means a female who is below the age of ten years;
(d) ‘‘parent’’ in relation to a girl child or adolescent girl, as the case may be,
include mother, father, a guardian and every person who has the actual custody of
such girl child or adolescent girl; and
(e) ‘‘prescribed’’ means prescribed by rules made under the Act.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but within one year of the commencement
of this Act, formulate and publish in the Official Gazette, a national policy for the overall
protection and welfare of the girl child and adolescent girls belonging to poor and middle
class families in the society who are malnourished, anaemic and diseases prone and shall
take appropriate measures for the uniform implementation of such a national policy.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in
sub-section (1) such national policy may indude provision for,—
(a) census or survey, from time to time, of girl child and adolescent girls who
are malnourished in slum areas, Jhuggi-Jhopri clusters, backward and tribal areas
and rural areas and maintain a data thereof in such manner and with such particulars,
as may be prescribed;
(b) conducting a periodic medical examination of every girl child and adolescent
girl covered under this Act from time to time and taking such remedial measures as
are recommended by the medical authorities;
(c) making it mandatory for the appropriate Government to provide folic acid
and multi-vitamin tablets to every malnourished and anaemic girl child and adolescent
girl;
(d) providing a monthly allowance of not less than two thousand rupees to every
malnourished girl child and adolescent girl covered under this Act for taking healthy
meals in such manner as may be prescribed;
(e) providing sanitary napkins and proper dresses to the adolescent girls covered
under this Act in such manner as may be prescribed.
4. (1) It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to provide every girl child and
adolescent girl covered under this Act—
(a) medical facilities including medicines and hospitalization wherever necessary
free of cost ;
(b) educational facilities including technical, medical, vocational, information
technology and higher education at the college and university level free of cost;
(c) recreational, entertainment and playing facilities;
(d) such other welfare and protective measures as may be deemed necessary
and appropriate or as may be prescribed.
(2)  It shall be the duty of every parent of a girl child or adolescent girl covered under
this Act,—
(a) to send the girl child or adolescent girl, as the case may be, to an educational
institution for getting education as per her age;
(b) not to burden the girl child or adolescent girl, as the case may be, with
household chores and allow her to study, play and entertain;
(c) Not to pledge or force the girl child or adolescent girl, as the case may be, to
work as a domestic servant.
National
Policy for the
protection
and welfare of
girl child and
adolescent
girls.
Certain
welfare
measures for
the girl child
and
adolescent
girls.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(3) No person shall employ a girl child or adolescent girl as domestic servant or in any
establishment in any manner whatsoever.
5. Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (2) or (3) of section 4 shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year but may
extend upto three years and also with fine which may extend upto two lakh rupees.
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite funds, from time to time, to the State Governments for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
7. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force dealing with the subject matter of this Act.
8.  (1) The Central Government may, by  notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of  thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before
the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modifications,
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
that rule.
Penalty.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Malnutrition and anaemia is prevalent among the girl child and adolescent girls in all
the States and regions of the country. India has the highest number of malnourished and
anaemic girl child and adolescent girls. It is very unfortunate that girl child and adolescent
girls in major parts of our vast nation remain neglected, malnourished and suffer from anaemia
and various diseases. In some parts they are married off before becoming adult and majority
of such malnourished Balika Vadhus meet pre-natal and post-natal deaths. They are not
treated well in their own families. They are either not given nutritious meals or their families
cannot afford nutritious meals for them. In some cases, they don't even get two square meals.
Majority of them are forced to work as domestic maids etc. They remain illiterate and exploited.
Ours is a welfare State and it is the duty of the State to take care of these malnourished
girl child and adolescent girls and initiate welfare measures for them.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; A.T. NANA PATIL
November 7, 2016.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that Central Government shall formulate a  National policy
for the protection and welfare of girl child and adolescent girls. Clause 4 provides for certain
welfare measures for the girl child and adolescent girls. Clause 6 makes it mandatory for the
Central Government to provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The
Bill, therefor, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
estimated that a sum of rupees thirty thousand crore may involve as recurring expenditure
per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of  rupees twenty thousand crore is also likely
to be  involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 8 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carring out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of  a normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
 to provide for the  protection of girl child and  adolescent girls  from malnutrition, anaemia
and various diseases afflicting them and for matters connected therewith..
————
(Shri A.T. Nana Patil, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3320LS(S3)—29.11.2016.