1
THE FOOD SAFETY AND STANDARDS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI CHANDRAKANT KHAIRE, M.P .
A
BILL
further to amend the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Food Safety and Standards (Amendment) Act,  2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No.  307 of 2015
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In section 3 of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006, (hereinafter referred to as
the principal Act), in sub-section (1), in clause (zz), after sub-clause (vii), the following sub-
clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(viia) by injecting chemical into any food, vegetable or fruit in order to early
ripen or colour which is not permitted;".
3. In section 65 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for clauses (a), (b), (c) and the
provisos thereunder, the following clauses and provisos shall be substituted, namely:—
"(a) not less than rupees twenty lakh in case of death;
(b) not less than rupees ten lakh in case of grievous injury;
(c) not less than rupees five lakh in other cases of injury; and
(d) not less than rupees two lakh in case of minor injury:
Provided that the compensation shall be paid at the earliest and in no case later  than
three months from the date of occurrence of the incident:
Provided further that in case of death, an interim relief of not less than rupees ten lakh
shall be paid to the next of the kin within thirty days of the incident.".
Amendment
of section 3.
Amendment
of section 65.
10
34 of 2006.
5
15

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 provides for regulation of manufacture,
storage, distribution, sale and export of articles of food to ensure availability of safe and
wholesome food for human consumption. However, the present Act fails to address the
issue of early ripening of fruits or vegetables by injecting harmful chemicals into them. The
regulation for the same is urgently required. Moreover, the Act also provides for compensation
in case of injury or death of consumer, which does not commensurate with the gravity of
offence committed. Therefore, it is proposed to enhance the compensation and payment of
the same in a time bound manner.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 with a
view to—
(i) include act of early ripening of fruits or vegetables by injecting harmful chemicals
or adding colours to make food unsafe as offence; and
(ii) enhance the compensation for offences in case of injury or death of consumer.
Hence, this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; CHANDRAKANT KHAIRE
November 18, 2015.
3

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE FOOD SAFETY AND STANDARDS ACT, 2006
(No. 34 of 2006)
3.(1) * * * * *
(zz) "unsafe food" means an article of food whose nature, substance or quality is  so
affected as to render it injurious to health:—
(i) * * * * *
* * * * *
(vii) by the article being so coloured, flavored or coated, powdered or polished, as to
damage or conceal the article or to make it appear better or of greater value than it really is; or
* * * * *
65 (1) Without prejudice to the other provisions of this Chapter, if any person whether
by himself or by any other person on his behalf, manufactures or distributes or sells or
imports any article of food causing injury to the consumer or his death, it shall be lawful for
the Adjudicating Officer or as the case may be, the court to direct him to pay compensation
to the victim or the legal representative of the victim, a sum—
(a) not less than five lakh rupees in case of death;
(b) not exceeding three lakh rupees in case of grievous injury; and
(c) not exceeding one lakh rupees, in all other cases of injury:
Provided that the compensation shall be paid at the earliest and in no case later than
six months from the date of occurrence of the incident: Provided further that in case of death,
an interim relief shall be paid to the next of the kin within thirty days of the incident.
* * * * *
Definitions.
Compensation
in case of
injury or death
of consumer.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006.
————
(Shri Chandrakant Khaire, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2942LS(S3)—08-12-2015.