1
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 308 of  2019
THE COMPULSORY TEACHING OF CONSTITUTION IN
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS BILL, 2019
By
SHRI VINOD KUMAR SONKAR, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory teaching of Constitution in all educational institutions and  for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Teaching of Constitution in Educational
Institutions Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Advisory Council" means the Advisory Council for Teaching Constitution
constituted under section 6;
( b) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(c) "educational institution" means a primary or a middle or a secondary or a
senior secondary level school or an University or college imparting education to student,
by whatever name such institution is called but does not include a minority educational
institution; and
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. From such date, as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette specify, the Constitution shall be taught as a compulsory subject in all educational
institutions from such class onwards as may be determined by the Central Government on
the recommendation of the Advisory Council.
4. The appropriate Government shall, immediately after issuance of the notification
under section 3, issue directions for compulsory teaching of Constitution in educational
institutions from such class onwards as it may determine, within its jurisdiction.
5. Subject to such rules, as may be prescribed, the appropriate Government shall ensure
appointment of such number of teachers with such qualifications, as may be specified, for
teaching constitution in all educational institutions.
6. (1) The Central Government shall, within three months of the coming into force of
the Compulsory Teaching Constitution in Educational Institutions Act, 2019, by notification
in the Official Gazette, constitute an Advisory Council for Teaching Constitution of India.
(2) The Advisory Council shall consist of such number of persons, having special
knowledge or practical experience in the field of teaching, legal profession or administration,
as the Central Government may deem fit.
7. The Advisory Council shall perform the following functions, namely:—
(a) recommend to the Central Government the class from which onwards the
Constitution of India shall be taught in educational institutions;
(b) recommend to the appropriate Government the qualifications of teachers to
be appointed in educational institutions for teaching Constitution of India;
(c) recommend to the appropriate Government the institutions which may be
given recognition for training teachers in Constitution of India for the purpose of their
appointment in educational institutions;
(d) co-ordinate with the appropriate Government and the school authorities with
a view to ensuring effective implementation of the provisions of this Act.
8. The appropriate Government shall de-recognize educational institutions, which does
not comply with the provisions of section 4, after giving such institution a reasonable
opportunity of being heard.
9. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by law by
Parliament in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying
out the purposes of this Act.
Definitions.
Compulsory
teaching of
Constitution.
Appropriate
Government to
issue directions
for compulsory
teaching of
Constitution in
educational
institutions.
Appointment of
teachers.
Constitution of
Advisory
Council for
Teaching
Constitution.
Functions of
Advisory
Council for
Teaching
constitution.
De-recognition
of educational
institutions for
non-compliance
of the provisions
of the Act.
Central
Government to
provide fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
10. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purpose of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to make
rules.
5
10

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
It has been generally believed among different sections and groups of the society that
the knowledge of the Constitution of India is only meant for the law students. Lawyers and
politicians, etc. But no one ever thought that how important role can basic information
about the Constitution play in our daily life. It is very necessary for every person to have
certain basic knowledge of their own Constitution including his fundamental rights, duties
and guarantees and protection available to him. There are certain provisions of the
Constitution, basic knowledge of which is very necessary for a person, even if doesn't
belong to a group which is related to legal field. Lack of knowledge is the main reason that
certain rights of a person get violated so easily.
It has been said that "Knowledge is the Power", and indeed it is not wrong. It is
responsibility of education system to make a common man aware of his constitutional rights
and how these rights can be saved. Current education system in educational institutions
lays emphasis on imparting quality education. However, it is missing out on imparting
teaching of the Constitution and is, therefore, incomplete without it.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide for teaching Constitution compulsory in all
educational institutions to make every students aware of basic values, ideals, feature and
fundamental provisions of the Constitution.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; VINOD KUMAR SONKAR
November 6, 2019

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for appointment of teachers for teaching Constitution in
all educational institutions. Clause 6 provides for Constitution of Advisory Council for
Teaching Constitution by the Central Government. Clause 8 provides for payment of adequate
funds to the States for carrying out the purposes of the Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted,
would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. At this stage, it is not
possible to give exact estimate of expenditure, both recurring and non-recurring, which
will be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India, if the Bill is enacted into a law.
However, it is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore
will be involved per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory teaching of Constitution in all educational institutions
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Vinod Kumar Sonkar,  M.P.)
MGIPMRND—3143LS(S3)—15-11-2019.