1
Bill No. 308 of  2015
THE  DROUGHT CONTROL AND PROTECTION OF FARMERS OF
DROUGHT PRONE AREAS BILL, 2015
By
SHRI KUNWAR PUSHPENDRA SINGH CHANDEL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide funds to the States affected with drought for construction and maintenance
of water resources for irrigation; interest-free agricultural loans for protection
of farmers of the drought prone area; encouragement to bio-farming
and action plan for the creation of market for agricultural
produce  and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Drought Control and Protection of Farmers of
Drought Prone Areas Bill, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "drought prone areas" means the areas consistently receiving below normal
rainfall and includes such areas which in the opinion of Central Government are
drought prone areas and declared as such, by notification in the Official Gazette, in
consultation with the State Governments concerned; and
(b) "irrigation infrastructure" means infrastructure such as canal, dam, tube
well, pump canal (lift canal), pipeline, river linking including construction and
preservation of lakes and ponds.
3. The Central Government shall provide adequate funds to the State affected with
drought particularly for making availability of water for irrigation purposes and to carry
out development and maintenance of irrigation infrastructure in the drought prone areas
of that State.
4. The Central Government shall provide interest-free agricultural loans from
Nationalised banks to the farmers of the drought prone areas in such manner as may be
prescribed.
5. (1) The Central Government shall formulate a Crop Insurance Scheme for the
welfare of farmers of the drought prone areas.
(2) The payment of premium in respect of insurance shall be borne by the
Central Government.
6. It shall be the duty of the Central Government to pay the bonus for the sale of
crops produced by the farmers of the drought prone areas directly into the accounts of
the farmers through electronic payment.
7. ( 1) The Central Government shall encourage and formulate action plan for
bio-farming in the drought prone areas.
(2) The action plan for the bio-farming in the drought prone areas shall inter-alia
include—
(a) provision for payment of encouragement amount to farmers engaged in
bio-farming;
(b) insurance for bio-farming; and
(c) marketing of the bio-farming products.
8. The Central Government shall after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, provide requisite funds, from time to time, for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
9. The Central Government may give such directions to the Government of any
State having drought prone areas within its territorial jurisdiction, as may appear it to be
necessary for carrying out in the State any provisions of this Act or of any rule made
thereunder.
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a
total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification
in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however,
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of
anything previously done under the rule.
Funds to the
State for
development
and
maintenance
of irrigation
infrastructure
in drought
prone areas.
Interest-free
agricultural
loans to
farmers.
Insurance
Scheme.
Payment of
Agricultural
bonus.
Encouragement
to bio-
farming.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Power to give
directions.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The problem of non-availability of water for irrigation and drinking purposes in
Bundelkhand region has turned out to be a grave issue. This region traditionally has been an
agricultural based region and for this purpose the popular local Chandel Kings had initiated
many schemes during their regime whose archaeological evidences are still present here and
is hopeful of a new research in this regard. Many development blocks of Hamirpur
Parliamentary constituency have been declared as "dark zone" by the Government. People
are left with no choice other than hoping for a divine intervention which is the last resort of
the disappointed Indian society. Such areas are spread over various geographical conditions
in the whole country and there is a need to provide potable water without any further delay
to the said areas. Initiation of irrigation schemes and farmer protection schemes remains the
only way out for the distressed people of the region and such a step will encourage the
people to work for the development of the country with full energy.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide for the construction and maintenance of water
resources and irrigation infrastructure like canal, dams, tube well, pipeline, pump canal (lift
canal) river linking, preservation of lakes and pond for drought control in the country;
interest-free agricultural loans for protection of farmers of the drought prone area; and
encouragement to bio-farming and action plan for the creation of market for agricultural
produce and for matters connected therewith.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KUNWAR PUSHPENDRA SINGH CHANDEL
November 18, 2015.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that Central Government shall provide adequate funds to
the drought affected states for making available water for irrigation and carrying out
development and maintenance of irrigation infrastructure in drought prone areas. Clause 4
provides for proceeding interest-free agricultural loans from Nationalised banks to the farmers
of drought prone areas.
Clause 5 provides for the formulation of a Crop Insurance Scheme for the farmers of
drought prone areas. It also provides that the premium in respect of crop insurance shall be
borne by the Central Government. Clause 6 provides for payment of agricultural bonus to the
farmers of drought prone areas. Clause 7 provides for payment of encouragement amount
and insurance for bio-farming by the Government. Clause 8 provides that Central Government
shall provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. At this stage, it is not possible to estimate the amount likely to be incurred from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of about rupees One thousand Crore
would be involved as recurring expenditure per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved in this behalf.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will matters of detail only the delegation of legislative
power is of a normal character.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide funds to the States affected with drought for construction and maintenance
of water resources for irrigation; interest-free agricultural loans for protection
of farmers of the drought prone area; encouragement to bio-farming
and action plan for the creation of market for agricultural
produce  and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3020LS(S3)—08-12-2015.