1
THE REPRESENTA TION OF THE PEOPLE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI FEROZE VARUN GANDHI, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Representation of the People  (Amendment)
Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In section 2 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 (hereinafter referred to as
the principal Act), in sub-section (1),—
(a) after clause (bb), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(bc) “constituency” means the Parliamentary constituency or the
Assembly constituency, as the case may be;”;
(b) after clause (e), the following clause shall be inserted:—
“(ea) “member” in reference to PART VB means member of the House of
the People or the Legislative Assembly of  a State, as the case may be;’;
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 308  of  2016
Interpretation.43 of 1951.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(c) after clause (h), the following clause shall be inserted:—
‘(ha) “recall petition” means a petition calling for vacation of seat of a
Member of Parliament of the House of the People or the Legislative Assembly of
a State, as the case may be;’; and
(d) after clause (i), the following clause shall be inserted:—
‘(ia) “Speaker” means the Speaker of the House of the People or the
Legislative Assembly of a State, as the case may be;’, and
3. After PART VA of the principal Act, the following PART and sections thereunder
shall be inserted, namely:—
“PART VB
Recall of Representatives
78C. (1) Any elector of a particular constituency, may, if not satisfied with the
performance of elected member of that constituency, file a recall petition, signed by not
less than one-fourth of the total number of electors of that constituency, with the
Speaker in such manner as  may be prescribed.
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), no process of recall of a member
shall be initiated—
(i) within a period of two years from the date of election of that member; or
(ii) if that member was elected in a bye-election and one-half of the period
of tenure of such member has not expired; or
(iii) before the expiry of a period of six months from the date of submission
of an earlier recall petition; or
(iv) within a period of six months prior to the polling day for the next
general election for the purpose of constituting a new House of the People or a
new State Legislative Assembly, as the case may be; or
(v) if  that member is already subject to a recall petition process.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, the expression “member is
already subject to a recall petition process” means the period beginning with the
reference of the recall petition by the Speaker to the Election Commission and
ending with the notification by the Speaker of the outcome of the petition.
78D. (1) The Speaker shall, as soon as possible, after confirming the genuineness
of the recall petition filed under section 78C refer the recall petition to the Election
Commission for verification and signing by electors of the constituency from where
the member whose recall petition has been filed got elected.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, it is clarified that the Speaker
shall not entail a review of the merit of the recall petition or decide as to whether that
member should be recalled but shall instead limit his review to decide whether the
petition has been filed by an eligible person, whether it bears the requisite number of
signatures and whether it sets out in detail reasons for recall of the member and that
the recall petition is not prima facie frivolous.
(2) The Election Commission shall, on receipt of recall petition from the Speaker,
initiate the verification process for authentication of the signatures on the recall petition
in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that the verification process for authentication of signatures shall be
completed within a period of ninety days from the date of receipt of the recall petition
from the Speaker.
Insertion of
new Part VB.
Initiation of
the recall
process for a
member.
Verification
of signatures
in recall
petition.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
78E. (1) The Election Commission shall, if safisfied about the genuineness of
signatures on the recall petition, designate one of its officials to be Chief Petition
Officer in relation to that recall petition.
(2) The Chief Petition Officer shall be responsible for the conduct of the recall
petition.
(3) The Election Commission shall provide the Chief Petition Officer such
number of employees and funds as may be necessary for the conduct of recall petition.
78F. (1) The Chief Petition Officer shall, within ten days of the receipt of recall
petition, specify—
(a) a place or places where the recall petition shall be made available for
signing by the electors; and
(b) the days on which the recall petition shall be made available for signing
to the electors:
Provided that the Chief Petition Officer shall not specify more than ten
places within the constituency for signing the recall petition:
Provided further that, in extraordinary circumstances, the Chief Petition
Officer may specify more than ten places within the constituency for signing the
recall petition after presenting in writing detailed reasons thereof to the Election
Commission and the Speaker:
Provided also that in specifying the number of places where the recall
petition shall be made available, due consideration shall be given to the size and
population of the constituency in respect of whose member, the recall petition
has been filed.
(2) The Chief Petition Officer, while specifying the place or places under
clause (a) of sub-section (1), shall ensure that—
(a) all electors entitled to sign the recall petition have such reasonable
facilities for signing it as are practicable in the circumstances; and
(b) as far as practicable, every place where the recall petition is made
available for signing is accessible to persons with disabilities.
78G . (1) The Chief Petition Officer shall, within a period of ten days after specifying
the places and the days under sub-section (1) of section 78F,—
(a) issue a public notice containing details of the designated places and
days on which every elector eligible to vote in the constituency may sign on
recall petition;
(b) cause such notice to be printed in all the leading newspapers circulated
in the constituency; and
(c) cause such notice to be put up on the notice board of all the Courts,
Government offices and institutions in the constituency.
78H. Every elector of the constituency, in respect of whose member the recall
petition has been filed, shall be eligible to sign the recall petition.
78I. (1) Every recall petition shall be signed by means of electronic voting
machines.
(2) For the purposes of this Act, every voting on recall petition by electronic
voting machines shall be deemed to be a signature of an elector on the recall petition.
78J. (1) The Chief Petition Officer shall, within a period of not more than fifteen
days after the end of the signing period, cause the signatures to be counted and
forward the result of counting to the Speaker.
Chief Petition
Officer and
other
employees.
Procedure for
signing recall
petition.
Notice of
signing on the
petition.
Persons
eligible to
sign recall
petition.
Manner of
signing the
recall
petition.
Counting of
signatures and
declaration of
result.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(2) A recall petition of a member shall be deemed to be a successful recall petition
for the purposes of this Act, if it is signed under section 781 by electors whose number
is not less than three-fourth of the member of valid votes which that member was
polled in his election.
(3) The Speaker shall, within twenty-four hours of the receipt of the result of
counting under sub-section (2), notify the result to the general public in such manner
as may be prescribed.
78K. The member, in respect of whom the recall petition was filed, upon notification
of the successful recall petition under sub-section (3) of section 78J, shall be deemed
to have vacated his seat in the House of the People or Legislative Assembly of a State,
as the case may be.
78L. When as a result of a successful recall petition, a seat in the House of the
People or the Legislative Assembly of a State, as the case may be, is duly vacated
under section 78K, the Election Commission shall cause a bye-election to be held to fill
the vacant seat in such manner as may be prescribed.
78M. Whoever,—
(a) tampers with or forges any of the signatures including on the initial
recall petition submitted to the Speaker; or
(b) signs the same recall petition more than once; or
(c) either directly or through an agent, gives bribe by way of gift, offer or
promise any gratification to any person with a view to directly or indirectly
induce such person to sign or refrain from signing a recall petition; or
(d) receives, either directly or through an agent, by way of gift, offer or
promise any gratification, either himself or through an agent , from any person in
respect for signing or refraining from signing a recall petition,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend upto five years or
with a fine which may extend upto rupees ten lakh or with both.
Explanation—For the purposes of this section the term “gratification” shall not be
restricted to pecuniary gratifications or gratifications estimable in money and shall
include all forms of entertainment and all forms of employment for reward.”.
V acation of
seat upon
recall.
Conduct of a
bye-election.
Penalties.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STA TEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
True democracy envisages a government that is of the people, for the people and by
the people. Unfortunately oftentimes, in a first past the post system not every elected
representative truly enjoys the mandate of the people. Logic and justice necessitate that if
the people have the power to elect their representatives, they should also have the power to
remove these representatives when they engage in misdeeds or fail to fulfil their duties.
At present there exists no recourse to the electorate if they are unhappy with their
elected representative. The Representation of the People Act, 1951 only provides for vacation
of office upon the commission of certain offences and does not account for general
incompetence of the representatives or dissatisfaction of the electorate as a ground for
vacation.
Countries all over the world have experimented with the concept of Right to Recall.
The system exists at the State level in many States of the United States and at the Cantonal
Level in Switzerland as well as at the national level in Venezuela. In India too attempts have
been made at the local level to incorporate recall provisions in the cases of mayors, sarpanchs
and other local government officials in certain states.
Whereas it is necessary to ensure that a recall process is not frivolous and does not
became a source of harassment to elected representatives by preventing them from exercising
their duties, the process for recall has several safeguards incorporated in it such as an initial
recall petition to kick start the process and electronic based voting to finally decide its
outcome.
The Bill provides for verification of signatures and first review by the Speaker of the
concerned House. Furthermore, to ensure that a representative cannot be recalled by a small
margin of voters and that the recall procedure truly represents the mandate of the people, the
threshold for success of a recall petition is accordingly high. To ensure transparency and
independence, Chief Petition Officers from within the election commission have been
designated to supervise and execute the process. Furthermore, the Bill, recognizing the
potential for abuse of certain provisions has accordingly provided more than adequate
punishment for such abuses.
A free and fair election is right of the citizens of the country and in the event that their
elected representatives no longer enjoy the confidence of the people, the people must have
a right to remove them. It is on this edifice of accountability of politicians that the true idea
of democracy can be achieved.
Hence this Bill
N
EW DELHI; FEROZE V ARUN GANDHI
November  3,  2016.
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill vide proposed section 78E(3) provides that Election Commission
shall provide the Chief Petition Officer with such number of employees and funds as may be
necessary for the conduct of recall petition. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. As the expenditure to be incurred would
depend upon the number of recall petitions filed, it is not possible at this stage to give the
exact amount of recurring expenditure which would be involved out of the Consolidated
Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is also likely to be involved.
6

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 3 of the Bill vide proposed section 78C provides that any elector may file a recall
petition with the speaker in such manner as may be prescribed. The proposed section 78D
empowers the Election Commission to initiate verification process for authentication of
signatures on the recall petition in such manner as may be prescribed. The proposed section
78J empowers the Speaker to notify the result of counting of signatures on recall petition
within 24 hours of the receipt of result in such manner as may be prescribed. The proposed
section 78K empowers the Election Commission to hold a bye-election to fill the vacant seat
on a successful recall petition in such manner as may be prescribed. As the rules with relate
to matters of detail only, the delegation of  legislative power is of  a normal character.
7

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE REPRESENTATION OF PEOPLE ACT, 1951
(43 OF 1951)
****
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
****
(bb) “chief electoral officer” means the officer appointed under section 13A of
the Representation of the People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950);
****
(e) “elector” in relation to a constituency means a person whose name is entered
in the electoral roll of that constituency for the time being in force and who is not
subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in section 16 of the Representation
of the People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950);
****
(h) “public holiday” means any day which is a public holiday for the purposes of
section 25 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 (26 of 1881);
****
Interpretation.
8

GMGIPMRND—3407LS(S3)—30-11-2016.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
————
(Shri Feroze Varun Gandhi, M.P.)