1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title  and
commencement.
Bill No. 309 of  2016
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Amendment
of article 124.
2. In article 124 of the Constitution,
(a) in clause (2),—
(i) for the words "on the recommendation of the National Judicial
Appointments Commission referred to in article 124A", the words "after
consultation with the Chief Justice of India and four senior most Judges of the
Supreme Court" shall be substituted; and
(ii) after the proviso, the following Explanation shall be added at the end,
namely:—
"Explanation.—In this clause, 'consultation' means taking opinion or views in
a merely advisory manner without any compulsion to act in accordance with the
advice tendered during the course of such consultation.";
(b) the existing clause (2A) shall be renumbered as clause (2B) and before
clause (2B) as so renumbered, the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(2A) The appointment of the Chief Justice of India shall be made on the
basis of seniority.".
3. Article 124A, 124B and 124C shall be omitted.
4. In article 217 of the Constitution, in clause (1),—
(a) for the words "Every Judge of a High Court shall be appointed by the
President by warrant under his hand and seal on the recommendation of the National
Judicial Appointments Commission referred to in article 124A", the words "Every
Judge of a High Court, including the Chief Justice, shall be appointed by the President
by warrant under his hand and seal after consultation with the Chief Justice of India,
two senior most Judges of the Supreme Court, the Governor of the State, and, in the
case of appointment of a Judge other than the Chief Justice, the Chief Justice of the
High Court" shall be substituted; and
(b) after the proviso, the following Explanation shall be added at the end,
namely:—
"Explanation.—In this clause, 'consultation' means taking opinion or views in
a merely advisory manner without any compulsion to act in accordance with the
advice tendered during the course of such consultation.".
Omission of
articles 124A,
124B and
124C.
Amendment
of article 217.
5
10
15
20
25
30

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Indian Constitution aims to establish an independent judiciary; for the
judiciary entrusted with the power of judicial review cannot perform its functions without
any fear or favour unless it is kept outside realm of control of the executive and the
legislature. Towards this end, the Constitution, as originally enacted, provided that the
appointment of judges to the Supreme Court and the High Courts shall be made by the
President through a consultative process in which, inter alia , the Chief Justice of India
and, in case of appointment of a judge to a High Court, the Chief Justice of that High
Court shall be consulted. What the Constitution envisaged, therefore, was essentially
a participatory consultative process for selecting the best and most suitable persons
for appointment to the higher judiciary. It was so held by the Supreme Court in S.P.
Gupta vs. Union of India (1982).
However, the constitutional provisions regarding appointment to the higher judiciary
were almost rewritten by the Supreme Court in Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record Vs.
Union of India (1993), where the Court held that in case of any conflict, the opinion of the
Chief Justice of India, formed after consulting two senior most judges of the Supreme
Court,  shall have primacy over the others and no appointment can be made unless it is
in conformity with the opinion of the Chief Justice of India as 'consultation' under articles
124 and 217 means 'concurrence'.
The scope of consultation with the Chief Justice of India was further widened by
the Supreme Court in its opinion in Presidential Reference under article 143 in 1998. The
Court held that the Chief Justice was required to consult, in case of appointment to the
Supreme Court, a collegium of four senior most judges of the Supreme Court, and in case
of appointment to the High Courts, two senior most judges of the Supreme Court and
among others, the Chief Justice of the concerned High Court and other judges of the
Supreme Court and the High Court.
The balance between the authority of the executive and the judiciary was sought to
be restored by the Constitution (Ninety-ninth Amendment) Act, 2014, which ushered in
the mechanism of National Judicial Appointments Commission to make appointments to
the higher judiciary. The amendment was, however, struck down by the Supreme Court in
Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record Vs. Union of India (2015). Thus, the collegium
system has been restored, though the court held that "the present Collegium system lacks
transparency, accountability and objectivity".
Amid a situation where the balance of power has been tilted in favour of the judiciary
vis-a-vis judicial appointments, it would be wise to recollect what Dr. B.R. Ambedkar had
said during debates in the Constituent Assembly on 24th May, 1949:—
".....it would be dangerous to leave the appointments to be made by the
President, without any kind of reservation or limitation, that is to say, merely on the
advice of the executive of the day..... and I think, to allow the Chief Justice practically
a veto upon the appointment of judges is really to transfer the authority to the
Chief Justice which we are not prepared to vest in the President or the Government
of the day. I, therefore, think that is also a dangerous proposition. ....."
It would, therefore, be prudent to accept a middle path where both the institutions,
namely the executive and judiciary, are able to remove the imperfections in the decision
making of the other in the matters of appointment to higher judiciary.

With the above objectives in view, the Bill seeks to amend the Constitution with a
view to provide that while the President has to consult the Chief Justice of India and
other Judges of the Supreme Court and the Chief Justice of the High Court in case of
appointment of  the Judge of the Supreme Court or the High Court, as the case may be,
the President shall not be under compulsion to act according to the advice tendered after
such consultation.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BHARTRUHARI  MAHTAB
November 4, 2016.
4

5
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * * *
124 (1) There shall be a Supreme Court of India consisting of a Chief Justice of India
and, until Parliament by law prescribes a larger number, of no more than seven other Judges.
(2) Every Judge of the Supreme Court shall be appointed by the President by warrant
under his hand and seal on the recommendation of the National Judicial Appointments
Commission referred to in article 124A and shall hold office until he attains the age of sixty-
five years:
Provided that—(a) a Judge may, by writing under his hand addressed to the President,
resign his office; ( b) a Judge may be removed from his office in the manner provided in
clause (4).
(2A) The age of a Judge of the Supreme Court shall be determined by such authority
and in such manner as Parliament may be law provide.
* * * * * *
124A (1) There shall be a Commission to be known at the National Judicial
Appointments Commission consisting of the following, namely:—
(a)  the Chief Justice of India, Chairperson, ex-officio;
(b) two other senior Judges of the Supreme Court next to the Chief Justice of
India—Members, ex-officio;
(c) the Union Minister in charge of Law and Justice — Member, ex officio;
(d)  two eminent persons to be nominated by the committee consisting of the
Prime Minister, the Chief Justice of India and the Leader of Opposition in the House
of the People or where there is no such Leader of  Opposition, then, the Leader of
single largest Opposition Party in the House of the People—Members:
Provided that one of the eminent person shall be nominated from amongst the
persons belonging to the Scheduled Caste, the Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward
Classes, Minorities or Women: Provided further that an eminent persons shall be
nominated for a period of three years and shall not be eligible for renomination.
(2) No act or proceedings of the National Judicial Appointments Commission shall
be questioned or be invalidated merely on the ground of the existence of any vacancy or
defect in the Constitution of the Commission.
124B. It shall be the duty of the National Judicial Appointments Commission to—
(a) recommend persons for appointment as Chief Justice of India, Judges of the
Supreme Court, Chief Justices of  High Courts and other Judges of High Courts;
(b) recommend transfer of Chief Justice and other Judges of High Courts from
one High Court to any other High Court; and
(c) ensure that the person recommended is of ability and integrity.
124C. Parliament may, by law, regulate the procedure for the appointment of
Chief Justice of India and other Judges of the Supreme Court and Chief Justices and
other Judges of High Courts and empower the Commission to lay down by regulations
the procedure for the discharge of its functions, the manner of selection of persons
for appointment and such other matters as may be considered by it.
* * * * * *
Establishment
and
Constitution
of Supreme
Court.
National
Judicial
Appointments
Commission.
Functions of
Commission.
Power of
Parliament to
make law.

217 (1) Every Judge of a High Court shall be appointed by the President by warrant
under his hand and seal on the recommendation of the National Judicial Appointments
Commission referred to in article 124A, and shall hold office, in the case of an additional or
acting Judge, as provided in article 224, and in any other case, until he attains the age of
sixty two years:
Provided that — (a) a Judge may, by writing under his hand addressed to the President,
resign his office;
(b) a Judge may be removed from his office by the President in the manner provided
in clause (4) of article 124 for the removal of a Judge of the Supreme Court;
(c) the office of a Judge shall be vacated by his being appointed by the President to
be a Judge of the Supreme Court or by his being transferred by the President to any other
High Court within the territory of India.
* * * * * *
6
Appointment
and conditions
of the office
of a Judge of a
High Court.

LOK   SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3276LS(S3)—30-11-2016.