1
THE RESIDENTIAL SCHOOLS (FOR SCHEDULED CASTES AND
SCHEDULED TRIBES) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI KODIKUNNIL SURESH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for setting up of residential schools for children belonging to the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Residential Schools (For Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes) Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
Short title and
extent.
Bill No.  309   of 2015
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, "appropriate Government" means
in the case of a State, the Government of that State and in all other cases, the Central
Government;
3. (1) The Central Government shall set up a residential school in every area having
such high population of the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes as the Central
Government may deem appropriate.
(2) The residential school shall cater to children belonging to the Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes only.
(3) The residential school shall conduct classes from nursery to twelfth standard.
(4) The medium of instruction shall be English, Hindi and the language of the State in
which the school is situated.
(5) No fees or other expenses, whatsoever, shall be charged from any student and the
education shall be imparted free of cost.
4. The appropriate Government shall provide land free of cost for setting up of
residential schools within  its territorial jurisdiction and shall not charge any money for
providing essential services like electricity and water.
5. (1) The examinations and course of studies in residential schools shall be on the
lines of schools following Central Board of Secondary Education pattern.
(2) The students shall also be given training in vocational courses of their choice.
6. The residential schools shall have all basic infrastructure facilities like playground,
library, laboratories, hostels and free dining facilities.
7. (1) The Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Definition.
Central
Government
to set up
residential
schools for
the Scheduled
Castes and
Scheduled
Tribes.
Appropriate
Government
to provide
land for
setting up of
residential
schools.
Residential
schools to
have basic
facilities.
Residential
schools to
follow CBSE
pattern.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes are residing in
large number in certain areas. But there are not enough educational facilities in those
areas. The children belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, being
generally poor, cannot afford good education in private schools and the Government
schools are very few.
Therefore, it is proposed that residential schools should be set up exclusively for
children belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes with all facilities.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KODIKUNNIL SURESH
November 18, 2015.
3

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to set up residential schools exclusively for children
belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in areas where their
concentration is high. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve an annual recurring expenditure of about
rupees one thousand crore.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees two thousand crore would also be
involved.

5
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government to make rules for
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for setting up of residential schools for children belonging to the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Kodikunnil Suresh, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3086LS(S3)—08-12-2015.