As Inrropucep 1x Lox SABHA

28 FEB 1992

Pardes’ 30 of 1992
THE INDIAN RED CROSS SOCIETY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1992
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Red Cross Society Act, 1920.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-third Year of the Republic
of India as follows:—

1, (1) This Act-may be called the Indian Red Cross‘Society (Amend-
ment) Act, 1992: ,

5. (2) It shall be deemed to have come: into force on the 28rd day of
January, 1992.

2. After section 4 of the Indian Red Cross Society Act, 1920 (herein-

after referred to as the principal Act), the following sections shall be
inserted; namely: —

10 “4A, The President of India shall be the President of the Society
(hereinafter referred to as the President).

4B. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in. section 3, the
(a) a Chairman to be nominated by the President for such
15 term as he may deem fit;

(0) six members to be nominated by the President for such
tetin as he may deem fit;

Short

title and
commence-
ment.

Insertion
of new
sections
4A to 48.
Presiden
of the
Society.

Composi-

Managing Body shall consist of the following members, namely:— tion of

Managing
Body.


Secretary-
General
and
Treasurer
of the
Society.

(०) twelve members to be elected by the State Branch
Committees for a term of two years in accordance with the
tules made by the Managing Body under section 5:

Provided that not more than one member shall be elected by
any State Branch Committee:

Provided further that no member, elected under this section,
shall hold office continuously for more than two terms.

(2) The Managing Body existing immediately before the com-
™mencement of the Indian Red Cross Society (Amendment) Act, 1992
shall’ cease to exist and the Chairman and all the mem-
bers of the said Body shall be deemed to have vacated their officers
on such commencement and the Managing Body shall be reconstituted
within a period of six months from such commencement in accor-
dance with the provisions of sub-section (7) and until it is so re-
constituted, the President may authorise any person or body of
Persons to exercise and discharge all the powers, functions and
duties which may, under the provistons of this Act or the rules
made thereunder, be exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the
Managing Body.

40. (1) The Managing Body shall, with the previous approval of
the President, appoint a Secretary-Goneral and a Treasurer of the
Society. :

(2) The term of office and the conditions of service of the
Secretary-General and the Treasurer shall be such as the Managing
Body may determine by rules made under section 5:

Provided that the term of office and conditions of service of the
Secretary-General and the Treasurer may be varied in like manner
by the Managing Body.

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any contract or
agreement and notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of
any court, tribunal or authority or anything contained in any other
provision of this Act or the rules made thereunder, the term of
office and conditions of service of any person appointed as the
Secretary-General of the Society at any time before the commence-

10

25

30

ment of the Indian Red Cross Society (Amendment) Act, 1992 35

may be varied by the Managing Body with the previous approval
of the President.

4D. (1) The powers and functions of the Chairman shall be—

(०) to preside over the meetings of the Managing Body
and all other Committees set up by the Managing Body of which
he is the Chairman; Ss

(0) to re-appropriate, on the advice of the Treasurer of the
Society, budgetary allocation from one major head of account
to another major head of account;

(०) to authorise, on the advice of the Treasurer of the
Society, expenditure on items not contemplated in the annual
Budget of the Society, subject: to the availability of funds:

40


at

ton Sadia

Cobh GENDUM
to
THE INDI“N KED 5058 McreTY ( qwikNDusNT ) BILL, 1992

[2b_be/as Intro! Introduced in lo. Sabha / in Io. Sabha 7

Page 2, tine 41,-

for "officers" read "offices"

NEW DLT;



r

15

20

25

30

35

3

(d) to institute, if necessary, disciplinary proceedings against _

officers of and above the rank of Deputy Secretary of the
Society:

Provided that the final decision on the basis of the disciplinary
proceedings so instituted shall be taken,—

(i) in the case of the Secretary-General of the Society, with
the previous approval of the President;

(४) in other cases, with the previous approval of the Manag-
ing Body,

(2) The powers and functions of the Vice-Chairman shall be,—

(a) to exercise the powers and perform the functioNs con-
ferred on the Chairman under sub-section (/) or delegated to
him under sub-section (3), in the absence of the Chairman on
leave or On tour abroad or for any other similar reasons;

(0७) to act as ex ojicio member in all the Committees or
Sub-Committees appointed by the Managing Body.

(3) The Chairman and the Vice-Chairman shall, in addition to
the powers exercisable by them under sub-sectiong (/) and (2),
exercise such Other iinancial and administrative powers as may be
delegated to them by the Managing Body in accordance with rules
made by it under section 5.

48, (1) If, at any time, the President is of opinion—

(a) that there has been gross failure in the management
of the affairs of the Society by the Managing Body; or

(b) that the Managing Body is acting in a manner which
is prejudicial to carrying out the objectives of the Society,

the President may, by order in writing, supersede the Managing
Body for such period, not exceeding six months, as may be specified
in the order:

Provided that before issuing an order under this sub-section,
the President shall give a reasonable opportunity to the Managing
Body to show cause why it should not be superseded and shall
consider the explanations and objections, if any, of the Managing
Body.

(2) Upon the issue of an order under sub-section (/) supersed-
ing the Managing Body,—

(a) all the members of the Managing Body shall, as from
the date of supersession, vacate their offices as such;

(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, under
the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder, be
exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the Managing Body,
shall, until the Managing Body is re-constituted, be exercised
and discharged by such person or body of persons as the
President may appoint in this behalf.

Powers
of the
President
1० super-
sede the
Managing
Body.


4
+

tion of the period of Supersession, whether as originally specified

steps as are hecessary ६० re-constitute the Managing Body in accor-

dance with the Provisions of section 48.7, 10
cane: 3. Section 5 of the pridcipal Act shall be re-numbered ag sub-section
ment of (1) thereof and—

section 5, (०) in sub-section (1) as so re-numbered,—

(i) in the Opening portion, for the words “subject to the
condition of previous publication’, the words “with the 15
Previous approval of the President” shall be substituted;

(1) for clause (d), the following clause shall be substituted,
namely:

“(@) the procedure ot election of members by State
Branch Committees;”,

(iii) for clauses (ee) and (j), the following clauses shall
be substituted, namely:—

20

“(f) the powers exercisable by the Managing Body in
supervising the activities of State Branch Committees;

(9) delegation of financial and administrative powers 25
to the Chairman and the Vice-Chairman;

(४) disqualifications for membership of the Managing
ys Hy
(i) the term ०६ office and conditions f Service of the

Secretary-General and the Treasurer ang other officers of 30
the Society;

(9) the Tegulation of the procedure Senerally of the
Society and Managing Body.”;

(0०) after sub-section (2) as so re-numbered, the following sub-
section shall be inserted, namely:— 138

“@) The Central Govemment shall cause every rule made
Under this section to be laid as soon as may be after the rule

Successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any
Modification in the Tule or both Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, that rule shal] thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the ९886 may be; 45
30, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be

without prejudice to the validity of anything Previously done
under that rule,”,


5

4 In section 12 of the principal Act, the words “to regulate its own
procedure and constitution,” shall be omitted.

5. (1) The Indian Red Cross Society (Amendment) Ordinance, 1992
ds hereby zepealed

5 Gas ap such repeal, anything done or any action taken
‘under the principal as amended by the Ordinance, shall be
ee nee ee eee जलन

ment of
section 12.

Repeal
and
savings.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

‘The Indian Red Cross Society Act, 1920 governs the functioning of
Red Cross Society all over the country. ‘The working of the Act during
the past 70 years has shown many loopholes. The Act does not contain
Sufficient provisions relating to appointment of President of the Society,
Composition of the Managing Body, appointment of Secretary-General
and Treasurer. The entire management structure has been left to be
decided by the Managing Body by rules made by it. As a result,

2. The Indian Red Cross Society (Amendment) Ordinance, 1992 was,
accordingly, promulgated by the President on 23rd day of January, 1992
to correct the above-mentioned distortions and to amend the Act suita-
bly to plug loopholes therein, so that the affairs of the Society are mana-
ged and regulated properly 0 achieve the objectives for which the
Society was established, The Ordinance made Provisions relating to com-
Position of the Managing Body and provided that the Managing Body
existing immediately before the promulgation of the Ordinance shall

@ ‘Lreasurer of the Society and laid-down their conditions of service in
the rules to be made by it. It also provided for delegation of financial and
administrative powers to the Chairman and Vice-Chairman, laying down
the qualifications ang disqualifications of the members of the Managing
Body. It also empowered the President of the Society to supersede the
Managing Body if there is gross failure in the management of the affairs
of the Society or in other cases where the Managing Body acts in a
wnanner which is prejudicial to carrying out the objectives of the Society.

3. The Bill seeks to replace the said Ordinance.

New Denim; M. L, FOTEDAR,

The 19th February, 1992.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to insery new sections 4A to 4E in the
Indian Red Cross Society Act, 1920. Section 4B provides that twelve
members to be elected by the State Branch Committees of the Society
for 8 term of two years shall be elected in accordance with the rules
to be made by the Managing Body of the Society under section 5 of
the Act. Section 4C provides that the term of office and the conditions
of service of the Secretary-General and the Treasurer of the Society
shall be regulated by the Managing Body in accordance with the rules
made under section 5. The said conditions of service can also be varied
by rules made by the Managing Body. Section 4D provides that the
Chairman and Vice-Chairman shall exercise certain financial and ad-
‘ministrative powers which may be delegated to them by the Managing
Body in accordance with rules made by it under section 5. Section 48
empowers the President of the Society to supersede the Managing
Body for such period, not exceeding six months, as he may specify by
order.

2. The aforesaid matters are matters of detail and it is not possible
to make provision in that behalf in the Bill. The rules to be made by the
Managing Body are required to be laid before Parliament. The delega-
tion of legislative powers is, therefore, of a normal character.


Power to
make
rules.

Powers of
Branch.
Com-
mittees.

ANNEXURE
Extracts: yRom: ne INprax, Rep Cross. Socikry Act, 1920.
(15 ०७ 1920)

* * = * *

5, The Managing: Body may, subject: to the: condition’ of previous
publication, make’ rules’ for the’ management, functions, control and’ pro®
cedure of the Society, The riles may provide’ among’ other matters’ for
the’ following, nately: —

* * * रू *

(के representation.on the Managing Body. of State Branch Com-
mittees and affiliated societies. and_ bodies:

* * * * «

(ce) the powers exercisable by the Managing Body in supetvis«
ing the activities of Branch Committees;

(f); the-regulation. of the: procedure: generally of. the: Society: and
Managing Body:

* * * * *

42. Subject to the provisions of rules made under section 5 and the
powers of supervision exercisable by the Managing Body thereunder,
each Branch Committee shall have all power to regulate its own pro-
cedure and constitution, to receive gifts and expend all monies received
by it for its purposes, either directly or through other societies or
bodies -

* * * * *


LOK SABHA

A

BILL

further to amend the Indian Red Cross Society Act, 1920,

(Shri M. L, Fotedar, Minister of Health and Family Welfare)