BW .0. ao of UtlS. 
THE PATIALA AND EAST PUNJAB STATES t~NION 
LEGISLATURE (DELEGATION OF POWERS) BILL, 1953 
[As INTBODUOlID IN TIlE HoUSE OF TB.B PBoPLB] 
A. 
BILL 
to confer on the PreBident the power of the LegiBlature of the Sta.te of 
Ptltiala tlnd EtJIIt Punjab StateB Union to mtlke law,. 
BI: it enacted by Parliament as follows:-
1. Short tiQe.-This Aot may be called the Patiala and East Punjab 
States Union Legislature (Delegation of Pawers) Act, 1953. 
2. DeBnition.-Jn this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, l5 
"J7oo1amation" means the Proclamation issued on the 4th day of March, 
1953, by t.he President under olause (1) of artiole 856 of the Constitution. 
3. OoDferment on the Prelident of the power of the State LqiIlature. 
(1) The power of the Legislature of the State of Patiala and East Punjab 
States Union to make laws, which has. been declared by the Proclama- IO 
tion to be exercisable by or undilr the authority o! Parliament, is hereby 
conferred on the President. 
(2) In the exercise of the said power, the President may, from time to 
time, whether Parliament is or is not in 88uion, enact as a President's Aot 
a Bill containing such provisions 1\8 he considers necessary. 
(3) Every Act enacted by the President under sub-section (2) shall. 115 
as soon as may be after enactment, be laid before each House of Parlia· 
ment. 
(4) Either House of Parliament may, by resolution passed within 
seven days from the date on which the Act has been laid before it under 
8ub-section (3), direct any modifications to be made in the Act and if the 20 
modifications are agreed to by the other House of Parliament during the 
&e118ion in which the Act has been so laid before it, such modifications 
IIhall be given effeot to by the President by enacting an amendipg Act 
under sub-section (8): 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall affect the validity of 26 
th" Act or of any action taken thereunder before it is 80 amended. 

2 
STA.TEMENT OF OBJEOTS AND REASONS 
Under the Proclamation of the Preaident dated the 4th Maroh, 1968. 
Ui(' powers of the Legislature of the Patiala and East Punjab States Union 
are now exerdsable by or under the authority of Parliament. There are 
a number of legislative measures, including tenancy and land reforms, 
which it is n8C8saary to enact for the Pa.tia.la and East Punjab Statea 
Union. These legislative measurea can be taken up by Parliament only 
by postponing its busineas and even then, it is likely that Parliament 
may not have the time to deal with all legislative measures for the Statle. 
It is therefore proposed that Parliament should, in aooordanoe with the 
pro~ons of artiole 857 (1) of ~e OonBtitution, confer by la~ on ~ 
PreBldet1t the power of the le81s1ature of the State M the PatJala. _nel 
East Punjab States Union to make laws 1.01' the State. 
The present Bill is intended to give effect to this proposal. 
NJIW DsLRI~ 
The 26th MArch, 1953. 
:I.. N. KA.TJU. 

HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE-: 
A. 
BILL 
to confer on the President the power of the Legislature otr 
the State of Patiala and I1:aet Punjab States Unioa. 
to make laws. 
(SAri KaiUu Nat" Katju, 
M inuter·/or StaUB.) 