To B& INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA 
Bill No. 30 of 1965. 
THE KERALA STATE LEGISLATURE (DELEGATION 
OF POWERS) BILL, 1965 
A 
BILL 
to confer on the President the power of the Legislature 'of tM 
State of Kef'cda to make laWI. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixteenth Yellr of the Republic 
of India as fonowa: _ .. 
1. This Act may be called the Kerala State Legislature (Delega- Short title. 
tion of Powers) Act, 1965. 
5 Z. In this Act, "Proclamation" means the Proclamation issued on Definition. 
the 24th day of March, 1965, under clause (1) of article 356 of the Con-
stitution, by the Vice-President of India discharging the functions of 
the President, and published with the notification of the Govern-
ment of India in the Ministry of Home Mairs, No. G.S.R. 490 of the . , 
10 said date. ' 

Conferment 
on the 
Pre8ident -Of-the 
power of 
the State 
Legisl8.-
tureto 
make laws. 
3. (1) The power of the Legislature of the State of Kerala to 
make laws, which has been declared by the Proclamation to be exer-
cisable by or.underthe authorj~Y_9J.Parliamel1lt, is hereby conferred 
on the President. 
(I) In the exercise of the said power, the President may, from 5 
time to time, whether Parliament is or is not in session, enact as a 
President's Act a Bill containing such provisions as he considers 
necessary: 
Provided that before enacting any such Act, the President shall, 
whenever he considers it practicable to do so, consult a committee 10 
constituted for the purpose, consisting of-
(a) thirty members of the House of the People nominated 
by the Speaker among whom shall be included all members who 
for the time being fill the seats allotted to the State of Kerala in 
that House; and -
(b) fifteen members of the Council of States nominated by 
the Chairman among whom shall .be included all members who 
for the time being fill the seats aUotted to the State of Kerala in 
that House. 
15 
(3) Every Act enacted by the President under sub-section (2) 20 
shall, as soon as may be after ermctment, be laid before each House 
of Parliament. 
(4) Either House of Parliament may, k!y resolution passed within 
seven days from the date on which the Act has been laid before it 
under sub-section (3), direct any modifications to be made in the 25 
Act and if the modifications are agfeed to by the other House of Par-
liament during the session in which the Act has been so laid before 
it or the session succeeding, such modifications shall be liven effect 
to by the President by enacting an amending Act under sub-sec-
tion (2): 30 
~Ilo 4 
Provided that nothing in t~sub-section shall affect the vatidity 
of the Act or of any action taken thereunder before it is so amended. 

Under the Proclamation of the Vice-President discharging the 
functions of the President, dated the 24th March, 1965, tlie powers of 
the Legislature of the Kerala State are now exercipble by or under 
the authority of Parliament. Such legislative measures as may be 
necessary for the State can be taken up by Parliament only by post-
poning its business; and even then, it is likely that Parliament may 
not have time to deal with all legislative measures for the State. It 
ic;, therefore, proposed that Parliament should, in accordance with the 
provisions of sub-clause (a) of clause (1) of article 357 of the Con-
stitution, confer by law on the President the powers of the Legisla-
ture of the State of Kerala to make laws for the State. The present 
Bill is intended to give effect to this proposal. 
NEW DELHI; GULZARILAL NANDA. 
The 23rd April,. 1965. 

LOKSABHA 
A 
Bll..L 
to confer on the President the power of the Legislature 
of the State of Kerala to make laws. 
(S hri Gulzartlal Nand,!, 
Minister of Home Affaul.) 