BW No. 30 oe 1984 
THE PAYMENT OF GRATUITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1984 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Payment of Gratuity Act; 1972 
-.. ~. 
. BE it enac.ted by Parliament in the Thirty-ruth Year of the Republic: 
of India as follows:-
- -Ii: 1. This Act may be called the Payment of Gratuity (Amendment) 
~,' f . Act, 1984. .J 
39 of 1972. 5 2. In section 1 of the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 ,(hereinafter 
refer.red to as the principal Act), after sub-sec.tion (3), the following 
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(3A) A shop or establishment to which this Act. has become 
applicable shall continue to be governed by this Act notwithstanding 
10 that the number of persons employed therein at any time after it 
has become so applicable falls below ten. It. 
3. In section 2 of the principal Act, for clause (c) and the Explana-
tions thereto, the following clause shall be SUbstituted, namely:-
'(c) "continuous service" means continuous service as defined 
i, in section 2A;'. 
4. In the principal Act, after section 2, the following section shall be 
inserted; namely:-
"2A. For the purposes of this Act,-
(1) an employee shall be said' to be in continuous service 
for a period if he has, for that period, been in uninterrupted 
Short title. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 1. 
Amend. 
mentof 
lIeOtion 2. 
ItuertioJ1 
of new 
section 2A. 
Continuous 
servleel 

service including service which may be interrupted on account 
of 'Sickness, accident, leave, absence from dutY. without leave 
(not being absence in respect of which an order imposing 81 
punishment or penalty or treating the absenoo as break in 
service has been passed in accordance with the standing orders, 5 
rules ox regulations governing the employees of the estabUsh-
ment), lay-off, strike or a lock..out or cessation of work not due 
to any fault of the employee, whether such ~terrupted or 
intelTupted service was rendered before or after the commence-
ment of this Act; 
(2) where an employee (not being an employee employed 
in a seasonal establishment) is not in continuous service within 
the meaning of clause (1), for any period of one year or six 
months, he shall be deemed to be in continuous service under 
10 
the employer- 15 
(4) fox the said period of one year, if the employee 
during the period of twelve calendar months preceding the 
date with reference to which calculation is to be made, has 
actually worked· under the employer for not less than-
(i) one hundred and. ninety days, in the case of an 20 
employee employed below the ground in a mine or 
in an establiShment which wo.rka for leSs than six 
days in a week; and 
(ii) two hundred and forty days, in any other 
case; 
I as 
(b) for the said period of six months, if the employee 
during the period of sbc. calendar months preceding the date 
with .reference to which the calculation is to be made, has 
actually worked under the employer for not less than-
(i) ninety-five days, in the case of an employee So 
employed below the ground in a mine or in an establish-
ment which works for less than six days in a week; and 
(ii) one hundred and twenty days, in any other 
~; I . 
(3) where an employee, employed in a seasonal establiah- 35 
roent, is not in continuous service within ,the meaniDg of clause 
(1), for any pe.riod of one year or six months,he shall be deemed 
to be in continuous service under the employer for such period 
if he has actually worked for not leS'S than seventy-five per cent. 
of the number of days on which the establishment was in opera- 40 
Uon during such period.". 
Amend- 5. Section 5 of the principal Act shall be renumbered as sub-section 
ment of (1) of that section and, after sub-ilection (1) as so renumbered, the 
section 5. following sub-s~ion 'Shall be inserted, namely:-
"(2) The appropriate Government may, by notification and 45' 
subject to such conditions as maybe specified in the noti1ication, 
exempt any employee or class of employees employed in any' 
establishment, factory, mine, Oilfield, plantation, port railway 
company or shop to which this Act applies from the owation of 

LOK 
SABHA 
CORiU 
GENDUM to 
THE 
PAYMENT 
OF 
GRATUITY 
(I>MENDMENT) 
BILL, 
1994 
(TO 
be/A.£ 
__ Jntrcduced 
in 
Lok 
Sabh 
a) 
Page 
3, 
line 
11~-
'ill 
"authoriy" 
rea2-. 
"authOrity" 
Hal 
DElli! 
; 
March?2 
1984 
~ai 
t1.~-a-2~-Pijb 
{SaKaT 

3 
;the proVIsIons of this' Act, if, in the opmIOn of the appropriate 
Government, such employee or class of employees are in receipt of 
gratuity or, pensionary benefits not less favourable than the benefits 
conferred under this Act.". 
5 S. The amendments made in the principal Act by section 3 and 
section ·4 shall be deemed to have been made with e1fect from the 11th 
day of February, 1961 and accordingly any action or thing taken or 
done or purporting to have. been taken or done under the principal: Act 
on @r after the 'Said date and before the commencement of this Act, 
10 shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, decree or 
order of any court. tribunal or other authoriy, be deemed to be, and to 
have always been, for all purposes, as validly and effectively taken or 
done as if the said amendments had been in force at all material times. 
Explanation.-For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that 
15 no act or omission on the part of any person, before the commencement 
of this Act, shall be punishable as an offence which would not haw 
been so punisha·ble if this Act had not come into force. 
Valida-
tion. 

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 provides for payment of gratuity 
,to the employees employed in factories, mines, oilfields, !plantations, 
ports, railway companies, shoPs or other establishments and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
2. The Supreme Court had in its judgment in the case of Lalappa 
Lingappa ·Vs. Lakshmi Vishnu Textile Mills, Sholapur (1981-1 L.L.J. 
308) held that in terms of the existing definition of "continuous service" 
in section 2 (c) of the Act, the pennanent employees were not eptitJed 
to payment of gratUity for the years they remained absent without leave 
and had actually worked for less than 240 days in a year. It has been 
represented that the enforcement· of this ruling has resulted in denial 
of gratuity to a number of employees, whose short term absence had 
remained unregularised due to lack of appreciation of its significance 
for the purpose of working out their entitlement to gratuity. It is, 
therefore now proposed to amend the definition of "continuous services" 
suitably and to specifically provide that a period of absence in respect 
of which no punishment or penalty has been imposed would not operate 
to interrupt the continuity of service for the purpose of payment of 
gratuity. It is also proposed to amplify the definition of "continuous 
service" to provide,- 'II 
(a) that an employee working in an establishment which works 
for less than six days in a week and who is not in uninterrupted 
service for one year, snall be deemed to be in continuous service 
fOoT a period of one year if he has actually worked for 190 days in 
the 9receding year, and 
(b) that for determining the continuous period of six months 
for the pUrpose of payment of gratuity. an employee should have 
completed half the number of days of actual work which constitutQ 
"continuous service" fnr a whole year. 
3. Opportunity is also being taken to provide that a 'Shop or estabUsli-
ment once covered shall continue to be covered under the Act notwitli-
stanC:ling that the number of persons employed therein at any time 
falls nelow 10. This is intended to clieek the tendency amo~g the 
employers to artificially reduce the number of employees so as to get 
out of the coverage under the Act. It is also proposed to provide fM 
grant of exemption from the operation of tlie Act to any person or 
cla'Ss of persons if they are in receipt of gratuity o.r pensionary beneftts 
not less favourable than the benefits conferred under the Act. 
4. The Bill seeks to give effect to the above proposals. 
NEW D!'.LHI; VEERENDRA PATIL. 
The 9th MMCh, 1984. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE PAYMENT OF GRATtTITY ACT, 1972 
(39 OF 1972) 
• • • • • 
Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
• • • • • • 
(c) "continuous service" means uninterrupted service and in~ 
eludes service which is interrupted by sickness, accident, ,leave, lay-
off, strike or a lock-out or cessation of work not due to any fault of 
the employee concerned, whether such uninterrupted or interrupt .. 
ed service was rendered before or after the commencement of this 
Act. 
Explanation I.-In the case of an employee who is not in uuinter~ 
rupted service for one year, he shall be deemed to be in continuous 
service if he has been actually employed by an employer during the 
twelve months immediately preceding the year for not less than-
(i) 190 days, if employed below the grounu in a mine, or 
(ii) 240 days, in any other case, except when he is employed 
in a seasonal establishment. 
Explanation II.-An employee of a seasonal establishment shall 
be deemed to be in continuous service if he has actually worked for 
not less than seventy-five per cent. of the number of days on which 
the establishment was in operation during the year; 
" . • • • • • 
Deftnl-
tiGns. 

LOK SABAA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972. 
(S}"ti 'Veetendra Pettti, 
Minister oj Labour a.nd 
Reha.biUtgtion.). 
,. 