Short title
and com-
mencement.
Definitions.
Bill No. 30 of  2019
THE PREVENTION OF FEMALE INFANTICIDE BILL, 2019
By
SHRI ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY, M.P.
A
BILL
to prevent female infanticide.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Female Infanticide Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless for context otherwise requires,
(i) "girl child" means a girl upto the age of ten years; and
(ii) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. Whoever causes, or does any act with the intention of causing death of a girl child
or allows a sick girl child to die by deliberately not giving timely and proper medical assistance
or does any act or neglects the care of the girl child which may result in her death, commits
the offence of female infanticide.
Female
infanticide.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
4. (1) Whenever a girl is born or a girl child dies, it shall be the duty of the parents or
the guardian of the child to inform the nearest health centre run by the Government or such
authority as may be prescribed for this purpose, about the birth or death of the girl child.
(2) In case of death of a girl child, the child shall not be cremated or buried unless the
health centre or such other authority, as may be prescribed for this purpose, has caused an
investigation into the cause of the death of the child.
(3) The  investigation under sub-section ( 2) shall be completed within twenty-four
hours from the time the information about death is received.
5. If after a preliminary investigation into the cause of the death of a girl child, any
person is found to have committed the offence of infanticide, he shall be taken into custody
at once.
6. Any person who commits or abets the commission of the offence of female infanticide
or withholds information about the death of the girl child, shall be punished with imprisonment
for a period of ten years and also with fine of rupees one lakh:
Provided that any person who withholds information about the birth of a girl shall be
punished with imprisonment for a period of six months.
7. Any inquiry or investigation into female infanticide and filing of reports or a suit in
a court of law shall be completed within a period of three months from the date of the death
of the girl child.
8. An offence under this Act shall be non-bailable.
9. The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in the Indian Penal Code, 1860
or any other law for the time being in force.
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Information
about birth or
death of a girl
child to be
given to
authorities.
Arrest of
person
committing
female
infanticide.
Punishment.
Investigation
and filing of
report.
Offence to be
non-bailable.
Act to have
over-riding
effect.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
45 of 1860.

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
With the menace of dowry system still continuing in the country, birth of a girl child in
an ordinary family is considered as inauspicious and a curse. Birth of a girl child is considered
as a burden by poor families. As a result, the number of cases of female infanticide has
increased manifold in the country. Thousands of innocent girls are dying prematurely as a
result of inadequate care and indifference on the part of their families. It is high time that this
dastardly act is brought to an end. However, in the absence of a stringent legislation, it is
quite difficult to put end to this evil practice.
It is, therefore, proposed to bring forward a legislation providing for severe punishment
to those who commit female infanticide in order to eradicate this malady from the country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
June 4, 2019.

4
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

MGIPMRND—326LS(S3)—13-06-2019.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to prevent female infanticide.
————
(Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury, M.P .)