1
THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED TRIBES) ORDER
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011
By
SHRI HANSRAJ GANGARAM AHIR,  M.P .
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order (Amendment)
Act, 2011.
2. In the Schedule to the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950, in Part IX. —
Maharashtra, for entry 19, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:—
"19. Halba, Halbi, Halba Koshti, Halbi Koshti, Vinkar Koshti, Saavji Koshti,
Bunkar Koshti, Koshti.".
Short title.
Bill No.  30 of  2011
Amendment
of the
Schedule.
C.O. 22 of
1950.
5
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Even in the pre-independence period, that is, during the British period and also after
independence, the people belonging to Halba and Halbi community were recognised as
tribes and were availing the benefits of reservation. This community, which is settled mostly
in the tribal areas of Central India, chronically suffered from poverty, lack of education
resulting in social and economic backwardness. These factors caused their migration to
other areas in search of employment. These people also migrated to certain parts of
Maharashtra in search of employment. In Maharashtra, people of this community adopted
the profession of Weaving to earn their livelihood. Weavers are addressed as Koshtis in
Marathi. Because of this, the people who were known as Halba and Halbi earlier are now
known as Koshti. After coming in contact with other communities their language and way
of living has changed a little but their essential character has not changed. This fact has
also been recorded during the British times. This community was getting all the benefits of
reservation till the British period. But since 1950, such benefits have been withdrawn as
they could not produce any evidence in support of their claim as a tribe. These people have
Halbas and Halbis as their predecessors, but as a result of widespread backwardness and
lack of education they have been deprived of the facility of reservation for which they are
entitled. This has, in turn, resulted in further worsening of their condition.
Therefore, in order to ensure justice to such people and keeping in view their economic,
social and educational backwardness it is imperative that they are placed among Scheduled
Tribes in respect of the State of Maharashtra.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.
N
EW DELHI; HANSRAJ GANGARAM AHIR
July  15, 2011.

3
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
The Bill seeks to include Halba, Halbi, Halba Koshti, Halbi Koshti, Vinkar Koshti,
Saavji Koshti, Bunkar Koshti and Koshti communities in the list of Scheduled Tribes in
respect of the State of Maharashtra by way of amending the Constitution (Scheduled
Tribes) Order, 1950. The Bill, if enacted, would involve recurring and non-recurring  expenditure
on account of the benefits to be given under the schemes and programmes of the Government
meant for social, educational and economic development of the persons belonging to the
Scheduled Tribes. At this stage, it is not possible to mention the exact amount which may be
incurred on this account. However, it is estimated that a sum of approximately rupees one
hundred crore is likely to be involved as a recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED TRIBES) ORDER, 1950.
C.O. 22
* * * * * * *
(PART III. Rules and Orders under the Constitution)
* * * * * * *
PART IX. Maharashtra
* * * * * * *
19. Halba, Halbi
* * * * * * *

GMGIPMRND—537LS(S3)(F)—27-07-2011.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950.
————
(Shri Hansraj Gangaram Ahir, M.P.)