1
THE INSURANCE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI SUSHIL KUMAR SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Insurance Act, 1938.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (I) This Act may be called the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by  notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In section 2 of the Insurance Act, 1938 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),
sub-section (7A) shall be re-numbered as sub-section (7B) and  before sub-section (7B) as
so re-numbered, the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
"(7A). "Grievance Redressal Authority" means the Grievance Redressal Authority
established under section 101D.".
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment of
section 2.
Bill No. 30 of  2015
4 of 1938. 5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
3. After Part IVA, of the principal Act, the following Part shall be inserted, namely:—
"PART  IVB
GRIEVANCE  REDRESSAL  MECHANISM
101D. (1) Every insurer shall set up an in-house grievance redressal mechanism in
such manner, as may be prescribed, for disposal of policy related complaints.
(2) The complaint filed through in-house grievance redressal mechanism shall be
disposed of within a period of thirty days of its receipt.
(3) Where a complainant is not satisfied with the decision made through in-house
grievance redressal mechanism, he may approach the Grievance Redressal Authority for
resolution of his dispute within thirty days of the date of such decision.
101E. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may,  by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint, there shall be established an Authority to be known as the
Grievance Redressal Authority for redressal of policy related grievances.
(2) The head office of the Authority shall be at such place as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify.
101F. The Grievance Redressal Authority shall consist of —
(a) a Chairperson, who is, or has been, a judge of a High Court; and
(b) two members, having proven experience and expertise in insurance industry
for not less than fifteen years,
to be appointed by the Central Government.
101G. The Chairperson and members of the Grievance Redressal Authority shall hold
office for a term of three years from the date of their appointment and shall be eligible for
re-appointment:
Provided that no person shall hold office as a Chairperson or a member, as the case
may be, after he has attained the age of sixty-five years.
101H. (1) The Central Government shall remove from office the, Chairperson or any
member of the Grievance Redressal Authority, who,—
(a) is, or at any time has been, adjudged as an insolvent; or
(b) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a Chairperson or a
member; or
(c) has been convicted of any offence which, in the opinion of the Central
Government, involves moral turpitude; or
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to prejudicially
affect his functions; or
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuation in office detrimental
to the public interest.
(2) The Chairperson or a member of the Grievance Redressal Authority shall not be
removed under clauses (d) or (e) of sub-section (1) unless he has been given a reasonable
opportunity of being heard in the matter.
(3) The Central Government may, by rules, regulate the procedure for the investigation
of misbehaviour or incapacity of the Chairperson or a member.
Insertion of
new Part IVB.
In-house
grievance
redressal
mechanism.
Establishment
of Grievance
Redressal
Authority.
Composition of
the Grievance
Redressal
Authority.
Tenure of
Office of
Chairperson
and members.
Removal of
Chairperson or
a member of
the Grievance
Redressal
Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
101-I. The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson and members of the Grievance Redressal Authority shall be
such as may be prescribed.
101J. Notwithstanding anything in this Act or any other law for the time being in force,
the Grievance Redressal Authority shall perform the following functions, namely:—
(i) resolution of disputes between a policy holder and an insurer in respect of the
following matters,—
(a) any partial or total repudiation of claims by an insurer including delay
in settlement of claims;
(b) premium paid or payable in terms of policy;
(c) non-issue of any policy document to policy holder after receipt of
premium: and
(d) legal construction of the policies in so far as such dispute relate to
claim.
(ii) resolution of disputes between insurer and intermediaries;
(iii) resolution of disputes between the assignees of a policy as to priority of
assignment: and
(iv) disposal of complaints on such other matters as the Grievance Redressal
Authority may deem appropriate for the purposes of this Act.
101K. The Grievance Redressal Authority shall have, for the purpose of discharging
its functions under this Act, the same powers as are vested in a Civil Court under the Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him
on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any office;
(e) issuing commissions for examination of witnesses or document; or
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.
101L. (1) Any person, who has a grievance against an insurer, may himself or
through his legal heir make a complaint in writing to the Grievance Redressal Authority in
such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Grievance Redressal Authority shall dispose of the complaint within a period
of ninety days of its receipt.
101M. Any person, aggrieved by the decision of the Grievance Redressal Authority,
may, within sixty days from the date of receipt of such decision, prefer an appeal to the High
Court.’’.
Salary and
allowances
payable to
Chairperson
and members.
Functions of
the Grievance
Redressal
Authority.
Powers of
Grievance
Redressal
Authority.
Complaint
against insurer.
5 of 1908.
Appeal.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
To deal with the complaints of the policy holders, the existing system of Ombudsman
under the Redressal of Public Grievances Rules, 1998, has not been found satisfactory.
The remedy under the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 has also not proved to be effective
as a large number of cases are still pending. Therefore, a Grievance Redressal Authority is
required to be established to deal with and resolve the disputes between the insured and the
insurer; between the insurer and the intermediaries and between insurer and insurer.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SUSHIL KUMAR SINGH
November 25, 2014.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for establishment of a Grievance Redressal Authority by
the Central Government. It also provides for payment of salaries and allowances to the
Chairperson and members of the Grievance Redressal Authority.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred
crore will be involved per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to insert, inter alia, sections 101D, 101H and 101K in the
Insurance Act, 1938. Proposed section 101D  provides for setting up of an in-house grievance
redressal mechanism by every insurer in such manner, as may be prescribed. Proposed
section 101H provides that the Central Government, may, by rules regulate the procedure for
investigation of misbehavior or incapacity of the Chairperson or a member. Proposed section
101K provides that the Grievance Redressal Authority, for the purpose of discharging its
functions, shall have the same powers as are vested in the Civil Court in respect of matters
like summoning and enforcing of attendance of any person, etc. and such other matters as
may be prescribed by rules made under the Insurance Act, 1938.
The matters in respect of which rules may be made are generally matters of administrative
detail and procedure and it is not possible to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation
of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
6

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE INSURANCE ACT, 1938
No. 4 of  1938.
* * * * *
2. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context—
(1) "actuary" means an actuary possessing such qualifications as may be
specified by the regulations made by the Authority;
* * * * *
(7A) "Indian insurance company" means any insurer being a company,—
(a) which is formed and registered under the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of
1956);
(b) in which the aggregate holdings of equity shares by a foreign company,
either by itself or through its subsidiary companies or its nominees, do not
exceed twenty-six per cent paid-up equity capital of such Indian insurance
company;
(c) whose sole purpose is to carry on life insurance business or general
insurance business or re-insurance business.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this clause, the expression "foreign company"
shall have the meaning assigned to it under clause (23A) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act,
1961 (43 of 1961);
* * * * *
Definitions.
7

GMGIPMRND—4364LS(S-3)—20.02.2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Insurance Act, 1938.
————
(Shri Sushil Kumar Singh, M.P .)