AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

; 2 O.APR 2009

Bill No. 30 of 2000

THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
By
‘Suet RAMESH CHENNITHALA, M.P,
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code 1860.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2000. _ short ttle.
2. In section 21 of the Indian Penal Code after Explanation 3, the following Excep- Amendment of
tion shall be added, namely:— section 21,

“Exception — For the purposes of this Code, members of Parliament and State
Legislatures shall not be deemed to be public servants.”.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Supreme Court has in a number of cases held that members of Parliament and
State Legislatures are public servants. Section 21 of the Indian Penal Code mentions the
categories of persons who shall be deemed to be public servants, Members of Parliament
and State Legislatures have not been specifically included in those categories, However,
the decisions of the Supreme Court have changed this position. This has serious implica.
tions as the elected representatives are likely to be subjected to criminal investigation and
Punishment under the Prevention of Corruption Act in the course of discharge of their
duties towards the people who have elected them. The basic difference between an elected
representative who performs the public duty and an officer of the Government who per-
forms within well defined public duties has to be understood. Otherwise, serious damage
will be caused to public interest.

The proposed amendment to the Indian Penal Code takes care of this problem.

New Deut; RAMESH CHENNITHALA
January 28, 2000.


ee

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM INDIAN PENAL CopE

पथ * . * * *

21. “Public servant”—The words public servant denote a person falling under any
of the description hereinafter following, namely:—

io . . * * .

Second.—Every Commissioned Officer in the Military, *[Naval or Air] Forces [of
India;)

‘{ Third —Every Judge including any person empowered by law to discharge, whether
by himself or as a member of any body of persons, any adjudicatory functions:]

Fourth.— Every officer of a Court of Justic ‘[(including a liquidator, receiver or
commissioner)] whose duty it is as such officer, to investigate or report on any matter of
law or fact, or to make, authenticate, or keep any document, or to take charge or dispose of
any property or to execute any judicial process, or to administer any oath, or to interpret,
0 to preserve order in the Court, and every person specially authorized by a Court of
Justice to perform any of such duties;

Fifth—Every juryman, assessor, or member of a panchayat assisting a Court of
Justice or public servant;

Sixth.—Every arbitrator or other person to whom any cause or matter has been re-
ferred for decision or report by any Court of Justice, or by any other competent public
authority;

‘Seventh—Every person who holds any office of virtue of which he is empowered to
place or keep any person in confinement;

Eighth —Every officer of ‘[the Government] whose duty it is, as such officer, to
Prevent offences, to give information of offences, to bring offenders to justice, or to pro-
tect the public health, safety or conveyance;

Ninth_—Every officer whose duty it is, as such officer, to take, receive, keep or
expend any property on behalf of ‘[the Government], or to make any survey, assessment
‘or contract on behalf of ‘[the Government], or to execute any revenue process, or to inves-
tigate, or to report, on any matter affecting the pecuniary interest of [the Government], or
to make, authenticate or keep any document relating to the pecuniary interest of [the
Government], or to prevent the infraction of any law of the protection of the pecuniary
interest of १७6 Government;]’***

Tenth —Every officer whose duty it is, as such officer, to take, receive, keep or
expend any property, to make any survey or assessment or to levy any rate or tax for any
secular common purpose of any village, town or district, or to make, authenticate or keep
any document for the ascertaining of the rights of the people of any village, town or dis-
trict;

‘(Eleventh —Every person who holds any office in virtue of which he is empowered
toprepare, publish, maintain or revise an electoral roll or to conduct an election or part of
an election;]

[Twelfth.—Every person—

(a) in the service or pay of the Government or remunerated by fees or commis-
sion for performance of any public duty by the Government;

(b) in the service or pay of a local authority, a corporation established by or
under a Central, Provincial or State Act or a Government company as defined in
section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956).]


Illustration
A Municipal Commissioner is a public servant.

Explanation I.—persons falling under any of the above descriptions are public serv-
ants, whether appointed by the Government or not.

Explnation 2—Wherever the words public servant occur, they shall be understood
of every person who is in actual possession of the situation of a public servant, whatever
legal defect there may be in his right to hold that situation.

[Explanation 3.—The word election denotes an election for the purpose of selecting
members of any legislative, municipal or other public authority, of whatever charcter, the
method of selection to which is by, or under, any law prescribed as by election.]

* . * * .


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code 1860.

(Sari Ramesh Chennithala, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRNO—3578LS—24-02-2000.