5

10

AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA.

3 MAY zooz

Bill No. 30 of 2002
THE RESERVATION FOR SCHEDULED CASTES AND SCHEDULED
TRIBES (IN PRIVATE SECTOR) BILL, 2002
By
Suet KoikuNNiL SURESH, M. P.
A
BILL

to provide for reservation for the persons belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes in private sector.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. This Act may be called the Reservation for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
(in Private Sector) Act, 2002.

(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —

(i) “private sector” means establishment which is not owned or controlled by
Government; and

(ii) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.

3. (1) There shall be reservation in favour of persons belonging to Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes in private sector.

Short title,
extent and
commencement.

Definitions.

Provision for
reservation in
private sector


Compulsory
compliance
of provisions
of Act.

Government
to encourage
private sector
to make
provision for
reservation.

Non-compli-
ance of provi-
sions of Act

Power to
make rules.

2

(2) The reservation in favour of persons belonging to Scheduled Castes and Schedul

Tribes in private sector shall be not less than the percentage of reservation for them |
services under the Government.

4. Every private sector shall comply with the provisions contained in section 3.

5. The Central Government or a State Government, as the case may be, shall encot
private sector to make provision for reservation in favour of persons belonging to Schedul
Castes and Scheduled Tribes in their establishment in such manner as may be prescribed.

6. Any organisation in private sector which does not comply with the provisions
this Act shall not be entitled to:-—

(i) concessions or facilities as may be extended by the Government from time:
time to trade and business sector; and
(ii) loan facilities from any financial institution under the control of the
Government.
7. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Government has done well by making provision for reservation for Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes in appointments and posts under the State and in educational
institutions, Despite this, the community has not gained much. Jobs in Government sector
are very few, Besides, the Government has decided not to fill up thousands of vacancies
arising every year. Morcover, with the economic liberalisation and globalisation, the avenues
in Government sector have shrinked vefy much as privatisation has become the new mantra
now.

With the all-round privatisation and globalisation, the rights of persons belonging to
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes are not getting any protection from the State.
Nearly forty percent of our population belong to these communities.

Government should give its attention to improving the economy of our country and
at the same time the rightful claims of persons belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes should not be ignored. The only alternative rests with the Government is to encourage
private sector to make provision for reservation in their organisations

The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.

New Deut; KODIKUNNIL SURESH
March 4, 2002.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying |
the provisions of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of administrative detail only
as such the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. |



A
BILL

to provide for reservation for the persons belonging to Scheduled Castes
Scheduled Tribes in private sector.

(Shri Kodikunnil Suresh, MP),

MGIP(PLU)MRND—5844LS—21-03-2002.