1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI ANURAG SINGH THAKUR, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2016.
2. In the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution,—
(i) In List II-State List, in entry 33, the word "sports," shall be omitted; and
(ii) In List III-Concurrent List, after entry 47, the following entry shall be inserted,
namely:—
"48. Sports-promotion and development.".
Bill No. 30 of  2016
Short title.
Amendment
of the Seventh
Schedule.5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
India is home to a more than billion population. However, our dismal performance at
the International sports like the Olympics, Asian Games and the Common Wealth Games
make it evident that there is an absence of thrust in sports in the country. Clearly, our culture
and attitude towards sports is a major deterrent towards improving sporting standards in our
country. Even in our Constitution, sports is clubbed along with theatre, entertainment and
other amusements as a State subject.
Promoting sportspersons by providing equal opportunity, incentives and access to
sporting facilities is essential, however, changing the attitude of people and bringing
seriousness about sports education and training in physical fitness is of utmost importance.
Moreover, sporting activities are means of a holistic development for all. It is a potential tool
for the physical and mental well-being of people by inculcating values of leadership, teamwork,
endurance, and focus along with bringing exposure, helping skill development and increasing
immunity towards various illnesses that in turn would increase the productivity of people
and hence boost economic development throughout the country.
The United Nations recognizes sport as a low-cost and high-impact tool in humanitarian
development and peace-building efforts, the standard of which is increasingly being
recognised. In India the prevalent scenario does not provide for students and sportspersons
to excel in the arena of sports, but only emphasizes the importance of sports in physical
fitness. The lack of infrastructural facilities and training of international standards are major
impediments in the process of development of sports in India. This should not be used in
excuse and deter the Central Government to wash their hands off the responsibility of
providing sporting facility, from the grassroots level, in villages and small towns to upgrade
the quality of infrastructure at major towns and regional centers.
The proposed Bill seeks to inculcate the beginning of importance to be given to sports
by shifting it to concurrent list so that the Central Government can play its due role. This is
a step towards promoting a culture of sports by coordinating the responsibility among
Center and State in order to harness the talent and potential of the youth and bring international
acclaim to India.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; ANURAG SINGH THAKUR
February  10, 2016
2

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
Seventh Schedule
(Article 246)
List II-State List
* * * * * *
33. Theatres and dramatic performances; cinemas subject to the provisions of entry 60
of List I; sports, entertainments and amusements.
* * * * * *
List III-Concurrent List
* * * * * *
47. Fees in respect of any of the matters in this List, but not including fees taken in any
court.
* * * * * *

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Anurag Singh Thakur, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4256LS(S3)—24.02.2016.