1
THE RENEWABLE ENERGY (PROMOTION AND COMPULSORY USE)
BILL, 2014
By
SHRI ARJUN MEGHWAL, M.P.
A
BILL
to  provide for the promotion and greater exploitation of  renewable  energy  available
from  sources like solar heat, wind, biogas, urban waste, tides, waves  and  geothermal
sources by making its use compulsory by certain establishments and households in
order to reduce the over dependence on fossil fuels for energy needs resulting in
global warming, noxious emissions and ecological and climatological
imbalances and to protect the environment and for the establishment
of a Board for the purpose and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Renewable Energy (Promotion and Compulsory Use)
Act, 2014.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
Short title and
extent.
Bill No. 30 of  2014
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “Board” means the National Renewable Energy Promotion Board
constituted under section 4 of this Act;
(c) “establishment” includes all offices of public and private sector, hotels of all
kinds, restaurants, eating joints, shopping malls, multi-storey buildings, departmental
stores, hospitals, nursing homes, clinics, schools, colleges and universities, banks,
railway stations and airports;
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(e) “renewable energy” means energy or power derived from non-conventional
energy sources such as sun, wind, animal dung, geothermal sources, tides or waves,
carbon waste and garbage or any other sources from which the renewable energy can
be obtained.
3. It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the national and public interest that
Central Government shall take under its control the promotion and development of the
renewable energy generation and take appropriate measures in that direction.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, within six months of the commencement of this
Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a Board to be known as the National
Renewable Energy Promotion Board for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property both
movable and immovable and to contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
(3) The head office of the Board shall be at New Delhi and the Board may establish
offices at conspicuous places in all the States and Union territories in the country for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(4) The Board shall consist of—
(a) a Chairperson who shall be an expert scientist having enough professional
experience and profound knowledge in the field of renewable energy to be appointed
by the Central Government;
(b) a Deputy Chairperson having such qualification and experience, as may be
prescribed to be appointed by the Central Government;
(c) five members of Parliament of whom three shall be from Lok Sabha and two
from Rajya Sabha to be nominated by the respective Presiding Officers of both Houses;
(d) five members to represent the Central Government of the Ministries of
Finance, Environment and Forests, Science and Technology, Planning, New and
Renewable Energy, respectively, to be appointed by the Central Government;
(e) three members to represent Non-Governmental Organizations working for
promotion of  new and renewable energy in the country to be appointed by the Central
Government; and
(f) four members to be nominated by the Governments of the States to be rotated
amongst the States in alphabetical order.
(5) The term of office of the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and Members of the
Board and the procedure to be followed by the Board in discharge of its functions shall be
such as may be prescribed.
Definitions.
Establishment
of the
National
Renewable
Energy
Promotion
Board.
Central
Government to
take control of
promotion and
development of
renewable
energy.
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
5

3
(6) The Board shall be assisted by a Secretariat with such number of officers and staff
and with such terms and conditions of service as may be prescribed.
5. (1) The Board shall formulate a comprehensive new and renewable energy policy
with its goals and execution plan so as to accelerate the promotion and development of
renewable energy and to minimize the dependence on fossil fuels for energy production.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provision of sub-section (1), the Board
shall—
(a) support and encourage research and development to promote renewable
energy through Government and Private Sector participation involving all major
research laboratories and centres in the country;
(b) disseminate information about the developments made abroad in the field of
renewable energy;
(c) develop indicative standards of renewable energy;
(d) facilitate quick technology transfer and adoption of renewable energy;
(e) facilitate infrastructure development of renewable energy in rural areas;
(f) make provision for small biomass based energy systems for rural areas, promote
dung based individual and community biogas plants, reduce dependence of firewood
and encourage lighting in streets and other places  through solar energy and setting
up of wind power projects;
(g) suggest ways for conversion of fossil fuel based industrial heating to solar
thermal heating through solar concentrator technology or its hybrids;
(h) suggest educational and other policy initiatives for renewable energy in the
country;
(i) create interactive web based resource maps of different renewable technologies
to facilitate speedy project development and market expansion;
(j) undertake such other activities as may be assigned to it by the Central
Government from time to time.
6. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the appropriate Government shall, in consultation with the Board, take the following measures
to promote the use of renewable energy:
(a) make use of photovoltaic energy compulsory in establishments;
(b) make time bound provision for introducing solar water heating system in
establishments;
(c) set time bound mandate for promotion of biomass energy systems in the
country;
(d) reserve adequate land for setting up of renewable energy projects; and
(e) make it mandatory for electricity utilities for compulsory purchase of electricity
from renewable energy producing units.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, "establishment" means such
places, as the appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify.
(2)  It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to make available the necessary
apparatus, equipment and other infrastructure either free of cost or at subsidized rates to
the establishments and individuals to enable them to tap and make maximum use of renewable
energy sources and for this purpose shall promote the industrial units manufacturing
such apparatus and equipment by extending various incentives, concessions and
infrastructure facilities.
(3) It shall be compulsory for every establishment to use the renewable energy to the
extent possible.
Functions of
the Board.
Miscellaneous
provisions.
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
5
45

4
(4) The appropriate Government shall, as soon as may be, identify the exploited sources
of renewable energy in its territorial jurisdiction and send project reports to the Board which
shall depute a team of experts to the concerned State or Union territory, as the case may be,
to verify and assess the possibility of exploiting renewable energy sources as per the claim
of that Government.
(5) The Board shall on the basis of the report of the team of experts work out the likely
expenditure on the projects and recommend to the appropriate Government to implement the
projects in a time bound manner.
(6) The Board shall submit to the Central Government such other projects and
programmes for the optimum exploitation of renewable energy sources as it may deem
necessary and expedient for the purposes of this Act.
7. (1) Whoever contravenes any provisions of this Act shall be guilty of an offence
under this Act.
(2) Where an offence under this Act is committed by any establishment is proved to
have been committed with the consent or connivance of or is attributable to any neglect on
the part of any Director, Chief Executive, Secretary or other such officer of the establishment
or any person who was purporting to act in any such capacity, he as well as the establishment
shall be guilty of that offence and shall be punishable with simple imprisonment which may
extend to three months or with fine which shall not be less that five lakh rupees but may
extend to ten lakh rupees or with both.
8. (1) The Board shall prepare once in every calendar year in such form as may be
prescribed an Annaul Report giving a true and full account of its activities during the previous
year and shall forward it to the Central Government.
(2) The Central Government shall, as soon as possible, lay the report before each
House of Parliament.
9. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite funds to the Board and the Government of the States and
Union territory Administrations for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
10. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provision, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary to expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall,  as soon as may be after it is made, be laid
before both the Houses of Parliament.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may  be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Penalty.
Annual
Report.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Power to
make rules.
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
5
45

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
A world Summit was held at Copenhagen, Denmark to find out ways to save the earth
from the effects of carbon emission resulting in global warming. Although no foolproof
solution could be finalized but the fact remains that global warming is being caused by
human activities mainly due to burning of fossil fuels which releases greenhouse gases.
Carbon dioxide emissions have increased manifold due to rising consumption of energy
particularly coal, petroleum products and firewood by the ever increasing world population.
This has put the world on the danger map and if concrete measures are not taken, the coastal
areas of the world will submerge in the sea water and many small countries will be wiped out
from world map.
For this transition, low carbon economy has to be adopted by massive development of
new and renewable energy for the protection of our environment. In our own country, due to
ever increasing population and over dependence on fossil fuels, we have invited ecological
disaster. Jungles are being vanished due to  over use of wood as firewood in the chulhas and
making furniture, doors, windows, etc. The country is importing petroleum products on a
large scale spending precious foreign exchange. The demand for fuel and power is increasing
day by day. Therefore, we have to take steps to promote the use of renewable energy
sources to meet the demands of future energy.
Fortunately we have very vast potential of renewable energy but, unfortunately, we
have not tapped this potential so far at the anticipated level. There is enormous wind power
potential. So is the solar energy. The desert areas have the requisite solar radiation for
producing Concentrating Solar Power (CSP). A 60km X 60km area can produce one lakh
Mega Watt of power and our country has a desert area of 208110 square kilometer in Rajasthan
and Gujarat alone which if tapped can produce enormous power. The country is also capable
of producing bio-fuels. Hence, we have to adopt greater use of renewable energy sources
which are considered to be non-polluting and eco-friendly. The use of renewable energy
sources, therefore, has to be made compulsory for all establishments and households. For
this a national Board needs to be established to promote and develop the use of renewable
energy resources in the country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; ARJUN MEGHWAL
June 11, 2014.
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the National Renewable Energy
Promotion Board. Clause 9 makes it obligatory for the Central Government to provide requisite
funds to the Board, State Governments and Union territory Administrations for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees two hundred crore may be
involved as recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
6

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only.
The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
7

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to  provide for the promotion and greater exploitation of  renewable  energy  available from
sources like solar heat, wind, biogas, urban waste, tides, waves  and  geothermal sources
by making its use compulsory by certain establishments and households in order to
reduce the over dependence on fossil fuels for energy needs resulting in
global  warming, noxious emissions  and ecological and climatological
imbalances and to protect the environment and for the establishment
of a Board for the purpose and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Arjun Meghwal, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—706LS—27.06.2014.