THE COMMISSION FOR THE FORMATION OF THE STATE OF
VIDARBHA BILL, 2020
By
SHRI RAMDAS TADAS, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Commission for the formation of a separate
State of Vidarbha by re-organization of the existing State of Maharashtra
and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Commission for the Formation of the State of
Vidarbha Act, 2020.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill  No. 30 of  2020
Short title
and
commencement.
5
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(b) "Vidarbha" includes the districts of Chandrapur, Gadchiroli, Wardha, Nagpur,
Bhandara, Gondia, Washim, Akola, Buldhana, Yavatmal and Amravati in the State of
Maharashtra.
3. The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Commission to study and report on the formation of a separate State of Vidarbha by
re-organization of the existing State of Maharashtra.
4. The Commission shall consist of:—
(a) a retired judge of the Supreme Court who shall be the Chairperson;
(b) Members of Parliament from the Vidarbha Region-members, ex-officio;
(c) five members having considerable experience in the field of social service
in the Vidarbha region to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as
may be prescribed; and
(d) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of the
service of Chairperson and members of the Commission shall be such as may be
prescribed.
5. (1) The Commission shall complete its work within a period of one year from the
date of its first sitting.
(2) After the completion of its work, the Commission shall submit a report to the
Central Government.
6. The Central Governmment shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, pay to the Commission by way of grants such sums of money as the
Central Government may think fit for the purposes of this Act.
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Definitions.
Commission
for the
formation of
a separate
State of
Vidarbha.
Composition
of the
Commission.
Term of the
Commission.
Central
Government
to provide
adequate
funds.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The people of Vidarbha region in the State of Maharashtra complains about the
discrimination being made with them because of which people living in the region have
been continuously demanding for a separate State.
The proposal of two States for Marathi speaking people was also supported by
Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar. In 1947, the then Marathi leaders had agreed that two independent
States for Marathi speaking people were requested to form under Akola Pact. It was again
reiterated under the Nagpur Pact in the year 1953. Under the said Pact, funds in proportion
to the population for the development of Vidarbha region, a session was decided to be
convened in Nagpur but no progress was made in this regard.
Vidarbha is a north-eastern region of the State of Maharashtra. Coal mines and costly
mines are found in abundance in Vidarbha. Because of the coal mines, the thermal power
stations are found in Chandrapur, Koradi, Khaperkhede, Munda and Tiroda in Vidarbha
which are providing electricity supply to whole of Maharashtra. Apart from this, most of the
forest estate lies in Vidarbha region only. Besides this, Tumsar Mandi famous for rice
production is also in Vidarbha region which is regarded as the biggest agricultural products
market in the State of Maharashtra. Famous Basmati rice is also produced in this area. Most
of the cement factories out of total factories of the State of Maharashtra are situated in
Chandrapur district only. Despite having all the said resources, Vidarbha region is too
backward and the people feel themselves helpless. The situation of the villages of Vidarbha
is even more deteriorating. Poverty is spread all over the areas. Farmers of this area are
attempting suicide even today because of the heavy burden of debt. Ninety-six per cent of
people have supported Vidarbha to be made as a separate State in a non-Government
referendum held in recent past.
The people of Vidarbha are of the opinion that the creation of a separate State of
Vidarbha is the only solution to ensure development and prosperity of the region. Thus,
honouring the highest desire of the people of Vidarbha, the Central Government needs to
take necessary steps to bifurcate Maharashtra and form a separate State of Vidarbha. This
Bill provides for constituting a Commission for formation of a separate State of Vidarbha.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAMDAS TADAS
December 13, 2019.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a Commission for the formation of
a separate State of Vidarbha. Clause 4 provides for the salary and allowances of the
Chairperson and members of the Commission. Clause 6 provides for grant of adequate
funds to the Commission by the Central Government. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring
expenditure of rupees Twenty five crore per annum would be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees Ten crore is also likely to be involved.
4

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Commission for the formation of a separate
State of Vidarbha by re-organization of the existing State of Maharashtra
and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Ramdas Tadas, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—4523LS(S3)—01-02-2020.