THE AGRICULTURAL WORKERS (EMPLOYMENT, CONDITIONS
OF SERVICE AND WELFARE) BILL,  2009
By
SHRI ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY, M.P.
A
BILL
to protect the interests of agricultural workers and to provide for their welfare.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Agricultural Workers (Employment, Conditions of
Service and Welfare) Act, 2009.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. The Central Government shall establish an Agricultural Workers Welfare Board
(hereinafter referred to as 'Board') to protect the interests of agricultural workers in the
country.
3. (1) The Board shall consist of a Chairman and twenty other members.
(2) The Chairman of the Board shall be elected by the members of the Board.
Bill No. 30 of  2009.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Chairman and
other members
of Board.
5
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Establishment
of Agricultural
Workers
Welfare Board.
10

2
(3) The members of the Board shall be elected by agricultural workers in such manner
as may be prescribed by rules made under this Act.
(4) The Chairman and other members of the Board shall hold office for a period of five
years.
(5) The headquarters of the Board shall be at New Delhi.
4. The Board shall perform the following functions:—
(i) to provide employment to agricultural workers during off season period or natural
calamities with such wages as may be prescribed;
(ii) to provide financial assistance to agricultural workers if employment is not
provided to them.
(iii) to establish a Board at State level to monitor the implementation of rules and
regulations made by the Board for welfare of agricultural workers.
5. (1) The Central Government may make rules for carrying out the purposes of this
Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Functions of
Board.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
There are about 320 million workers in the country, out of whom 20 million are agricultural
workers. Floods and droughts play havoc in the lives of agricultural workers. The use of
pesticides and chemical fertilizers also cause serious health hazards to the agricultural workers.
Their jobs are at the mercy of the land owners and there is no security of employment. It is,
therefore, necessary that the agricultural workers are fully protected and the benefits available
to industrial workers in the country are also provided to agricultural labourers.
N
EW DELHI; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
June 17, 2009.
3

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for establishment of Agricultural Workers Welfare Board
to protect the interests of agricultural workers in the country. Clause 4 of the Bill provides for
employment and assistance to agricultural workers during off season period. The Bill, if
enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve
an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees three hundred crore from the Consolidated
Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one crore is also likely to be involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to frame rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

GMGIPMRND—2319LS(S5)—26-06-2009.
LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to protect the interests of agricultural workers and to provide for their welfare.
————
(Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury, M.P.)