AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA.

रन,
+9 WW

Bill No. 30 of 2004

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2004
By
Suet Basupes ACHARIA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows: —
1, (7) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2004.

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
| in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2, After article 16 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—

"164. Every able bodied citizen who has attained eighteen years of age shall have the
right to get minimum one hundred days employment in a calendar year with such wages as
may be prescribed and in the event of failure of the State to provide any employment he shall
be provided with an unemployment allowance at such rate for the same period as may be
prescribed by law".

Short title
and

‘commencement.

Insertion of
new article
16A.

Right to
work,


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Political democracy and freedom and civil liberties without economic security is a
farce. It is true that man does not live on bread alone, but it is equally true that man cannot
live without bread. Right to life and liberty is meaningless without tight to livelihood.
Democracy will be a mere mockery, if millions of unemployed youth are left uncared and
Without any means of livelihood, which may lead to many undesirable consequences like
social unrest, terrorism, violence and crime and erosion of ethical values.

Part-II of the Constitution guarantees fundamental rights to the citizens of India, But
the fundamental human requirement like right to work does not find the place in the list of
Fundamental rights. This Bill seeks to include in the category of Fundamental rights, the
basic human requirement of right to work for atleast hundred days in a calendar year The
Fight to work already forms part of the Directive principles of the State Policy in Part IV ofthe
Constitution, which is mere platitude without enforceability,

After completing fifty six years of our independence, it is high time to make right to
Work a fundamental right, since it is more fundamental for all human beings. Employment for
all will be possible only when the state guarantees jobs to all able-bodied persons, The
Constitution, therefore, must Suarantee the citizens the right to work.

New Deum; BASUDEB ACHARIA
June 21,2004,


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill provides that every able-bodied citizen who has attained eighteen
years of age shall be provided right to get minimum one hundred days employment in a
calendar year with such wages as may be prescribed and in event of failure of the State to
provide any employment, he shall be provided with an unemployment allowance at such rate
for same period.

The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. A recurring expenditure of about rupees ten thousand crore per annum is likely to be
involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be
involved,


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Basudeb Acharia, M.P.)

MGIPMRND—879LS—01.07.2004.