Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
                   
  
Bill No. 30 of 2025
THE DEATH PENALTY ABOLITION BILL, 2025
By 
Sආඍ. Kൺඇංආඈඓඁං Kൺඋඎඇൺඇංൽඁං , M.P.
ൺ 
BILL
to abolish death penalty in the country.
 B ൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:–
 1. (1) This Act may be called the Death Penalty (Abolition) Act, 2025.
 ( 2) It extends to the whole of India.
 ( 3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
 2. (1) Notwithstanding anything in any other law for the time being in force, 
death penalty is hereby abolished.
 ( 2) On and from the commencement of this Act, provision of punishment of 
Short title, 
extent and 
commencement.
Abolition of 
death penalty.
5

death in any enactment shall be deemed to have been substituted by penalty of 
imprisonment for life.
 ( 3) The provisions of this Act apply in relation to offences being tried at the 
commencement of this Act.
2

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 The Indian Criminal Laws retain capital punishment for a number of serious 
offences. However, death penalty is not only unjust and inhuman but also inconsistent 
with the fundamental rights and the dignity and worth of the human being.
 The opposition to the continuation of capital punishment has been from as early 
as the 1950s. Many of the founding fathers of India were firmly opposed to the death 
penalty. The architect of the Constitution, Babasaheb Ambedkar, himself admitted 
in the Constituent Assembly that people may not follow non-violence in practice but 
‘‘they certainly adhere to the principle of non-violence as a moral mandate which 
they ought to observe as far as they possibly can’’. With this in mind, he said, ‘‘the 
proper thing for this country to do is to abolish the death sentence altogether’’. 
 Miscarriage of justice is one of the biggest concerns about death penalty. There 
have been cases of executions of innocent people. No matter how developed a 
justice system is, it will always remain susceptible to human failure. Unlike prison 
sentences, the death penalty is irreversible and irreparable. The Supreme Court has 
itself admitted on several occasions that there is confusion and contradiction in the 
application of the death penalty. Last year, fourteen eminent retired judges wrote 
to the President, pointing out that the Supreme Court had erroneously given the 
death penalty to fifteen persons since 1996, of whom two were hanged. The judges 
called this ‘‘the gravest known miscarriage of justice in the history of crime and 
punishment in independent India’’.
 The death penalty lacks the deterrent effect. As recently stated by the General 
Assembly of the United Nations, ‘‘there is no conclusive evidence of the deterrent 
value of the death penalty’’ (UNGA Resolution 65/206). Capital punishment is 
merely revenge masquerading as justice. When the Government is trying to create a 
just society where there is less violence and murder, it cannot be allowed to commit 
the same crime against its citizens in the name of justice.
 The world is moving away from using the death penalty. The European Union 
has made ‘‘abolition of death penalty’’ a pre-requisite for membership. In November 
2012, the United Nations adopted a resolution to establish a moratorium on 
executions and abolition of death penalty for the fourth time. Amnesty International 
reports that about one hundred and forty countries have abolished death penalty 
either in law or in practice. This accounts for more than two thirds of the countries 
of the world.
 The Law Commission of India, in its 243rd Report, has recommended the 
abolition of death penalty in all but two instances — crimes of terrorism and waging 
war against the State. However, the Parliament should go one step further by passing 
a legislation to abolish death penalty once and for all.
 The continuation of death penalty is a stain on our society built on the values 
of non-violence, love and justice. Hence, in this land of Mahatma Gandhi and 
Gautama Buddha, it is necessary to abolish this barbaric punishment in order to be 
in consonance with our own inherent morals and the global trend.
 Hence this Bill.
 Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                                KANIMOZHI KARUNANIDHI
January 20, 2025.
3

LOK SABHA
ൺ
BILL
to abolish death penalty in the country.
 
(Shrimati Kanimozhi Karunanidhi, M.P .)