1
Short title and
commencement.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
SHRI OM BIRLA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In article 348 of the Constitution, for clause ( 1), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:—
"(1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Part, unless
Parliament by law otherwise provides—
(a) all proceedings in the Supreme Court shall be in the Hindi language;
(b) all proceedings in a High Court shall be in the Hindi language and also in
that regional language which is used in the State where the principal seat of that High
Court is situated;
Bill No.  30 of  2017
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Amendment of
article 348.
10

2
(c) the authoritative texts—
(i) of all Bills to be introduced or amendments thereto to be moved in
either House of Parliament;
(ii) of all Acts passed by Parliament and of all Ordinances promulgated
by the President; and
(iii) of all orders, rules, regulations and bye-laws issued under this
Constitution or under any law made by Parliament,
shall be both in the Hindi and the English languages; and
(d) the authoritative texts—
(i) of all Bills to be introduced or amendments thereto to be moved in
the House or either House of the Legislature of a State;
(ii) of all Acts passed by the Legislature of a State and of all Ordinances
promulgated by the Governor of a State; and
(iii) of all orders, rules, regulations and bye-laws issued under any law
made by the Legislature of a State;
shall be both in the Hindi language and also in the regional language which is used
in that State.".
5
10
15

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
After Independence, while framing the Constitution, the founding fathers of the
Constitution had envisaged the continuation of English language in the Courts of India till
Hindi language spreads adequately across the country. As per article 348 of the Constitution,
all works in courts should be transacted in English language. Now the time has come for
the one hundred and twenty-five crore citizens of India to deliver justice to them in their
own language. Justice should be delivered in Indian languages (languages specified in the
Eighth Schedule to the Constitution) in High Courts as well. Even after sixty-nine years
of Independence, the usage of English language in Courts still continues. As per
Constitution, all laws and ordinances, etc. are requirement to be codified in the English
language only. This phase of slavery to English language being witnessed in our courts and
Parliament should discontinue. With the constitutional obligation neither the Judges can
pronounce their judgements in the Hindi or in any other Indian language nor can the
lawyers argue in courts in Indian languages. They have to perform all their work in English
language. Even if a Judge wants to use any Indian language for pronouncing judgement,
the Constitution does not permit it. There is a restriction on use of Indian languages in the
High Courts of India also. It is a matter of concern for whole of the country. The country
can prosper only when its languages are not demeaned. Everyone has a right to get
justice in his language and it should be done at the earliest.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the article 348 of the Constitution with a view
to provide that—
(i) all proceedings in the Supreme Court shall be in Hindi;
(ii) all proceedings in a High Court shall be in the Hindi language and also in
that regional language which is used in the State where the principal seat of that
High Court is situated;
(iii) the authoritative texts of all Bills, introduced in and Acts passed by
Houses of Parliament shall be in both Hindi and English languages; and
(iv) the authoritative text of all Bills introduced in and Act passed by the
Legislature of a State shall be both in Hindi language and also in the regional
language which is used in that State.
Hence, this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; OM BIRLA
January 31, 2017.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * *
CHAPTER III
LANGUAGE OF THE SUPREME COURT, HIGH COURTS, ETC.
348. (1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Part, until
Parliament by law otherwise provides—
(a) all proceedings in the Supreme Court and in every High Court,
(b) the authoritative texts—
(i) of all Bills to be introduced or amendments thereto to be moved in
either House of Parliament or in the House or either House of the Legislature
of a State,
(ii) of all Acts passed by Parliament or the Legislature of a State and of
all Ordinances promulgated by the President or the Governor 
1[***] of a State,
and
(iii) of all orders, rules, regulations and byelaws issued under this
Constitution or under any law made by Parliament or the Legislature of a
State,
shall be in the English language.
* * * * * *
4
Language to be
used in the
Supreme Court
and in the High
Courts and for
Acts, Bills, etc.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Om Birla, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4559LS(S3)—22-02-2017.