As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

94

° ly

Bill No. 57 of 2000.
—____

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
By
Dr. (Cot..) Duant RAM SHANDL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

Be itenacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows: —
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2000,
2. In Sixth Schedule to the Constitution —

(0) in the heading, after the word “Tripura”, the words, “Himachal Pradesh”
shall be inserted;

i) in sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 1, for the words and figure “and in Part
III”, the words and figures, “Part IT] and in Part [५९ shall be substituted;

(a after paragraph 128, the following paragraph shall be inserted, namely:—
“12९. Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, —

(@) if any provision of a law made by a District or Regional Council in the
State of Himachal Pradesh with respect to any matter specified in sub-paragraph (1)
of paragraph 3 of this Schedule or if any provision of any regulation made by a District

Short title

Amendment of
Sixth Schedule,

Application of
‘Acts of Parliament
and of the Legisla-
ture of the State of
Himachal Pradesh
to autonomous
district and au-
tonomous region
in the State
of Himachal
Pradesh.


(6) the President, with respect to any act of Parliament, by notification, direct
that it shall not apply to an autonomous district or an autonomous region in the State
of Himachal Pradesh, or shall apply to such district or region or any part thereof
subject to such exception or modifications as he May specify in the notification and
any such directions may be given so as to have retrospective effect.”;

(iv) in paragraph 17, for the words,—

“or Tripura”, wherever it Occurs, the words “or Tripura or Himachal Pradesh
or”, shall be substituted;

(२) in paragraph 20,
(a) in sub-paragraph (1),—
(9 for the word and the figure “and 11)”,
the word and figures, “II and Iv” shall be substituted;

(ii) after the words “the State of Tripura”, the words, “the State of Himachal
Pradesh” shall be inserted;

8) in the Table, after Part II, the following Part shall be inserted, namely,—
“PART IV
1. Girpar area

20


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Himachal Pradesh is a hilly State and consists of small hills and hillocks. tt consists of
mini tribal areas. Peopie belonging to Girpar area have the same characteristics as that of
tribal people living in other States. They are innocent and adopt the same customs and
Practices that are adopted by most of the tribal People in the country. They do not have even
basic facilities and it may notbe too much to say that they have not seen the civilized world,

A special provision and dispensation has been made for the tribal areas located in
certain North Eastern States. The same provision is sought to be extended to this area also
with a view to facilitating fast. development and protecting the ethnic culture and tradition of
this tribal people. Accordingly, it is Proposed to amend the Constitution to make provision
in this regard,

New Det; DHANI RAM SHANDIL
March 14, 2000.



ANNEXURE,
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA,

* * * * *

Sixth Schedule
Urticles 244 (2) and 275 (1)]
Provisions as to the Administration of Tribal areas in '[?[the States of Assam,
»[Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram]

1. Autonomous districts and autonomous regions —(1) Subject to the provisions
of this paragraph, the tribal areas in each item of *[*Parts 1, Il and 14 and in Part वा of the
lable appended to paragraph 20 of this Schedule shall be an autonomous district.

* के * * *

17. Exclusion of areas from autonomous districts in forming constituencies in
such districts—For the purposes of elections to the Legislative Asscmbly of Assam or
Meghalaya or Tripura or Mizoram, the Governor may by order declare that any area within
an autonomous district in the State of Assam or Meghalaya or Tripura or Mizoram, as the
cas¢' may be, shall not form part of any constituency to fill a seat or seats in the Assembly
reserved for any such district but shall form Part of constituency to fill a seat or seats in the
Assembly not so reserved to be specified in the order.

* * * * * +

20. Tribal areas—{1) The areas Specified in Parts 11, 14 and II] of the table below
shall respectively be the tribal areas within the State of Assam, the State of Meghalaya the
State of Tripura and the State of Mizoram,

* * + + «
TABLE
Part I
1. The North Cachar Hills District.
2. The Karbi Anglong District.

Parr I
1, Khasi Hills District.
2. Jaintia Hills District.
3. The Garo Hills District,

2[Parr ILA

Tripura Tribal areas District.

Parr Il
* * * +

1. The Chakma District.
2. The Mara District.
3. The Lai District.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Dr (Col,) Dhani Ram Shandil, M.P)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—4545LS—31, 03.2000,