As introduced in Lok Sabha
                   
                                                       
          
Bill No. 30 of 2024
THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED TRIBES) ORDER 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024
By
Shri C.N. Annadurai,  M.P.
A
BILL
 further to amend the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950.  
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—      
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order (Amendment) Act, 
2024.
2. In the Schedule to the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950, in Part XIV , 
Tamil Nadu, for entry 18, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:— 
"18. Kuruma, Kuruman, Kurumba, Kurmbagounder, Kurumban and 
Kurumbar.”. 
  
Short title.
5 Amendment of 
the Schedule.
22 of 1950.

STATEMENT  OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 The Kurumans is aboriginal tribe of Tamil Nadu and are dwelling throughout the State 
of Tamil Nadu with their tradition, culture, custom, traits, etc. but still being denied the ST 
categorisation and other affirmative actions in the better interest of the tribe community. 
 As per the article 366(25) of the Constitution of India, Scheduled Tribe means such tribe 
or tribal communities or parts of or groups within such tribe for the purpose of Constitution 
of article 342(2) to specify the Tribe. Kurumans synonyms are presently deprived and 
denied their constitutional rights being extended to tribes. The said community is tribal by 
birth, culture, customs, traits, as concluded, under an ethnographic detailed study by the 
Tribal Research Centre, Ooty, Tamil Nadu. Moreover, as early as Meckenzie Manuscript's 
1816, First India Surveyor General of India and other Tribal Literature viz. Madras General 
of Literature and Science support the Kurumans Tribes synonyms with common and 
generic name & culture, customs, history and origination, therefore, to be identified under 
ST Categorisation. 
 In order to render the social justice and affirmative actions without further loss of time, 
this bill seeks to amend 'The Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950' for inclusion 
of Kurumans synonyms names such as “Kuruma, Kuruman, Kurumba, Kurmbagounder, 
Kurumban, Kurumbar tribes” in the ST List in order to render social justice to oppressed 
and suppressed Kurumans & its synonyms names. That will ensure constitutional protection 
to the adivasi's Kurumans tribal synonyms against all sorts of socio-economic exploitation. 
Moreover it will confer all Constitutional and Legal Rights to Kuruman generic tribes as 
guaranteed under article 46 of the Constitution. 
 Hence this Bill.
     New Delhi;                                           C.N. ANNADURAI
 July 3,  2024.
2

 FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
 The Bill seeks to include Kuruma, Kuruman, Kurumba, Kurmbagounder, Kurumban 
and Kurumbar as the synonym name of Kurumans to the list of Scheduled Tribes with 
respect to the State of Tamil Nadu by way of amending the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) 
Order, 1950. The Bill, if enacted, would involve recurring and non-recurring expenditure on 
account of the benefits to be given under the schemes and programmes of the Government 
meant for social, educational and economic development of the Scheduled Tribes. At this 
stage, it is not possible to mention the exact amount which may be incurred on this account. 
However, it is estimated that a sum of approximately rupees thirty-five crore is likely to be 
involved as a recurring expenditure per annum. 
 A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees seventy crore is also likely to be 
involved.  
3

 ANNEXURE
[Extract from the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950]
(C.O. 22)
 * * * * *   
(PART III—Rules and Orders under the Constitution)
 * * * * *  
PART XIV .—[Tamil Nadu]
 * * * * *  
  18. Kurumans
 * * * * *  
4

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950.
————
(Shri C.N. Annadurai, M.P.)