1
Short title,
extent  and
commencement.
Bill No. 310 of  2016
Definitions.
THE PUBLIC LIABILITY FOR NON-NUCLEAR
INDUSTRIAL MISHAP BILL, 2016
By
SHRIMATI RANJEET RANJAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for stringent punishment and adequate compensation for non-nuclear
industrial mishaps in the country and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Public Liability for Non-Nuclear Industrial Mishap
Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "Claims Commissioner" means the Claims Commissioner appointed under
section 3;
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
10

2
(c) "Fund" means Non-nuclear Industrial Mishap Fund constituted under
section 15;
(d) "liability" means the liability of the Central Government or the State
Government or both for fixing and awarding compensation to the victims of any mishap
causing minor or major injuries or death of the individuals;
(e) "mishap" means any incident causing injury or death of any individual due to
operational fault in the non-nuclear industry;
(f) "non-nuclear industries" includes industries other than the nuclear industries,
which are covered under the Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage Act, 2010 and the
Public Liability Insurance Act, 1991, whether Government undertakings, private or in
joint venture or an autonomous undertaking; and
(g) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) Whoever suffers due to mishap in a non-nuclear industry shall be entitled to
claim compensation in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
(2) For the purpose of adjudicating upon claims for compensation for any mishap, the
appropriate Government shall—
(a) notify the mishap within a period of six months from the date of occurrence of
such mishap; and
(b) appoint one or more Claims Commissioners for such areas of mishap, as
may be specified in that notification, in such manner as may be prescribed.
4. A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Claims Commissioner unless
he—
(a) is, or has been, a district judge, or
(b) in the service of the appropriate Government and has held the post not below
the rank of Joint Secretary or Deputy Collector of the area or any other equivalent post.
5. The salary and allowances, payable to, and other terms and conditions of service, of
Claims Commissioner shall be such as may be prescribed.
6. (1) For the purpose of adjudication of claims under this Act, the Claims Commissioner
shall follow such procedure as may be prescribed.
(2) For the purpose of holding inquiry, the Claims Commissioner may associate with
him such persons having expertise in non-nuclear industries or such other persons and in
such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
a person associated under sub-section (2) shall be such as may be prescribed.
(4) The Claims Commissioner shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of
discharging his functions under this Act and shall have the same powers as are vested in a
civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
7. After the notification of non-nuclear mishap under clause (a) of sub-section (2) of
section 3, the Claims Commissioner, having jurisdiction over the area, shall cause wide
publicity to be given, in such manner as he deems fit, for inviting applications for claiming
compensation for injuries or death caused due to such mishap.
Compensation
for Non-
nuclear
Industrial
mishaps.
Qualification
for
appointment
as Claims
Commissioner.
Salary,
Allowances &
other terms
and conditions
of service of
the Claims
Commissioner.
Adjudicating
procedure and
powers of
Claims
Commissioner.
Inviting
applications
for claims by
Claims
Commissioner.
38 of 2010.
6 of 1991.
5 of 1908.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

8. An application for compensation before the Claims Commissioner of Non-nuclear
industrial mishap shall be made by—
(a) a person who has sustained injury or any agent duly authorized by such
persons; or
(b) the legal representatives of the deceased.
9. (1) Every application for compensation before the Claims Commissioner shall be
made in such form, containing such particulars and accompanied by such documents as may
be prescribed.
(2) Every application under sub-section (1) shall be made within a period of six months
from the date of issue of notification of mishap under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 2) of
section 3.
10. (1) The Claims Commissioner shall, on receipt of an application under sub-section
(1) of section 9, after giving notice of such application to the owner and after giving a
reasonable opportunity of being heard to the parties, dispose of the applications within a
period of three months from the date of such receipt and make an award accordingly.
(2) The Claims Commissioner shall provide the copies of the award to the parties
within a period of fifteen days from the date of pronouncing the award in such manner as may
be prescribed.
11. The maximum amount of liability with respect to Non-nuclear industrial mishap
shall,—
(a) in case of loss of life to a person shall be rupees ten lakh; and
(b) in case of permanent injury including immediate and long term health impact to a
person shall not be less than rupees two lakh but which may extend upto rupees five lakh
depending upon the nature of such injury sustained.
12. Whoever—
(a) negligently causes loss of life or personal injury, in any mishap, or
(b) contravenes any provisions of this Act and rules made under it,
shall, for the first offence, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend upto
five years or with fine which shall not be less than rupees fifty thousand but which may
extend upto rupees one lakh, or with both:
Provided that if offender fails to pay the amount of fine under clause (b), the term of
imprisonment shall be extended by another two years:
Provided further that if second mishap causing death or permanent injury takes place
in any non-nuclear industry by an act of negligence of any person, the operations in that
industry shall be stopped forthwith.
13. Where a contravention under this Act is committed by a private company or joint
venture Industry, the owner, or the majority shareholding person, who, at the time the offence
was committed, was directly in charge of, and was responsible to the conduct of business of
the industry shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded
against and punished accordingly.
14. Where a contravention under this Act is committed by any Department of the
Government, the Head of that Department shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
15. (1) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute a fund to be known as Non-nuclear Industrial Mishap Relief Fund which shall be
utilized for paying in accordance with provisions of this Act relief under the award made by
Claims Commissioner.
Persons
entitled to
make
application
for Non-
nuclear
industrial
mishap.
Procedure for
making
applications
before Claims
Commissioner.
Award by
Claims
Commissioner.
Limits of
Liability.
Penalties.
Offences by
industries.
Offences by
Government
Department.
Non-nuclear
Industrial
Mishap Relief
Fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
3

(2) The Fund shall be constituted by the grants from the Central Government and the
State Governments in such proportions as may be prescribed from time to time.
(3) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in Official Gazette, specify the
authority in which the Fund shall vest and the manner in which the Fund shall be
administered.
16. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
contained herewith in any other law for time being in force.
17. The provisions of the Act shall be in addition to and not derogation of any other
law for the time in force.
18. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of  Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Overriding
effects.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
4

5
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Non-nuclear industrial mishaps causing injury or danger to life in respect of persons
engaged in such sectors or industries are on the rise in the country and the affected people
are not adequately covered by relevant laws in respect of such industries, which result into
the affected individuals or his/their family/families not getting adequate compensation or the
offender getting away with mild charges being made against him or the concerned industry's
management. It is, therefore, need of the hour that law be passed in this regard for stringent
punishment and adequate compensation before the situation goes beyond control.
The Public Liability Insurance Act, 1991 was supposed to reflect post-Bhopal concerns.
Despite amendments providing for minimal insurance and interim relief, it proved to be a
damp squib. Insurance does not reflect claims. The Act is barely used. Therefore, there is a
pressing need for a law to ensure all such disasters other than nuclear ones are covered
under it and victims are paid adequate and timely compensation.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RANJEET RANJAN
November 15, 2016.

6
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall appoint one or
more Claims Commissioner to adjudicate claims for compensation with respect to non-nuclear
industrial mishap. Clause 5 of the Bill provides for salary and allowances payable to Claims
Commissioner. Clause 6 provides for payments to persons associated for adjudication of
claims by the Claims Commissioner. Clause 7 provides for wide publicity to be given for
inviting application for claims. Clause 11 provides for a compensation of rupees ten lakh in
case of death caused by non-nuclear industrial mishaps in the country and compensation to
injured person which may vary from rupees two lakh to five lakh depending upon the nature
of injuries. Clause 15 provides for establishment of  Non-nuclear Industrial Mishap Relief
Fund. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve recurring as well as non-recurring expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about
rupees Five hundred crore would involve from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees One hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

7
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 17 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for stringent punishment and adequate compensation for non-nuclear
industrial mishaps in the country and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shrimati Ranjeet Ranjan, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3371LS(S3)—30-11-2016.