Short title and
commencement.
THE DRUGS AND COSMETICS (AMENDMENT)  BILL, 2016
By
SHRI RAGHA V LAKHANPAL,  M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In  section 5 of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940,—
(a) in sub-section (2), after clause (xvi), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(xvii) one scientist who shall be an expert in non-animal alternatives, to
be nominated by the Central Government.”; and
(b) in sub-section (3), in proviso, for the words “or clause (xvi)”, the words “or
clause (xvi) or clause (xvii)” shall be substituted.
Bill  No.  311 of  2016
23 of 1940. Amendment
of section 5.
5
10
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In 2007, the National Academy of Sciences in the United States identified the need for
a fundamental paradigm shift in the way safety testing is carried out, envisioning” ...a
not-so-distant future in which virtually all routine toxicity testing would be conducted in
human cells or cell lines”. The approach - termed “toxicology from the 21st century” or “Tox
21” — involves uncovering exactly how chemicals disrupt normal human biological processes
at the molecular and cellular levels, and then using state-of-the-art in vitro, computational,
and robotic tools to test for these disruptions and make predictions regarding real-world
risks to people.
Some of the new technology being developed is truly revolutionary. Harvard
University’s Wyss Institute is developing an approach known as “organs-on-a-chip” in
which human cell cultures are subjected to dynamic forces ( e.g. lung cells “breathe”) and
subsequently display properties that are very similar to those seen in vivo in humans.
However, very little of it is seen in India, whether in research or in regulation. While the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India has made landmark decisions of
prohibiting animal testing for cosmetics and phasing out the infamous Draize Test, there is a
lack of scientific expertise available on key committees to relay the progress made in research
regulation.
India has been signatory to the Mutual Acceptance of Data (MAD) agreement of the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) since 2011. The OECD
contains a number of non-animal alternatives for any of its member countries or MAD
signatory countries to uptake however with India, the consideration of uptake of these
alternatives have been close to nil. With the advent of alternatives in a larger way in the near
future owing to the development of alternatives worldwide and the requirements of Indian
law, i.e., section 17(2)(d) of Chapter IV of the prevention of Cruelty to Animals (PCA) Act,
1960 requires that “experiments on animals are avoided wherever it is possible to do so”, it is
important that a scientist with knowledge and expertise on non-animal alternatives to
experimentation is included in the Drugs Technical Advisory Board under the Drugs and
Cosmetics Act, 1940 so that redundant animal testing could be avoided wherever necessary.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAGHAV  LAKHANPAL
November 16, 2016.
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE DRUGS AND COSMETICS ACT, 1940
ACT NO. 23 OF 1940
****
5. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, constitute a Board (to be called
the Drugs Technical Advisory Board) to advise the Central Government and the State
Governments on technical matters arising out of the administration of this Act and to carry
out the other functions assigned to it by this Act.
(2) The Board shall consist of the following members, namely:—
***
(xvi) two persons holding the appointment of Government Analyst under this
Act, to be nominated by the Central Government.
(3) The nominated and elected members of the Board shall hold office for three years,
but shall be eligible for renomination and re-election:
Provided that the person nominated or elected, as the case may be, under clause (ix) or
clause (x) or clause (xi) or clause (xvi) of sub-section (2) shall hold office for so long as he
holds the appointment of the office by virtue of which he was nominated or elected to the
Board.
****
3
The Drugs
Technical
Advisory
Board.

LOK  SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940
————
(Shri Raghav Lakhanpal, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3368LS(S3)—30-11-2016.
————