1
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL,  2019
By
DR. SUJAY RADHAKRISHNA VIKHE PATIL,  M.P .
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After 21A of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
"21 B (1) The State shall provide accessible and affordable healthcare facilities to all
its citizens in such manner as the State may by law, determine.
(2) The State shall not discriminate against any citizen on grounds only of religion,
race, caste, sex, descent, place of residence or any of them while providing the right to
affordable and accessible healthcare.
(3) The State shall spend not less than ten percent of the annual estimated receipts of
the State for achieving the right to affordable and accessible healthcare as provided under
clause (1).".
Insertion of
new article
21B
Bill  No. 311 of  2019
Right to
Affordable
and Accessible
Healthcare.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Constitution of the World Health Organization provides that "Health is a state of
complete physical, mental and social well-being and not merely the absence of disease or
infirmity." The Constitution has no express provision to recognize the fundamental right to
health. The scope and ambit of article 21 has been broadened over the years through judicial
pronouncements and the expression life in this article means a life with human dignity and
not mere survival or animal existence. The right to health is inherent to a life with dignity, and
article 21 should be read with articles 38, 42, 43 and 47 to understand the nature of the
obligation of the State in order to ensure the effective realization of this right.
Health is considered as a vital parameter of human development and human development
is the basic ingredient to analyze the economic and social development of a country. The Bill
seeks to grant a fundamental right status to healthcare by amending article 21 of the
Constitution which will create a legal obligation on the State to ensure access to timely,
acceptable, and affordable healthcare of appropriate quality as well as to providing for the
underlying determinants of health, such as safe and potable water, sanitation, health-related
information and education, and gender equality. In order to realize this goal it is important to
cast an obligation on the State to support the right to health through increased spending on
healthcare. It is imperative that in order to enforce the right to health it should be done
without any kind of discrimination on any grounds.
India's healthcare market may see a threefold jump in value terms to reach $372bn. by
2022. India has the lowest Government spend and public spend, as a proportion of Gross
Domestic Product (GDP), and the lowest per capita health spend. Indians met more than 62
per cent. of their health expenses from their personal savings, called "out-of-pocket expenses",
compared with 13.4 per cent. in the US, 10 per cent in the UK and 54 per cent. in China.
The Committee constituted by the 15th Finance Commission has also suggested that
India should get ready to declare the 'right to health' as an Independence Day announcement
in 2022. It is the primary duty of the State to provide for secured health to its citizen. As the
legal guardian responsible for the safety and security of all its citizens, the State is duty
bound to protect its citizens from mortality and morbidity which has been on the rise due to
increase in diseases as a result of lifestyle. An important objective of this Bill is to make
health a fundamental right which would thus give citizens the power to hold the state
accountable for fulfilling its responsibility toward them.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SUJAY RADHAKRISHNA VIKHE PATIL
November 6, 2019.
2

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for making the right to affordable and accessible healthcare
a fundamental right. It also provides that the State shall spend not less than ten percent. of
the annual estimated receipts of the State for achieving the right to affordable and accessible
healthcare. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure-recurring and non-recurring
from the Consolidated Fund of India as well as Consolidated Fund of the concerned State.
However, it is not  possible to assess the actual financial expenditure likely to be incurred at
this stage.
3

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhe Patil, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—3164LS(S3)—18.11.2019.