1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI P.P. CHAUDHARY, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment)  Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the official Gazette, appoint.
2. In article 338 of the Constitution, in clause (10), the words "to such other backward
classes as the President may, on receipt of the report of a Commission appointed under
clause (1) of article 340, by order specify and also" shall be omitted.
Bill No.  312  of  2015
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment of
article 338.
5

2
3. In article 340 of the Constitution,—
(i) in clause (1), after the words "steps that should be taken by the Union or any
State", the words "for the purposes of clauses (4) and (5) of article 15 and clause (4) of
article 16" shall be inserted; and
(ii) after clause (2), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
"(2A) It shall be the duty of the Commission to—
(a) investigate and monitor all matters relating to the safeguards
provided for the backward classes under the Constitution or under any
other law for the time being in force or under any order of the Government
of India or a State and to evaluate the working of such safeguards;
(b) inquire into specific complaints of deprivation of rights and
safeguards of the backward classes;
(c) participate and advise on the planning process of socio-economic
development of the backward classes and to evaluate the progress of their
development under the Union and any State;
(d) present to the President, annually and at such other times, as the
Commission may deem fit, reports upon the working of those safeguards;
(e) make in such recommendations as to the measures that should
be taken by the Union or any State for the effective implementation of
safeguards and other measures for the protection, welfare and socio-
economic development of the backward classes; and
(f) discharge such other functions in relation to the protection,
welfare, development and advancement of the backward classes as the
President may, subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament,
by rule specify.
(2AA) The Commission shall, while investigating any matter referred to in
sub-clause (a) or inquiring into any complaint referred to in sub-clause (b) of
clause (2A), have all the powers of a civil court trying a suit and in particular in
respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from
any part of India and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court
or office;
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and
documents;
(f) any other matter which the President may, by rule, determine.".
Amendment of
article 340.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Article 340 of the Constitution provides for the appointment of a Commission to
investigate the conditions of Backward Classes in the country. The Commission so appointed
by the order of the President is constituted to investigate the conditions of socially and
educationally Backward Classes and the difficulties under which they labour and 'to make
recommendations as to the steps that should be taken by the Union or any State' to remove
such difficulties and to improve their condition.
Article 15(4), as an enabling provision, allows the State, as defined by the Constitution,
to make special provisions for the advancement of any 'socially and educationally' backward
classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. Article 15(5) allows
the State to make special provisions in relation to their admission to educational institutions,
including private and aided or unaided institutions other than minority institutions as referred
to in article 30(1).
Article 16(4) allows the State to make any provisions for the reservation of appointments
or posts in favour of any backward class of citizens, which in the opinion of the State, is not
adequately represented in the services under the State.
The Constitution while allowing the State these special provisions for the advancement
of Backward Classes does not clarify the limitations or the scope of the Commission that is
to be appointed under article 340 and hence it is important to ensure that the scope and
constitutional limitations of the Commission be specified in the article 340 itself. This is to
ensure the integrity and consistency of the Constitution as a whole with respect to the intent
of the framers of the Constitutions regarding the advancement of the Backward Classes and
to allow for the uniform interpretation and implementation of the objectives as enshrined in
sovereign document as a whole.
The Constitution under Articles 338 and 338A empowers the National Commission for
the Scheduled Castes and the National Commission for Scheduled Tribes to look into the
grievances of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes respectively. However, similar powers
have not been provided to the National Commission for Backward Classes (NCBC) that
draws its powers from article 340 of the Constitution. Hence, it is important to ensure that the
interests and grievances of all classes of citizens are represented and addressed, while
ensuring equality of powers between the different arms of Government that have been
entrusted with similar duties. Hence, it is imperative that the amendments as proposed to
empower the NCBC to look into the grievances of persons of Other Backward Classes be
undertaken.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; P.P. CHAUDHARY
November 13, 2015.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * * *
338. (1) * * * * *
(10) In this article, references to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes shall
be construed as including references to such other backward classes as the President may,
on receipt of the report of a Commission appointed under clause (1) of article 340, by order
specify and also to the Anglo-Indian Community.
340. (1) The President may by order appoint a Commission consisting of such persons
as he thinks fit to investigate the conditions of socially and educationally backward classes
within the territory of India and the difficulties under which they labour and to make
recommendations as to the steps that should be taken by the Union or any State to remove
such difficulties and to improve their condition and as to the grants that should be made for
the purpose by the Union or any State and the conditions subject to which such grants
should be made, and the order appointing such Commission shall define the procedure to be
followed by the Commission.
* * * * * * *
4
National
Commission
for Scheduled
Castes and
Scheduled
Tribes.
Appointment
of a
Commission
to investigate
the conditions
of backward
classes.

GMGIPMRND—2828LS(S-3)—08.12.2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri P .P. Chaudhary, M.P.)