1
THE BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
By
SHRI VINCENT H. PALA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Biological Diversity Act, 2002.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Biological Diversity (Amendment) Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 2 of the Biological Diversity Act, 2002 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act),—
(a) after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(ba) "consent agreement" means a written and signed agreement denoting
prior informed consent of the community concerned or the Biodiversity
Management Committee, as constituted under section 41; and
Bill No. 313 of 2019
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of section 2.
5
10

2
(b) in clause (h), for the words, "Panchayats", wherever they occur, the words
"Gram Sabhas or Panchayats" shall be substituted.
3. In section 7 of the principal Act, for the words "after giving prior intimation", the
words "after making an application in the prescribed form, with the consent agreement
attached to the application" shall be substituted.
4. In section 18 of the principal Act, after clause ( 4), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
"(4a) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 4), the National
Biodiversity Authority shall take all efforts required to litigate and represent the local
communities' case in a court of law to oppose the grant of any form of intellectual
property right in India or outside India, on any biological resource obtained from India
or knowledge associated with such biological resource which is derived from India.".
5. In section 19 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words, "in such form",
the words "in such form accompanied with consent agreement" shall be substituted.
6. In section 24 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words, "give prior intimation", the words "attach
a consent agreement" shall be substituted; and
(b) in sub-section ( 2), for the words "an intimation", the words "a consent
agreement" shall be substituted.
7. In section 40 of the principal Act, after the words, "National Biodiversity Authority",
the words "and local bodies" shall be inserted.
8. In section 61 of the principal Act, for clause ( b), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:—
"(b) any benefit claimer, member of the concerned or affected community, the
Biodiversity Management Committee or the local bodies.".
Amendment
of section 7.
Amendment
of section 18.
Amendment
of section 19.
Amendment
of section 24.
Amendment
of section 40.
Amendment
of section 61.
5
10
15
20
25

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Biological Diversity Act, 2002, was introduced and passed to take appropriate
action for the purpose of conservation of biological diversity, sustainable use of its
components and fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising out of utilization of these
resources. Considering that the indigenous local communities stand to lose in the process
usually, the legislation must ensure protection of their rights. The principal Act fails to
provide for their voices and opinions to be heard in matters related to protection of biological
resources and traditional knowledge. It is important that while deciding matters that affect
and have an impact on the communities at large, their say must be a major deciding factor.
Their informed consent is a matter of necessity, than a mere consultation, for granting
access to resources for whichever purpose. It is the only way in which we can ensure local
level participation in the real sense the term, and thus, effectively realize the objectives of the
73rd and 74th Amendment of the Constitution.
Hence, this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; VINCENT H. PALA
November 6, 2019.
3

4
LOK SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Biological Diversity Act, 2002.
—————
(Shri Vincent H. Pala, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—3168LS(S3)—18-11-2019.