1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI NISHIKANT  DUBEY, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment)  Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. For  article 130 of the Constitution, the following article shall be substituted, namely:—
“130. The Supreme Court shall sit in Delhi and Ranchi or in such other place
or places, as the Chief Justice of India  may, with the approval of the President, from
time to time, appoint.”
Bill No. 314 of  2015
Short title and
commencement.
Substitution of
new article for
article 130.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The appellants are already burdened and are further shunned to face the ordeal of
having to travel thousands of kilometers to the seat of the Supreme Court in New Delhi for
their trial and the consequent follow up of their cases.
Moreover, the number of pending court cases in the country has crossed three crore
mark. Figures on the chronic backlog of court cases are in indictment of the country’s
beleaguered legal system. The plight of persons awaiting trial needs to be understood and
addressed. It is not the wastage of time, but also an increased financial burden that makes the
process inconvenient, cumbersome and expensive.
Article 130 of the Constitution envisages that the Supreme Court shall sit in Delhi or in
such other place or places as the Chief Justice of India may with the approval of the President
from time to time appoint.
The language of the article clearly indicates that there was an intention of the founding
fathers of the Constitution to have more than one seat of the Supreme Court.
Hence, the Bill seeks to establish a permanent Bench of the Supreme Court in Ranchi
in Jharkhand. Strategic location for a permanent Bench as it is easily accessible for litigants.
This will provide for a robust mechanism to not only manage pendency of court cases but
simultaneously make the justice available at low cost and in an efficient manner to the public.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; NISHIKANT DUBEY
November 13, 2015.
2

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to amend article 130 of the Constitution to establish a
permanent Bench of the Supreme Court in Ranchi, Jharkhand.
This Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore would be involved
annually.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved.
3

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * *
130. The Supreme Court shall sit in Delhi or in such other place or places, as the Chief
Justice of India may, with the approval of the President, from time to time, appoint.
* * * *
Seat of the
Supreme
Court.

GMGIPMRND—2819LS(S-3)—08.12.2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Nishikant Dubey, M.P.)