1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 314 of  2019
THE SPICES (REMUNERATIVE SUPPORT PRICE)
BILL, 2019
By
ADV. DEAN KURIAKOSE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the fixation of  Remunerative Support price of spices such as black pepper,
cardamom, ginger, turmeric, garlic and other spices on annual or seasonal basis
and for matters connected therewith.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Spices (Remunerative Support Price) Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ‘Authority’ means Remunerative Support Price to Spices Authority
constituted under section 3;
(b) ‘prescribed’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(c) ‘spices’ shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in the Spices Board
Act, 1986.
3. (1) The Central Government shall constitute an authority to be known as the
Spices Remunerative Support Price Authority for the purpose of regulating and controlling
the price of spices such as black pepper, cardamom, ginger, turmeric, garlic, and other
spices on an annual or seasonal basis in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Authority shall consist of the Chairperson and such other member as may be
prescribed.
(3) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and staff as it
considers necessary for the efficient functioning of the Authority.
(4) The headquarter of the Authority shall be situated at Kattappana in Idukki District
of Kerala.
4. The Authority shall perform the following functions:—
(i) fixation of remunerative support price of black pepper, cardamom, ginger,
turmeric and garlic on annual  seasonal basis;
(ii) payment of additional amount to the farmers if the market price is lower than
the remunerative support price fixed;
(iii) assessment of damage to spice crops due to natural calamities and loss
suffered by farmers and determine compensation to be paid to the farmers;
(iv) assessment of damage to spice crops due to plant disease and loss suffered
by farmers and payment of compensation  to the farmers;
(v) assessment of damage to spice crops by wild animals and loss suffered by
farmers and payment of compensation; and
(vi) advice the Central Government, from time to time, on policy matters of
import duty fixation and free trade agreements.
5. The Central Government, shall from time to time provide, after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
6. The provision of this Act and rules made there under shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act—
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Definition.
10 of 1986.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Constitution
of Spices
(Remunerative
Support Price)
Authority.
Functions of
the Authority.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
STATEMENTS  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
In 2015-16, we earned a total of Rs. 11,997 crore in foreign exchange through spice
exports which is the fourth largest agricultural export commodity in terms of value. It is also
important to note that the productivity of spices in our country continues to be low compared
to the world average.
It is inevitable to provide a Remunerative Support Price to the farmers for their spice
produce, as it would help them in repaying their agriculture loans apart from meeting  their
social and personal obligations. It has been a common occurrence for the post harvest price
of the spices to drop sharply. For example in October 2019, the price for pepper was reduced
to rupees three hundred per kilogram which is relatively a huge blow to a farmer who spends
around five hundred per kilo gram for the production of the same volume of pepper. The
oversupply in the global market and rising imports have been the primary cause, pushing
the pepper prices to the lowest in a decade.
Apart from the price issues, the farmers are also affected by low volume of output
owing to various factors such as epidemics, climate variations, wildlife intrusion, etc. Most
of the farmers are not aware of the factors determining the price of their produce. The prices
are directly and indirectly influenced by the international market scenarios and the Nations
obligation to Regional and International Free Trade Agreements (FTAs). Considering all
these issues, it is important to set up an Authority for the fixation and payment of
Remunerative Support Price for the spice produce and other welfare measures for farmers
who grow  spice crops.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; DEAN KURIAKOSE
November 6, 2019.

4
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution  of Remunerative Support Price to
Spices Authority. Clause 5 provides for the Central Government to provide adequate funds
for the functioning of the Authority. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, is likely to involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure
of rupees five hundred crore is likely to be involved per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees two hundred and fifty crore is also likely to be
involved.

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the fixation of  Remunerative Support price of spices such as black pepper,
cardamom, ginger, turmeric, garlic and other spices on annual or seasonal basis and
for matters connected therewith.
————
(Adv. Dean Kuriakose, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—3733LS(S3)—26-11-2019.