1
THE  COMPLETE  PROHIBITION  OF  LIGHT  FISHING  AND
PROTECTION AND  DEVELOPMENT OF TRADITIONAL
FISHING TECHNIQUE IN COASTAL AREAS
BILL, 2019
By
SHRI VINAYAK BHAURAO RAUT, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for complete prohibition of 'Light fishing' and protection and development of
traditional fishing technique in coastal areas and for matters connected thereto.
BE it enacted by Paliament in the Seventeith Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Complete Prohibition of Light Fishing  and Protection
and Development of Traditional Fishing Technique in Coastal Areas Act, 2019.
Bill  No. 315  of  2019
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "coastal area" means the coastal and sea regions under the sovereignty of
India;
(b) " light fishing" means fishing by using nets and the other things by attracting
fishes with the help of Light Emitting Diode (LED);
(c) "traditional technique" means various methods being used for fishig in coastal
areas since ancient time.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, constitute a Board for protection
and promotion of traditional technique for fishing in coastal areas.
(2) The headquarters of the Board shall be at Mumbai in the State of Maharashtra and
the Board may establish its offices in various coastal States of the country.
(3) The Board shall consists of—
(a) a chair person;
(b) a deputy chairperson;
(c) one representative from each of the coastal States & Union territories with
minimum 20 years of experience in traditional techniques of fishing to be nominated
by the concerned State Government;
(d) minimum 5 Members of Lok Sabha regarding coastal districts;
(4) The Board shall elect its chairperson by consensus from amongst themselves.
(5) The Board shall meet at least once every month and Central Government shall
make such provisions as may be necessary for review of its work and coordination among
various ministries.
(6) The Board shall constitute a Monitoring Committee to prepare and publish a
report of the functioning of the Board.
(7) Every report under sub-section (6) shall be forwarded to the Central Government
which shall be laid before each House of Parliament.
4. The Board shall,—
(a) impose a complete ban on light fishing within twelve nautical miles (nm) from
sea coast and in sea level in each coastal area:
Provided the traditional Chinese technique of fishing being used in coastal
districts of south India and special nets being used for fishing in coastal areas in the
State of Kerala shall not be prohibited;
(b) review and consider the appropriate use of latest technique in fishing and its
effect on the fisherman community using traditional techniques;
(c) take special measures for betterment and upliftment of traditional techniques
of fishing and providing of financial assistance to fishermen.
(d) take such other measures as it may deem appropriate.
5. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide to the Board by way of grants such sums of money as it may think fit
for being utilized for the purposes of this Act.
Definitions.
Board for
protection
and
promotion of
traditional
techniques.
Functions of
the Board.
Grants by the
Central
Government.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
6. The Central Government may give directions to the Government of coastal States to
implement any provisions of this Act or any rules made thereunder in the regional jurisdiction
of the State which it may consider necessary.
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purpose of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which
maybe comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under the rule.
Power to give
directions.
Power to
make rules.
5
10

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In coastal States of India including Maharashtra, fisherman community in a large
number catch fish with traditional techniques for their livelihood and it not only feeds their
families but also it has been a carrier of diverse culture of India since thousands of years.
Therefore, the livelihood crisis in front of this community means abolition of rich and glorious
folk culture from Indian society. India is the only country in the world where different cultures
not only flourished but also helped each other in development during their
co-existence. But during last few years there is a livelihood crisis in front of fishermen
community of the country.
It is evident for last few years that in the coastal states of India latest technique known
as "light fishing" is being used for fishing. Although, light is being used in fishing from
ancient time but it is evident that its form and uses have changed a lot with latest technique.
Fishes are being caught in huge sea boats with big nets by attracting them in large number
by powerful LED lights  used on the  surface and inside the sea water. Because of this method
there is a livelihood crisis in front of fishermen community fishing with traditional techniques.
So, it is imperative to ban "light fishing"' immediately under the sea borders of Sovereign of
India so that livelihood can be ensured to fishermen with traditional techniques.
It is also required to empower and uplift the traditional methods of fishing by improving
and upgrading such fishing techniques.
Hence the Bill.
N
EW DELHI; VINAY AK BHAURAO RAUT
October 26, 2019.

55
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a Board for protection and promotion
of traditional technique of fishing.
The Bill, therefore if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is not possible to give the exact estimates of recurring expenditure, which would be
involved out of the Consolidated Fund of India at this stage. However, an annual recurring
expenditure of rupees  one hundred crore will be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of  Rupees ten crore is also likely to be incurred from the
Consolidated Fund of India.

66
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for complete prohibition of 'Light fishing' and protection and development of
traditional fishing technique in coastal areas and for matters connected thereto.
————
(Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—3131LS(S3)—18.11.2019.