Bill No. 315 of 2016
THE W ASTE MANAGEMENT AND RECYCLING BILL, 2016
By
PROF. RICHARD HAY, M.P.
————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
————
CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent, commencement and non-application.
2. Definitions.
3. Act to have overriding effect.
CHAPTER II
ACCOUNTABILITIES OF APPROPRIATE GOVERNMENT
4. Ascertaining the current status of waste disposal, providing financial assistance and
supporting research and development in waste management.
5. Multi-regional waste management.
6. Charges for waste disposal in waste disposal facilities.
CHAPTER III
CITIZENS DUTIES AND PROHIBITION OF DUMPING WASTES
7. Duties of citizens.
8. Prohibition of dumping wastes and measures for compliance.
CHAPTER IV
PLANS FOR WASTE MANAGEMENT
9. Preparation of basic plan for waste management once in ten years.
10. Master plans for waste management and review the feasibility once in five years.
11. Research on wastes disposal and on waste management.
12. Official waste testing method.
CHAPTER V
D
ISCHARGE OF HOUSEHOLD WASTES
13. Standards of waste management.
14. Disposal of household wastes.
15. Direction as to the disposal of household waste discharged.
CHAPTER VI
COMMERCIAL WASTE DISPOSAL
16. Duties of commercial waste producers.
17. Disposal of commercial wastes.
18. Pricing of disposal of commercial wastes.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

CLAUSES
CHAPTER VII
WASTE IMPORT AND EXPORT
19. Report on waste import or export.
20. Disposal of Imported Waste.
CHAPTER VIII
WASTE MANAGEMENT BUSINESSES
21. Waste management businesses.
22. Reasons for disqualification.
23. Revocation of licence.
CHAPTER IX
W
ASTE DISPOSAL FACILITIES
24. Installation of waste disposal facilities.
25. Inspection of waste disposal facilities.
26. Management of waste disposal facilities.
27. Succession of rights and obligations.
CHAPTER X
G
UIDANCE OVER WASTE MANAGEMENT BUSINESS OPERA TORS
28. Technical manager.
29. Reporting on shutdown or closure of business.
30. Reporting and inspection.
31. Establishment of mutual aid association for waste management business and contri-
bution.
CHAPTER XI
P
ROMOTION AND RECYCLING OF WASTE RESOURCES
32. Basic principles of recycling of waste resources.
33. Duties of appropriate Government.
34. Duties of businesses.
35. Duties of people.
36. Formulation of basic plans for recycling of waste resources.
CHAPTER XII
F
ACILITA TION OF RECYCLING OF WASTE RESOURCES
37. Saving of resources.
38. Assessment of recyclability of resources of goods, etc.
39. Control of generation of packing wastes.
40. Control of use of disposable goods, etc.
41. Consideration of recyclability of resources in development projects, etc.
42. Waste charges.
CHAPTER XIII
F
ACILITA TION OF SEPARATE COLLECTION AND REUSE OF WASTE RESOURCES
43. Separate storage by waste dischargers, etc.
44. Separate Collection of Recyclable Waste Resources.
(ii)

CLAUSES
45. Establishment and Operation of Recycling Centers, etc.
46. Separate discharge mark.
47. Facilitation of reuse of parts, etc.
CHAPTER XIV
F
ACILITATION OF WASTE RECYCLING BUSINESS.
48. Obligation of manufacturer, etc. to recycle.
49. Mandatory recycling ratio.
50. Submission of plan for fulfillment of obliglation to recycle, etc.
51. Collection of Recycling Dues, etc.
52. Usage of waste charges and recycling dues.
53. Installation and operation of energy recovery facilities, etc.
54. Matters to be observed by designated by-product discharging businesses.
55. Facilities to use solid fuels composed of wastes.
56. Observance, etc. by User and Manufacturer of Solid Fuels.
57. Fees Collected by the authentication Organization.
CHAPTER XV
W
ASTE RECYCLING BUSINESS MUTUAL AND COOPERATIVES
58. Establishment of waste recycling business mutual aid cooperatives.
59. Procedure for authorizing establishment of cooperatives, etc.
CHAPTER XVI
ESTABLISHMENT OF FOUNDATION FOR FACILITA TION OF RECYCLING OF WASTE RESOURCES
60. Financial assistance, etc. for fostering of waste recycling industries.
61. Building of waste recycling complexes, etc.
62. Subsidies for building of waste recycling complexes.
63. Installation of public waste recycling infrastructure.
64. Installation of facilities for facilitation of waste recycling, etc.
65. Provision of information on recycling of waste resources, etc.
66. Establishment of voluntary agreement.
67. International cooperation for facilitation of recycling of waste resources.
CHAPTER XVII
P
ENAL PROVISIONS IN RELATION TO WASTE MANAGEMENT
68. Punishment for dumping commercial waste.
69. Punishment for operating without license, obtained license by fraudulent means, etc.
70. Offences inviting punishment of three years imprisonment or fine or both.
71. Offences inviting punishment of two years imprisonment or fine or both.
72. Joint penal liability.
73. Fine for negligence.
CHAPTER XVIII
P
ENAL PROVISIONS IN RELATION TO RECYCLING OF WASTE RESOURCES
74. Punishment for not submitting report or false report or evading investigation, etc.
75. Joint penal liability.
(iii)

CLAUSES
76. Fines for negligence.
77. Imposition and collection of fines for negligence.
CHAPTER XIX
MISCELLANEOUS P ROVISIONS
78. Financial and technical assistance.
79. Legislative and financial measures, etc.
80. Power to make rules.
(iv)

Short title,
extent,
commencement
and non-
application.
THE WASTE MANAGEMENT AND RECYCLING BILL, 2016
By
PROF. RICHARD HAY, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for ascertaining of current status of waste generation and its disposal;
financial assistance for research and development in waste management;
charges for waste disposal facilities; duties of citizens for segregating
waste; prohibition on dumping waste; preparation of master plans
for waste management; disposal of household, commercial and
imported wastes; regulation of waste management business,
promotion of recycling and reuse of waste resources and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Waste Management and Recycling Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 315 of 2016
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
(4) This Act shall not apply to any of the following substances:
(a) an emission into the atmosphere, other than an emission from a facility for the
holding, recovery or disposal of waste;
(b) sewage and sewage effluent (other than sludge from a facility for the treatment
of sewage);
(c) the treatment of effluent or the discharge thereof to waters, other than the
treatment of effluent at, or its discharge from, a facility for the holding, recovery or
disposal of waste;
(d) the dumping of waste at sea; or
(e) a radioactive substance within the meaning of the Atomic Energy Act, 1962.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:
(a) ‘appropriate Government’ means—
(i) in relation to an establishment of the Central Government, or an
establishment, wholly or substantially owned or financed by that Government,
or a Cantonment Board constituted under the Cantonments Act, 1924, or a Union
territory without legislature, or the provider of a service which pertains to
List I - Union List of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, the Central
Government;
(ii) in all other cases, the State Government or, as the case may be, the
Government of a Union territory with Legislature.
(b) ‘bulky wastes’ means substances which are separately measurable and the
name of the article is identifiable, such as furniture and household electric appliances
that are discharged from homes, workplaces etc;
(c) ‘by-products’ means things produced incidentally in the process of
manufacturing, processing, repairing or selling goods, supplying energy, or performing
civil and construction works;
(d) ‘collection’ means, in relation to waste, the gathering, sorting or mixing of
waste for the purpose of its being transported, and includes the transport of waste and
the acceptance of control of waste;
(e) ‘commercial wastes’ means any wastes generated from places of business
with discharging facilities installed and managed in accordance to law prescribed or
any other place of business established in accordance to law;
(f) ‘controlled wastes’ means the commercial wastes specifically enumerated by
law as harmful substances such as waste oil and waste acid, which may contaminate
environment or medical refuse, which may cause harm to human bodies;
(g) ‘disposal’ means both interim disposal, such as incineration, neutralization,
fragmentation, and solidification (including recycling) and terminal disposal, such as
landfill and discharging into the sea;
(h) ‘energy recovery’ means recovering energy from recyclable resources in
accordance with the standards established by the Union Ministry of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change or converting them into energy-recoverable substances;
(i) ‘establishment’ includes—
(i) departments and ministries of Government;
(ii) local authorities and authorities or bodies owned, controlled or aided
by the Central or State Government;
Definitions.
33 of 1962.
2 of 1924.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(iii) any statutory or non-statutory body created, owned, financially or
administratively controlled or aided by the Central or State Government or any
such body performing public or civic functions and includes Government
Companies as defined in clause (20) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013;
(iv) any company, firm, cooperative or other society, association, trust,
agency, institution, organization, union, industry, supplier of goods or services,
factory or other non-statutory body which is not covered under clause ( i) to
(iii);
(j) ‘household wastes’ means any wastes other than commercial wastes;
(k) ‘local authority’ means a municipality, a Cantonment Board, a panchayat or
any other authority, established under an Act of Parliament, or a State Legislature to
administer the civic affairs of any habitation as defined in or under such Act;
(l) 'medical refuse' means the wastes discharged from public health and medical
institutions, veterinary clinics, testing and inspection institutions and other similar
institutions, which may cause harm to human bodies by infection or otherwise and for
which it is deemed necessary to be put under special control for public health and
environmental conservation such as parts and extracts of human bodies and carcasses
of laboratory animals;
(m) 'packing materials' means materials, containers, etc. which are used to pack
goods for the purpose of protecting their value and state and preserving their quality
in the process of transportation, keeping, handling and use;
(n) 'premises' includes any building, vessel, structure or land (whether or not
there are structures on the land and whether or not the land is covered with water), and
any plant or vehicles on such land, or any hereditament of any tenure, together with
any out-buildings and curtilage;
(o) 'prescribed' means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(p) 'recycling of waste resources' means using and managing the process of
recycling resources in an environment-friendly manner by controlling the generation
of wastes to a necessary extent and properly recycling or treating generated wastes in
order to achieve the objectives of environmental policies;
(q) 'recyclable resources' means goods or by-products collected after being
disposed of in an used or unused state, which are reusable or reusable after
reconditioning (including recoverable energy and waste heat, but excluding radioactive
substances and substances contaminated by radioactive substances);
(r) 'recycling' means activities of reusing or recycling wastes or making wastes
reusable or renewable or recovering energy in accordance with the standards
established by the Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change;
(s) 'reuse' means using recyclable resources again as they are or after repairing or
making them usable again for production activities;
(t) 'recycled goods' means goods prescribed by the Union Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change which are produced by using recyclable
resources;
(u) 'recycling facilities' means installations, equipment, facilities etc. prescribed
by the Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change which are used to
manufacture, process, assemble, repair, collect, transport and keep recyclable resources
or recycled goods;
(v) 'recycling industries' means industries which manufacture, process, assemble,
repair, collect, transport and keep recyclable resources or recycled goods or conduct
the research and development of recycling technology;
18 of 2013.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(w) 'transport' includes, in relation to waste, the movement of waste by road, rail,
air, sea or inland waterway but does not include the movement of waste from one place
to another—
(i) by means of any pipe or similar apparatus which joins those two places,
or
(ii) on and within the site at which the waste is held for the time being;
(x) 'treatment' includes, in relation to waste, any thermal, physical, chemical or
biological processes that change the characteristics of waste in order to reduce its
volume or hazardous nature or facilitate its handling, disposal or recovery;
(y) 'use after regeneration' means using recyclable resources again in whole or in
part as raw materials or making them usable again;
(z) 'wastes' means such materials as garbage, burnt refuse, sludge, waste oil,
waste acid, waste alkali, and carcasses of animals, which have become no longer
useful for human life or business activities;
3. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any enactment other than this Act or in any instrument having effect
by virtue of any enactment other than this Act.
CHAPTER II
A
CCOUNTABILITIES OF APPROPRIATE GOVERNMENT
4. (1) The appropriate Government shall—
(a) ascertain the current status of wastes discharged and disposed of within its
jurisdiction;
(b) install and operate waste disposal facilities;
(c) implement affairs relating to waste management efficiently by improving
the methods for collecting, transporting and disposing of wastes and raising the
skills and quality of the persons in charge; and
(d) create awareness among the residents and business operators of the
importance of protecting environment and to restrain the production of wastes.
(2) The appropriate Government shall provide financial assistance to the local
authorities to help them fulfil their accountabilities under sub-section (1) and coordinate
among all agencies providing waste management services within their jurisdiction.
(3) The appropriate Government shall ascertain the current status of controlled
wastes discharged and disposed of and take such measures as may be necessary for properly
disposing of such wastes.
(4) The appropriate Government shall support the research and development of
technology for waste disposal, provide technical and financial assistance as may be necessary
in helping persons or agencies in fulfil their accountabilities under sub-sections (1) and
(2) and coordinate among different agencies providing waste management services with
them whenever deemed proper and necessary.
5. (1) If the appropriate Government deems it necessary to dispose of wastes generated
from two or more places with an integrated system for a multiple number of regions, it may
solely or jointly install and operate multi-regional waste disposal facilities (including public
disposal facilities for controlled wastes).
(2) The appropriate Government may commission a person designated to install or
manage the multi-regional waste disposal facilities under sub-section (1).
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Ascertaining
the current
status of
waste
disposal,
providing
financial
assistance and
supporting
research and
development
in waste
management.
Multi-
regional
waste
management.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
6. (1) An institution that has installed and operates a waste disposal facility under sub-
section (1) of section 4 or sub-section (1) of section 5, may charge fee for disposal of wastes
brought into the facility (hereinafter referred to as the "waste disposal charge") from the
persons who bring wastes into such facility.
(2) In cases where a waste disposal facility has been installed and is operated jointly
by two or more local authorities, the waste disposal charge shall be determined by the local
authority in terms of rules framed by the appropriate Government.
(3) The amount of waste disposal charge shall be prescribed by the rules framed by the
appropriate Government.
CHAPTER III
C
ITIZENS DUTIES AND PROHIBITION OF DUMPING WASTES
7. (1) Every citizen shall keep natural and living environments clean and make efforts
to reduce and recycle wastes.
(2) Every owner, occupant, and manager of a parcel of land or a building shall keep
such land or building owned, occupied, or managed by him clean, and implement general
clean-up in accordance with the plan prepared by the appropriate Government.
8. (1) No person shall dump wastes in any public area, other than the places and
facilities provided for collection of wastes by the appropriate Government or the manager of
a facility.
(2) No person shall bury or incinerate wastes in any area other than the landfill sites
licensed or approved under this Act:
Provided that provision of sub-section (2) shall not apply to incineration or disposal
of household waste discharged within his private house or place.
(3) The appropirate Government may by order direct the owner, occupant, or manager
of a parcel of land or building to take necessary measures if the owner, occupant, or manager
fails to keep the property clean under his control pursuant to sub-section (2) of section 7.
CHAPTER IV
P
LANS FOR WASTE MANAGEMENT
9. (1) The appropriate Government shall prepare a basic plan for proper management of
wastes generated within its jurisdiction once every ten years in compliance with the guide-
lines prescribed by the Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, subject
to the approval of the Union Cabinet.
(2) The Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change shall, while
revising any basic plan prepared under sub-section ( 1), consult the heads of central
administrative agencies concerned.
(3) The head of local authority shall prepare a basic plan for management of wastes
generated in that local area once every ten years and submit it to the District Collector.
(4) The basic plan under sub-section (1) and (2)  shall contain the following details—
(a) overview of the population, residential patterns, industrial structure and
distribution, geographical environment, or any other such factor within his
jurisdiction;
(b) the quantity of wastes generated by categories and the estimated quantity of
wastes in the future;
(c) current status of and future plan for waste management;
(d) matters concerning reduction, recycling, and conversion of waste into
resources;
Charges for
waste disposal
in waste
disposal
facilities.
Duties of
citizens.
Prohibition
of dumping
wastes and
measures for
compliance.
Preparation
of basic plan
for waste
management
once in ten
years.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
(e) current status of and future plan for installation of waste disposal facilities;
(f) matters concerning collection, transportation, and storage of wastes and
improvement of equipment and containers for wastes; and
(g) plan for securing financial sources.
10. (1) The Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change shall prepare
a master plan for nationwide waste management based on the basic plans for waste management
under sub-section (1) of section 9 and the results of statistical researches on wastes under
section 11 once every ten years for proper management of wastes generated throughout the
country.
(2) The Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change may review the
feasibility of the master plan for revision once every five years after the date on which the
master plan is finalized.
(3) If the Master Plan is revised under sub-section ( 2), the appropriate Government
shall also revise the basic plan for waste management under sub-section ( 1) of section 9,
reflecting the revised details of the master plan in the basic plan, and submit it to the Union
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change for approval.
(4) The Master plan shall contain the following details—
(a) evaluation of the previous mater plan;
(b) circumstances and prospects for waste management;
(c) basic principle of the master plan;
(d) policy on waste management by sectors; and
(e) plan for securing financial sources.
11. (1) The appropriate Government shall conduct statistical researches on the current
status of wastes generated and disposed of; the distribution of wastes generated by kinds
and by areas; and trends of changes in wastes, as prescribed by the Union Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change in order to secure basic data and information
necessary for establishing policies on wastes.
(2) The appropriate Government shall conduct research and development in the area
of waste management.
12. The Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change shall determine
and notify the official testing method for wastes in order to ensure accuracy and uniformity
in the analyses of the nature and state of wastes, the leaching of contaminants therefrom, for
basic data required for examining the seriousness of hazards caused by wastes and determining
waste disposal methods.
CHAPTER V
D
ISCHARGE OF HOUSEHOLD WASTES
13. Any person who intends to collect, transport, keep in storage, or dispose of wastes
shall comply with the standards and methods prescribed by appropriate Government.
14. ( 1) The appropriate Government shall be responsible for the collection,
transportation, and disposal of household wastes discharged within his jurisdiction:
Provided that a specific area designated by the appropriate Government, as may be
prescribed by the rules framed by the Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change shall be excluded from the area under its jurisdiction for the purposes of this section.
(2) The appropriate Government may commission a person specified by the Union
Ministry of Environment, forest and Climate Change to vicariously implement the collection,
transportation, or disposal of under sub-section ( 1).
Master plans
for waste
management
and review
the feasibility
once in five
years.
Research on
wastes
disposal and
on waste
management.
Official waste
testing
method.
Standards of
waste
management.
Disposal of
household
wastes.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
(3) The appropriate  Government may collect service charge for collection,
transportation, and disposal of household wastes as prescribed by rules of the competent
local authority.
15. (1) Every owner, occupant, and manager of a parcel of land or a building from which
household wastes are discharged (hereinafter referred to as "household waste producers")
shall either dispose of such wastes himself in a manner that can avoid any harm to conservation
of the living environment or reduce the quantity of wastes, as may be prescribed by the
appropriate Government.
(2) Every household waste producer shall separate the household wastes which he is
unable to dispose of himself, under sub-section (1), from other wastes and shall store such
wastes separately according to the types, nature and state as may be prescribed by the
appropriate Government.
(3) Any household waste producer who discharges the food wastes specified by the
Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (including wastes of agricultural,
marine, and livestock products; hereinafter the same shall also apply) shall submit a plan for
reducing the production of such food wastes and a report on the results of disposal of such
wastes to the appropriate Government, make and keep records of the quantity of wastes
generated, the results of disposal, and comply with the rules prescribed by the appropriate
Government to reduce the production of food wastes.
CHAPTER VI
C
OMMERCIAL WASTE DISPOSAL
16. (1) Any business premises that discharge wastes from place of business (hereinafter
referred to as "commercial waste producers") shall comply with the following provisions:—
(a) all wastes generated from each place of business shall be properly disposed
of;
(b) the production of commercial wastes shall be minimized by installing waste
minimization in a manufacturing process, developing technology, recycling wastes,
and in any other way; and
(c) a commercial waste producer who intends to commission someone to provide
him with the services of collection, transportation, and disposal of wastes under sub-
section (1) of section 17 shall ascertain as to whether the commissioned person has
the capability to provide the services of collection, transportation, and disposal of
such wastes in compliance with the standards under section 13 before such
commissioning:
Provided, that the foregoing provisions shall not apply in case where a person
who has installed and operates waste disposal facilities under section 4 or 5 and
commissioned to provide such services.
(2) The commercial waste producers specified by the Union Ministry of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change shall submit to the local authority a report on the types and
quantity of commercial wastes generated as prescribed by the rules framed by the Union
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change.
(3) If a commercial waste producer transfers his business to another person or dies, or
a corporation discharging commercial wastes is merged into another corporation, the
transferee or successor, or the corporation surviving the merger or the corporation newly
established as a consequence of the merger shall succeed to the rights and obligations
relating to such commercial wastes.
17. (1) Every commercial waste producer shall either dispose of wastes generated from
his place of business by him or commission the disposal of such wastes to a person who has
a license for a waste management business under sub-section (3) of section 21, a person who
Direction as
to the
disposal of
household
waste
discharged.
Duties of
commercial
waste
producers.
Disposal of
commercial
wastes.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

8
has installed and operates a waste disposal facility under section 4 or 5, or a person who has
completed the registration of a business of discharging wastes into the sea.
(2) No commercial waste producer who intends to commission a business operator
under section 21 to dispose of commercial wastes may attempt to commission such operator
to perform such disposal at any price lower than the minimum price publicly notified by the
Union Minister of Environment, Forest and Climate Change for waste disposal pursuant to
section 18.
(3) Two or more commercial waste producers as specified by the Union Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change may collectively collect, transport or dispose of
wastes generated from their places of business, as may be prescribed by the rules framed by
the Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change.
(4) In commercial waste produce establishments a joint operating organization may
appoint one of them as the representative of such joint operating organization and it shall be
deemed to be jointly install and operate waste disposal facilities.
18. The Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change may, if deemed
necessary for properly disposing of wastes, determine and notify the minimum and maximum
prices for disposal of such wastes considering the cost for such disposal.
CHAPTER VII
W
ASTE IMPORT AND EXPORT
19. (1) A person who intends to import or export waste as specified and prescribed by
the Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change report it to the appropriate
Government along with documents stating matters such as the types and quantity of wastes
and plans for disposal.
(2) In order to change major matters prescribed by the Union Ministry of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change among matters reported under sub-section (1) of section 19, a
report of change shall be filed up.
20. (1) A person who has filed an import report under sub-section (1) of section 19, or
a person who has obtained permission for import under the Act shall dispose of such
imported wastes (hereinafter referred to as "imported wastes") by himself or commission the
disposal of such waste to a person falling any of the following:—
(a) a person who has set up and operates facilities under section 4 or section 5;
(b) a person who has obtained a license for waste management business; and
(c) a person who has reported on waste recycling.
(2) A person who transports imported wastes shall always carry documents of import
report under sub-section (1) of section 19 and prints-out of matters concerning the delivery
and receipt of wastes under sub-section (2) with him whenever he transports such wastes,
and show them to the competent public officials upon request.
(3) A person who transports, stores, or disposes of imported wastes shall transport,
store, or dispose of them in accordance with standards and methods of commercial wastes
among those standards and methods of waste disposal pursuant to section 13.
(4) No imported wastes shall be exported in the same state or condition as it was
imported.
CHAPTER VIII
W
ASTE MANAGEMENT BUSINESS
21. (1) Any person who intends to engage in the collection, transportation, or disposal
of wastes (hereinafter referred to as "waste management business") and wishes to treat
controlled wastes shall submit a waste management plan to the Union Ministry of Environment,
Pricing of
disposal of
commercial
wastes.
Report on
waste import
or export.
Disposal of
Imported
Waste.
Waste
management
businesses.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

9
Forest and Climate Change, while such person who wishes to handle any wastes other than
controlled wastes shall submit such plan to the local authority, as may prescribed by the
rules framed by the Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change.
(2) The Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change or the local
authorities, as the case may be, shall examine a waste management plan submitted under
sub-section (1) of section 21 pursuant to each of the following matters, and notify a person
who has submitted such plan the acceptability thereof:—
(a) whether a person who has submitted such plan (including an officer, in case
of a corporation) falls under reasons for disqualification under section 22;
(b) whether the location of waste disposal facilities violates other Acts;
(c) whether facilities, equipment or technical capability according to a waste
management plan meets criteria for permission under sub-section (3); and
(d) impact on environment around neighborhood, such as reservoirs, resulting
from the building and operation of waste disposal facilities.
(3) A person who has received a notice of acceptability pursuant to sub-section ( 2)
shall, within two years (six months, in cases of waste collecting or transporting business;
three years, in cases of a waste disposal business that requires incinerators and landfill
facilities) from the date of receipt of such notification, prepare such facilities, equipment, and
technical capability in conformity with the standards prescribed by rules framed and shall
thereby obtain a license for each business type from the appropriate authority:
Provided that a person who intends to engage in a waste management business for
handling controlled wastes  shall obtained a license from the Union Ministry of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change.
(4) The appropriate authority may extend a period of submitting an application for
permission within the extent of one year, depending on applications, for persons who have
failed to file application forms within the period referred to in sub-section (3) due to a natural
disaster or other unavoidable circumstances.
(5) The types and scope of waste management business shall be classified as follows—
(a) waste collection and transportation business: A business collecting wastes
and transporting it to a disposal facility;
(b) interim waste disposal business: a business specializing in interim disposal
such as incineration, physical, chemical or biological treatments, or other methods
approved and publicly announced by the Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change as safe ways of interim treatment of waste (excluding the recycling of
household wastes) with facilities for interim treatment of wastes;
(c) terminal waste disposal business: a business specializing in final disposal of
wastes such as landfills (excluding discharging into the sea) with facilities for final
disposal of wastes; and
(d) general waste management business: a business performing interim disposal
and terminal disposal of wastes with facilities for waste disposal.
(6) The appropriate authority may, when grants a license under sub-section ( 3), add
such necessary conditions as prescribed by rules:
Provided that the appropriate authority may add a condition that restricts the business
territory to a license for a business collecting and transporting household wastes.
(7) Any person to whom a license for a waste management business under sub-section
(3) has been granted (hereinafter referred to as a "licensed waste management business
operator") shall neither allow another person to collect, transport or dispose of wastes under
his name or trade name nor lend the license to another person.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

10
(8) No waste management business operator shall accept commissioned waste
management at a price higher or lower than the maximum or minimum price fixed under
section 18 for waste disposal, nor store wastes in excess of the quantity and period of time
prescribed by rules framed by the Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change.
(9) Any person who intends to engage in a business collecting, transporting, or
disposing of medical refuse shall install and operate such facilities, equipment, and place of
business as required for collecting, transporting, or disposing of such wastes separately
from other wastes.
(10) Whenever a person holding a licence under sub-section (3) wishes to amend any
important matter of the licence as specified by rules framed by the Union Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change, he shall obtain permission for such amendment.
(11) Any person who amends any matter under sub-section (10), shall also file a report
on amendments, if such amendments involves any matter other than an important matter
specified by rules framed by the Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change.
22. A person shall not be granted a licence for a waste management business, if—
(a) such person is a minor, or an incompetent, or quasi-incompetent person;
(b) such person is or who has been declared bankrupt, but not yet reinstated;
(c) a person in whose case two years time has not yet elapsed since an execution
of imprisonment was completely fulfilled, or finally and conclusively exempted;
(d) a person who was sentenced to a suspended sentence of imprisonment or
heavier punishment and is still under the period of suspension;
(e) a person in whose case two years have not yet elapsed since his licence for
a waste management business was revoked; or
(f) it is a body corporate where an officer who falls under any provision of
sub-section (a) to (d) is employed.
23. (1) The appropriate Government shall revoke licence of a waste management
business operation, if—
(a) the licence has been obtained by false or other fraudulent means;
(b) he is disqualified pursuant to section 22(a) to (d) or (f); and
(c) he has operated business while the business is suspended.
(2) The appropriate Government may revoke its licence or order suspension of the
whole or a part of business, specifying a period within six months if a waste management
business operator—
(a) disposes of, buries or incinerates commercial wastes in violation of
sub-section (1) or (2) of section 8;
(b) fails to conform to standards or methods of collection, transport, storage, or
processing in violation of section 13;
(c) conducts business that exceeds the extent of types or details of business
under sub-section (5) of section 21;
(d) violates conditions under sub-section (6) of section 21;
(e) allows other persons to use his name or title of business and collect, transport,
or dispose of wastes, or borrowed his licence to other persons, in violation of
sub-section (7) of section 21;
(f) stores waste or violated rules, in violation of sub-section (8) of section 21;
Reasons for
disqualifica-
tion.
Revocation
of licence.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

11
(g) fails to set up and operate separate facilities, equipment or the place of
business to collect, transport, or dispose of waste, in violation of sub-section ( 9) of
section 21;
(h) changes matters that require permission or report without obtaining permission
for changes or filing a report on changes under sub-section (10) of section 21;
(i) fails to undergo inspection in violation of sub-section (1) or (2) of section 25;
(j) operates waste disposal facilities, not meeting standards for its maintenance
under sub-section (1) of section 26;
(k) fails to cnform to orders of correction or suspension of use under
sub-section (4) of section 26;
(l) fails to conform to orders of close down under sub-section (5) of section 26;
(m) fails to conform to orders of measure or inspection under sub-section (6) of
section 26;
(n) fails  to  report  on  the  succession  of  rights  or  obligations  under
sub-section (2) of section 27; and
(o) fails to open business within one year from the date of permission obtained,
or has such business closed for one year or more consecutively without justifiable
grounds.
CHAPTER XI
W
ASTE DISPOSAL FACILITIES
24. (1) Every waste disposal facilities shall be installed in conformity with the standards
prescribed by rules framed by the Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
but any waste incineration facility shall not be installed or operated, unless it conforms to the
size prescribed by rules framed by the Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change.
(2) A person who installs a waste disposal facility shall, when he intends to start
operating the facility after the completion of the installation works, submit a report thereon to
the head of the competent administrative agency.
25. (1) A person who has completed the installation of a waste disposal facility specified
by rules framed by the Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change shall
have it inspected by an inspection agency designated by rules framed by the Union Ministry
of Environment, Forest and Climate Change.
(2) A person who has installed and operates a waste disposal facility shall have it
inspected by an inspection agency under sub-section (1) of section 25 at a regular interval
prescribed by the rules framed by the Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change.
(3) A waste disposal facility shall be deemed to have successfully passed a periodic
inspection if it has undergone a technical examination within the period of time set for such
inspection.
26. (1) Any person who has installed and operates a waste disposal facility shall
maintain and manage such facility in compliance with the guidelines for the management as
prescribed in the rules framed by the Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change.
(2) Any person who has installed and operates a waste disposal facility shall take
measurements of pollutants discharged from the waste disposal facility or arrange for a
measuring institution specified in the rules framed by the Union Ministry of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change and shall submit a report on the results thereof to the appropriate
Government.
Installation
of waste
disposal
facilities.
Inspection of
waste disposal
facilities.
Management
of waste
disposal
facilities.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

12
(3) Any person who has installed and operate a waste disposal facility shall examine
the impact that the installation and operation of such waste disposal facility has on its
surroundings every three years, and shall submit a report on the results thereof to the
appropriate Government.
(4) If a waste disposal facility fails to meet the standards for installation or the standards
for management in its installation, maintenance or management, the appropriate Government
may order for improving the facility within a period of time prescribed in rules framed by the
Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change or suspend the operation of
such facility.
(5) If a person to whom an order to improve or suspend the operation has been issued
pursuant to sub-section (4) fails to perform as ordered or if it is found that such person is
unable to perform as ordered, the appropriate Government may order him to close down the
facility permanently.
(6) If a person who has installed and operates a waste disposal facility fails to perform
his duty to measure pollutants in accordance with sub-section ( 2) or fails to examine its
impact on surroundings in accordance with sub-section ( 3), the appropriate Government
may order the person to take such measurement of pollutants or to examine such impact
within a period of time prescribed by the rules framed by the Union Ministry of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change.
(7) The pollutants that shall be measured in accordance with sub-section (2), the cycle
of such measurements, the reporting on the results thereof, and other necessary matters
shall be prescribed by the rules framed by the Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change.
(8) The method and scope of assessments made under sub-section ( 3), the report on
the results thereof, and other necessary matters shall be prescribed by the rules framed by
the Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change.
27. (1) Where a person who holds a lincence for a waste management business or who
has obtained approval for the installation of a waste disposal facility or has filed a report
thereon transfers the waste management business or the waste disposal facility to another
person, where such person dies, or where the corporation has been merged with another
corporation if it is a body corporate, the transferee, successor, or the corporation surviving
the merger or newly established as a consequence of the merger shall succeed to the rights
and obligations under such licence, approval, or report.
(2) A person who has succeeded to the rights and obligations under sub-section ( 1)
shall report the facts to the appropriate Government as may be prescribed by the rules framed
by the Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change.
CHAPTER X
G
UIDANCE OVER WASTE MANAGEMENT BUSINESS OPERA TORS
28. (1) Any person who has installed or manages a waste disposal facility shall employ
a technical manager who shall take charge of technical affairs relating to the maintenance and
management of such facility (including cases where the person himself holds a qualification
as technical manager and takes charge of such technical management) or shall make a contract
on technical management services with a person who is as capable of taking charge of
technical management.
(2) Necessary matters concerning the qualifications such as technical managers
or contracts on technical management services, under sub-section ( 1) shall be
prescribed by the rules framed by the Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change.
Succession of
rights and
obligations.
Technical
manager.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

13
29. Any waste management business operator or a person who has completed a report
shall, when he temporarily shuts down, permanently closes down, or resumes his business,
file a report on such facts with the competent administrative agency for the related licensing
or reporting as prescribed by rules framed by the Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change.
30. (1) The appropriate Government may require the persons concerned to submit
such report or data as may prescribed by rules framed by the Union Ministry of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change within the extent necessary for the enforcement of this Act, and
may also assign public officials in charge to enter an office or a place of business of such
persons to inspect the documents, facilities, equipment, or such therein.
(2) Every public official who enters an office or a place of business for the purpose of
the inspection under sub-section (1) shall carry with him an identity card and show it to the
persons concerned.
31. (1) Waste management business operators specializing in disposal of commercial
wastes and the persons who has filed a report on recycling of wastes may establish a mutual
aid association for the waste management business (hereinafter referred to the "Association")
in order to guarantee the performance of disposal of abandoned wastes.
(2) The Association shall be a legal entity.
(3) The Association shall be duly formed upon the completion of the registration of its
establishment with the registry office having jurisdiction over its principal place of business.
(4) Each member of the Association shall pay such contribution as is required.
(5) The guidelines for computing the contribution under sub-section (4), the procedure
for the payment of such contribution, and other necessary matters shall be stipulated by the
Association's articles of association.
CHAPTER XI
P
ROMOTION AND RECYCLING OF WASTE RESOURCES
32. (1) Any person who manufactures, processes, imports, sells, consumes materials,
goods, or does construction works shall control the generation of wastes to the utmost
extent and mitigate any harm caused thereby.
(2) The generated wastes shall be recycled or properly treated in accordance with the
following principles—
(a) wastes are required to be reused or used after regeneration in whole or in part
to the utmost extent;
(b) wastes difficult to reuse or use after regeneration in whole or in part are
required to be used for the purposes of energy recovery;
(c) wastes not possible of reuse, nor used after regeneration or energy recovery
are required to be properly treated in a manner which minimizes their impact on the
environment.
33. (1) The Central Government shall devise policies to facilitate the recycling of
resources.
(2) The appropriate Government shall assume the duty to devise and implement policies
for the facilitation of the recycling of resources, taking into account the characteristics of the
areas under their jurisdiction in accordance with the national policies devised under sub-
section (1).
34. (1) Every business owner shall endeavour to be able to observe the basic principles
under section 32 and cooperate in policies specified by the appropriate Government to attain
the purposes of this Act.
Reporting on
shutdown or
closure of
business.
Reporting
and
inspection.
Establish-
ment of
mutual aid
association
for waste
management
business and
contribution.
Basic
principles of
recycling of
waste
resources.
Duties of
appropriate
Government.
Duties of
businesses.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

14
(2) A person who manufactures, imports or sells goods (hereinafter referred to as
"manufacturer, etc.") shall prevent raw materials, goods from becoming wastes and if they
have become wastes, endeavour to recycle or properly treat them.
(3) A business that places an order for construction works shall endeavour to conserve
resources, use more recycled goods and recycle by-products generated in such construction
works.
35. Every person shall endeavour to facilitate the recycling of resources through
discharging recyclable resources after separation, preferentially purchasing recycled goods
and preventing them from using disposable goods, and at the same time, cooperate in
measures taken by the appropriate Government and businesses to attain the purposes of
this Act.
36. (1) The Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change shall formulate
a basic plan for the recycling of resources (hereinafter referred to as "basic plan") every five
years in consultation with the heads of central administrative organs concerned, the State
Government and the local authority heads.
(2) A basic plan referred to in sub-section (1) shall include the matters in each of the
following sub sections:
(a) basic directions and goals for the facilitation of recycling of resources;
(b) matters concerning the conditions of the recycling of resources, such as the
generation and recycling of wastes and the state of recycling industries;
(c) matters concerning setting the goal of recycling of resources;
(d) plans for raising funds needed to achieve goals for the recycling of resources
and investment plan;
(e) other matters necessary for the facilitation of recycling of resources.
(3) the heads of the relevant central administrative organs and the appropriate
Government shall formulate an annual action plan including investment of a basic plan
(hereinafter referred to as "action plan").
(4) The Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change shall notify the
action plan.
(5) The heads of appropriate Government shall draw up an execution plan for the
recycling of resources, taking into account the characteristics of the areas under their
jurisdiction and submit it to the District Collector and implement it.
CHAPTER XII
F
ACILITA TION OF RECYCLING OF WASTE RESOURCES
37. (1) The Central Government may recommend matters necessary for the saving of
resources, control of generation of wastes and recycling of wastes to producers and
consumers or guide them.
(2) The concerned ministries may request the heads of the relevant central administrative
organs for cooperation in the dissemination of equipment and technology for saving of
resources and control of generation of wastes.
38. The appropriate Government shall develop measures necessary to mitigate the
impacts of the waste goods on the environment and shall extend, technical support to
manufacturers to enable them to make self-assessment of the waste matters in each of the
following categories—
(a) in cases where goods have become wastes, matters concerning the recycling
and proper treatment thereof;
Duties of
every person.
Formulation
of basic plans
for recycling
of waste
resources.
Saving of
resources.
Assessment
of
recyclability
of resources
of goods, etc.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

15
(b) in cases where goods have become wastes, matters concerning the weight
and volume thereof;
(c) matters concerning harmful substances contained in goods;
(d) durability of goods; and
(e) any other matter relevant for assessment information.
39. (1) A manufacturer of goods shall restrict the generation of packing wastes and
facilitate the recycling of packing wastes by prescribing—
(a) standards for the quality of packing materials and methods of packaging
(referring to the rate of packing space and the frequency of packing; hereinafter the
same shall apply); and
(b) standards for the annual reduction of packing materials made of synthetic
resin (excluding goods made of biodegradable resin; the same shall apply hereinafter
in this section).
(2) The Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change shall establish
detailed standards for the quality of packing materials of goods, method of packing and
standards for the annual reduction of packing materials made of synthetic resin under sub-
section (1) in consultation with the concerned Ministries.
40. Any businessman who runs a restaurant, a department store or other types of
business as prescribed by rules framed by the Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change shall control the use of disposable goods as prescribed by the rules and
shall not provide disposable goods without compensation:
Provided that disposable goods made of biodegradable may be provided without
compensation.
41. (1) The appropriate Government shall devise measures necessary to enable the
performer of a urban development project or any other development project to facilitate the
recycling of resources prior to the implementation of such project, taking into consideration
the following—
(a) selection of structures and materials to facilitate the recycling of resources at
the time of planning and designing a development project;
(b) use of recycled aggregates at the time of carrying out a development project;
and
(c) recycling and proper treatment of wastes generated by development projects.
(2) The appropriate Government may advise a business person engaging in business
of constructing apartment houses or accommodation facilities to furnish storage spaces,
such as built-in closets, or furniture or fixtures of built-in type in order to restrict the generation
of wastes.
42. (1) The Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change shall, in order
to restrict the generation of wastes and prevent the waste of resources, impose and collect
expenses incurred from the treatment of the wastes of goods, materials and containers which
contain substances mentioned in sub-clause (a) to (c) or are difficult to recycle or likely to
cause problems in the management of wastes on and from the manufacturer or importer
thereof—
(a) specified hazardous air pollutants;
(b) specified hazardous water pollutants; and
(c) poisonous substances.
Control of
generation of
packing
wastes.
Control of
use of
disposable
goods, etc.
Consideration
of
recyclability
of resources
in
development
projects, etc.
Waste
charges.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

16
(2) The criteria for the calculation of the amount of expenses to be borne by a
manufacturer or importer under sub-section (1) (hereinafter referred to as "waste charges"),
time of payment, procedure for payment and other necessary matters shall be determined by
the rules framed by the Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change.
(3) If a person fails to pay waste charges within prescribed time limit, the appropriate
Government shall order him to make the payment within a further period of thirty days and,
in such cases, additional dues equivalent to 5/100 of waste charges in arrears shall be
imposed.
(4) The waste charges and additional dues under sub-section (3) shall be utilized
exclusively for environment improvement under this Act.
CHAPTER XIII
F
ACILITA TION OF SEPARATE COLLECTION AND REUSE OF WASTE RESOURCES
43. (1) Every owner, occupant or manager of land or building shall recycle recyclable
wastes discharged from the land or buildings in accordance with the criteria determined by
the rules framed by the Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change or store
them separately by kind, character and condition to enable them to be recycled.
(2) The appropriate Government may order a waste discharger who fails to observe the
criteria under sub-section (1) to take necessary measures to follow rules.
44. (1) The Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change may establish
guidelines for classification, storage and collection for the separate collection of recyclable
resources in consideration of the quantity of wastes generated and conditions of recycling
in order to efficiently utilize recyclable resources.
(2) The appropriate Government shall provide assistance to local authority under
their jurisdiction for the efficient separate collection of wastes and they shall investigate
the quantity each of generation and separately collected recyclable resources each year in
accordance with the guidelines set by the rules framed by the Union Ministry of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change and publish the result thereof.
(3) The appropriate Government shall take measures necessary for separate collection
in consideration of regional circumstances, such as the installation of facilities or containers
to store recyclable resources in accordance with the guidelines under sub-section ( 1).
45. (1) The appropriate Government shall establish and operate facilities necessary
to facilitate the exchange of second-hand goods and recycling of reusable bulky wastes
(hereinafter referred to in this section as "recycling centres").
(2) The appropriate Government shall set up at least one recycling centre in each
Panchayat, and one recycling centre shall be installed and operated additionally wherever
the population exceeds two lakh.
(3) The appropriate Government shall, when collecting, sorting and treating bulky
wastes, utilize recycling centres preferentially.
(4) The appropriate Government may provide persons who install and operate recycling
centers with financial and technical support.
46. A manufacturer of goods and packing materials is required to put a separate collection
mark for the facilitation of recycling of wastes and shall put a separate discharge mark on
such goods and packing materials in accordance with the guidelines determined and
announced by the Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change.
47. (1) A manufacturer of goods shall, when distributed goods have become wastes,
endeavour to recover such goods or parts to use them for the manufacture of new goods or
make them reusable.
Separate
storage by
waste
dischargers,
etc.
Separate
collection of
recyclable
waste
resources.
Establish-
ment and
operation of
recycling
centers, etc.
Separate
discharge
mark.
Facilitation
of reuse of
parts, etc.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

17
(2) The appropriate Government shall take necessary measures, such as provision
of  technical  assistance  to  enable  manufacturers  to  achieve  the  objectives  under
sub-section (1).
CHAPTER XIV
F
ACILITATION OF WASTE RECYCLING BUSINESSES
48. (1) A manufacturer or importer of the goods and packing materials, of which recovery
and recycling can be facilitated through the improvement of the quality of materials, structure
or recovery system in the stages of production and distribution or which generate a large
quantity of wastes after use shall recover the wastes of such goods and packing materials for
recycling or pay allotted charges to the Recycling Business Mutual Aid Association.
(2) A producer who is duty bound to recycle or a person entrusted with recycling work
by the producer shall recycle wastes in accordance with the methods of and criteria for
recycling each of goods and packing materials as determined by rules framed by the
Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change.
49. (1) The Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change shall publish
the ratio of the quantity to be recycled (hereinafter referred to as "mandatory recycling
ratio") among the annual quantity shipped out of factory by the type of goods and packing
materials, taking into account the quantity of goods and packing materials shipped out of
factory, the quantity of separate collection of recyclable resources separately collected,
records of recycling, conditions of recycling, in consultation with the Ministries concerned.
(2) The standards for calculating the quantity to be recycled by a producer obligated
to recycle pursuant to the mandatory recycling ratio (hereinafter referred to as "mandatory
recycling quantity") shall be prescribed by the rules, taking into account the quantity shipped
out of factory, the mandatory recycling ratio each of goods and packing materials.
50. (1) A producer obligated to recycle shall submit to the Union Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change a plan for the fulfillment of the obligation to recycle
and obtain the approval of the Ministry thereon under conditions prescribed by the rules
framed by the Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change.
(2) A person who has obtained approval for a plan for the fulfillment of the obligation
to recycle under sub-section (1) shall submit a report on the outcome of fulfilling the obligation
to recycle, including materials to verify the records of recycling to the concerned authority
authorized under the Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change under
conditions prescribed by the rules.
51. (1) The appropriate Government shall, when a producer obligated to recycle fails to
carry out the obligation under section 48 or the Recycling Business Mutual Aid Cooperatives
under section 58 fails to vicariously fulfil the obligation of cooperative members to recycle,
impose and collect the expenses incurred for the recycling of the quantity of wastes not
recycled among the mandatory recycling quantity, adding to it an amount of money equivalent
to 30/100 of the expenses (hereinafter referred to as "recycling dues") on and from the
producer obligated to recycle or the Recycling Business Mutual Aid Cooperatives.
(2) The expenses required for the recycling of wastes, which become the basis for
calculating recycling dues, time and procedure of payment thereof and other necessary
matters shall be determined by the rules framed by the Union Ministry of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change.
(3) Recycling dues and additional charges shall become the revenue of the special
accounts for environmental improvement under the Act on the Special Accounts for
Environmental Improvement.
52. The waste charges and recycling dues shall be used for the following purposes—
(a) assistance for waste recycling projects and installation of waste disposal
facilities;
Obligation of
manufacturer,
etc. to
recycle.
Mandatory
recycling
ratio.
Submission of
plan for
fulfillment of
obligation to
recycle, etc.
Collection of
recycling
dues, etc.
Usage of
waste charges
and recycling
dues.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

18
(b) research and technology development for the efficient recycling and reduction
of wastes;
(c) assistance for recovery, recycling, disposal of wastes by local Government;
(d) purchase and reserve of recyclable resources;
(e) assistance for projects for facilitation of recycling;
(f) granting collection expenses of waste charges (including additional charges)
or recycling dues (including additional charges); and
(g) others, such as assistance for projects necessary to facilitate recycling of
resources.
53. The facilities to recover energy (hereinafter referred to as "energy recovery
facilities") shall be installed and operated to meet the standards for energy recovery when
they are inspected pursuant to the method and procedure of inspection announced by the
Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change in consultation with other
Ministries.
54. (1) A business that discharges designated by-products (hereinafter referred to as
"designated by-product discharging business") shall comply with the guidelines jointly
published by the Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change and the
Ministries concerned in accordance with the basic directions and procedures prescribed by
the rules.
(2) The guidelines referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall include the following
matters:—
(a) matters concerning the methods of recycling pursuant to the usage of
designated by-products;
(b) matters concerning the formulation and implementation of plans for the
facilitation of use of designated by-products; and
(c) matters concerning the separation or crushing of designated by-products.
55. A person who uses solid fuels made of wastes among recycled goods (hereinafter
referred to as "solid fuels") shall use them in the facilities prescribed by the rules framed by
the Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change.
56. (1) Any person who intends to manufacture and supply solid fuels shall obtain
authentication on the quality and grade of solid fuels from an organization (hereinafter
referred to as "authentication organization") designated by the Union Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change.
(2) Any person who manufactures or uses solid fuels shall comply with the rules to be
observed, such as the quality standards, maintenance and management of grade, management
of facilities for manufacture, storing and utilization.
(3) The details on procedures of authentication on the quality and grade, standards for
quality and grade, examination and analysis for authentication, and the rules to be observed
pursuant to sub-section (2) shall be stipulated by the rules framed by the Union Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change.
57. The authentication organization may collect fees from persons who apply for
authentication on the quality and grade of solid fuels in accordance with the standards and
method of calculating fees stipulated by the rules framed by the Union Ministry of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change.
Installation
and operation
of energy
recovery
facilities, etc.
Matters to be
observed by
designated
by-product
discharging
businesses.
Facilities to
use solid fuels
composed of
wastes.
Observance,
etc. by user
and
manufacturer
of solid fuels.
Fees collected
by the
authentication
organization.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

19
CHAPTER XV
WASTE RECYCLING BUSINESS MUTUAL AID COOPERATIVES
58. (1) A producer who is duty bound to recycle may establish waste recycling business
mutual aid cooperatives by goods and packing materials (hereinafter referred to as the
"Cooperatives") to perform the obligation under sub-section (1).
(2) Each Cooperative shall be a corporation.
(3) The Cooperatives shall be established by registering establishment thereof at the
location of its principal office.
59. Any person who intends to establish a Cooperative shall obtain authorization of
the Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change by submitting an application
in such form and manner for the purposes of authorization along with the following:—
(a) the articles of association of the corporation, including matters concerning
the purpose, scope of business, Cooperative members, allotted charges, and others
concerning the operation of the Cooperative are included;
(b) the agreement of producers obligated to recycle affiliated with the Cooperative
on participation;
(c) the mandatory recycling quantity of each cooperative member;
(d) statement of the Cooperative's recycling facilities (limited to Cooperatives
which have their own recycling facilities); and
(e) business plan to vicariously perform the obligation to recycle.
CHAPTER XVI
E
STABLISHMENT OF FOUNDATION FOR FACILITA TION OF RECYCLING OF WASTE RESOURCES
60. (1) The appropriate Government or local authority, as the case may be, may
subsidize or lend funds or arrange loans needed for the recycling of waste resources to a
person who conducts business referred to in clauses (a) to (g)—
(a) a business to install recycling facilities;
(b) a resource recycling business conducted by designated recycling businesses
and designated by-product discharging businesses;
(c) the installation and operation of energy recovery facilities;
(d) a business to build a recycling complex;
(e) a recycling business conducted by those who have obtained permission for
intermediate waste disposal business or general waste disposal business and persons
reporting waste recycling;
(f) a business of research and technical development to facilitate recycling of
resources; and
(g) any business determined by the rules framed by the Union Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change, which is necessary for the fostering of
recycling industries other than businesses specified in clauses (a) to (f).
(2) The appropriate Government may preferably provide a recycling business with
funds necessary for facilities, research, and technical development, from funds for:—
(a) building industrial foundations for recycling waste resources; and
(b) development and industrial foundation of small and medium enterprises
dealing with recycling waste resources.
Establishment
of waste
recycling
business
mutual aid
cooperatives.
Procedure for
authorizing
establishment
of
cooperatives,
etc.
Financial
assistance,
etc. for
fostering of
waste
recycling
industries.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

20
61. (1) The appropriate Government may build waste recycling complexes in order to
foster the recycling industry and sharpen the competitiveness of the recycling industry.
(2) The building of waste recycling complexes as referred to in sub-section (1) shall
comply with the procedure for designation and development of national or local industrial
complexes under the relevant statute regarding it.
(3) Matters necessary for the building, management and operation of waste recycling
complexes shall be determined by the rules framed by the Union Ministry of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change.
62. In cases where a local authority or a person prescribed by the rules builds a waste
recycling complex under sub-section (1), section 61, the State Government may subsidize the
expenses needed to build such waste recycling complex.
63. (1) The appropriate Government shall install facilities capable of collecting,
storing, sorting, and treating bulky wastes and recyclable waste resources prescribed by
the rules.
(2) The appropriate Government may provide financial and technical support to those
who install the facilities referred to in sub-section (1), and may offer advice necessary to
increase the efficiency of the installation and operation of such facilities.
64. (1) The appropriate Government may establish and operate a pre-treatment facility
in order to recover recyclable resources to the utmost extent through mechanical treatment
processes, such as crushing, grinding and sorting or biological treatment processes, such
as aerobic or anaerobic decomposition prior to the treatment of wastes by means of
incineration or reclamation.
(2) The appropriate Government may, if deemed necessary to take measures to facilitate
waste recycling prior to the final treatment of wastes generated.
65. (1) The Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change shall endeavor
to provide people with knowledge and information on the recycling of waste resources.
(2) The Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change may generate
and disseminate knowledge and information on the recycling of waste resources and establish
and operate a waste resources recycling information system to facilitate the generation
and dissemination of knowledge and information on the recycling of waste resources.
(3) The Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change may demand the
head of a relevant central administrative organ to submit data necessary for the establishment
and operation of a waste resources recycling information system.
66. (1) The Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change or the head of
a local Government may enter into an agreement with a waste discharging business, recycling
business, manufacturer, or organization comprised thereof (hereinafter referred to as "voluntary
agreement") in order to control the generation of wastes and facilitate waste recycling.
(2) The necessary matters concerning the objective of a voluntary agreement, method
and procedure of fulfillment shall be determined by the rules framed by the Union Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change.
(3) The Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change or the head of a
local Government may provide a person who has entered into a voluntary agreement under
sub-section (1) with assistance necessary for the fulfillment of such voluntary agreement.
67. (1) The appropriate Government shall devise necessary measures, such as exchange
and provision of information and holding international conferences for the promotion of
international cooperation for facilitation of recycling of waste resources.
Building of
waste
recycling
complexes,
etc.
Subsidies for
building of
waste
recycling
complexes.
Installation
of public
waste
recycling
infrastructure.
Installation
of facilities
for
facilitation of
waste
recycling, etc.
Provision of
information
on recycling
of waste
resources, etc.
Establishment
of voluntary
agreement.
International
cooperation
for
facilitation of
recycling of
waste
resources.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

21
(2) The Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change may promote all
or any of the following projects to promote international cooperation under sub-section (1)
for—
(a) investigation and research for international cooperation related to recycling
of waste resources;
(b) international exchange of manpower and information related to recycling of
waste resources;
(c) holding exhibitions and seminars related to recycling of waste resources;
(d) development of overseas markets for the fostering of waste recycling
industries; and
(e) any other project deemed necessary for the promotion of international
cooperation.
CHAPTER XVII
PENAL PROVISIONS IN RELATION TO WASTE MANAGEMENT
68. Any person who dumps or buries commercial wastes in violation of sub-section (1)
or (2), of section 8 shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend upto five
years or fine or with both.
69. Any person who—
(a) operates a waste management business without a licence;
(b) obtains a licence for a waste management business by fraudulent or other
unlawful means; or
(c) does not comply with an order of closure,
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend upto five years or fine or
with both.
70. Any person who—
(a) buries wastes in violation of section 13 or sub-section (3) of section 20;
(b) disposes of commercial wastes or imported wastes, in violation of sub-
section (1) of section 17 or section 20;
(c) exports imported wastes as the same state or condition as they were
imported, in violation of sub-section (4) of section 20;
(d) alters an item contained in a licence for a waste management business with-
out an amended licence under sub-section (10) of section 21;
(e) carries on business during the business suspension period under section 23;
(f) installs a waste disposal facility in violation of sub-section (1) of section 24;
(g) operates a waste disposal facility without an inspection or a confirmation on
conformity in violation of any provision of sub-section (1) or (2) of section 25; or
(h) fails to comply with an order of improvement under sub-section (4) of section
26 or who has violated an order to suspend the operation,
shall be punished wiht imprisonment for a term which may extend upto three years of fine or
with both.
71. Any person who—
(a) contaminates the surrounding environment by collecting, transporting,
keeping in storing, or disposing of wastes;
Punishment
for dumping
commercial
waste.
Punishment
for operating
without
licence,
obtained
licence by
fraudulent
means, etc.
Offences
inviting
punishment
of three years
imprisonment
or fine or
both.
Offences
inviting
punishment of
two years
imprisonment
or fine or both.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

22
(b) fails to file a report or who has filed a false report;
(c) does not obtain verification or verification on changes, who has discharged,
transported, or disposed of controlled waste in a manner different from that certified;
(d) fails to transmit information on the delivery and receipt of wastes to the
electronic information processing center, failed to transmit it pursuant to the ways as
prescribed by rules framed by the Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change, or has transmitted false data to the center;
(e) carries out his business in deviation from the type and scope of business
under sub-section (5) of section 21;
(f) breaches a condition under sub-section (6) of section 21;
(g) allows another person to use name or trade name in collection, transportation,
or disposal of wastes or who has lent his licence to other person;
(h) stores wastes in violation of sub-section (8) of section 21;
(i) installs or operated a waste incineration facility, although it is prohibited from
being installed, in violation of sub-section (1) of section 24;
(j) maintains and managed a waste disposal facility in a manner that does not
conform to the guidelines for the management under sub-section 26(1) of section and
has consequently contaminated the surrounding environment; and
(k) fails to comply with an order to take a measurement or make an assessment,
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend upto two years or
fine or with both.
72. (1) If any representative, or an agent, an employee or any other worker of a legal
entity commits an offence under any provision of section 68 to section 71 in connection with
the business of the legal entity shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may
extend upto two years or fine or with both.
(2) If an agent, an employee, or any other servant of a private individual commits an
offence under any provision of section 68 to section 71 in connection with the business of
the private individual shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend upto
two years or fine or with both.
73. (1) Any person who—
(a) collects, transported, kept in storage or disposed of wastes in violation of
section 13;
(b) charges any price higher than the maximum price or any price lower than the
minimum price prescribed for waste management, in carrying out commissioned waste
management;
(c) a person who has failed to comply with the rules under sub-section ( 8) of
section 21;
(d) maintains or managed a waste disposal facility in a manner that does not
conform to the guidelines for such management or who has filed to take a measure or
make an assessment of the pollutants or impacts on the surrounding area;
(e) fails to appoint a technical manager or has failed to make a contract for
technical management services; and
(f) fails to submit a report within a prescribed time limit or has prepared and
submitted a false report,
shall be punished with a fine which may extend upto ten lakh rupees.
Joint penal
liability.
Fine for
negligence.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

23
(2) Any person who—
(a) commissions someone to provide him/her with a service without ascertainment;
(b) fails to perform his obligations to comply with the guidelines publicly notified;
(c) commissions someone to implement waste management at a price lower than
the price prescribed for waste management;
(d) fails to transmit information on the delivery and receipt of waste to the
electronic information processing center on time, or has transmitted false information
to the center;
(e) make an amendment to any reported item without filing a report on such amendment;
(f) fails to carry documents, etc. with him or failed to generate it; and
(g) fails to file a report in violation of section 29,
shall be punished with a fine which may extend upto three lakh rupees.
(3) Any person who—
(a) dumps, buries or incinerates household wastes in violation of sub-section (1)
or (2) of section 8;
(b) fails to comply with an order to take measures in violation of sub-section (3)
of section 8;
(c) violates sub-section (1) or (2) of section 15;
(d) operates a facility without filing a report under sub-section (2) of section 24;
(e) a person who has failed to file a report under section 30 (1) or who has filed
a false report; and
(f) a person who has rejected, interfered with, or evaded an access or inspection
under sub-section (1) of section 30.
shall be punished with a fine which may extend upto one lakh rupees.
(4) The fine for negligence under sub-sections (1) to (3) of section 73 shall be imposed
and collected by appropriate Government, as the case may be, prescribed by the rules framed
by the Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change.
(5) A person who dissatisfies with the disposition of a fine for negligence under
sub-section (4) of section 73 may file an objection with the appropriate Government within
thirty days from the date of which he is notified of the disposition.
(6) The appropriate Government shall, upon receiving an objection under sub-section (5)
of section 73 from a person subject to the disposition of a fine for negligence, under
sub-section (5) of section 73 notify the competent court of the objection without delay, and
the court shall, submit the case to trial.
(7) If neither an objection is filed nor the fine for negligence is paid within the period
under sub-section (5) of section 73, such fine for negligence shall be collected in accordance
with the practices of the disposition on default of national or local taxes.
CHAPTER XVIII
PENAL PROVISIONS IN RELATION TO RECYCLING OF WASTE RESOURCES
74. Any person who fails to submit a report or data or has submitted a false report or
false data and a person who has refuses, interferes with or evades entrance for investigation
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend upto one year or fine which
may extend upto five lakh rupees.
Punishment
for not
submitting
report or
false report
or evading
investigation,
etc.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

24
75. (1) If any representative, agent, employee or any other worker of a corporation
commits any violation under section 74 in relation to the business of the corporation, shall be
punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend upto one year or fine which may
extend upto five lakh rupees but a corporation shall also be punished with a fine which may
extend upto rupees five lakh.
(2) If any representative, agent, employee or other worker of an individual commits any
violation under section 74 in relation to the business of the individual, not only the offender
shall be punished but the individual shall also be punished with imprisonment for a term
which may extend upto one year or fine which may extend upto five lakh rupees.
76. (1) Any person who—
(a) fails to abide by the standards for the quality of packing materials, method of
packing, and goals of the annual reduction of packing materials made of synthetic
resin for goods;
(b) uses, or offered for free disposable goods, in violation of section 40;
(c) fails to put a separate discharge mark or affixed a false mark;
(d) uses solid fuels, in violation of section 55;
(e) supplies without obtaining certification,
shall be punished with fine which may extend to three lakh rupees.
(2) Any person who—
(a) fails to perform an order to take measures under sub-section 43;
(b) fails to submit a plan for fulfilment of the obligation to recycle or a report on
the results of fulfilment of the obligation to recycle under section 50,
shall be punished with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees.
77. (1) The appropriate Government shall impose and collect fines for negligence
under section 76 in such manner as may be prescribed by rules.
CHAPTER XIX
M
ISCELLANEOUS P ROVISIONS
78. The appropriate Government may provide necessary financial and technical
assistance to local authorities to promoting the business relating to—
(a) assessment of recyclability of resources of goods under section 38; and
(b) technical development and installation of facilities, necessary for
manufacturers, under section 47 to reuse goods or parts.
79. The appropriate Government shall take legislative and financial measures necessary
for the implementation of policies to facilitate the recycling of waste resources.
80. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in makiing any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Joint penal
liability.
Fines for
negligence.
Imposition
and collection
of fines for
negligence.
Financial and
technical
assistance.
Legislative
and financial
measures, etc.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

25
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
For long, we have used the backyards of our cities, as dump-yards. But as we became
literate, empowered politically and socially, people in poor neighbourhoods and in villages
are pleading enough is enough, "Your waste cannot be dumped in our backyards" is how
anyone will react if anyone attempts to do so. But where is the backyard? If there is no
backyard, then waste has to be managed in the front-yard. Then its management will have to
change.Therefore, this Bill titled as the Waste Management and Recycling Bill attempts to
address the issues of garbage disposal and its recycling.
India is growing rapidly and so are the mountains of waste its cities, heartlands and
hamlets are producing. The composition of waste is also witnessing a major shift as the use
of plastics and paper grow with the rise of the middle class and with the consumerist culture.
In 2008, India produced 48 million tonnes of solid waste as per one estimate. By 2016, this had
risen to 52 million tonnes. An assessment says that per capita waste generation is increasing
by about 1.3 per cent annually.
Solid waste management has been for many years. For decades, courts have driven
policy; regulations have been devised and revised and technologies are known—the world
has seemingly fixed one environmental problem and that is sweeping municipalities, towns
and cities off garbage. In spite of the fact that solid waste is taking over our streets, fields and
sidewalks, there is little known about the quantity or quality of waste that is generated.
Studies and research in the area of waste management although is very limited or non-
existent, however, from the given resources, all shows the need for policy changes in garbage
management.
As India looks for alternatives, how effective are the refuse-derived fuel (RDF) and other
waste-to-energy technologies and can we look beyond them? The truth remains that we do not
even know the composition of waste in India. Shockingly, the only comprehensive study
which looked at waste quantity was done by National Environmental Engineering Research
Institute (NEERI) way back in 1995. In the 1995 survey, the methodology to calculate waste
generated adopted was to simply multiply the population, with an assumed quantity estimate.
India's legal system rose to the challenge of waste management more than a decade
ago. Since then, there have been many regulations. The Municipal Solid Waste Rules, 2000
framed under the Environment Protection Act, 1986 lays down steps to be taken by municipal
authorities to manage waste. In fact, the laws and legislation had a deficit of clarity. Legal
sanctions and implementation have resulted in little action on the ground. The only solace is
what the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India has done as it has taken a proactive role in the
development of a better solid waste management regime. Therefore, the laws in India need to
be strengthened and so does their implementation.
Given the magnitude of environmental destruction associated with construction
material, promotion of alternative and recycling of waste is not a matter of choice but
a necessity. Several countries have found ways to manage their construction and demolition
waste: they recycle the waste and reuse it in construction. Singapore, which generates
260 kilogram of construction and demolition waste per person recycles 98 per cent of it. Why
not India then?
Currently, limited resources are available for waste management. The trend is unlikely
to change in the near future. Urban local bodies have to be intelligent about waste finance
and treat garbage as a resource, and not as waste. Private players entering different levels of
the management stream need to be made accountable. Neither households nor municipalities
in India practice segregation of biodegradable waste, and public awareness on the benefits
of segregation is low. The collection of garbage from dump-sites is infrequent, processing is
not done in most cases, and disposal rules are followed more in the breach. Contracts,

26
sometimes along with equipment, are given for door-to-door collection of wastes. This
activity is labour intensive and generally taken up by small contractors or Non-Governmental
Organisations at a low cost. As assessment shows that the city managers are struggling to
find a framework for contracting solid waste management services, where segregation and
waste recovery is ensured and costs for this disposal are paid.
Different cities in India have adopted different strategies to deal with solid waste.
While some are simply trying to brush their waste under the carpet, others have achieved
various levels of segregation, recycling, reduction and reuse. The Centre for Science and
Environment (CSE) under the leadership of Sunita Narain has conducted a massive survey
this year (2016) and in its report has revealed that technology for waste disposal is not the
problem. The problem is two-fold. Firstly, households and institutions are not responsible
for management, through segregation or payment of the waste they generate. Secondly,
there is an absolute collapse of financial and institutional (human) capacity and so
accountability in our municipal systems. In this scenario, the best option according to CSE
is found exists in Kerala, where municipalities have withdrawn from the waste business.
People segregate and compost; informal recyclers collect and sell. This is perhaps the most
exciting model for future waste business in the country. And even if it cannot be emulated
completely, it holds important lessons for other cities. Waste-to-energy technology is still
a good bet. But segregation holds the key—without it, India cannot unlock the resource
potential in its waste.
This bill on waste management and recycling of waste resources has the potential to
drive a 'waste revolution' and the desideratum is to enact and umbrella legislation to make it
happen. The Government has put 'cleaning India' at the top of its agenda and launched its
flagship programme named Swachh Bharat Mission on 2nd October, 2014, Mahatma Gandhi's
birth anniversary. But across the country, citizen movements against garbage have expanded
beyond simple calls for cleaning up. Since the right time has come to clean up India, this
legislation on waste management and recycling will act as a catalyst. Undoubtedly then, the
common ground between the Government and citizens will be a  place where waste is managed
and recycled, and not a foul-smelling mound over which vultures hover.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI RICHARD HAY
November 18, 2016.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for accountability of the appropriate Government to
ascertain current status of waste discharge, install and operate waste disposal facilities;
create awareness amongst residents and business operators about the importance of
protecting environment and coordinate among all agencies providing waste management
services. Clause 11 provides for conducting statistical research on current status on waste
generated and mode of disposal area wise. Clause 14 provides that appropriate Government
shall be responsible for collection, transportation and disposal of household wastes. Clause 38
provides that the appropriate Government shall take steps to mitigate the impact of waste
goods on environment and to extend technical support to manufacturers for self assessment.
Clause 44 provides for separate collection of recyclable waste resources. Clause 45 provides
for establishment and operate facilities necessary to facilitate the exchange of second hand
goods and recycling of reusable bulky weight. Clause 47 provides for facilities of technical
support of manufacturers to recover goods or parts in order to reuse them. Clause 60 provides
that the appropriate Government shall lend fund or arrange loans for recycling of waste
resources. Clause 63 provides for installation of public waste recycling infrastructure. Clause 64
provides for facilities for facilitating of waste recycling etc. Clause 65 provides for information
of  recycling of waste resources. The Central Government shall incur expenditure for providing
waste disposal facilities etc. from the Consolidated Fund of India in respect of Union territories.
The State Governments shall incur expenditure for providing waste disposal facilities etc. in
respect of their States from their respective consolidated funds. Moreover, the Central
Government has to provide fund to the State Governments to carry out the purposes of this
Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of rupees five hundred crore is
likely to be incurred.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
27

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 80 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
28

GMGIPMRND—3502LS(S3)—02.12.2016.
LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for ascertaining of current status of waste generation and its disposal;
financial assistance for research and development in waste management;
charges for waste disposal facilities; duties of citizens for segregating
waste; prohibition on dumping waste; preparation of master plans
for waste management; disposal of household, commercial and
imported wastes; regulation of waste management business,
promotion of recycling and reuse of waste resources and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Prof. Richard Hay, M.P.)