Short title,
extent
and
commencement.
THE RIGHT TO PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA BILL, 2016
BY
SHRI OM PRAKASH YADAV, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the right to privacy of personal data to all individuals in the country;
establish the liability of the organizations holding personal data as well as the
appropriate Government in case of misuse of such personal data;  for creation of a
National Do-Not-Disturb Registry to ensure that individuals are not harassed by
organisations and creating awareness among individuals for protection of their
personal data and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right to Privacy of Personal Data Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No.  316  of  2016
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “business contact information” means  individual’s name, position name or
title, business telephone number, business address, business electronic mail address
or business fax number and any other similar information about the individual, not
provided by individual solely for his personal purposes;
(c) “data subject” means an individual whose personal data is being processed;
(d) “individual” means a human being whether living or deceased;
(e) “intermediary” means an organisation which processes personal data on
behalf of another organisation;
(f) “national interest” includes issues of national security, defence and conduct
of international affairs;
(g) “organisation” includes any individual, company, intermediaries, contractors,
association or body of persons, corporate or unincorporated,whether or not—
(i) formed or recognised under any law of the country; or
(ii) resident, or having registered office or a place of business in India.
Explanation.— Organisation shall also include Government Ministries, Departments
and public funded Institutions at all levels.
(h) “personal data” means any data, whether true or not, about an individual
who can be identified from that data and other information about an individual which
any organisation has collected or is likely to have access to;
(i) “prescribed’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(j) “privacy risk” means the potential for personal data, on its own or when
linked to other information about an individual, to cause emotional distress, or physical,
financial, professional or any other harm to an individual;
(k) “processing of personal data” means taking any action regarding data that is
linked to an individual or a specific device, including but not limited to collecting,
retaining, disclosing, using, merging, linking, and combining data.
(l) “Research  Centre’’ means the  National Research Centre for Excellence in
Data Management established under section 10; and
(m) ‘‘Registry’’ means National Do-Not-Disturb  Registry established under
section 4.
3. (1) Every individual, whether he is citizen or not, shall have the right to privacy of
personal data generated by him while staying legally within the country.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, no
person shall process the personal data without the consent of the individual:
Provided that if the individual is deceased, after the commencement of the Act, this
right shall pass on to his legal heir(s), as the case may be.
(3) Before taking the consent for processing of personal data every organisation shall
provide the individual in concise and easily understandable language, accurate, clear, timely
and conspicuous notice of its privacy and security practices.
(4) Every organisation shall provide convenient and reasonable access to such notice,
in electronic, physical or any other feasible form, and any updates or modifications to such
notice to the individual whose personal data is processed.
(5) After taking the consent, every organisation shall provide the individual with
reasonable means to control the processing of personal data in proportion to the privacy risk
to the individual.
Definitions.
Right to
Privacy of
Personal
Data.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
4. (1) The Central  Government shall , by notification in the Official Gazette  establish
a Registry to be named as National Do-Not-Disturb Registry where citizens may  register
themselves to restrict any sort of communication, in any form including but not restricted
to receiving phone calls, messages or mails.
(2) The appropriate Government shall take necessary measures to promote the
National Do-Not-Disturb Registry and make the individuals aware of the same.
5. (1) Every organisation shall frame  a data requirement policy, within three months of
the commencement of the Act, and shall review the actual requirement of personal data of
individuals on a periodical basis.
(2) The review of data requirement policy shall be updated on  yearly basis unless a
need to update the same arises earlier for an organisation.
6. The appropriate Government shall take necessary measures for creation of
awareness of protection of personal data among the persons living in the country.
7. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the right to privacy of personal
data of the individual shall be restricted to,—
(a) matters of national security;
(b) protect the life and health of an individual who is not able to express his
consent;
(c)  the data of the individuals who have died deceased before the commencement
of the Act;
(d) when an individual is acting in the course of his employment with an
organisation; and
(e) for business contact information.
8. (1) The appropriate Government, as and when required, shall issue guidelines for
maintaining privacy of personal data.
(2) The guidelines shall be issued after due consultations with the concerned
stakeholders.
9. The appropriate Government shall take all measures to ensure effective coordination
between services provided by concerned Ministries and Departments such as those dealing
with Law, Home Affairs, Human Resource Development, Electronics and Information
Technology, Information and Broadcasting, Defence, Corporate Affairs and External Affairs
to address issues of privacy of personal data.
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette,  establish
for the purposes of this Act,  Research Centre to be known as the  National Research
Centre for Excellence in Data Management which shall conduct holistic research activities
in the field of data management.
(2) The Central Government may, by notification, specify the headquarters of the
Research Centre established  under sub-section (1).
(3) The Central Government shall provide the Research Centre with such number of
officers and staff as it considers necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of the officers
and  staff of the Research Centre shall be such as may be prescribed.
11. (1) On and from such date, as the appropriate Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette specify, the education of privacy of personal data in educational
institutions shall be imparted compulsorily from such class onwards as may be prescribed.
Establishment
of a National
Do-Not-
Disturb
Registry.
Creation and
review of data
requirement
policy.
Creation of
awareness of
protection of
personal data.
Restrictions on
right to
privacy of
personal data.
Guidelines for
privacy of
personal data.
Coordination
within
appropriate
Government.
Establishment
of National
Research
Centre for
Excellence in
Data
Management.
Compulsory
education of
privacy of
personal data
in educational
institutions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(2) The appropriate Government shall appoint of such number of teachers with such
qualifications, as may be specified, for teaching privacy of personal data in educational
institutions in such manner as may be prescribed.
12. No public servant shall misuse the access to personal data or track the personal
data of the individual including the Members of Parliament, Members of Legislative Assembly
or Council except for matters of national security.
13. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
14. (1) Any organisation who directly or indirectly contravenes or attempts to
contravene the provisions of this Act, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to seven years or with fine which may extend up to fifty lakh rupees or with both.
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1)  shall  apply to  individuals including the directors of the
organisations who  prove  his innocence with regard to the illegal data processing conducted
in the organisation.
15.  ( 1) If it is proved that the organisation has undertaken illegal personal data
processing of individuals, the organisation shall be liable to pay ten times the revenues
earned from such activities as compensation to the aggrieved individuals.
(2) In case the organisation is unable to pay  financial compensation under
sub-section (1),  their assets shall be liable to be attached for this purpose.
16. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of three years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
17. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
18. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as may
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days, which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, Parliament agrees in making any modification in the rule or Parliament
agrees that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modifications
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
that rule.
Public
Servants not
to misuse
access to
personal data
of citizens.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Penalty.
Payment of
financial
compensation
to aggrieved
individuals.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Personal data refers to data, whether true or not, about an individual who can be
identified from that data and other information to which any organisation has or is likely to
have access. In the earlier times, personal data of citizens was confined to limited domains of
Government records and paper documentation managed privately by citizens. However,
India has witnessed a digital revolution at the cusp of the 21st century. The social and
economic landscape of the country underwent a metamorphosis with the advent of technology.
With this, the scope of personal data expounded exponentially. According to data industry
giant IBM website, nearly 90% of the total data in the world has been created in last two
years alone. A major portion of this personal data is generated through electronic medium
chiefly through the means of internet. With the advent of cloud compouting, millions of
terabytes of data get uploaded on the web on a daily basis.
In the past two decades, there has been a meteoric rise in promoting digital governance
in the country and the same has been undertaken in the recent months under the Digital India
Initiative. Digital provisions of governmental, banking and various other necessary services
have given way to generation of millions of terabytes of sensitive citizen data in the country.
There has been an upsurge in the use of e-Locker services (DigiLocker) provided by the
Government and various cloud based storage applications for storing crucial personal data
by the citizens. The marquee government program for digital identification of all its citizens
(Aadhaar) is on its way of completing a universal coverage in the country.
With an array of governmental services being provided digitally to the citizens, there
lies an imminent threat of unauthorised capturing and recording of personal data generated
through the provisions of these services. With the meteoric rise of the Business Process
Outsourcing (BPO) industry in the country, the demand for personal data of people is huge
and in order to cater to the same, there has been a rise of a data mafia and an entire illegal
industry has come up, worth thousands of crores which would provide personal details of
citizens for profit-making purposes. Due to phenomenal penetration of smartphones in the
country, there has been a rise in the application (Mobile App) culture and data generated on
these applications has also increased significantly.
In such circumstances, it becomes extremely important to protect the personal data
especially generated through electronic means belonging to the citizens in the country.
Individual data of extremely sensitive nature such as retina scans, thumb imprints of millions
of Indian citizens collected under Aadhaar need highest degree of safeguards especially
when the same is collected by private Enrolment Agencies. The data captured under
e-Locker and online storage programs need comprehensive security considering the
invaluable nature of data stored in the same by the Indian citizens.
There is also an urgent need to create a broad, transparent and comprehensive
framework to determine the liability of the organizations collecting, storing and maintaining
the personal data of the user. There is a need to introduce a ‘Review of Data Requirement
Policy’ to keep a check on the greed of organizations seeking more data for nefarious purposes.
This policy must specifically differentiate the instances where the need is of mere identification
of individuals and cases where specific personal data of the citizens is required. Despite
having a Do-Not-Disturb (DND) Policy in place, the organizations have found loopholes
within the same and the tele-marketing harassment of common and innocent citizens in the
country continues. There is a need to legislate for the creation of a National Do-Not-Disturb
Registry (NDNDR) along with stringent penal provisions against the organizations which
harass the citizens who register their numbers within this Registry. There is also an urgent
need to create awareness among the citizens to explain the significance of their personal data
and the need to protect the same. A large number of instances have come to light where the
5

6
access to personal data of the politicians in the country especially the Parliamentarians at
both the central and state level is misused for political vendetta. Hence, there is a need to
bring the Government officials to be brought under the purview of the Act in order to ensure
that such illicit tracking and misuse of access to personal data can be prevented.
Various countries across the globe have recognized the importance of enacted
comprehensive legislations giving protection to data of its citizens.
Various provisions in the current legal framework including the information Technology
Act deal with the protection of data of the citizens. However, the laws in this country have
not been able to keep up with the speed of fast changes occurring in the world of technology.
There is a need to make the penal provisions for illegal capturing, storing and performing
other such malicious activities with the personal data of the citizens even more stringent.
There is also a need to introduce a component of payment of financial compensation to
aggrieved user whose data has been misused by the organizations in order to disincentivize
perfomance of such unlawful activities.
Hence, in the times when the internet and data generated through the same are becoming
ubiquitous, it is pertinent that the rights in relation to the same are imparted to the citizens
and such a measure will surely help in proving the age old adage ‘A stitch in time, saves
nine.’  The AP shah Committee submitted a report on the need to enact a law on privacy in the
year 2012. Despite the passage of four years, still the Government has not enacted a
comprehensive law on data privacy in the country. It is high time that a law should be
enacted to protect the very foundational premise for the success of Digital India which is the
protection of data of its citizens without further delay.
The need of the hour is to develop fool-proof data-protection laws in the country.
There is an urgency to create a comprehensive law for imparting holistic privacy to the
personal data of the citizens of this country.
Hence this Bill.
OM PRAKASH Y ADA V
N
EW DELHI;
November 16, 2016

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for establishment  of a National Do-Not-Distrub Registry.
Clause 6 provides for creation of awareness of protection of personal data. Clause 10 seeks
to establish a National Research Center for Excellence in Data Management. Clause 11
provides for compulsory education of privacy of personal data in educational institutions.
Clause 13 provides that the Central Government shall provide requisite funds for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. At this stage, it is not possible to estimate the amount to be
incurred. However, the Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees one
thousand crore would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand and five hundred crore is
also likely to be involved.
7

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 18 empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the purposes
of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative power
is of a normal character.
8

A
BILL
to provide for the right to privacy of personal data to all individuals in the country;
establish the liability of the organizations holding personal data as well as
the appropriate Government in case of misuse of such personal data;
 for creation of a National Do-Not-Disturb Registry to ensure that
individuals are not harassed by organisations and creating
awareness among individuals for protection of their
 personal  data and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Om Prakash Yadav, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3365(S3)—02.12.2016.
LOK  SABHA
————