1
THE SEX WORKERS (REHABILITATION AND
SOCIAL SECURITY) BILL, 2015
By
SHRIMATI POONAM MAHAJAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the rehabilitation and social security of sex workers and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Sex Workers (Rehabilitation and Social Security) Act,
2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 316 of  2015
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) 'abuse' includes verbal and physical abuse;
(b) 'adult literacy programmes' means programmes aimed at extending educational
options, including literacy, basic education, skill development (vocational education)
and equivalent, to those adults who have lost the opportunity and have crossed the
age of formal education, but now feel a need for learning of any type;
(c) "appropriate Government" means in the case of State, the Government of that
State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(d) 'barrier' means any factor, including attitudinal, cultural, economic, institutional,
political, religious, social or structural factor which hampers the full and effective
participation of sex workers in society;
(e) 'Board' means the Central or the State Rehabilitation Board for Sex Workers
constituted under section 6;
(f) 'child' means a person who has not completed the age of eighteen years;
(g) 'counselling centre' means a centre which facilitates an interpersonal, dynamic
communication process between a client and a trained counsellor, who is bound by a
code of ethics and practice, to resolve personal, social or psychological problems and
difficulties and encourages the client to explore important personal issues, identify
ways of coping with anxiety and stress and plan for the future;
(h) 'discrimination' means any distinction, exclusion or restriction on the basis of
identity and expression which has the purpose or effect of impairing or nullifying the
recognition, enjoyment or exercise, on an equal basis with others, of all human rights
and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic, social, cultural, civil or any other
field and includes all forms of discrimination, including denial of reasonable
accommodation;
(i) 'higher education' means a course of education which can be pursued after
completing twelve years of school education;
(j) 'human rights' shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause (d) of section 2
of the Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993;
(k) 'institution' means an institution for the reception, care, protection, education,
training, rehabilitation or any other service of sex workers;
(l) 'public place' means any place intended for use by, or accessible to, the public
and includes any public conveyance;
(m) 'registered organization' means an association of sex workers, or a voluntary,
non-Governmental or charitable organization or trust, society, non-profit company
working for sex workers, duly registered by the Central or a State Government;
(n) 'rehabilitation' refers to a process aimed at enabling sex workers to attain and
maintain maximum independence, full physical, sensory, intellectual, psychiatric, social
and vocational ability, inclusion and participation in all aspects of life;
(o) 'sex worker' means a female, male, and transgender adult or young person,
generally over the age of eighteen years, who receive money or goods in exchange for
sexual services, either regularly or occasionally;
(p) 'services' means services provided by members of any profession or trade or
by any Government, local authority or establishment and includes services relating to
banking and finance, education, health, insurance, rehabilitation, entertainment,
recreation and hospitality, transport or travel and telecommunications; and
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(q) 'skill development' means systematic, deliberate and sustained training in
order to carry out complex activities or job functions involving ideas, things and/or
people in order to enable professional and personal growth.
CHAPTER II
R
IGHT TO EQUALITY AND NON-DISCRIMINATION
3. (1) The appropriate Government shall take all necessary steps to ensure that sex
workers enjoy the right to equality, life with dignity and integrity equally with others.
(2) The appropriate Government shall take measures to protect sex workers from being
subjected to abuse, cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment.
4. The sex-workers shall have the right to live in the community without any
discrimination and given access to a range of in-house, residential and other community
support services, including personal assistance necessary to support living.
5. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Board to be known as the Central
Rehabilitation Board for sex workers to exercise the powers conferred upon, and to perform
the functions assigned to Central Board under this chapter.
(2) Every State Government shall constitute a Board to be known as the State
Rehabilitation Board for sex workers to exercise the powers conferred upon, and to perform
the functions assigned to State Board under this chapter.
(3) The Board shall consist of a Chairperson and six other Members.
(4) The Chairperson of the Board shall be an eminent person with distinguished
record of service in the field of sex worker rights; and
(5) The Board shall consist of following Members—
(i) a person who is or has been a Judge of a High Court for atleast five years, or
has been, a District Judge for at least five years;
(ii) a person who is or has been Joint Secretary to the Government of India
under the Central Staffing Scheme or any other post under the Central Government
carrying a scale of pay which is not less than the Joint Secretary to the Government
of India, for atleast three years and has adequate knowledge and experience in dealing
with problems and implementation relating to rehabilitation and social security
schemes of the Government;
(iii) a social worker who has a distinguished record of service in the field of
rehabilitation, advocacy and law relating to the rights of sex-workers;
(iv) two sex workers who are popularly acknowledged as the representatives of
sex workers; and
(v) a person to represent the Health and Family Welfare department of the
appropriate Government.
(6) The Chairperson and the members of the State Board shall be appointed by the
State Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(7) The headquarters of the Board shall be at such place as the appropriate Government,
may, by notification, specify.
6. (1) The Central or the State Board shall undertake or cause to be undertaken,
services and programmes of rehabilitation, particularly in the areas of health, education,
financial assistance and employment of sex workers.
(2) The Board, while formulating rehabilitation policies, shall consult the registered
organizations working for the cause of sex workers.
Right to
Equality.
Right to non-
discrimination.
Constitution of
Rehabilitation
Boards.
Rehabilitation.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(3) The Board shall provide provisions for rehabilitation for ailing or aged sex workers,
who are unable to support themselves through earnings from commercial sex.
7. The Board shall—
(a) inquire suo moto or on a complaint by affected sex worker or any person or
organization on behalf of a sex worker, with respect to deprivation of their safeguards
and rights of sex workers;
(b) identify sex workers who have been newly recruited into brothels;
(c) interacting with the sex workers who wants to leave sex work and deliberate
on rehabilitation options; and
(d) implement the rehabilitation plan for sex workers in coordination with the
district agencies.
8. (1) The Chairperson or any Member may, by notice in writing under his hand
addressed to the President of India or Governor of the State, as the case may be, resign his
office.
(2) The Chairperson or any Member may be removed from his office by order of the
President of India or the Governor of the State, as the case may be, on the ground of proven
misbehaviour or incapacity after holding an inquiry held in accordance with such procedure
as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
(3) The Chairperson or any Member, shall also be removed from office, if he—
(a) is adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) engages during his term of office in any paid employment outside the duties
of his office; or
(c) is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which in the
opinion of the appropriate Government involves moral turpitude.
9. The Chairperson and Members of the Board shall hold office for a term of three years
from the date on which he enters upon his office or until he attains the age of sixty-five years,
whichever is earlier and shall be eligible for reappointment for another term of three years.
10. (1) In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the Chairperson
by reason of the death, resignation or otherwise, the appropriate Government may, by
notification authorise one of the Members to act as the Chairperson until the appointment of
a new Chairperson to fill such vacancy.
(2) If the Chairperson is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence on leave
or otherwise, one of the Member as the appropriate Government may, by notification,
authorised in his behalf, shall discharge the functions of the Chairperson until the date on
which the Chairperson resumes his duties.
11. (1) The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson and the Members shall be such as may be prescribed by the
appropriate Government:
Provided that neither the salary and allowances nor the other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson or a Member shall be varied to his disadvantage after his
appointment.
(2) Subject to such rules as may be made by the appropriate Government in this
behalf, the Rehabilitation Board may appoint such other administrative and technical officers
and staff as it may consider necessary.
(3) The salaries, allowances and conditions of service of the officers and other staff
appointed, shall be such as may be prescribed by the State Government.
Functions of
the Board.
Resignation
and Removal
of
Chairpersons
and Members.
Term of office.
Member to act
as Chairperson
in certain
circumstances.
Salary and
allowances of
Chairperson
and Members.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
12. (1) The Board shall submit an annual report to the appropriate Government and
may at any time submit special reports on any matter which, in its opinion, is of such urgency
or importance that it should not be deferred till submission of the annual report.
(2) The Central Government shall cause the annual and special reports of the Board to
be laid before each House of the Parliament along with a memorandum of action taken or
proposed to be taken on the recommendations by the Central Government.
(3) The State Government shall cause the annual and special reports of the Board to be
laid before each House of the State Legislature, where it consists of two Houses, or where
such a Legislature consist one House, before that House along with a memorandum of action
taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations by the State Government.
CHAPTER IV
Q
UALITY HEALTHCARE
13. The Board shall take necessary measures to ensure that quality healthcare is
provided to the sex workers and their children by ensuring—
(a) separate clinics which offer free medical aid/medication for Human
Immunodeficiency Virus infection (HIV), Sexually Transmitted Infections (STIs) and
other life-threatening diseases caused because of their profession;
(b) Integrated Counselling and testing Centres for HIV and anti-retroviral
treatment; and
(c) Barrier-free access in the hospitals and other healthcare institutions and
centres.
14. To fulfil its obligations under this Chapter, the Board shall make schemes and
programmes with participation and involvement of sex workers and registered organizations
that inter-alia makes provisions for coverage of medical expenses and therapeutic intervention
by a comprehensive health insurance scheme.
CHAPTER V
A
CCESS TO JUSTICE
15. (1) The Board shall ensure that sex workers are able to exercise the right to
access at any court, tribunal, authority, or any other body having judicial or quasi-judicial
or investigative powers without discrimination on the basis of their profession.
(2) The Board shall provide free social and legal aid to sex-workers in distress.
CHAPTER VI
COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATION PROGRAMME
16. (1) The Board shall ensure that all educational institutions funded or recognized
by them, provide quality education, and inter-alia—
(a) admit sex-workers without discrimination and provide them education as
also opportunities for sports, recreation and leisure activities on an equal basis with
others;
(b) provide necessary support in environments that maximize academic and
social development, consistent with the goal of full inclusion;
(c) monitor participation, progress in terms of attainment levels and completion
of education, in respect of every sex-worker.
(2) The appropriate Government, in consultation with the Board and local authorities
shall ensure participation of sex workers in adult education and continuing education
programmes on an equal basis with others.
Annual Report
of Boards.
Healthcare.
Comprehensive
Health
Insurance
scheme.
Access to
Justice.
Education for
sex workers.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
17. (1) The Board shall ensure a comprehensive educational programme for the
children of sex-workers who face gross discrimination and abuse alike to their mothers.
(2) The educational programme shall cover children of different ages and learning
needs through the following components:
(i) pre-school care;
(ii) academic support for junior school going children;
(iii) educational centres for school dropouts;
(iv) special coaching classes for senior school children;
(v) vocational training for teenage children; and
(vi) higher education for children completing senior secondary education.
CHAPTER VII
SKILL DEVELOPMENT AND VOCA TIONAL TRAINING
18. The Board shall formulate schemes and programmes, especially for vocational
training and self-employment of sex workers, at concessional rates to facilitate and support
employment of sex workers.
CHAPTER VIII
F
INANCIAL SECURITY
19. The Board shall ensure financial security of sex workers as well as their
children—
(a) by introducing micro-credit programmes to enable sex workers to save in
daily collection, monthly income or fixed deposit schemes; and
(b) by making available loans to sex workers at low interest rates with easy
repayment options.
CHAPTER IX
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
20. (1) Whoever exploits the sex workers for commercial gain shall be punished with
imprisonment which may extend to three years and fine which may extend to twenty-five
thousand rupees and in case of subsequent offence of exploitation with further fine which
may extend to rupees one thousand for each day of continued exploitation after the date of
original order imposing punishment or fine.
(2) Whoever voluntarily or knowingly commits or abets the offender by words, either
spoken or written, action, or by signs or by visible representations or otherwise, shall be
punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year and with fine.
CHAPTER X
M
ISCELLANEOUS
21. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of State Legislature, where it consists of two
Houses or where such legislature consists of one House, before that House.
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
Education for
children of sex
workers.
Skill
development
and vocational
training.
Financial
Security to sex
workers.
Offences and
penalties.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

7
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule of
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rules shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The sex workers in India face a lot of abuse on a daily basis. Though there is the
Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1956 to combat trafficking and sexual exploitation for
commercial purposes, this law only lays down offences for commercial prostitution and does
not mention any welfare measures for the prostitutes and their children. In India, prostitution
is not an offence, rather practicing it in a brothel or within 200 meters of any public place is
illegal. In such a scenario, it is important to formulate a new law which provides for the
welfare of the sex-workers and their families in the aspects of healthcare, education, shelter
and skill training.
Sex-workers wish to be integrated in society and hold rights and responsibilities, like
any other citizen. This requires efforts to assimilate rather than allienate sex-workers from the
wider community. Detention in corrective institutions or protective homes worsens
estrangement of sex-workers, erodes social ties and weakens the realization of genuine
rehabilitation.
This view has been endorsed by the Supreme Court in the case of Budhadev Karmaskar
Vs. Government of West Bengal. In this case, the court recognized the need to ensure that
sex-workers are able to live a life of dignity under Article 21 of the Constitution of India
since they are also human beings and their problems also need to be addressed. The Court
further noted a sex-worker is compelled to indulge in prostitution not for pleasure but
because of abject poverty. If they are granted opportunity to avail some technical or
vocational training, they would be able to earn their livelihood by such vocational training
and skills instead of by selling their bodies.
The Court set up a panel to discuss "conditions conducive for sex-workers to live with
dignity in accordance with the provisions of article 21 of the Constitution".  It also suggested
that free legal services be provided to sex-workers through the State Legal Services
Authorities. Thus, this Bill proposes to implement the aforesaid order of the honourable
Supreme Court.
The salient features of the Sex Workers (Rehabilitation and Social Security) Bill, 2015,
inter-alia are—
/circle6The sex-workers shall not be discriminated against in any field.
/circle6Quality healthcare shall be provided to the sex-workers and their children in form of
free medical aid/medication for HIV and other life threatening disesases which are
caused because of the trade.
/circle6Free social and legal aid shall be provided to sex-workers in distress.
/circle6The State shall set up institutes to facilitate adult literacy programmes.
/circle6A comprehensive educational programme is proposed to be set up for the children of
sex-workers who face gross discrimination and abuse alike to their parent(s).
/circle6There shall be provisions for rehabilitation for ailing and/or aged sex-workers, who are
unable to support themselves through earnings from commercial sex. This age bracket
of sex-workers desperately seek income and social security, as many of them have no
family or savings to fall back on in their old age.
/circle6The sex-workers shall be given training and vocational education to enhance their
skills and make them employable.
8

9
/circle6The Government shall provide financial security to the sex workers by initiating special
loan programmes for them.
Hence this Bill.
NEW DELHI; POONAM  MAHAJAN
November 16,  2015.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for constitution of the Central and State Boards for
Rehabilitation of sex workers. Clause 6 provides that Board shall take certain rehabilitation
measures for sex workers. Clause 7 provides that the Board shall take appropriate measures
for identification of newly joined in profession of sex workers, implementation of rehabilitation
plans in co-ordination of district agencies. Clause 11 provides for salary and allowances of
the Chairperson and Members of the Board and officers and staff of the Board. Clause 13
provides for providing of quality healthcare to sex workers and their children. Clause 15
provides that Board shall take steps to free social and legal aid to sex workers in distress.
Clause 16 provides for educational and other facilities for sex workers. Clause 17 provides for
educational facilities for children of sex workers. Clause 18 provides for vocational training to
sex workers. Clause 19 provides for extending of financial security to sex workers and their
children.
The expenditure relating to States Boards constituted in the States shall be borne out
of  the Consolidated Fund of the respective States. However, the expenditure in respect of
Union Territories shall be borne out of the Consolidated Fund of India. The Bill, therefore, if
enacted, would involve expenditure of about rupees Five Hundred Crore per annum from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees One Hundred Crore is also likely to be
involved.
10

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLATION
Clause 21 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only,  the delegation
of Legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
11

GMGIPMRND—3563LS(S-3)—14.12.2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the rehabilitation and social security of sex-workers and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shrimati  Poonam Mahajan, M.P .)