1
Short title  and
commencement.
Bill No. 317 of  2016
THE IMPORT OF CONSUMER GOODS (REGULATION)
BILL, 2016
By
SHRI PRAHLAD SINGH PATEL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for institutional mechanism to regulate import of consumer goods
having potential to cause harm to the well being of citizens.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Import of Consumer Goods (Regulation)  Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) 'Committee' means the Committee for Regulation of Import of Consumer
Goods constituted under section 4; and
(b) 'prescribed' means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. No importer, whether in individual capacity or as a body corporate, shall import any
product or consumer goods for use or consumption by human or animals into India without
obtaining the clearance certificate from the Committee.
4. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Committee to be known as the
Committee for Regulation of Import of Consumer Goods to regulate the import of products
or consumer goods into India.
(2) The Committee shall consist of a Chairperson and such number of other members
as may be prescribed.
(3) The Central Government shall provide such number of officers and staff to the
Committee as may be necessary to discharge its functions efficiently.
5. Every importer shall apply to the Committee for clearance certificate for importing
any product or consumer goods into India in such form and manner as may be prescribed.
6. The Committee shall—
(i) entertain application from importers for clearance certificate to import any
product or consumer goods for use or consumption by human or animals into India;
(ii) examine the applications received under clause (i);
(iii) issue clearance certificate, if satisfied with quality and purpose of importing
a product or consumer goods into India, within a period of one month from the date of
receipt of application under section 5;
(iv) reject application, if not satisfied with quality and purpose of importing
product or consumer goods, within a period of one month from the date of receipt of
application under section 5, after giving an opportunity of being heard to the applicant;
(v) take help of experts to assess the qualities or harmful effects of use or
consumption of any product or consumer goods by human or animals; and
(vi) specify products and consumer goods which are not to be imported into
India.
7. (1) Any importer who is aggrieved by the decision of the Committee may prefer an
appeal to such Authority as may be so designated by the Central Government and the
Authority shall dispose of the appeal within a period of one month from the date of its filing.
(2) The Appellate Authority shall give an opportunity of being heard to every importer
while deciding the appeal under sub-section (1).
8. Any person who indulges in any activity of importing consumer goods into India
without obtaining clearance certificate from the Committee shall be punished with imprisonment
for a term which may extend upto one year and with fine which may extend upto rupees fifty
thousand.
9. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law, for the time being in force, regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act.
Application
for clearance
certificate for
importing of
consumer
goods.
Definitions.
Clearance
certificate for
importing
consumer
goods.
Constitution
of the
Committee
for Regulation
of Import of
Consumer
Goods.
Functions of
the
Committee.
Appeal.
Penalty.
Act not to be
in derogation
of other Laws.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
10. (1) The Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to make
rules.
5
10

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
After the liberalization of economic policies including import and export of products or
consumer goods, it has been witnessed that quality and standards of such products or
consumer goods are not fit for human consumption or consumption by animals and also
hazardous to environment. Therefore, there is an urgent need for evolving some mechanism
to regulate import of consumer goods into India and prevent the country from becoming a
dumping ground of foreign goods. The Bill seeks to regulate import of consumer goods into
India by constituting a Committee for the purpose and to check the uninterrupted importing
of consumer goods affecting not only well being of citizens but also causing harm to our
environment.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; PRAHLAD SINGH PATEL
November 15, 2016.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for constitution of the Committee for Regulation of Import
of Consumer Goods by the Central Government. It further provides that the Central Government
shall provide necessary officers and staff to the Committee.
The Bill,  therefore,  if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees five crore may be involved as recurring expenditure
per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees three crore is likely to be involved.
5

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATGED  LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central  Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for institutional mechanism to regulate import of consumer goods
having potential to cause harm to the well being of citizens.
————
(Shri Prahlad Singh Patel, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3406LS(S3)—02-12-2016.