1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 318 of  2016
THE SPECIAL COURTS FOR TRIAL OF OFFENCES
AGAINST WOMEN BILL, 2016
By
SHRIMATI SUPRIYA SULE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for constitution of special courts for trial of cases of offences
of sexual violence against  women in order to ensure speedy
disposal of such cases and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Special Courts for Trial of Offences Against Women
Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the State Government
and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(c) "sexual violence" refers to offences referred to in sections 292, 354, 354A,
354B, 354C, 354D, 375, 376, 376A, 376B, 376C, 376D, 376E and 509 of Indian Penal
Code, 1860; and
(d) "special court" means a Court constituted under section 3 to exclusively try
cases of offences of sexual violence against women.
3. The appropriate Government shall, within six months of the coming into force of
this Act, constitute in every district a special court to exclusively try cases of sexual
violence.
4. The selection criteria for appointment of Judges in the special courts and the term of
office and other conditions of service of such Judges shall be such as the appropriate
Government may, in consultation with High Court, specify.
5. The number of Judges to be appointed in any special court shall be such as the High
Court may, in consultation with State Government, specify, after taking into consideration
the backlog of cases of sexual violence in that special court.
6. Every case or other proceeding relating to offences of sexual violence pending
before any court or other authority immediately before the date of constitution of a special
court under this Act shall stand transferred on that date to the special court of appropriate
jurisdiction:
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to any appeal pending as
aforesaid before a High Court.
7. (1) The appropriate Government shall coordinate with the National Law Universities
and other Law colleges in the State in order to allow final year law students to intern at the
special courts.
(2) The law students, as intern, shall assist in disposal of cases, other than cases
under sections 375, 376, 376A, 376B, 376C, 376D and 376E of the Indian Penal code,
1860, being tried in special courts, in such manner, as may be prescribed.
8. (1) The charge sheet of offence of sexual violence shall be filed within such period,
not exceeding thirty days, as the appropriate Government may specify:
Provided that in case of delay in filing the charge sheet, the Investigating Officer
shall submit before the special court the reasons of such delay.
(2) Where the delay in filing charge sheet is caused due to negligence on the part of
the Investigating Officer or some other person, such Investigating Officer or that person
shall be punished with simple imprisonment which may extend upto six months or with fine
or with both.
9. The special court shall decide the case of sexual violence within such period, not
exceeding one hundred and twenty days from the date of filing of charge sheet, as the
appropriate Government may specify.
10. Any person aggrieved by the order of the special court may file an appeal to the
High Court within sixty days from the date of order:
Provided that the High Court may, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented
by sufficient cause from filing an appeal within the said period, allow it to be filed
within a further period not exceeding sixty days.
Definitions.
Constitution
of special
courts.
Selection
criteria for
appointment
of Judges.
Number of
Judges in
special courts.
45 of 1860.
45 of 1860.
Transfer of
pending cases.
Law students
to assist special
courts.
Time limits
for filing of
charge
sheet.
Time limit for
deciding cases
by special
court.
Appeal in High
Court.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
11. The appropriate Government shall take such measures, as may be prescribed, to
increase awareness amongst women about the legal safeguards against, and the legal
provisions relating to, eve-teasing and sexual violence.
12. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, provide adequate funds for the implementation of the provisions of the Act.
13. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument having
effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.
14. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law, for the time being in force, regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act.
15. (1) The Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of  the session immediately following the session or  the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Increasing
awareness.
Central
Government
to provide
adequate
funds.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Act not to be in
derogation of
other Laws.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In Madheshwardhari Singh and Anr., vs State of  Bihar 1986, the Supreme Court upheld
the right to speedy trial as a fundamental right. But not much progress has been achieved by
the courts in disposing civil and criminal cases. The total number of pending cases in High
Courts and subordinate courts, by the end of 2014, was more than three crore. Of these
pending cases, 9.2% are pending for more than ten years.
The main reasons for pendency of cases are vacancies, inadeqauate judge strength,
lack of physical infrastructure and large influx of new cases into Courts. According to the
data collected by the National Crime Records Bureau, as many as 3,37,922 cases of crimes
against women were registered in 2014. This is an increase of 9.2% from the registered crimes
against women in 2013. Crimes committed under the Indian Penal Code (IPC) against women,
as proportion of total crimes, have increased to 11.4% in 2014.
The voluminous nature of pending cases and the resultant delay in the delivery of
justice to the victims encourage criminals to commit crimes. Criminal justice system as a
mechanism to check the crime rate has been rendered ineffective due to time lags in disposal
of cases.
One way to tackle the problem is to have special courts dealing with cases of crimes
against women. After the Delhi gang rape case of 2012, the Union Law ministry directed the
States to set up fast track Courts to deal with such crimes against women. Despite such
efforts, backlog of cases continues to persist.
This Bill aims to define the role and  responsibilities of these Fast Track Courts to
augment them in their functioning. Its objective is enable women victims to realise their right
to speedy delivery of justice.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SUPRIYA  SULE
October 10, 2016.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for establishment of special courts at the district level.
Clause 5 provides for appointment of judges in special courts. Clause 7 provides that law
students, as intern, shall assist in disposal of certain type of cases in special courts. Clause 11
provides that the appropriate Government shall take measures to create awareness amongst
women about the legal safeguards and provisions relating to eve-teasing and sexual violence.
Clause 12 provides that the Central Government shall provide adequate funds to the State
Government for effective implementation of this Act. The expenditure in respect of special
courts in Union territories shall be met out of the Consolidated Fund of India and the
expenditure in respect of special courts in States will be met out of the Consolidated Fund of
the respective States. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees two thousand crore would be
involved as recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 15 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for constitution of special courts for trial of cases of offences
of sexual violence against  women in order to ensure speedy
disposal of such cases and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shrimati Supriya Sule, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3450LS(S3)—02-12-2016.