1
Short title
and
commencement.
Bill No.  318  of  2015
THE  MOTOR VEHICLES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI DUSHYANT CHAUTALA, M.P.
A
BILL
Further to amend the Motor V ehicles Act, 1988.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Motor Vehicles (Amendment)  Act, 2015.
(2)  It shall come into force on such date as Central Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In this Motor Vehicle Act, 1988 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in
section 2, after clause (17), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘‘(17A) Institute of Driving Training and Research’’ means an institution
established under sector 215A.’’.
   5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Amendment
of section 2.
59 of 1988

2
3.  After section 215 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘‘215A. (1) The Central Government for every district in the Union territories and
the State Government concerned for every district in the State, shall, by notification in the
Official Gazette, establish at least one Institute of Driving Training and Research for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every Institute of Driving Training and Research established under sub-section
(1), shall discharge the following functions—
(a) impart training to persons who intend to seek driving licence;
(b) providing periodical refresher course to the drivers;
(c) undertake research on road safety; and
(d) any other function as may be assigned to it by the Central Government or the
State Government, as the case may be.’’.
Insertion of
new section
215A.
Establishment
of Institutes
of Driving
Training and
Research in
every
district.
5
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
According to the Report titled ‘‘Road Accidents in India, 2013’’ of the Union Ministry
of Road Transport and Highways, the total number of reported road accidents in the year
2012 and 2013 were 4,90,383 and 4,86,476, respectively, and the number of persons killed were
1,38,258 and 1,37,572, respectively. Further, the Severity of accidents (number of persons
killed per 100 accidents) for the years 2012 and 2013 was 28.2 and 28.3, respectively. The data
indicates that despite the reduction in the number of persons killed during 2013, the accident
severity had increased as compared to the previous year.
It has also been noticed that for the year 2013, about 78 per cent. of the road accidents
were caused due to human errors i.e. due to fault of drivers. These statistics clearly indicate
that many drivers who have been given the licence to drive are not properly trained.
Thus, today the country needs an institutional mechanism which can impart holistic
training to the licence seekers as well as to the drivers. These institutions shall educate these
persons the correct method of driving, get them acquainted with different driving environment
and make them educated about road safety rules and regulations. Further, such institutions
shall also conduct research and surveys for developing a better road safety guidelines and
techniques.
A scheme for setting up a model driving training institute was formulated by the
Government and during the 11th Five Year Plan, eight Institutes of Driving Training and
research were sanctioned. However, as on date, only three are functional. Hence, there is a
need that such institutions in large number with at least one institute per district in the
country be established.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Motor V ehicles Act, 1988 with a view to establish
at least one institute of Driving Training and Research in each district of the country so that
the number of road accidents and consequently the number of deaths in road accidents can
be brought down in the country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; DUSHYANT CHAUTALA
November 18, 2015.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to provide for establishment of at least one Institute of
Driving Training and Research by Central Government in each district in the Union territories
and State Governments in every district of the State to impart training to persons intending
to seek driving licence. The expenditure in relating to the State shall be borne from the
Consolidated Funds of the respective States and expenditure relating to Union territories
shall be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would
involve expenditure of about rupees fifty two crore and forty lakhs per annum from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees forty four crore is also likely to be involved.
4

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988.
————
(Shri Dushyant Chautala,  M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2941LS(S3)—08-12-2015.