1
THE ORPHAN CHILD (PROVISION OF SOCIAL SECURITY)
BILL, 2016
By
SHRI VINOD KUMAR BOIANAPALLI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for social security and welfare measures to orphan children and for
matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1)  This Act may be called the Orphan Child (Provision of Social Security) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 319 of  2016
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
Definitions.
National
policy for
welfare of
orphan
children.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "child" means a child who has not completed the age of eighteen years;
(c) "foster care home" means foster care home established under section 8; and
(d) "orphan child" means a child who has been abondoned or has lost both
parents or whose parents' identity is not known and includes a child who is not part of
a family either natural or foster;
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, in consultation with State Governments, conduct
and publish the survey of orphan children after every ten years alongwith census.
(2) The survey conducted under sub-section ( 1) shall include—
(a) socio-economic status of orphan children;
(b) data on the cause and effect of becoming orphans;
(c) Demographic profile of orphan children; and
(d) performance appraisal of existing orphan children welfare schemes and
programmes.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, within one year of the publication of the survey
under section 3, formulate a National Policy for the welfare of orphan children.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the National Policy
referred to in sub-section (1) may provide for—
(a) placing orphan children in a family setting either through reunion with their
natural parents or relatives or through adoption by foster ones;
(b) establishment of a robust system of institutional care for orphan children
who are unable to be reintegrated in a family setting;
(c) evolution of a preventive approach to the phenomenon of children becoming
orphans;
(d) development of a tracking system for identification of families of abandoned
children to facilitate reunification;
(e) development of psychological and other support system to prevent
abandoning of children by parents due to poverty, deprivation and other such factors;
(f) universalising the Cradle Baby Reception Centre scheme and its mandatory
inclusion in every public health centre in the country;
(g) counselling facilities at the Cradle Baby Reception Centres to link parents to
relevant welfare schemes;
(h) simplification and reform of the adoption system by foster parents;
(i) conducting awareness campaigns in high risk districts informing the parents
about the Governmental assistance;
(j) training and capacity building to health workers to cater to the complex
psychosocial needs of orphan children;
(k) specialised attention to orphan children suffering from vulnerable diseases
like HIV and other communicable diseases and to orphan children living in militancy
and naxal affected areas;
Central
Government
to conduct
survey of
orphan
children.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(l) post-institutional support to ensure education, skill training and livelihood to
orphan children;
(m) grants-in-aid to foster care homes and Non-Governmental Organisations
working for the orphan children;
(n) stringent monitoring of foster care institutions to prevent any kind of emotional,
physical or sexual abuse of orphan children;
(o) Strict and Swift punishment to child abusers in foster care institutions;
(p) issuance of single and multi-purpose 'orphan certificate' containing therein,
if available, such information as date of birth, nativity, parental status and family
surname to ensure enjoyment of legal rights, entitlements and benefits;
(q) linkage of all orphan-related agencies such as cradle baby centres, adoption
centres and foster care homes with authorities that issue orphan certificates;
(r) promoting awareness about legal rights and entitlements of orphan children;
and
(s) such other provisions as may be deemed necessary and expedient for carrying
out the purposes of this Act.
5. It shall be the duty of  the appropriate Government to implement the National Policy
for welfare of orphan children formulated under section 4.
6. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the Official
Gazette, constitute a Fund to be known as the Orphan Children Welfare Fund for the
purposes of this Act with an initial corpus of rupees two thousand crores, to be provided by
the Central Government, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf.
(2) The Fund shall also include,—
(a) contributions made by the Central Government and State Governments in
such ratio, as may be prescribed;
(b) money received by way of donations, contributions, assistance or otherwise
from individuals, body corporates, domestic and foreign financial institutions.
(3) The contributions to the Fund by the private institutions shall be exempted from
income tax and such institutions shall be provided such fiscal incentives by the
Central Government, as may be prescribed.
(4) The Fund shall be utilised for rehabilitation and welfare of orphan children in such
manner as may be prescribed.
7. There shall be three per cent. reservation in educational institutions and in posts
and services under the Central Government for orphan children.
8. (1) The appropriate Government shall establish such number of foster care homes
as may be necessary for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The foster care homes established under sub-section (1) shall provide free of cost
boarding and lodging and such other facilities to the orphan children as may be prescribed.
9. (1) The appropriate Government shall designate a nodal officer in every district to
ensure effective implementation of all the schemes and policies meant for welfare of orphan
children;
(2) Every nodal officer shall submit to the appropriate Government an annual report
containing such details, as may be prescribed, of welfare measures provided to orphan
children in the district.
Appropriate
Government
to implement
the National
policy.
Constitution
of an Orphan
Children
Welfare Fund.
Reservation in
Educational
Institutions
and in posts
and services.
Establishment
of foster care
homes.
Nodal officer
to ensure
welfare
schemes in
every district.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
(3) The appropriate Government shall, if satisfied that schemes and policies are not
being implemented properly, remove from the office, the nodal officer for dereliction of duty:
Provided that no criminal proceedings shall be initiated against the nodal officer who
is removed from office.
10. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament, by
law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
11. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
12. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
13. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session, or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20

5
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
At present there is no comprehensive legislation or policy that addresses the issues
faced by orphan children in India. As a result of this they face several difficulties. The
foremost difficulty in this regard is lack of identity. This causes many problems in daily civic
life and acts as a barrier to access public services and benefits of Government schemes and
entitlements.
The lack of identity proof touches upon a more fundamental issue regarding orphan
children. The present Bill seeks to provide for formulation of a comprehensive legislation
covering the needs of orphans, in general, but focuses primarily upon the needs of the
orphan children who are at high risk of abuse, exploitation and neglect. Moreover, being a
welfare State, it is obligatory upon the State to provide care, shelter and succor to this tender
and helpless category of society.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; VINOD KUMAR BOIANAPALLI
August 7, 2015.
————
PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 117(1) AND 117(3) OF
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
[Copy of letter No. 31/117/2015-CW-I dated 31 October, 2016 from
Shrimati Maneka Sanjay Gandhi, Minister of  Women and Child Development to the
Secretary General, Lok Sabha].
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of Orphan Child
(Provision of Social Security) Bill, 2016 by Shri Vinod Kumar Boianapalli, Member of
Parliament, recommends to the Hosue the introduction and the consideration of the Bill
under articles 117(1) and 117(3) of the Constitution, respectively.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for survey of orphan children. Clause 4 provides for
formulation of a national policy for the welfare of orphan children. Clause 6 provides for
constitution of an Orphan Children Welfare Fund. Clause 8 provides for establishment of
foster care homes to provide free food, lodging and other requisite amenities to orphans.
Clause 10 provides that the Central Government shall provide adequate funds to the
State Governments for carrying out the purposes of the Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted,
would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of
rupees two thousand crore would be involved as recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty thousand crore is also likely to be
involved.
6

7
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 13 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules to be made relate to matters of detail only, the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for social security and welfare measures to orphan children and for
matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Vinod Kumar Boianapalli, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2385LS(S3)—05-12-2016.