Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 319 of  2015
THE HINDU SUCCESSION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI DUSHY ANT CHAUTALA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Hindu Succession Act, 1956.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. For section 15 of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), the following section shall be substituted, namely:—
"15. (1) The property of a female Hindu dying intestate shall devolve according
to the rules set out in section 16,—
(a) firstly, upon the sons and daughters (including the children of any
pre-deceased son or daughter);
(b) secondly, upon the mother, father and husband;
(c) thirdly, upon the heirs of the husband and the heirs of the father; and
(d) lastly, upon the heirs of the mother.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),—
(a) any property inherited by a female Hindu from her father or mother
shall devolve, in the absence of any son or daughter of the deceased (including
the children of any pre-deceased son or daughter) not upon the other heirs
referred to in sub-section (1) in the order specified therein, but upon the heirs of
the father, if inherited from her father and upon the heirs of the mother, if inherited
from her mother;
(b) any property inherited by a female Hindu from her husband or from her
father-in-law shall devolve, in the absence of son or daughter begotten from the
husband from whom or from whose father she inherited the property (including
the children of any pre-deceased son or daugher) not upon the other heirs
referred to in sub-section (1) in the order specified therein, but upon the heirs of
the husband; and
(c) any property self-acquired by a female Hindu during the time of desertion
shall devolve, in the absence of any son or daughter of the deceased (including
the children of any pre-deceased son or daughter) not upon the other heirs
referred to in sub-section (1) in the order specified therein, but upon the heirs of
the father and the mother.".
3.  After section 22 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
"23. Any heir who is related to an intestate as the widow of a pre-deceased son,
the widow of a pre-deceased son of a pre-deceased son or the widow of a brother shall
not be entitled to succeed to the property of the intestate as such widow, if on the date
the succession opens, she has remarried.".
4. (1) In the Schedule to the principal Act—
(i) under the sub-heading "Class I", for the words "mother; son of  a pre-deceased
son; daughter of a pre-deceased son;", the words "mother; father; son of a
pre-deceased son; daughter of a pre-deceased son; son of a pre-deceased son of a
pre-deceased daughter; son of a pre-deceased daughter of a pre-deceased son;" shall
be substituted.
(ii) for the sub-heading "Class II and entries I to IX thereunder", the following
sub-heading and entries thereunder shall be substituted, namely:—
"Class II
I. (1) Brother, (2) sister.
II. (1) Brother's son, (2) sister's son, (3) brother's daughter, (4) sister's daughter.
III. Father's father; father's mother.
Insertion of
section 24.
Substitution
of new
section for
section 15.
General rules
of succession
in the case of
female
Hindus.
Amendment
of the
Schedule.
Certain
widows
remarrying
may not
inherit as
widows.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

3
IV . Father's widow; brother's widow.
V. Father's brother; father’s sister.
VI. Mother's father; mother's mother.
VII. Mother’s brother; mother’s sister.".

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Hindu Succession Act, 1956 provides for certain criteria for the succession of the
property of a female Hindu dying intestate. However, the same has not been implemented in
its true spurt. The need is that property should not lose the real source from where the
deceased female had inherited it.
The rules of inheritance prescribed under the Act are based on the principles of
closeness in relationship and love and affection. As parents are as much near as husband, so
both should be given equal importance during the succession of property of female Hindus
dying intestate.
As female Hindu inherits property from parent as well as husband, therefore, after her
death her property should be succeeded by both of them. There is no difference between
mother and father as far as love and importance in life is concerned. So both should be
treated equally during the succession and distribution of property of the female Hindu.
Moreover, one should not take the benefit of its own wrong. So property can not be
given to the delinquent husband who deserted his wife in her lifetime.
The Bill therefore, seeks to amend the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 with a view to
provide equal rights to the parents of a female Hindu dying intestate at par with the husband
in succession to her property. The Bill also seeks to re-insert the provision pertaining to
restriction on the inheritance of the certain widows, who, on the date of opening of succession
has got remarried.
N
EW DELHI; DUSHYANT CHAUTALA
November 18, 2015.
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE HINDU SUCCESSION ACT, 1956 (ACT NO. 30 OF 1956)
* * * * * * *
15. (1) The property of a female Hindu dying intestate shall develove according to the
rules set out in section 16,—
(a) firstly, upon the sons and daughters (including the children of any pre-
deceased son or daughter) and the husband;
(b) secondly, upon the heirs of the husband;
(c) thirdly, upon the mother and father;
(d) fourthly, upon the heirs of the father; and
(e) lastly, upon the heirs of the mother.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),—
(a) any property inherited by a female Hindu from her father or mother shall
devolve, in the absence of any son or daughter of the deceased (including the children
of any pre-deceased son or daughter) not upon the other heirs referred to in
sub-section (1) in the order specified therein, but upon the heirs of the fathers; and
(b) any property inherited by a female Hindu from her husband or from her
father-in-law shall devlove, in the absence of any son or daughter of the deceased
(including the children of any predeceased son or daughter) not upon the other heirs
referred to in sub-section (1) in the order specified therein, but upon the heirs of the
husband.
* * * * * * *
THE SCHEDULE
[Section 8]
HEIRS IN CLASS I  AND  CLASS II
CLASS I
Son; daughter; widow; mother; son of a pre-deceased son; daughter of a pre-deceased
son; son of a pre-deceased daughter; daughter of a pre-deceased daughter; widow of a
pre-deceased son; son of a pre-deceased son of a pre-deceased son; daughter of a
pre-deceased son of a pre-deceased son; widow of a pre-deceased son of a pre-deceased
son.
CLASS II
I. Father.
II. (1) Son's daughter’s son, (2) son's daughter's daughter, (3) brother, (4) sister.
III. (1) Daughter's son's son, (2) daughter's son’s daughter, (3) daughter's daughter’s
son, (4) daughter's daughter's daughter.
IV. (1) Brother's son, (2) sister's son, (3) brother's daughter, (4) sister's daughter.
V . Father's father, father's mother.
5
General rules
of succession
in the case of
female
Hindus.

6
VI. Father's widow; brother's widow.
VII. Father's brother; father's sister.
VIII. Mother's father; mother's mother.
IX. Mother's brother; mother’s sister.
Explanation:— In this Schedule, references to a brother or sister do not include
references to a brother or sister by uterine blood.
* * * * * * *

GMGIPMRND—2935LS(S3)—08-12-2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Hindu Succession Act, 1956.
————
(Shri Dushyant Chautala, M.P .)