1
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 319 of  2019
THE FOOD SAFETY AND STANDARDS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
By
SHRI PARVESH SAHIB SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Food Safety and Standards (Amendment) Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 50 of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 (hereinafter referred to as
the principal Act),—
(a) for the words  "not exceeding five lakh rupees", the words "not less than five
lakh rupees" shall be substituted; and
(b) in the proviso, for the words "not exceeding twenty five thousand rupees",
the words "not less than twenty-five thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Amendment of
section 50.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
 5
10
34 of 2006.

2
3. In section 51 of the principal Act, for the words "shall be liable to penalty which may
extend to five lakh rupees", the words "shall be liable to imprisonment which may extend to
six months and also with penalty which may extend to ten lakh rupees" shall be substituted.
4. In section 52 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words "shall be liable to
penalty which may extend to three lakh rupees", the words "shall be liable to imprisonment
which may extend to three months and also penalty which shall not be less than five lakh
rupees" shall be substituted.
5. In section 53 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words "shall be liable to
a penalty which may extend to ten lakh rupees", the words "shall be liable to imprisonment
which may extend to two years and also a penalty which shall not less than ten lakh rupees"
shall be substituted.
6. In section 54 of the principal Act, for the words "shall be liable to a penalty which
may extend to one lakh rupees", the words "shall be liable to imprisonment which may extend
to three months and also with penalty which may extend to ten lakh rupees" shall be
substituted.
7. In section 55 of the principal Act, for the words "shall be liable to a penalty which
may extend to two lakh rupees", the words "shall be liable to imprisonment which may extend
to three years and also with penalty which may extend to ten lakh rupees" shall be substituted.
8. In section 56 of the principal Act, for the words "shall be liable to a penalty which
may extend to one lakh rupees", the words "shall be liable to imprisonment which may extend
to six month and also with penalty which may extend to five lakh rupees" shall be substituted.
9. In section 57 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),—
(a) in clause (i), for the words "to a penalty not exceeding two lakh rupees", the
words "to imprisonment which may extend to six months and also with penalty which
may extend to ten lakh rupees" shall be substituted; and
(b) in clause (ii), for the words "to a penalty not exceeding ten lakh rupees", the
words "to imprisoment which may extend to seven years and also with penalty which
may extend to one crore rupees" shall be substituted.
10. In section 58 of the principal Act, for the word "two lakh rupees", the words "five
lakh rupees" shall be substituted.
11. In section 59 of the principal Act,—
(a) in clause (i), for the words "six months and also with fine which may extend
to one lakh rupees", the words "three years and also with fine which may extend to five
lakh rupees" shall be substituted;
(b) in clause (ii), for the words, "one year and also with fine which may extend to
three lakh rupees", the words "five years and also with fine which may extend to ten
lakh rupees" shall be substituted;
(c) in clause (iii), for the words, "six years and also with fine which may extend
to five lakh rupees", the words "ten years and also with fine which may extend to
fifteen lakh rupees" shall be substituted; and
(d) in clause (iv), for the words, "with imprisonment for a term which shall not
less than seven years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and also with fine
which shall not be less than ten lakh rupees", the word "with death, or imprisonment
for life, and also with fine which may extend to fifty lakh rupees" shall be substituted.
12. In section 60 of the principal Act, for the word "shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months and also with a fine which may
extend to two lakh rupees", the words "shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to three years and also with a fine which may extend to fifteen lakh rupees"
shall be substituted.
Amendment of
section 51.
Amendment of
section 52.
Amendment of
section 53.
Amendment of
section 54.
Amendment of
section 55.
Amendment of
section 56.
Amendment of
section 57.
Amendment of
section 58.
Amendment of
section 59.
Amendment of
section 60.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
13. In section 61 of the principal Act, for the words "shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three month and also with fine which may
extend to two lakh rupees", the words "shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to one year and also with a fine which may extend to five lakh rupees" shall
be substituted.
14. In section 62 of the principal Act, for the words "shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three month and also with a fine which may
extend to one lakh rupees", the words "shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to two years and also with a fine which may extent to five lakh rupees"
shall be substituted.
15. In section 63 of the principal Act, for the words "shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six month and also with a fine which may extend
to five lakh rupees", the words "shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to three years and also with a fine which may extend to twenty five lakh rupees" shall
be substituted.
16. In section 65 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),—
(i) in clause (a), for the words "five lakh rupees", the words "twenty-five lakh
rupees" shall be substituted;
(ii) in clause ( b), for the words "three lakh rupees", the words "fifteen lakh
rupees" shall be substituted; and
(iii) in clause (c), for the words "one lakh rupees", the words "five lakh rupees"
shall be substituted.
17. After section 67 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted,
namely:—
"67A. In every case, of an offence punishable with imprisonment as well as fine,
in which the offender is sentenced to a fine, whether with or without imprisonment,
and in every case of an offence punishable with imprisonment or fine, or with fine only,
in which the offender is sentenced to a fine, it shall be competent to the Court which
sentences such offender to direct by the sentence that, in default at payment of the
fine, the offender shall suffer imprisonment for a certain term, in which imprisonment
shall be in excess of any other imprisonment to which he may have been sentenced or
to which he may be liable under a commutation of a sentence.
67B. The term for which the Court directs the offender to be imprisoned in
default of payment of a fine shall not be less than one-half of the term of imprisonment
which is the maximum fixed for the offence, if the offence be punishable with
imprisonment as well as fine.
67C. Where the offence is punishable with fine only, the imprisonment which the
Court imposes in default of payment of the fine shall be proportional to the fine.
67D. The imprisonment which is imposed in default of payment of a fine shall
terminate whenever that fine is either paid or levied by process of law.".
Amendment of
section 61.
Amendment of
section 62.
Amendment of
section 63.
Amendment of
section 65.
Insertion of
new section
67A, 67B, 67C
and 67D.
Sentence of
imprisonment
for non-
payment of
fine.
Extension of
imprisonment
for non-
payment of
fine.
Imprisonment
for non-
payment of
fine when
offence
punishable with
fine only.
Imprisonment
to terminate on
payment of
fine.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Food adulteration is a wide spread problem in our country, however, it fails to attract
attention proportional to the magnitude of threat it poses. Past instances have left thousands
with chronic health problems often resulting in complete inability to work, sometimes even
death. Several Commissions and Panels (including the B.S. Chauhan panel set up by the
Hon'ble Supreme Court) have called for stricter provisions to prevent food adulteration. The
Law Commission has also recommended amendment to Indian Penal Code i.e. sections 272
(dealing with adulteration of food and drinks) and 273 (dealing with the sale of noxious food
and drinks) for making it a much serious offence.
Food adulteration, which is an act (incidental or intentional) of adding chemicals or
any unrequired extraneous materials that makes it unfit for consumption, is so prevalent that
the FSSAI in its survey found twenty five per cent, of the food samples unsafe for human
consumption. Basic items like milk and cooking oil were the most adulterated. This poses a
massive threat to India at a time when it is on the verge of reaping benefits of its demographic
dividend. India cannot afford to compromise on the health of its citizens, especially children,
and therefore it imperative to strengthen the Food Safety Standards Act, 2006.
The Bill seeks to amend the Food Safety Standards Act, 2006 to introduce graver
punishments and penalties for offenders. It also introduces death penalty for offenders who
manufacture, store or sell adulterated food which results in death of the consumer. The Bill
also enhances the amount of penalties up to rupees fifty lakhs and amount of compensation
to rupees twenty-five lakhs. An act of food adulteration has the potential of taking lives, we
shall ensure that the magnitude of the punishment be such that it can deter such heinous
acts.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; PARVESH  SAHIB  SINGH
November 6, 2019
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE FOOD SAFETY AND  STANDARDS ACT, 2016
(34 OF 2006)
* * * * * *
50. Penalty for selling food not of the nature or substance or quality demanded.-Any
person who sells to the purchaser's prejudice any food which is not in compliance with the
provisions of this Act or the regulations made thereunder, or of the nature or substance or
quality demanded by the purchaser. Shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding five lakh
rupees:
Provided that the persons covered under sub-section (2) of section 31, shall for such
non-compliance be liable to a penalty not exceeding twenty-five thousand rupees.
* * * * * *
51. Any person who whether by himself or by any other person on his behalf
manufactures for sale or stores or sells or distributes or imports any article of food for human
consumption which is sub-standard, shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to five lakh
rupees.
* * * * * *
52. (1) Any person who whether by himself or by any other person on his behalf
manufactures for sale or stores or sells or distributes or imports any article of food for human
consumption which is misbranded, shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to three lakh
rupees.
(2) The Adjudicating Officer may issue a direction to the person found guilty of an
offence under this section, for taking corrective action to rectify the mistake or such article of
food shall be destroyed.
* * * * * *
53. (1) Any person who publishes, or is a party to the publication of an advertisement,
which—
(a) falsely describes any food; or
(b) is likely to mislead as to the nature or substance or quality of any food or
gives false guarantee.
shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to ten lakh rupees.
(2) In any proceeding the fact that a lable or advertisement relating to any article of
food in respect of which the contravention is alleged to have been committed contained an
accurate statement of the composition of the food shall not preclude the court from finding
that the contravention was committed.
* * * * * *
54. Any person whether by himself or by any other person on his behalf manufactures
for sale or stores or sells or distributes or imports any article of food for human consumption
containing extraneous matter, shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to one lakh
rupees.
* * * * * *
Penalty for
selling food
not of the
nature or
substance or
quality
demanded.
Penalty for
sub-standard
food.
Penalty for
misbranded
food.
Penalty for
misleading
advertisement.
Penalty for
food
containing
extraneous
matter.
5

6
55. If a food business operator or importer without reasonable ground, fails to comply
with the requirements of this Act or the rules or regulations or orders issued thereunder, as
directed by the Food Safety Officer, he shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to two
lakh rupees.
* * * * * *
56. Any person who, whether by himself or by any other person on his behalf,
manufactures or processes any article of food for human consumption under unhygienic or
unsanitary conditions, shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to one lakh rupees.
* * * * * *
57. (1) Subject to the provisions of this chapter, if any person who whether by himself
or by any other person on his behalf, imports or manufactures for sale, or stores, sells or
distribute any adulterant shall be liable—
(i) where such adulterant is not injurious to health, to a penalty not exceeding
two lakh rupees;
(ii) where such adulterant is injurious to health, to a penalty not exceeding ten
lakh rupees.
(2) In a proceeding under sub-section ( 1), it shall not be a defence that the accused
was holding such adulterant on behalf of any other person.
* * * * * *
58. Whoever contravenes any provisions of this Act or the rules or regulations made
thereunder, for the contravention of which no penalty has been separately provided in this
Chapter, shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to two lakh rupees.
* * * * * *
59. Any person who, whether by himself or by any other person on his behalf,
manufactures for sale or stores or sells or distributes or imports any article of food for human
consumption which is unsafe, shall be punishable,—
(i) where such failure or contravention does not result in injury, with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to six months and also with fine which may extend to one
lakh rupees;
(ii) where such failure or contravention results in a non-grievous injury, with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year and also with fine which may
extend to three lakh rupees;
(iii) where such failure or contravention results in a grievous injury, with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six years and also with fine which may
extend to five lakh rupees;
(iv) where such failure or contravention results in death, with imprisonment for
a term which shall not be less than seven years but which may extend to imprisonment
for life and also with fine which shall not be less than ten lakh rupees.
* * * * * *
60. If a person without the permission of the Food Safety Officer, retains, removes or
tampers with any food, vehicle, equipment, package or labelling or advertising material or
other thing that has been seized under this Act, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for
a term which may extend to six months and also with fine which may extend to two lakh
rupees.
* * * * * *
Penalty for
failure to
comply with
the directions
of Food Safety
Officer.
Penalty for
unhygienic or
unsanitary
processing or
manufacturing
of food.
Penalty for
possessing
adulterant.
Penalty for
contraventions
for which no
specific
penalty is
provided.
Punishment
for unsafe
food.
Punishment
for interfering
with seized
items.

7
61. If a person, in connection with a requirement or direction under this Act, provides
any information or produces any document that the person knows is false or misleading, he
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months and also
with fine which may extend to two lakh rupees.
* * * * * *
62. If a person without reasonable excuse, resists, obstructs, or attempts to obstruct,
impersonate, threaten, intimidate or assault a Food Safety Officer in exercising his functions
under this Act, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
three months and also with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees.
* * * * * *
63. If any person or food business operator [except the persons exempted from licensing
under sub-section (2) of section 31 of this Act], himself or by any person on his behalf who
is required to obtain licence, manufactures, sells, stores or distributes or imports any article
of food without licence, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to six months and also with a fine which may extend to five lakh rupees.
* * * * * *
65. (1) Without prejudice to the other provisions of this Chapter, if any person whether
by himself or by any other person on his behalf, manufactures or distributes or sells or
imports any article of food causing injury to the consumer or his death, it shall be lawful for
the Adjudicating Officer or as the case may be, the court to direct him to pay compensation
to the victim or the legal representative of the victim, a sum—
(a) not less than five lakh rupees in case of death;
(b) not exceeding three lakh rupees in case of grievious injury; and
(c) not exceeding one lakh rupees, in all other cases of injury: Provided that the
compensation shall be paid at the earliest and in no case later than six months from the
date of occurrence of the incident:
Provided further that in case of death, an interim relief shall be paid to the next of the
kin within thirty days of the incident.
(2) Where any person is held guilty of an offence leading to grievous injury or death,
the Adjudicating Officer or the court may cause the name and place of residence of the
person held guilty, the offence and the penalty imposed to be punished at the offender's
expense in such newspapers or in such other manner as the Adjudicating Officer or the court
may direct and the expenses of such publication shall be deemed to be part of the cost
attending the conviction and shall be recoverable in the same manner as a fine.
(3) The Adjudicating Officer or the court may also,—
(a) order for cancellation of licence, re-call of food from market, for feiture of
establishment and property in case of grievous injury or death of consumer;
(b) issue prohibition orders in other cases.
* * * * * *
96. A penalty imposed under this Act, if it is not paid, shall be recovered as an arrear of
land revenue and the defaulters licence shall be suspended till the penalty is paid.
* * * * * *
Punishment
for false
information.
Punishment
for obstructing
or
impersonating
a Food Safety
Officer.
Punishment
for carrying
out a business
without
licence.
Compensation
in case injury
or death of
consumer.
Recovery of
penalty.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006.
————
(Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—3188LS(S3)—18-11-2019.