Bill No. 31 of 7968 i
THE INSURANCE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1968
A वि
BILL

further to amend the Insurance Act, 1988, so as to provide for

the extension of social control aver insurers carrying on gene- \-
ral insurance business and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto and also to amend the Payment of Bonus

Act, 1965. ;

Bz it enacted by Parliament in the Nineteenth Year of the
Republic of India as follows

३. (1) This Act may be called the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 590५ ।

1968. title and

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern- renee

ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this ment.
behalf and different dates may be appointed for different provisions
ज्ण this-Act,

1760(B) LSSte eer pe pes


2

2. Ln section 3 of the Insurance Act, 1938 (hereinafter referred

Amend- 1

ment of to 88 the principal Act), in sub-section (4),

section 3, :
(i) in clause (४), the words “a class of” shall be omitted,
(it) after clause (४), the following clause shall be inserted,

namely: —
“(ee) if the Central Government so directs under sub-

section (4) of section 8357.

Amend- 3, In section 3A of the principal Act, in swo-section (2), for the

ment of words “which shall not exceed one thousand rupees for each clase

sectia 8A, of insurance business, but may vary according to the volume of
business done by the insurer in India in each class of insurance
business to which the registration relates”, the words “which may
vary according to the total premiums during the year preceding the
year in which the application is required to be made under this
section (including consideration for annuities, if any, Jess re-insur-
ances), of the insurer in the class of insurance business in India to
which the registration relates but shall not—

| exceed one-fourth of one per cent. of such premium

fricome, .

(६) be less, in any case, than five hundred rupees for each
dass of insurance business” shall be substituted. :

4, In section 6A of the principal Act, after sub-section (10), the

Amend-
ment of following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
soction 6A,

“(i) The provisions of this section shall, on and from the
eormmencement of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1968, also
apply to insurers carrying on genera] insurance business sub-
ject to the modification that references in sub-sections (1), (3),
(5), (6) and (7) to the Tmsurance (Amendment) Act, 1950,
shall be construed as references to the Insurance (Amendment)
Act, 1968.”.

"Shends 5, In section 6B of the principal Act, after sub-section (3}, the
ment of feliowing sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
section 6B.

+ (4) The provisions of this section shall, on and from the
commencement of the Tyisurance (Amendment) Act, 1968, 9180
apply to insurers carrying on general insurance business.”.

190

20

25

30

35



@. In séétion 7 of the principal Act,-~ Arnend-
in sut मु _ ment of
(४) in sub-section (1),- avetion 7,
(i) for the words “the amount ‘hereafter specified”,
: the words “a sum of two million rupees” shall be substi-
5 tuted;

(ii) clauses (8) to (i} shall be omitted;

(iii) in the proviso, for the words “ten thousand
rupees”, the words “one hundred thousand rupees” shall be
substituted;

ro (b) after sub-section (1), the following sub-sections shall
: he inserted, namely:—

‘(1A) An insurer, who holds immediately before the

commencement of the Insurance (Araendment) Act, 1968,

8 valid certificate’ of registration in respect of any class of

15 insurance business and who has depésited and kept deposit-

ed a sum which is less than the sum required to be de-

posited under sub-section (1) may make deposit of the sum

which is equal to the difference between the sum already

deposited and kept deposited and the sum required to be

20 _ deposited under sub-section (1), in not more than four
instalments, of which—

(०) the first shall be not less than one-fourth of
the said sum and shall be paid before the expiry af one
year from such commencement,

25 (by the second shall be not less than one-third of
the balance left after making the deposit under clause
(a) and shall be paid before the expiry of two years
from stich commencement,

(०) the third shall be.not less than one-half of the
30° residue and shall be paid before the expiry of three
है yéats from such commencement, and

(d) the balitiice shall be paid before the expiry af
four years fromy such cotnmencement.

(1B) Notwithstanding anything’ contained in sub-

35 section (1), it shall be sufficient compliance with the provi-
: sions of sub-section (1) in the case of a group of insurers
operating in India as a group (héreaftér in this Act reter-
ted to a a’ group) if the total afnouint of the deposits
tnade by all the insurers in the group is “not less than the



~ 4

amount ‘which a single insurer would have been required
io deposit under sub-section, (7):

Provided that the deposit made by each insurer in the
group is not less than that proportion of the total deposit
required to be made under sub-section (1) 48 the propor> हैं
tion of his share of the risk on each policy issued by the
group bears to the total risk om that policy,

Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, &
“group” shall be deemed to be operating as such in India
if the following conditions are fulfilled, namely: — 10

(a) no insurer in the group hag commenced car-
rying on insurance business in India after the com-
mencement of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1968;

(b) all the insurers in the group are registered for
the same class or classes of insurance business} 15

(c) there is an agreement between all the insur~
ers in the group to function as a group and such agree-
ment provides that the proportionate share of each in-
surer in the total risk on every policy ‘issued by the
group shall be such as may be mentioned therein and 20
that such proportion shall be the same for all policies in
all the classes of insurance policies issued by the group;

(d) the agreement referred to in clause (c) has
been filed with the Controller within thirty days from
the date of its execution: हि 25

Provided that if the Controller is satished that any
insurer was prevented by sufficient cause from filing
such agreement within the specified time, he may, by
order, allow the insurer to file such agreement within
a period’ of thirty days from the date of his order; 30

(e) every policy issued by the insurers in the
group. mentions, on the face ‘of the policy, the names
of all the members of the group and the proportion of
the risk for which each member is liable;

(f). the insurers in the group function with com- 35
men offices, common. officers, not being directors or
. members of any Board of management, and common
staff within India; :



5

(9) all the expenses in India of the insurance bust
ness’ (but excluding expensés solely relating to any
Board of management, whether set up for the purpose
ot managing the insurance business or not,) are shared
by the insuirers in the group in the proportion in which
the risks are shared by and between them!

(10) When a group of insurers ceases to bea froup,
every insurer in that group who continues to earry on any
class of insurance business in Intlia shali comply with the
requirements of sub-section (1) as if he had not been an
insurer in any group at any time and he shall pay, within
a period of six months frotn the date of cessation of the
group, in a 10109 sum, the amount of the instalments of
deposit which he would have been required to make under
sub-section (1A) before the date of cessation of the group
had he not been an insurer in any group at any time, re-
duced by the amount of deposit, if any, made by him after

the commencement of the. Insurance (Amendment) Act,
1968, 1G

(12) The Central Government may, at its discretion,
extend the time for making any deposit or instalment of
deposit required to: be made by any insurer under the pro-
visions of sub-sections (1), (12), (78) and (iC). by a period
of not more than six months at a time:

Provided that not more than two’ extensions shall be
given in respect of any deposit or instalment of deposit re-
quired to be made by an insurer.’;

(९) in sub-section (2), the words “any class of’ and the

‘words “as the deposit for that class of insurance business” shall
be omitted; = है

t
4

(d) for sub-sections (3), (4), (5) and (6) the following

sub-sections. shall be: substituted, namely: —

“(3). Where the deposit is to be made by an insurer not
carrying on. insurance business in India immediately before
the. commencement of. the Insurance: (Amendment) Act,
1968, the deposit shall be made in full before the application
for registration is. made, 7 i है

( An insyrer ‘shall not’ be registered for any class of
insurance business in addition to the class or classes for



6

which he fs alveidy registered until the full deposit re-
quitéd hder sub-seétion (1) has béen thade.

(5). Where an insurer who intendes to become a mem-
ber of a group, does not. carry on all the classes of insur-
ance business carried on by the other insurérs in’ such
group, or, where out of the several insurers who desire to
form themselves into a group, any insurer does not carry
on all the classes of insurance business carried on by the
other insurers who desire to form themlselves into the

- group, such insurer may be régistered for that class or those

classes of insurance business which is or are carried on
by all the members of the grouj, and where any applica-
tidn for registration is made by any such insurer, the Con-
trolier may, notwithstanding anything contained in sub-
section (4), tegister such insurer for one or more addi-
tional classes of insurance, if the followiiz conditions arc
fufilled namely: —

(व) the Controller is satisfied that registration for
the proposed one or more additional classes of insur-
ance business would qualify the insurer to become a
miember of a group;

.. (b) agreements have been executed by all the in-
surers in the group or proposed group, as the case may
be, and such agreements, in the opinion of the Control-
ler, satisfy the requirements of the Explanation to sub-
section (1B); and

{c) the insurer has, after the commencement of
the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1968, made deposit of
a sumy not less than the total of all the instalments of
deposit which he wotld have. been required to make
after such commencement.till the date of his becoming
a member of the group, had he been a mnermber of the
group from such commencement.

(6) The Controller shall cancel the registration made
in pursuance of the provisions of sub-section (5), if the
insurer referred to therein fails to become, within 8 period
of three months from the date of such registration, a
member of the group or proposed group, as the case may
be, and, where such registration has been cancelled, the
provisions of this Act shall apply fo the insurer as if he
had not been registered for the class or classes of insurance
business in relation to which his registration has heen can-
called.”.

10

qs

20

25

30

35

Ao



i

है, Foy section 9 of the principal Act, the following section shal] Substi
डे. substituted; namely:— | . हि आम
section for
section 9,
“9. Where on insurer has. ceased to carry on.in India al] Refundot
classes of insurance business, and his liabilities in India in reg- (शक,
pect of all classes of insurance business have been satisfied or
are otherwise provided for, the court may, on the application
of the insurer, order the return to tha insurer of the deposit
made by hima under this Act.”, :

8. In section 10 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1) ,-- Amend-
. ment of
. section 10.

10 (i) for the words, brackets, letters and figures “classes

Specified in clauses (a), (b), (c) and (d) of sub-section (1)

of section 7”, the words “following classes, namely, life insur-

ance, fire insurance, marine insurance or miscellaneous insur-

ance” shall ‘be substituted:
15 (४) for the words, brackets and letter “the class specified in
clause (d) of that sub-section”, the words “miscellaneous in-
surance” shall be substituted;

(iii) for the words, brackets and letter “each such sub-class
of the class specified in clause (d)”, the words “each of such sub-
20 classes of miscellaneous insurance business” shall be substituted.

(iv) in the proviso, for the words, brackets, letter and
figures “the class of insurance business specified in clause (a)
of sub-section (1) of section 7", the words “miscellaneous in~
surance business” shail be substituted,

25 9. In section 11 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in clause Amend-
(b),.for the words, brackets, letters and figures “the classes speci- ment of
fied in clauses (a), (b) and (ce) of sub-section (1) of. section 7”, setcion 11,
the words “the following classes, namely, life insurance, fire insur-

ance or marine insurance” shall ke substituted.

30 40, In section 21 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), 41 asmena-
clause (9), after the words, figures and letter “or section 28A”, the ment of
words, figures and letters.“or. section 28B or. section 64VA” shall be section 21,
inigerted.



Tnaertion,
of new
section

15.

Further
provi- —
008 re-
garding

invest-
ments,

8

11, “Attet gaction 27A’ of the principal Act, the following ‘sebticn
shall be inserted, namely:—

‘27B. (2) No insurer carrying on general insitrance business

shall, after the commencement of the Insurance {Amendment)
‘Act, 1968, Invest or keep invested any part of his assefs. other. >

- Wise than in any’ of the following’ approved investments,
nemely:—: -- co oe

(@} the investments specified in clauses (a) to (f), (४)
to (९), (५) and (3) of sub-section (7) of section पल

(8) debenttites secured by a first charge on any im. 20
movable property, plant or equipment of any company
where, either the book value or the market value, whichever
is less, of such property, plant or equipment is more than
twice the value of such debentures;

(० first debentures secured by a floating charge on all 15
its assets or by a fixed charge on fixed assets and floating |
charge on all other assets of any company which has paid’

‘dividends on its equity shares for the five years immediate-

ly preceding or for at least five out of the six or seven
years immediately preceding the date of the investment; 20

(d} such other investments as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare’to be
approved investments for the purposes of this section.

(2) Any prescribed assets shall, subject to such conditions,

if any, as may be prescribed, be deemed to be assets invested 25
or kept invested in approved investments specified in’ sub-
section (1),

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2},

an insurer being a company may, subject to the provisions con- ;
tained in the next succeeding sub-sections, invest or keep in- 3°
vested any part of his assets otherwise than in an approved in-
vesitment, if,~-

(४) after such investment, the total amounts ef all such
investments of the insurer do not exceed twenty-five per
cent. of his assets, and 33

(it) the investment is made, Gr, in the case of any.in-
vestment already made, the continuance of such investment
is with the consent of al] the directors present at a meeting
and eligible to vote, special notice of which has been givem



9

to all the directors then in India, and all such investments,
including investments in which any director is interested,
are reported without delay to the Controller with full de-
tails of the investments and the extent of the director's ine
terest in any such investment,

(4) An insurer shall not invest or keep invested any part
of his assets in the shares of any one banking compatiy or in-
vestment company more than—

(a) ten per cent, of his assets, or

(9) two per cent, of the subscribed share capital and
debentures of the bankin g§ company or investment company
concerned,

whichever ts less,

(5) An insurer shall not invest or keep, invested any part
of his assets in the shares or debentures of any one company
other than a banking company or investment company more
than— 7

(a) ten per cent. of his assets, or

(9) ten per cent of the subscribed share capital and
debentures of the company,

whichever {s less:

Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to any
investment made with the previous consent of the Controller by
an insurer, being a company, with a view to forming a subsidiary
company carrying on insurance business,

(6) An insurer shall not invest or keep invested any part
of his assets in the shares or debentures of any private com-
pany, 1

(7) Where an investment is in partly paid-up shares, the

I 9० uncalled पाए 00 such shares shall he added to the amount

i invested for the purpose of computing the percentages referred
to in clause (a) of sub-section (4) and clause (a) of sub-
section (5).

(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-seetions (4)

35 and (5), where new shares are issued to the existing sharehol-

ders by a company, the existing shares of which are covered by

clause (i) or clause (k) or clause (7) of sub-section (1) and

of which an insurer is already a shareholder, the insurer may
subscribe to such néw shares: * हु oe

1760 LS—2.



10

Provided’ that’ the’ proportion of new shares subscribed by

iim does’ not extéed the proportion. which the, paid-up amount

on the shares held by bim immediately before such subscription

- beats to the total paid-up capital of the company at the time of
such subscription.

(9) Tf, on an application submitted to the Controller, he is
satisfied that special grounds cxist warranting such exemption,
he may, for such period, to such-extent and in relation to such
particular investments and subject ta such conditions as may
he’ specified by’ him in this: behalf, exempt on insurer from all
or’ any of the provisions’ of sub-séctions: (4), (5) and (6) .

(10) An insurer shall not keep more than ten. per cent. of his
assets in fixed deposit or current deposit, or partly in fixed de-
posit and partly in‘¢urrent deposit, with any one banking: com-
pany or with any co-operative: society registered under ‘the. Co-
operative Societies Act, 1912 or under any other law’ for the
time being in force and doing banking business:

Provided that in applying this sub-section to the amount in
deposit with a banking company’ on any day, all the premiums
collected by that company on behalf of the ingurer-duriig the
preceding thirty days shall be excluded.

(11) AD assets shall (except for part theteof not exceed-
tng one-tenth of the total assets in value ‘Which may, ‘subject to
such conditions and restrictions’ as may be prescribed, be offer-
ed as security for any loan taken for purposes of any invest-
ment) be held free of any encumbranee, charge, hypothetation
er Hen.

(12) If at any time the Controller considers any one or more
of the investments. constituting an insuror’s assets to be unsuit-
able or undesirable, he may, after giving the insurer an oppor-
tunity of being heard, direct the insurer to realise the invest-
Ment or invesiments, and the insurer shall comply with the
direction within such time as may be specified in this behalf
by the Controller.

(13) Every insurer in éxistence at the commencement of the
Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1968, whose investments or any part
thercof at such. commencement do or docs not fulfil:‘the require-
ments of this section, shall, within ninety days from such com-

20.

25

30

35



Io

20

30

= |

or portion thereof in respect of which the Contronter is satisfied

Li

_Mhencement, subniit ta the Controller a report specifying ali
such investments, and, if the Controller is satisfied that it will
not be in the interest-of the insurer or any-class of insurers
generally to realise any such investments, he may, by order,
direct that the provisions of this section, other than the provi-
sions contained in sub-section (12), shall not apply in relation to
any such investments or to any clays of investments generally
for such period or periods as may be specified in the order,

(44) Without prejudice to the powers conferred on the Cone

irolier hy sub-section (12), nothing contained'in this section shall

‘ 98 deomed to require any insurer to realise any investment made

in conformity ‘with’ the provisions of sub-section (Z) after the

‘commencement of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1968, which,

after thé making thereof, has ceased to be an approved investment
“within the meaning of ‘this section,

(15) Nothing contained in this section shal] be.deemed to
affect in any way the manner in which any moncys relating to
the provident fund of any employee or to any security taken
from any employee or other moneys of a like nature are requi-
red to be held by or under any Central, Provincial. or State Act.

(16) In this section, wnloss the context otherwise requires,
“assets” means—

(a) in the case of an insurer carrying on life insurance
business in India, all his assets required te be shown under
the column “Other Classes of Business” in the balance-shect
in Form A, in Part It of the First Schedule, but excluding
any items against the head “Other Accounts (to he speci-
fied)”;

(0) in the case of an insurer specified in sub-clause (a)
(i) or sub-clause (6) of clause (9) of section 2, who is not
carrying on life insurance business in India, all his assets re.
quired to be shown in the balance-sheet in Form A in Part
Ul of the First Schedule but excluding any items against the
head “Other Accounts (to be specified)”; and

(९) in the case of any other insurer, the assets required
to he shown in’'the’ statement-in. Form AA, in Part II of the
First Schedule, but excluding office furniture;

but does not include any assets specifically held agamst any fund



insertion
of new
section
288,

Returns
of invest-
ments
relating
tothe
assets and
changes
therein.

Amend-
ment of

gection 30.

12

that such fund or portion thereof, as the case may be, is regula-
ted by the law of any country outside India or in respect of
which the Controller is satisfied that it would not be in the in-
terest of the insurer.to apply the provisions of this section,’.

12. After section 28A of the principal Act, the following section
shall be inserted, namely:—-

“28B, (1) Every insurer carrying on general insurance
business, shall every year, within thirty-one days from the be-
ginning of the year, submit fo the Controller a return in the
prescribed form showing as at the 81st day of December of the
preceding year the investments made out of his assets referred
to in section 278, and every sich return shall be ¢ertified by a

_ principal officer of the insurer.

(2) Every insurer referred to in sub-section (7) shall also
submit to the Controller a return in the prescribed form showing
all the changes that occurred in the investments aforesaid dur-
‘ing cach of the quarters ending on the last day of March, June,
September and December within thirty-one days from the close
of the quarter to which it relates, and every such return shall
be certified by a principal officer of the insurer.

() Every imsurer shall submit, along with the returns re-
ferred to in sub-sections (1) and (2), a statement, where any
part of the assets are in the custody of a banking company, from
that company, and in any other case, from the Chairman, two
directors and a principal officer, if the insurer is a company, or
from a principal officer of the insurer, if the insurer is not a
company, specifying the assets, which are subjected to a charge
and certifying that the other assets are held free of any encum-
brance, charge, bypothecation or lien, and every such statement
after the first shall also specify the charges created in respect
of any of those assets since the date of the statement imme-
diately preceding, and, if any such charges have been Hquidat-
ed, the date on which they were so liquidated.”.

13. In section 30 of the principal Act, after the word, figures and
letter “section 27A”, the word, figures and letter “, section 27B”
shall be inserted.

20

25

3°



18

#4, In section 314A of the principal Act, in clause (vii) of the
proviso to sub-section (1) the words “, Sach bonus, in the case of any
employce, not exceeding in amount the equivalent of his salary for a
period which, in the opiniom of the Central Government, is reason.
able having regard to the circumstances of the case! shall be omit-
ied,

15. In section 33 of the principal Act,—

(i) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall he
inserted, namely:—

“(AJ Notwithstanding anything to the contrary con-
tained in, section 235 of the Companies Act, 1956 the Control-
ler may, at any time, and shall, on being dirceted so te do by
the Central Government, cause an inspection te he made by
ohe or more of his officers of any insurer and his books and
accounts; and the Controller shall supply to the insurer a
copy of his report on such inspection.”;

(#) in sub-section (2), after the words, brackets and figure
“ander sub-section (1)”, the words, brackets, figure and letter
“,or inspection under sub-section (1A),” shall be inserted;

(iii) in sub-section (3), after the words, brackets and figure
“under sub-section (1)”, the words, brackets, figure’ and letter
“or inspection under sub-section (IA)” shall be inserted;

(iv) after sub-section (3), the fdllowing sub-section shall
be inserted, namely: —

“(8A) The Controller Shall, if he has been directed by
the Central Government to cause an inspection te he made,
and may, in any other case, report to the Central Goyern-
ment on any inspection made under this section.”;

(०) in sub-section (4), after the words, brackets and figure
36 “under sub-section (1)”, the words, brackets, figure and letter
“or under sub-section (3A)” shall be inserted;

(vi) after sub-section (4), the following sisb-sections shall
be inserted, namely:—

‘(4A) The Central Government may, after giving rea.
35 sonable notice to the insurer, publish the report submitted
by the Controller under sub-section (3A) or such portion

thereof ag May appear to it to be necessary,

Amend-
ment of
Section
314,

Amend-
ment of
section 33.



14

(4B) The Central Government may. prescribe the qnini~

‘to be yoaintained by insurers in their
hich such jnformation should be
4 other verifications to be adopted
tion and all other matters inciden- 5
ry to enable the
netions under

nium information
'pooks, the manner in W
tnaititamed, the checks an
by insurers in that connec
tal thereto as are, in its opinion, necessa
Controller to discharge satisfactorily his fu

this section.

. Biplavation —For the'‘puiposes of this section, the © expression
‘jnsurer” shall include— 0
a. ; (i) in the dase"of an ‘insuret inediporated outside India, all
. “iis ‘braiiches in India, and oo
(i) in the case of an insurer inéorporated in India—
or the purposé of carry:

(a) ‘all his stibsttiaries formed 1
clusively outside India; 7

‘ing on the business of insurance स्क
and
j 1. :(9) all his branches whether situated in India-or outs

side India’.
Inser. 46, After section 33 of the principal Act, the following headings
tion of and sections shall be inserted: — oc # m
new scc-
tions 44,
' 34.8, 345, .
840, 34D,
348, 34F,
34G and
: 34H.
Ny
“PowER TO JSSUE DIRECTIONS
i . हि
7 . Power pf 34, (2) Where the Controller 18 satisfied that—
| the Con. हि
troller to (क) in the public jnterest; or
| issue dir- _
ections, (9) to prevent the affairs of any insurer being conduc-
| ह Tanner “gettimetital 40 thé interests of the policy:



15

“holders or in a manner prejudicial to -the interests of the
Insiirer; or ;

(c) generally to secure the proper management of any
insurer,

it is necessary 406 issue directions to insurers generally or to any
insurer in particular, he may, from time 40 time, issue such
dirgctions as he deems fit, and the insurers oy the insurer, as
the case may be, shall be bound to comply with such directions,

(2) ‘The Controller may, on représentation made to him or
on his own motion, modify or cancel any direction issued under
sub-section (2), and in so Modifying or cancelling any direction,

Contrer, over MANAGEMENT
34A. (३) In the case'of an insurer,— Amend-
oo ‘ ment of

क॑ ni af he co; Sncement of Provi-
(4) no amendment niade ter mam sions rela-

tin,
lating to” the appointment, re-appointment, termination of व्य
appointment or remuneration af 8 managing director 07 any ments of
other director, whole-time or otherwise, or of & manager or Managing
. वि directors,
8 chief executive officer, by whatever name called, or ete, to be
Secretary, accountant or underwriter, whether tha¢ provision subject to
be contained in the insurer's memorandum or articles of previous.
association, or in an agreement entered into by him, or in ore
any résolution passed by the. insurer in genera] meeting of Control.

by his Boarg of directors shall have effect. unless approved ler.

3० ance (Amendment) Act, 1968, of a managing director ot any
other director, whole-time or otherwise, or of a manager or
a chief executive officer, hy whatever natnie called, or. gecre.
tary, accountant or underwriter shall haye ~éfect unless
such appointment, Te-appointment or termination of ap-

5 Pointment is made with the Brevious approval of the-Coy-
troller.

Explonation__Fop the ‘purposes ‘of this sub-section, any pro-~
vision, conferring any benéfit or Providing any amenity or per-

quisite, in whatever form, whether during or after the termina-
tion of the term of Office of the manager or the’ chief executive



Power of
Cantrol-
ler to
remove
manage-
rial and
other
persons
from
office,

16

officer, by whatever name called, or secretary, accountant 08
underwriter! or the managing director, or any other director,
whole-time or otherwise, shall be deemed to be a provision re-
lating to his remuncration,

(2) Nothing contained in sections 268 and 269, the praviso
to sub-section (3) of section 309, sections 310 and 311, the pro-
viso to section 387, and section 388 (in so fart as section 388
makes the provisions of sections 310 and 311 apply in relation
to the manager of a company) of the Companies Act, 1956, shall
apply to any matter in respect of which the approval of the Con-
troller has to be obtained under sub-section (1).

(3) No act done by a person as 3 managing or whole-time
director or a director not liable to retire by rotation or a manager
or a chief executive officer, by whatever name called, or
by a secretary, accountant or underwriter shall be deemed to be
invalid on the ground that it is subsequently discovered that his
appointment had not taken effect by reason of any of the provi-
sions of this Act; but nothing in this sub-section shall be cons-
trued ag rendering valid any act done by such person after his
appointment has been shown to the insurer not to have had
effect.

3498, (1) Where the Controller is satisfied that in the public
interest or for preventing the affairs of an insurer being conduct-
ed jn a manner detrimental to the interests of the policy-holders
‘or for securing the proper management of any insurer it is
necessary so. to do, he may, for reasons to be recorded in writ-
ing, by order, remove from office, with effect from such date
as may be specified in the order, any director, chief executive
officer, by whatever name called, or other officer or employee. of
the insurer. ;

(2) No order under sub-section (1) shall be made unless
the director or chicf executive officer or other officer or em-
ployee concerned has been given a reasonable opportunity of
making a representation to the Controller against the proposed
order:

Provided that if, in the opinion of the Controller, any delay
would be detrimental to the interests of the insurer or his policy-
holders, he may, at the time of giving the opportunity aforesaid
or at any time thereafter, by order direct that, pending the con-
sideration of the representation aforesaid, if any, the directo

20

25

30

95:



Ww

60.88 the case may be, chief executive officer or other officer or
employee, shall not, with effect from the date of such order,—+

(8) act as such director or chief executive officer ox
other officer or employce of the insurer;

(0) in any way, whether directly or indirectly, be con-
cerned with, or take part in, the management of the insu-
rer,

(8) (@) Any person against whom an order of removal has
been made under sub-section (1) may, within thirty days from
the date of communication to him of the order, prefer an appeal
to the Central Government.

(9) The decision of the Central Government on such ap-
peal, and subject thereto, the order made by the Controller
under sub-section (1), shall be final and shall not be called into
question in any court,

(4) Where any order is made in respect of a director or
chief executive officer or other officer or employee of an insurer
under sub-section (1}, he shall ९०४४९ 10 be a director or, as the
case may he, chief executive officer or other officer or employee
of the insurer and shall not, in any way, whether directly or
indirectly, be concerned with, or take part in, the management
of. any msurter for such period not exceeding five years ay may
be specified in the order.

ee Tf any person in respect of whom an order is made by

the Controller under sub-section (1) or under the provise to sub-
section (2) contravenes the provisions of this section, he shail
be punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred and
fifty rupees for each day during which such contravention con-
tinues,

(8) Where an order under sub-section @) has been made,
the Controller may, by order in writing, appoint a suitable per-
son in place of the director or chief executive officer or other
officer or employee who has been removed from his office under
that sub-section, with effect from such date as may he specified
in the order, :

(7) Any person appointed as director or chicf executive offi-
cer or other officer or employee under this section shail,

(a) hold office during the pleasure of the Controller and
_ Subject thereto for a period not exceeding three years or
1760 (8) LS—3,



Power of
Controjler
to appoint
addi-
tional
direc-
tors,

18. .

- gueh-firther perieds not exceeding. threecyears ata time:as
the :CéntroHer may specify,

(b) not‘incur-any obligation or liability -by reason only
of his being a director or chief executive’ officeror' other offi-
cer or employee. or for anything. done or. omitted-to be done

. in good. faith.in the execution of the. duties: of. his.office or in
relation thereto

(8). Notwithstanding :anything. contained in any law\or in
any contract,.memorandum. or articles of; assogiation;.on the.re-
moval of a person from office under this.section,that,pergon shall
not be entitled ta claim any compensation for-the.loss-or. termi-
nation of office.

340, (1) If the Controller is of opinion that-in the interests
of an ‘insurer, or his.policy-holders it is necessary so to do,:he
may, from time to time, by order-in. writing, appoint, with effect
from, such date as.may be specified ,in.the order, one.of moré

_ persons to hold office as additional directors of the, insurer

Provided that the Humber of additional directors so appoint-

‘ed shall not, at any time, exceed five or one-third of the maxi- .

‘mum strength fixed for the Board by ‘the articles of associa-
ition of the insurer, whichever jis less.

(2) Any person appointed as additional. director. ‘in, pursu-
vance of this section,—

(a) shall hold office during the-pleasure of the Contrcl-

ler, and subject thereto for a period not exceeding three 2

years or such further periotls not.exceeding three years-at.a
time as the Controller ‘may specify;

(b) shall not ineur any obligation or liability hy reason
only of his being a director or for anything done or omitted
to be done in good faith in the execution of the duties of
his office or in relation thereto; and

(०) shall not be required to hold qualification shares:-of
the insurer.

(3) Forthe purpose of reckoning any proportion of the total

n
co

30

nimber of directors of the insurer, any additional. director ap- 35

Peinted under this section shall not be taken into account,



19

1410, ¢ Any ‘appointment-or removal of a dixector, chief exe gections
cutive officer or other officer or employee in pursuance of section 34B and
34B or section” 34C shall have effect notwithstanding anything ena de
to ‘the contrary contained in the Companies Act, 1956, or any other
‘other law’for the time being in force or in aay contract or any laws,

other instrument.

ME (7) The Controller may,— Further
‘ * powers
ot Con.
(8) caution or proliibit insurers generally or any insu- troller
rer in partictilar against entering into any particular transac- पा
10 tion or class ‘of ‘transactions, and generally give advice te ment.
. any insurer; * : .
(0) at any time, if he is satisfied ‘that in ‘the public
interest or in’ the interests of the insurer or for preventing
the affairs of the insurer being conducted in a manner
detrimental to the: interests of the insurer or his policy-
holders, it is necessary so to do, by order in writing and on
such terms and- conditions as may he specified therein,—

1S

. @)-require the insurer to call.a meeting of his
‘directors for the purpose of considering any matter rela-
ting to ०७ arising out of the affairs of the insurer;

20°"
(४) depute one or more of his officers to watch the
proceedings -at any meeting of the Board of directors of
‘the insurer or of any committee or of any other body
' constituted by it; require the insurer to give an oppor-
* tunity to the officers so deputed to be heard at such meet-
' ings and also require such officers to send a report of such
proceedings to the Controller;

25

(iii) require the Board of directors of the insurer or
an¥ committee or any other body constituted by it to give
in writing to any officer specified by the Controller in this
behalf at his usual address all notices of, and other com-
munications telating to, any meeting of the Board; com-
mittee or other body constituted by it; 4

1.30

(iw) appoint one or more of his officers to observe the
manner in which the affairs of the insurer or of his offices :
i गे . 5 /

35



Power of
Controll-
er to
issue
diree-
tions re-
garding
re-insur-
ance trea-
ties, ete.

Power of
Controlles
to order
closure 6f
foreign
branches,

20

or branches are being conducted and make a report theré>
on; *

(७) require the insurer to make, within such time as
may be specified in the order, such changes in the manage-
ment as the Controller may consider necessary. *

(2) The Central Government or the Controller may appoint
such staf? and at such places as it or he may consider necessary
for the scrutiny of the returns, statements and information fur-
nished by insurers under this Act, and generally to ensure the
efficient performance of the functions of the Controller under 10
this Act.

34F, (1) Without prejudice to the generality of the powers
conferred by sub-section (1) of section 34, the Controller may, if
he is of opinion that the terms or conditions of any re-insurance
_ treaty or other re-insurance contract entered into by an Insurer
are not favourable to the insurer or are detrimental to the public
interest, he may, by order, require the insurer to make, at the
time when the renewal of such treaty or contract becomes next
due, such modifications in the terms and conditions of such treaty
or contract as he may specify in the order or not to renew such 20
treaty: or contract, and, if the insurer fails to comply with such
order, he shall be deemed 10 have failed to comply with the
provisions of this Act.

m

5

(2) The Controller may, if he has reason to believe that an
insurer is entering into or is likely to enter into reinsurance 24
treaties or other ro-insurance contracts which are not favour- ”
able to the insurer or are detrimental to the public interest, he
may, by order, direct that the insurer shall not enter into such
re-insuranee treaty or other re-insurance contract ‘unless a copy
of such treaty or contract has heen furnished to him in advance 30
and the terms and conditions thereof have becy. approved by
him and if the insurer fails to comply with such order he shall
be deemed to have failed to comply with the requirements of
this Act.

345, (£) Without prejudice to the generality of the powers 58
conferred by sub-section (1) of section 34, the controller may, if
he has reason to believe that the working of any branch outside
India of an insurer- being an insurer specified in sub-clause (0) of
clause (9) of section 2, is generally resulting in a loss or that the



10

५ 75

20

25

30

95

Ao

2

affairs of that branch are being conducted in a manner prejudician
to the interests of the policy-holders or the public interest, he may,
alter giving an opportunity to the insurer of being heard, direei
that the insurer shall cease, within such periud, not being less
than one year, as may be specified in the order, to carry on in-
surance business in the country in which such branch is situated
and if the insurer fails to comply with such order he shall be
deemed to have failed to comply with the provisions of this
Act. :

(2) Any insurer aggrieved by an order made by the Con-
troller under sub-section (7) may, within a period of two months
from the date of receipt by him of the order, prefer an appeal
to the Central Government and the decision of the Central Gov-
ernment thereon shall be final,

34H. (1) Where the Controiler, in consequence of informa-
tion in his possession, has reason to believe that,—

(a) any person who has been required under sub-see-
tion (2) of section 33 to produce, or cause to be produced,
any books, accounts or other documents in his custody or
power has omitted or faited to produce, or cause to be pro-
duced, such books, accounts or other documents, or

(8) any person to whom a requisition toe produce any
books, accounts or other documents as aforesaid has been
or might be issued will not, or would not, produce or cause
to be produced, any books, accounts or other documents
which will be useful for, or relevant to, an inspection under
that sub-section, or

(c) a contravention of any provision of this Act has
been committed or is likely to be committed by an insurer,
or

(6) any claim which is due to be settled by an insur-
er, has been or is likely to be settled al a figure higher than
a reasonable amount, or

(९) any claim which is due to be settled by an insur-
.@r, has been or is likely to be rejected or.setiled at a figure
lower than a reasonable amount, or

{f) any illegal rebate or commission has been paid or
is likely to he paid by an insurer, or

(9) any books, accounts, receipts, vouchers, survey re-
ports or other documents, belonging to an insurer are
likely to be tampered with, falsified or manufactured,

Searck
and
ड21708६-



116: 0199 ; authorise any ‘subordinate officer’ of his; -not lower
in-rank than an ‘Assistant. Controller of Insurance - (here-
after referred to as the authorised officer) -to—
(0) enter and seatéh “any building or ‘place where
he has reason to suspéct that ‘such books, acconits or
other doctiments, ‘or any ‘books ‘or ‘papers relating to
any claim, rebate or comiiission ‘or apy ‘receipts; vou-
,chers, reports or other doctuments’ are Kept; है

(i) break open the lock of apy door, box, locker,
.safe, almirah or other receptacle for exercising: the'I
powers conferred by clause (४) “where the keys theréof ©
are not available; oe हि

_ (di) seize all or-any such books, accounts or other
documents, found as a result of such search; ‘

(iv) place marks of identification ‘on: -such ‘books, 1
accounts or other documents or make or — cause to be
made extracts or copies therefrom. coe

. (2). The authorised officer may requisition the services of

_any police-officer or of any officer of the Central Government, or

mo.

“of both, to assist him for all or any of the purposes specified in 20

हे sub-section (1) and it shall be the duty of every such officer to”
comply with such requisition. हु

(3) The authorised officer may, where it is not practicable
to seize any such book, account or other ' document,
specified in sub-section (1), serve an order on the per-
son who is in immediate possession or contvel © thereof
that he shall not remove, part with or otherwise deal with it
excépt with the prévious permission of such officer and such offi-

, cer may take such steps as may be necessaTy for ensuring com~
pliance with this sub-section. we हु है

, (4) The authorised officer nay, during the course of the
search or seizure, examine on oath any person. who is found to
be'in possession or control of any books, accounts or other docit-
ments, and any statement made by such person during such exa-
mination may thereafter be used in evidence in any proceeding
under this Act.

{5) The books, accounts, papers, receipts, vouchers, reports,
or other documents seized under sub-section (3) shail not be
retained by the authorised officer for a period exceeding one
hundred and eighty days from the date of the seizure unless the 4

25

_3o



sz)

t5

20

25

30

35

23

reasons for retaining the same are recorded. by. him: in writing:
and the approval of the Controller for such retention is obtained:

Provided that the Controller shall not authorise the reten-
tion of the books, accounts, papers, receipts, vouchers, reports, or
other doctuments for a period exceeding thirty days after all the
proceedings under this Act lor which the books, accounts, papers,
receipts, vouchers, reports, of other documents are relevant are
completed,

(6) The person from whose custody any books, accounts,
papers, receipts, vouchers, reports, or other. documents are seized
under sub-section (1) may make copies thereof, or take extraci#
therefrom, in the presence of. the authorised: officer or any other
person empowered by him in this behalf at such place and. time
as tHe authorised office? may appoirii in thig behalf,

(7) Ifa person legally entitled to the books, accounts, papers,
receipts, vouchers, reports, or other documients seized under subs
section (1). objects for any reason to the approval given by the
Controller undei sub-section: (5), he may make an application to
the Céntral Govérnment statirig therein the reasons for such ob-
jection and requésling for the return of the hocks, accounts,
‘papers, receipls, vouchers, reports, or other documents.

(8) On-receipt of the. application under sub-section (7), the

‘Central Governnient may, after giving the applicant an oppor-
tunity of being-heard, pass such orders ias it thinks ‘fit,

(9) The provisions of the Code of Criminal -Proeedure, 1898,

-Teélating to searches. and seizures -shal{ apply, so.far as. may ‘be,

to every search and scizure made under sub-section. (2).

‘10) ‘The ‘Central ‘Government may make rules:in- relation
ta .any..séarch or. seizure under this section; in particular, and
without. prejudice. to the generality. of the foregoing power, such
rules may. iprovide for, the procedure to be followed bythe authe-
Tised officer,— .

(3). for: obtaining ingress into :such ‘building or place ‘to
be searched where free ingress thereto is not available;

(i) for ensuring safe custody of any books, accounts,
eS receipts, vouchers, reports, on other documents seized
nder; this..section.”,



24

Inser= 47, After section 37 of the principal Act, the following section
tien .
shall be inserted, namely:— :

of new
section ,
STA,
Power of “37A, (1) If the Controller is satisfied that—

ontTal~ . FE
ler to (i) in the public interest; or s
prepare Ee
scheme of (ii) in the interests of the policy-holders; or 5 E
pmalga- .
mation, (iii) in order to sectire the proper management of an

insurer; or

{iv} in the interests of the insurance business of the
country a5 a whole,
it is necessary so to do, he may prepare @ scheme for the amal- 10
-gamation of that insurer with any other insurer {hereafter
referred, to in this section as the transferee Insurer). ५

(2) The scheme aforesaid may contain provisions for all or
any of the following matters, namely: — है

(६) the constitution, name and registered office, the 15
capital, assets, powers, rights, interests, authorities and privi-
leges, and the liabilities, duties and obligations of the trans-
ferec insurex;

(9) the transfer to the transferee insurer of the business,
properties, assets and liabilities of the insurer on such terms 20
and conditions as may be specified in the Scheme;

(९) any change in the Board of directors, or the appoint
ment of a new Board of directors of the transferee insuret
and the authority by whom, the roanner in which, and the
other terms and conditions on which, such change or appoint- 25
ment shaJl be made and, in the case of appointment of a new
Board of directors or of any director, the period for which
such appointment shall be made;

(8) the alteration af the memorandum and articles of
association of the transferee insurer for the purpose of alter- 3°
ing the capital thereof or for such other purposes as may be
necessary to give effect to the amalgamation:

(2) subject to the provisions of the scheme, the conti-
nuation by or against the transferee insurer, of any actions
or procecdings pending against the insurer; 35

(f) the reduction of the interest or rights which the
thareholders, policy-holders and other creditors have in oF



25

against the insurer before the amalgamation to such extent

as the Controller considers necessary in the public interest

or in the interests of the shareholders, policy-holders and

other creditors or for the maintenance of the business of the
5 insurer;

(9) the payment in cash or atherwise to policy-holders
and other creditors in full satisfaction of their claim—

(i) in respeet of their interest oF rights in or against
the insurer before the amalgamation; or

10 (ii) where their interest or tights aforesaid in or
against the insurer has or have been reduced under
clause (f), in respect of such interest oy rights .as so
reduced;

(h) the allotment to the shareholders of the insurer

15 for shares held by them therein before the amalgamation

[whether their interest in such shares has been reduced

under clause (f) or not] of shares in the transferee insurer

and where any shareholders claim payment in cash and not

allotment of shares, or where it is not possible to allot shares

20 to any shareholders the payment in cash to those share«
holders in full satisfaction of their claim—

(i) in respect of their interest in shares in the in-
surer before the amalgamation; or ‘

(ii) where stich interest has been veduced under
25 clause (1) in respect of their interest in shares as so re-
duced; हैं

(i) the continuance of the services of all the employees
of the insurer (excepting such of them as not being work-
12 01047, men within the meaning of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947,
30 are specifically mentioned in the scheme) in the transferee
insurer at the same reruncration and on the same terms and
conditions of service, which they were getting or, as the case
may be, by which they were being governed, immediately
before the date of the amalgamation:

Provided that the. schemo shall contain a provision that
the transferee insurer shall pay or grant not later than
the expiry of the period of three years, from the date of
the amalgamation, to the said employees the same remune
ration and the same terms and conditions of service py are
applicable to the other employees of corresponding rank or
4० status of the transferee insurer subject to the qua'lficatione

1760 (B) LS-—4



26

and experience. of the said employees being the same as or
equivalent to these of such other employces of the transferce
insurer,

Provided further that if in any case any doubt or differ-
ence arises as to whether the qualification and expericnce
- of any of the said employees are the same as or are equiva-
lent to the qualifications and experience of the other em-
ployees of corresponding rank or status of the transferee
insurer, the doubt or difference shali be referred to the Con-
troller whose decision thereoi shall be final;

(j) notwithstanding anything contained in clause (४),
where any of the employees of the insurer not being work-
men within the meaning of the Industrial Disputes Act,
1947, are specifically mentioned in the scheme under clause
(i) or where any employees of the insurer have by notice in
writing given to the insurer or, as the case may be, the
transferee insurer at any time before the expiry of one
month next following the date on which the scheme is saac-
tioned by the Central Government, intimated their intentica
of not becoming employees of the transferee insurer, the
payment to such employees of compensation, if any, to
which they are entitled under the Industrial Disputes Act,
1947, and such pension, gratuity, provident fund or clher
retirement benefits ordinarily admissible to them under the
rules or authorisations of the insurer immediately hefore the
date of the amalgamation;

हि (0) any other terms and conditions for the amalgama-
tion of the insurer;

(2) such incidental, consequential and supplemental

matters as.are necesszry to secure that the amalgamation 3

shal] be fully and effectively carried ont,

(3) (@ A copy of the scheme prepared by the Controller
shall be sent in draft to the insurer and also to the transferee
Insurer and any other insurer concerned in the amalgametion,
for suggestions end objections, if any, within such period as the
Controller may specify fur this purpose.

(b) The Controlier may make such modifications, if any, in
the draft scheme as he may consider nec ry in the light of the
the dralt ycheme ay he may consider necessary in the light of the
from the transferee insurer, and any other insurer concerned in
the amalgamation and from any shareholder, policy-halder or

१५०

20

25

35

oO



pac)

Is

20

25

30

35

6०

BY

other creditor of each af those insurers and the transferee in-
surer.

(4) The scheme shall thereafter be placed before the Centrat
Government for its sanction 2nd the Central Government may
sanction the scheme without any modification ot with such modi-
fications as it may consider necessary; and the scheme as sanc-
tioned by the Central Government shall come into foree on such
date as the Central Government may specify in this behalf:

Provided that different dates may be specified for different
provisions of the scheme.

(5) The sanction accerded hy the Central Government
under sub-section (4) shail be coriclusive evidence that all ‘the
requirements of this section relating lo amalzamation have
been complied with and a copy of the sanctioned scheme cerli-
fied in writing by an officer of the Central Government to be a
true copy thereof, shall, in all legal proceedings (whether in ap-
peai or otherwise) be admitted as evidence to the same extent as
the original scheme. .

(6) The Controller may, in like manner, add to, amend or.
vary any scheme made ynder this section.

(7) On and from the date of the coming. into operation of
the scheme or any provision thereof, the scheme or such provi-
sion shall be binding on the insurer or, as the case may be, on
the transferee insurer and any other insurer concerned in the
amalgamation and also on all the shareholders, policy-holders
and other creditors and employees of each of those insurers and
of the transferee insurer, and on any other person having any
tight or Iiability in relation to any of those insurers or the trans
feree insurer,

(8) On and frore such date as may be specified by the Cen.
tral Government in this behalf, the properties and assets of the
insurer shall, by virtue of and to the extent provided in the
scheme, stand transferred to, and vest in, and the Habilities of
the insurer shall, by virtue of and to the extent provided in the
scheme, stand transferred to and become the liabilities of, the
transferee insurer.

(9) If any dificulty arises in giving effect to the provisions
of the scheme the Central Government may by order’do any-
thing not inconsistent with such provisions which appears to it
necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing the diffi-

woe EL

culty.



Amend-
ment of

section
WA.

{10) Copies of every scheme made under this section and
of every order made under sub-section (9) shall be laid before
each House of Parliament, as soon as may be, after the scheme
has been ‘sanctioned by the Central Government, or, as the case
may be, the order has been made. 5

(11) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the
amalgamation with an insurer by a single scheme of several in-
surers, +

(12) The provisions of this section and of any scheme made
under it shali have effect notwithstanding anything to the 10
contrary contained in any other provisions of this Act or in any
other Jaw or any agreement, award or other instrument for the
time being in force. !

(79) The provisions of section 37 shall not apply to an .-.
amalgamation given effoct to under the provisions of this sec- 15
tion,”, .

18, In section 40A of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section’ (3)—
(1) for the words, brackets and figures “Insurance
(Amendment) Act, 1950”, the words, brackets and figures 20 47 oft
“mnsurance (Amendment) Act, 1968” shall bé substituted; :

(2) for clauses {a) and (9), the following clauses shall
- be substituted, namely: —

“(a) where the policy relates to fire insurance—

(i) if the policy relates to a period of a year, 25
ten per cent, of the first fifty thousand rupees, five

- per cent, of the next one hundred thousand rupees
and ni) thereafter of the premium payable on the
policy;

(ii) if the policy (hereafter in this clause 30
referred to as the relevant policy) relates to a period
other than a year, such percentage of the premium
payable on the relevant policy as the commission



a9

eamputed it accordance with sub-clause (i) on
a corresponding annual policy would bear to
the premium on such annual policy (the premium
on the annual policy being taken as the same pro-

5 portion of the premium on the relevant policy as
the period of onc year bears to the period of the
relevant policy) ;

(b) where the poticy relates to miscellaneous in-
surance, fifteen per cent. of the premium payable on
10 है the policy, and

(९) where the policy relates to marine insurance,
ten per cent, of the premium payable on the policy.”;

(४8) after sub-section (3), the following sub-sections and
Explanation shall bo inserted, namely:—

15 ५ “(34) Where any person applies for a policy relating
- to, fire insurance ‘in respect of any property, he shall dec- |
lare in the proposal form whether any other policy has |
been taken by him in respect of such property br any part !
thereof in relation to any part of the period to which the
20 proposal relates, and if he has taken out any such policy,
he shall state the particulars thereof in the proposal form,

(3B) Where it appears from the proposal form that
there is already in existence one or more policies relating
to fire insurance in respect of the property, or any part

25 thereof, the insurer shall take info account the total amount
of the premium relating to all-such policies for the period
or-any part thereof for which the proposal has been made
for the purpose of determining the amount of commission
on the premium payable on the policy proposed to be taken

3° cut from him.

Explanation —For the purposes of clause {a) of sub-
section (3), all the policies relating to a single property
comprising building, machinery, goods and contents therein
and to all other buildings and goods appertaining to that pro-

35 perty and under the same ownership shall be deemed to be
a single policy notwithstanding that such property might



Amend-
tment af
section

40C,

Amends
ment, of
section
42.

Omis-
sion of
snetion
ciiem

be insured jn parts under more than one policy 00 insured
with different insurers

19, In section 400 of the principal Act, in clause (b) of the

Explanation, afler the words “In India during the year”, the follow-
ing shall be inserted, namely :---

“but in computing the cxpenses of management in India
the following, and only the following, expenses may be exclud-
ed, namely:—

{i) in the case of an insurer having his principal place

of business in India, a share of head office expenses in respect

' of general insurance business transacted by him outside

India not exceeding such percentage of his gross direct
premium written outside India as may be prescribed,

(it) any expenses debited to profit and loss account
relating exclusively to the management of capital, and deal-
ings with shareholders and a proper share of managerial
expenses calculated in such manner as may be prescribed
and

(iii) any expenses debited. to claims in the revenue
account in Form F of Part ID of the Third Schedule”.

20, In section 42 of the principal Act,—

(a) in sub-section (J), for the words “ten rupees”, the words
“twenty-five rupees” shall. be substituted;

(9) in sub-section (3), for the words “ten rupees”, the
words “twenty-five rupees” and for the words “three rupees”,
the words “ten rupees’ shall be substituted;

(c) inthe proviso to sub-section (3A), for the words “thirty
rupees”, the words “seventy-five rupees” shall be substituted.

21, Section 48C of the principal Act shall be omitted.

20



31

22. After section 52G of the principal Act, the following heading Inser- é
and sections shall be inserted, namely:--- tion of
hew
occ.
tion
52H, $21,
523, 528,
52L and
52M.

*Acquisitian OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF INSURERS IN CERTAIN 035४७

52H. (1) 11, upon receipt of a report from the Controller, the Power

5 Centra} Government is satisfied that an insurer,— of Cen-
tral
(a) has persistently failed to comply with— Govern.
. . ५ . . ment |,
(i) any direetion given to him under section 24. acquire
section 34F or section 34G, or under-
takings
(ii) any order made under seetion 34E; or of in-
surers
10 (0) is being managed in a manner detrimental to the in cer-
public interest or to the interests of his policy-holders, or tain
shareholders, cases,

and that— *
8) in the public interest, or

15 (ii) in the interests of the policy-holticcs ux shareholders
of such insurer,

it is necessary to acquire the undertaking of such iusurer, the
Central Government may, by notified order, acquire the uuder-
taking of such instirer (hereattcr in this section and in see.

20 tions 521 and 527 and in the Eighth Schedule referred to as the
acquired insurer) with effect from such date as may be spncified
in the order (hereafter in this section and in sectiovs 52% and
523 and in the Kighth Schedute rcferréd to as the appdinied day);
day}: .

25 Provided that no undertaking of aa insurer shall be so
acquired unless such insurer bas heen given a reasonable oppor-
tunity of showing cause against the proposed uction, :

Explanation. For the purpeses of this section and of see-
tious 521 to 52M—
3° (०) “notified order” means an order published im the
Official Gazettg,
(b) “undertaking”, in relation te an insurer incorporat-
ed outside India, nieans the uridertaking of the insurer in
Tndia.



32°

(2) Subject to the othez ‘provisions contained in this section,
and in settions 521 to 52M, on the appointed day, the undertak-
ing of the acquired insurer ond all the assets and liabilities of
the acquired insurer shall stand transferred to, and vest in, the
Ceniral Government,

(3) The undertaking of the acquired insurer and! its assets

and liahilities shall be deemed to tnelude all rights, powers, +

authorities and privileges and al property, whether movable or
immovable, including, in particular, cash balances, reserve funds,
investments, deposits and all other interests and rights is, or
arising out of, such property, as may ‘be in ihe possession of, or
held by, the acquired insurer immediately hefore the appointed
day and all bouks, accounts and documents relating thereto, and
‘shall also be deemed ta-include all debts, abilities and obliga-
tions, of whatever kind, then existing of the acquired insurer.

(4) Notwithstanding anything eontained in sub-section (2),
the Central Government may, if it is satisfied that the under.
taking of the acguired insurer and all hig assets and Habilities
should, instead of vesting in the Central Government, or conti-

nuing to so vest, vest in A corporation sr company, whether
& AEb Y's 2

established under the scheme or not (hereafter in this scction
and in sections 921 to K2M aud in the Righth Schedule referred
te ag the acquiring insurer), thal Govermment may, by order,
direct that the said undertaling, including the assets and Habi-
lities thereof shall vest in the acquixing insurer, cither on the
publication of the notified ordex or on such other dafe as may
be specified im this behalf in the direction,

(5) Where the undertaking of the acquired insurer and the
assets and Habilities thereof vest in an acquiring insurer under
sub-section (4), the acquiring imsures shall, on and from the date
of such vesting, be deemed to have hecome the transferee of the
acquired insurer and ell the rights and liabilities in relation to
the acquired insurer shall, 08 and from the date of such vesting,
he deemed {o have leon the rights and linhiitles of such acquir-
ing msurer.

led by or under this
deads, bonds, agree-
ntation and
है having effect
<f

(9) Unless otherwise expressty provid.
section ar seeiions 52% to 529५0, ali vont
ments, powers of alterney, grants of Je;
other iustruments of whatever vatuve subsisting ¢
ely before the arpuinted day and te which the acqut
inser is a purty or which are in favour of the avanired ins
shafl be of as full force and effect against or in favour of the

ropr

imarnedi

10

15

25

50

35

4०



13
—

Ss

on
: 24
20

Eat 1947,

35

0. (8) LS—s,

33

Central Government 00, 85 the case may be, of the acquiring
insurer, and may be enforced or acted upon as fully and effec-
tually as if in the place of the acquired insurer the Central Gov-
ernment or the acquiring insurey had teen a party thevete or
as if they had heen issued in favour of the Central Guvermnent
or the acquiring insurer, as the case may be.

(7) If, on the appointed day, any suit, appeal or other pre-
ceeding, of whatever nature, is pending by or against the acquir-
ed insurer, the same shall not abate, be discontinued or be, in
any way, prejudicially affected by reason of the transfer of the
undertaking of the acquired insurer or of anything contained in
this section or in sections 521 to 52M, but the suit, appeal or other
proceeding may be continued, prosecuted and enforced by or
against the Central Government or the acquiring insurer, as the
case may be.

521, (7) The Central Government may make a scheme for
carrying out the purposes of sections 52H and 523 to 52M (both
inclusive) in relation to the acquired insurer.

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality
of the foregoing power, the said scheme may provide for all or
any of the following matters, namely:—

(a) transfer of the undertaking, including the ‘property,
assets and liabilities of the acquired insurer to an acquiring
insurer, and the capitel, constitution, name and office of the
acquiring insurer;

(>) the constitution of the first Board of management
(by whatever name called) of the acquiring insurer and all
such matters in connection therewith or incidental thereto
as the Central Government may consider to be necessary or
expedient;

{c) the continuance of the services of all the employees
of the acquired insurer (excepting such of them as, not
being workmen within the meaning of the Industrial Dis-
putes Act, 1947, are specifically mentioned in the scheme}
in the Central Government or in the acquiring insurer, as
the case may. be, on the same terms and conditions, so far as
may he, as are specified in clause (४) and (j) of sub-section
(2) of section 37A so far as they may apply;

concen aera

Power
of एलन
tral
Governe
nent to
make
scheme.



34

(d) theccontiiiuance of therights of'any person who, or

‘| the ‘appointed day; is erititled' to, or is in receipt of, a pen
“stot or other Siperarnuation or compassionate allowance 07
benefit from thé’ acquired insurer or any provident, pension
or ‘other fund or any authority administering such fund 5
to be paid by, and to reccive from the Central Government
or the acquiring insurer, as the case may be, or any provi-
dent; pension or other fund or any authority administering
such. fund, the same pension, allowance or. benefit so long as
he: observes the. conditions. on which the pension, allowance 10
ot benefit'was granted, and if-any question arises whether he
has-so observed. such conditions, the question shall be deter-
- mined. by. the. Central Government and the decision of the

_ Central. Government. thereon, shall be final;

(e) the manner of payment to the shareholders of the 15
acquired insurer in full satisfaction of thefr claim of the
compensation payable in accordance with the provisions of
section 52J'

(f) the provision, if any, for completing the effectual
transfer to the Central Government or the acquiring insurer 29
of any asset or liability which forms part of the undertak-
ing of the acquired insurer in any country outside India;

(g) such incidental, consequential and supplemental
matters as.may be necessary to secure that the transfer of

the undertaking; property, assets and liabilities of the acquir. 25
ed insurer to the Central Government or the. acquiring
insurer, as the case may be, is effectual and complete.

(3), The. Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, add to, amend or vary any scheme made under
this section. ३०

(4) Every scheme made under this section shall be publish-
ed in the Official Gazette.

(5) Copies of every scheme made under this section shall
be laid before each House of Parliament as soon as may be after
it is made 35

(8) The provisions of sections 52FL and 52J to 52M and of
any scheme made under this section shall have effect notwith-
standing anything to the contrary contained in any other provi-
sions of this Act or in any other Jaw or any agreement, award
or other instrument for the time being in force, 4o



Io

15

20

30

35

’

523, (1) Every person who, inimediaicly hefore thi nyinted
day, is registered as a holdex of shares in. the acq line
shall be given by the Central Government or the acquiring
imsurer, as the ease may be, stch compensation im respect of
‘the transfer of the undertaking of the acquired imsurer as is
determined in accordance with the principles contained in the
Highth Schedule,

(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (2). shall affect tho
rights inter se between the holder of any shares. in the, acquired
insurer and any other person who may have any interest in such
shares and such other.person shall, he entitled to enforce his in-
terest against the compensation awarded to the holder of, such
shares, but not against the Central Government or the acquiring
insurer.

(3) ‘The amount of compensation to be given in accordance
with the principles contained in the Eighth Schedule shall be
determined, in the first instance, by the Ceniral Government or
the acquiring insurer, :as ‘the case may be, in consuliation with
the ‘Controller, and shall be offered by it to all thuse to whom
compensation is:puyable under sub-section (1) in fill satisfaction
thereof.

(4) If the amount of compensation offered in terms of sube
section (3) is not acceptable to any shareholder of the acquired
insurer, such shareholder muy, before such date as may. be:noti-
fied by the Contrat Government in the Official Gazette request
the Central Government in writing to have the maticr referred
10 the Tribunal constituted under section 52K.

(5) If before the date notified under sub-section (4) the Con-
tral Government ‘receives requesis' in terms of that sub-séction
from not [९5४ than one-fourth in namber of all shareholders,
heing shareholders holding not less than one-fourth in value of
the paid-up share. capital of the acquired insurer, the Central

> Government shall, have the matter referred to the Tyibumal for

decision.

(6) If before the date notified under sub-section (4). the
Ceniral Govertiment does not receive requests as provided in
sub-section (5), the amount of compensation offered under sub-
section (3), 07 where a reference has beén made'to the Tribunal
the amount-determined by it, shall be the compensation ‘payable

pensa-
tion to

be givan
to the
share-
holders
of the
acquir-
ed insur-
er.



Conasti-
tution

of the

Tribu-

nal.

36

tinder ‘sub-section (1) ‘and shail he final and binding oir all thé
patties vouceined: :

(7) Where the Central Government does not receive re-
quesis as provided in sub-section (5); the compensation payable

- im pursuance of the provisions of this section shall become duc

fox payment on the expiry of one year from the appointed day,
and where a reference has been made to the Tribunal under sub-
section (5), the amount determined by the Tribunal as compen-
sation shall become due for payment on the expiry of one
year from the appointed day er on the date of decision of the
Tribunal, whichever is earlier.

(8) If between the appointed day and the date an which
the compensation becomes due in pursuance of sub-section (7),
any facts come to light which call for revision of the amount
of the compensation, the necessary modification of the amount
of the compensatien shull be made and the amount of the com-
pensation so determined shali be the compensation payable in
pursuance of sub-section (1).

(9) There shall alsy be paid simple interest at the rate of

. three per cent, per annum on the amount of the compensation

for the period from the appointed day to the date on which pay-
ment of the compensation becomes due.

52K. (1) The Central Government may, for the purposes of
sections 52H to 52J, constiiete a Tribunal which shall consist of
a Chairman and two other members.

(2) The Chairman shall be a person who is, or has been, a
Judge of a High Court or of the Supreme Court and of the two
other members, one shall be a person who, in the opinion of the
Ceniral Government, has had experience of matters connected
with general insurance and the other shall be a person who is a
vhariered accountant within the meaning of the Chartered
Accountanis Act, 1949.

(3) If, for any reason, a vacancy occurs im the effice of the
Chairman or any other member of the Tribunal, the Central Gov-
ernment may fill the vacancy by appoiniing another porson there-
to in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (2), and any
proceeding may be continued before the Tribunal so constituted
from the stage at which the vacancy occurred:

(4) The Tribunal may, for the purpose of determining any
compensation payable under section 523, choose one or more

20

25

30

35

go

38 of



Io

2. 75

20

8
persons having special knowledge or experience of any relevant
matter to assist it in the determination of such compensation,

52L. (1) ‘Phe ‘I'vibunal shalt have the powers of a Civil Court, Tribii-
while trying a suit, under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, nal to
in respect of the following matters, namely;— rove
(8) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any a 4
person and examining him on oath } vi

Court,
(8) requiring the discovery and praduction of docu-
ments;

{e) receiving evidence on affidavits;

(8) issuing commissions for the examination of witnes-
ses or documents.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (7)
or in any other law for the time being in force, the ‘Tribunal

shall not compel the Central Government or the Controller—

(a) te produce any books of account, or other documents
which the Central Government or the Controller claims to
he of a confidential nature;

(9) to make any such books or document a part of the
record. of the proceedings before the Tribunal;

(०) to give inspection of any such books or documents
to any party before it and to any other person,

(3) Any proceeding before the Tribunal shall be deemed ta
he a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and
228 of the Indian Penal Code and the Tribunal shail he deemed
to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter
XXXV of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898,

52M. (1) The Tr.

ibunal shail have power to regulate its own
procedure.

Proce-
dure

., Of the
or any part of its Triny.

nal,
cal error in any order of the
arising therein from any accidenta] slip
or omission may, at any tie, be corrected by the Tribunal either
of its own motion or on the application of any of the parties.’.

23. In section 58 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2) —

(2) The Tribunal may hold the whole
inquiry in camera.

(8) Any clerical or arithmeti
Tribunal or any error

Amend.

5 -¢ see _ ment of

(०) in sub 28058 (ii) of clause (8) section 88,
(7) for the words “the returms”, the words “any re-

turns or statements" shall be substituted;



BB

Gi) _for the words, “company is insolvent”, the words
“company, is,. 61 is deémed to be, insolvent” shall be substi-
“fae

(b) in.sub-clause (iv) of clause (b), after the words “it~
terests of the policy-holders”, the words “ox to public interest. 5
generally” shall be inserted.

Aménd- 24. In section 58 of the principal Act, sub-section (5) shall bé
ment of omitted,
section 58,
Amend- 25. In section 64E of the principal Act, the words “the Tariff
ment Committee and the other Committee thereof’ shall - be omitted, 40
of scc- पु
tion 649... : .
Amend- 26, In section 64L of the principal Act, to sub-section (2), the
mene following provigo shall be, and shall be deemed always to have been,
of sec- P . .
tion gat,  2dded, namely:—
“Provided that if the General Insurance Council thinks fit,
it may, by a resolution passed by it, waive the collection of the 15
prescribed fees for any year and where-any such. resolution has
been approved by the Central Government, the, Executive Com-
mittee of the General Insurance Council shall not collect any
fees iin relation to that year.”,~
Omis- 27, Sections 640 to 64Q of the principal Act shall be omitted, 20
gion : .
of 8४९-
ions
840 to
64Q.
Amend- -28, In section 64R of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), the
ment words “or the Tariff Committee appointed under section 640” shall
¢ sete ढ़
tion 848. be omitted.
Inser- 20. After Part ILA of the principal Act, the following Parts shall
timof + be inserted, namely:—
new
Parts
TIE and
1c.
‘PART HB
Tarirr Apvrsory COMMITTER AND CONTROL OF TARIVF RATES
5 Eslablish- 64U. (1) With cffect from the commencement of the Insur-
ment nf -mee (Amendment) Act, 1968, there shall be established a Com-
ane mittee, to be called the Tariff Advisory Committee (hereafter.
Com. on in this Part referred [6 us the Advisory Committee) to control

mittee. and regtilate ‘the rates, advantages, terms and conditions that



39:

may he offered by.insuvers im respect of general insurance byas-
ness,

(2) The Advisory Committee shall be a hedy corporate hav-

ing perpetual succession and छ common seal, with power, sub-

3 ject to the provisions: of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose

of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and
may, by the said name, sue and be sued.

64UA. (1) The Advisory Committee. shall consist of the Come

following members, namely:—- te
) of the
10 (a) the Controller of Insurance, ex-officio, who shall be Advi-
the Chairman; Cam

(8) a senior officer of the office of the Controller nomi- mittee.
nated by. the. Controller, who shall he the Vice-Chairman;
(c) not more than eight representatives of Indian insu-
15 rers, elected (in their individual capacities) by such insurers
in such: manner, from such areas and from among such in-
surers or grolips of insurers as may bé prescribed;

(८) not more than six representatives of insurers incor-
porated or domiciled elsewhere than in India but registered
20 in India, elected (in their individual capacities). by such in-
surers in such manner, end from among: such. insurers or
groups of insurers as may be prescribed.

(2), The Secretary to the Advisory Committee. shall be an
officer of the Central Government, nominated by that Govern-
25. ment,

64UB. (1) The Central Government may make rules to carry Power

hi to
out of the purposes of this Part. make

(2). In. particular, and: without prejudice to the generality of rues in
the: foregoing power, such rules may-provide for all or any of ee ate
30 the following matters, namely: — ters in

. thi:
(०) the functions to be discharged by the Advisory Com- Part
mittee;
(४) the term of office of the members of the Advisory
Committee, the procedure for their election and the manner
35 of filling casual vacancies in the Advisory Committee;

{c) the travelling and other allowances payable to the
members of. the Advisory Committee;

(@) the procedure for holding the meetings of the Ad-
visory Committée and for transaction of: business thereat.



Power of
the Advi-
sory Com-
Inittee to

40

(3): The Advisory: Committee-may, with the previous appro-
val 01 the Central Government, make regulations for all or any
of the following matters, namely:—

(a) the constitution, powers and duties of Regional Com-
mittees and of sub-committees constituted thereunder;

(b) the method of election of candidates for Regional
Committees and sub-committees thereunder, their eligibility,
term of office and method of {ling casual vacancies;

(९) the procedure for convening meetings and transac-
- tion of business by Regional Committees and sub-committees
thereunder;

(व) the appointment of officers and other employees of
the Advisory Committee and of Regional Committees or
sub-committees constituted by or under the Advisory Com-
mittee or any Regional Committee and the terms and con-
ditions of their service including traveling and other allow-
ances;

(९) such other matters pertaining to procedure as are
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act or of rules
made thereunder,

and may, from time to time, with the previous approval of the
Central Government, add to, amend or vary any such regula-
tions.

(4) The regulations made by the Tariff Committee of the
General Insurance Council under section 640 as they were in
force immediately before the commencement of the Insurance
(Amendment) Act, 1968, shall, after such commencement, con-
tinue to be in force until rules are made hy the Central Gov-
ernment under sub-section (1) and immediately after such rules
have come into effect, the regulations aforesaid shall cease to be
valid.

(5) The Controller of Insurance shall be in direct charge of
the establishment of the Advisory Committee and the Secretary
of the Advisory Committee shall worl under his direction and
control.

64UC. (1) The Advisory Committee may, from time to time
and to the extent it deems expedient, control and regulate the
rates, advantages, terms and conditions that may be offered by

20

25

30



281 dvantages, terms and conditions of which, in 7ates, ad-
६5 Opinion, it ig proper to contro) and regulate, and any such V@ntages,

4 sh oy ete,
Tates, advantages, tarrns and conditions shall pe binding on all
‘insdirers:

Provided that the Advisory
us approval of the Centra]
to offer, during such period
t which may be extended by periods of not more than
ars at a time) and subject to such conditions ag may be
ed by that Committee, rates of premium different from

Committee may, with the
Government, permit any
(being not more than two

8 or modifying an
ions, relating to any risk, the
ensure, as far as possible, that
between risks of essentially ६
considératio

¥ tates, advantages,
Advisory _Commit-
there is no unfair
he same _ hazard,
n is given fo past and prospective loss

Assigned. to the past experience, inchiding allowa

25 fluctuations and may also, at its diseretion, make suiteblée allow-
ances for future fluctuations and unforeseen future contingen-

cies? inchiding hazards of conflagration or catastrophe or both,

ry

SEPT a

30

dee ions, of the Advisory Committee
isions of this section shall be final.

of 4 iS

of the prov:

in pursuance



Transi-+
tional pro- *,
visions,

AS

64UD. (४) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Part,
“antil thé nanies of the members of the Advisory Committee elect~
ed for ‘the first’ time alter the commencement of the Insurance
(Amendment) Act, 1968, are notified, the Tariff Committee of
the General Insurance Council appointed under regulations made
ander sub-section (2) of sectiun 640: as it was in force imme-
diately before the commencement of ihe Insurance (Amend-
ment) Act, 1968, and in existence on such commencement (here-
after in this Part referred to as the Tariff Committee) shali
continue to function and shall be deemed to be the Advisory
Committee duly elected under this Part and the Controller of
Insurance shall become the Chaitman of that Committee with

‘eflect from the commencement of the Insurance (Amendment)

Act, 1968, and function as such, and any Chairman of the Tariff
Committee holding office immediately before such commencement
shall cease to be the Chairman thereof from the date of such
commencement but shall conlinue to. be an ordinary “member
of the Advisory Committee. :

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Part, the
coustitutions of the Regional Councils established under section
64P, as in force immediately before the commencement 6f the
Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1968 (hereafter referred to as the
Regional Councils), and of the Sectional Committees formed
thereunder, existing immediately before such commencement,
shall continue 10 be in full force and be of full effect until the

‘regulations made by the Advisory Committee for the first time

under section 64UB come into effect and as soon as such regula-

tions have come into effect such constitutions shall cease to have
effect, : TS

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Part, until
the Secretary to the Committee is nominated under sub-section
(2) of section 64UA, the Secretary to the Tariff Committee hold-
ing office immediately before the commencement of the Insu-
rance (Amendment) Act, 1968, shall function as the Secretary
and shall be deemed to have been duly nominated under this
Part.

(4) All rates, advantages, terms and conditions fixed by the
Tart Committee or ihe Regional Councils prior to the com-
meneement of the Insurance (Amendment} Act, 1968 and in
force immediately before such commencement shall continue,
execpt to such extent as they may be altered, replaced or abolish-
ed by the Advisory Committee, to be valid and fully in foree as

if they were rates, advantages, terms and conditions fixed by the
Advisory Commuttee,

253

30

35

40



43 _

f4AUE. (1) The Advisory Committee may require, by notices Power
in writing, any inslrer to supply to it such information or state- of the
ments, periodical or ad hoc, as it may consider necessary to en- Advi-
able it 10 discharge its functions under this Part and every in- Com.
§ surer shall comply with such requirements within such period mitteg
as may be specified by the Advisury Committee in this behall, to re-
failing which the insurer shall be deemed to have contravened ‘uire

the isi this Ket. infor-
e provisions of this Act. mation,

(2) Any information supplied under thig section shall be ste,

to certified by a principal officer of the insurer and if the notice so
requires, also by an auditor, ,

(3) The Controller ray, at any time, in writing, depate any
subordinate of his, to make a personal inspection of the books
of account, ledgers, policy-registers and other books oy docn-

14 ments of any insurer to verify the accuracy of any return or
statement furnished by him under sub-section (1), or to verity
that full particulars have been supplied by him in respect of all
policies issued by him, and the insurer shall provide all facilities
for such inspection, and mske available to such person all the

20 books of account, ledgors, policy-registers and other ‘books or

: documents of the insurer which might be needed by him for stich
verification and the person deputed may himself extract from
out of the books and records of the insurer such information

. as may be needed to fill up or complete the returns required

‘pg .: to’ be submitted to’ the Advisory Committee under this section,

(4) The Advisory Committee may, at any time, on the
‘application of an insurer, make arran gements for the inspection
: which is concerned with’ the inspection of
risks, adjiistment of lésses 67 fire fighting appliances, and may,
‘wheneves Tecessary, advise irisurers about the adequacy: af the
‘arrahgements for the inspection of risks and adiusiment of Josses
or the suitability of such appliances

Provided that no such inspection shall be made without
the written permission of the concerned organisation

:35 64UF. (1) On the commencement of the Thsurance (Amend- Assets
ment) Act, 1968, all the assets and Habilitics of the eneral and

bili-
Insurance Council appertaining to its Tariff Committee and to me of

its Regional Councils and their Sectional Committees existing on 4,
that day shall be transferred to, and vest in, the Advisory Com- Gene.
4o mittee. है ral In-

surance
(2) "The assets appertaining to the Tariff Cornmittece, the Goun.

Regional Councils, and their Seclional Committees shall be ला to



vestin
the Ads
visory
Com~-
mites,

“all debts, Habilities and abligati

। A

deemed to include all, ights and powers and all property, whe-
the Ovable” oF immovable, | ‘iheluding, in “particular, cash
Walahees, réseive’ funds, investments, deposits and,
interests and rights in,'‘or arising out of, 1५
bé'in the possession of the Tariff Commi onal. Coun- 5
cils and’ their Sectional’ Committees and all books af. 2ecount or
documents ‘thereof; and labilities shall be ed, to, in

ions of. whatever. ‘kind existing
and appertaining 10 the work of the Tariff Committee, the Re-
gignal Councils and, their Sectional Committees, 1°

(3) Where the General Insurance Council: has established a
provident or superannuation fund or any other fiind for the
benefit of the employees of its Tariff, Committee or Regional
Councils and ‘constituted’ a trust in’ respect, thereof (hereafter
in this section ' refered’ to as ‘an existing trust), the monies 15
standing to the credit of any sich find 4 the com ment of
the Insurance {Amendnient) Act, 1968, shall, subject, to, the pro-
visions of sub-section (4), "stand transferred to, ang, vest in, on

such commencemént, the Advisory Commitee,

(4) Where any employee of, the Tariff Committee, or the 20
Regional, Councils, of the General Insurance Council ‘does not
become an employee of the Advisory Committee, the monies
and. other assets appertaining to any, fund. referred: to. in sub-
section (3). shall be apportioned between, the trustees of the
fund, and, the Advisory Committee in the prescribed, manner; 25
and in case of, any dispute, regarding such. apportionment, the,
decision of the Central Government thereon, shall be final,

(8). The Advisory Committee shall, as spon as, May. be, after

the commencement of. the Insura 08, (Amen: . Ach: 1968,.
fute, In, Tespect, of the monies and other. ts. whith are, 30
al d to, and. vested.in, itvunder sub ection, (3), one. or, :.
more trusts baving, as far as practicable, objects similar. to the
objects of the existing trust.

(6) Where all the monies and other assets belonging to an
existing trust are transferred to, and vested in, the Advisory
Committee under sub-section (3), the trustees of such  trust,35
shall, on fhe commencement of the Tsurance (Amendment)
Act, 1968, be discharged trom the trust except, as respects things
gene or omitted to be done by them hefore such, commencement.

64UG. (1) Unless otherwise expressly provided b: or, under 4°
this Act, all contracts, agreements and other instruments of
whatever nature subsisting or having effect immediately hefore



the commencement of the Insurance. (Amendmont} Act, 1968, be effec.
and. to which the Tariff Committee, or any Regional Council is a tive by
party or which is in favour of that Committee or that Council, or ‘
shall be. of as full foree and effect against or in favour of: the the Ade

Advisory Committee or that Regional Council, as the case may visory |
be, and may be enforced or acted upon as fully. and: effectually Com-
as if, instead of the. Tariff Committee, or the Regional Council, mittee.
the Advisory Committee had becn a party thereto. or as. if they

had- heen entered into or issued in favour of the Advisory Com-
mittee, :

(2) If, at, the commencement of the Insurance (Ameénd-
ment) Act, 1968; any suit, appeal or other legal proceeding of
whatever nature is pending by or against the Tariff Cornmittee,
or any Regional Council then it shall not abate, be discontinued

15° or in any way be prejudicially affected by reason of the transfer
to, the Advisory Committee of, the. assets. and liabilities of the
Tariff; Committee, and. the Regional Councils. or of anything di
this Act, but. the. suit, appeal, or other proceeding. may be
prosecuted or. enforced: by gr against the Advisory

20. e, .
S4UH, (1), Every, whole-time, employeo. of. the Tariff Corn- Emplo-
mittee, or the Regional. Councils who was. employed. by: that Com-. Yees, ete,
-. taittee. op. those. Councils. wholly. or mainly-in conection. w S aoe
- ies immediately, before the commencement है
255 endment)} Act, 1968, shall, on and. from,

become an-employee.of.the Advisory. Committee
i his office init-by the same tenure, at the same re-
n Hon, and upon the, same, terms. and: conditions. ar
| the samie rates and privileges .as to- pension, gratuity and other.
taatters.es he woulth have. held:-on. such: Comimnehéemesit- if ‘this
Bart:had' not been enacted; and shall contintte to do.so.untit his
employment under the Advisory. Cornmittee. is terminated) or
until: his, remuneration, terms and: conditions, are duly. altered
by the. Advisory Committee:

Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall
apply to any employee who has given notice to the Central
Government. in writing either. prior to or within two months from ©
tha. commencement of the Insurance (Amendment). Act; 1968,
intimating his. intention of not becoming an employee of the: Ad-
visory Committee. हु

(2). Where. the. Central: Government, is, satisfied; that for the
'. .AUtRose. of. securing uniformity, in. the scales of, pay, xemunera-
tion and other terms, and: conditions of. service applicable to



Duty of
person
-having
custody
or con-
tral of
Preper-

46"

employees: of. the: Tariff Committee, or the Regional Councils,
it is nevessary''sé to do, or that a reduction in the remuneration
payable or revision of the other terms and conditions of service
applicable to employees or any class of them is called for, the
Central Government may, notwithstanding anything contained

- क subssection (1), or in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, or in

any other Jaw for the time being jn force or in any award,
‘settlement, or agreement for the time being in farce, alter. (whe-
ther by way of reduction or otherwise) the remuneration. and
other terms and conditions of service ¢o such extent and in such
manner as it thinks fit; and if the alteration is not acceptable to
‘any employee, the Advisory Committee may terminate his em-
ployment by giving him compensation equivalent to _ three
menths’ retnuneration, unless the contract of service with such

_ employee provides for a shorter notice of termination. .

- Explanation.—The compensation payable to an employee
under this sub-section shall be in addition to, and shall nat
affect any pension, gratuity, provident fund money of any other
benefit to which the employce may be entitled under his ‘con-
tract of service. : :

(3) Tf any question arises as to whether any person was &
whole-time employee of the Tariff Committee, or the Regional

Council, on the commencement of the Insurance (Amendment)
“Act, 1968, or as to whether any employee was employed wholly
“or ma

unty in connection with the statutory duties of the | Tariff
Committee; or ‘any: Regional Council, immediately _ before stich
Central

eomiencement, the question shall-be referred to thi
Government whiose decision thereon’ shall bevfinal: *:

ye -Notwithstanding- anythihg contained in the Industrial
Disputes Act, 1947, or in-any~other-law for. the, time beitig in
force, the transfer of the serviccs ‘of any employee. of the Tariff
Committee, or the Regional Councils, to the Advisory Commitice
shall not entitle any such employee to any compensation under
that Act or other law, and no such claim shall be entertained by
any court, Tribunal or other authority.

6411. (2) Where any property of the Tariff Committee, or
the Regional Councils (appertaining to its or their statutory
duties) has been ransterred to, and vested in, the Advisory
Committee, then,—

(a) every person in whose possession, custody or con-
trol any such property may be, shall deliver tlie property
to the Advisory Committee forthwith:

14 of

0

15

20.

25:

4g if

35

40



RDS NRE RN SHEET 2052

ro

a5

20

25

Fog

35

47

(9) any person, who, on the commencement of the In=
surance (Amendinent) Act, 1968, hag in his Possession, cus-
ody or control any hooks, documents ang other papers re-
jating to the ‘Tariff Committes, or the Regional Councils,
shal] be liable to account for the said books; documents and
Papers to the Advisory Committee and shali deliver therm to
the Advisory Committee ur to such person as that Commit-
tee may direct,

(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained -in this
Section, it shall be lawful for the Advisory Committee to take

all necessary steps for Securing possession of all: properties

Which have been transf erred to, and vested in, it under this Act.

6403, (1) The Advisory, Committee may constitute such
Regional Committees as and when it deems fit for one or more
of the prescribed Tegions,

- (2) Each Regional Committee shall eunsist of not more than
Seven persons elected by such groups of insurers carrying on
general insurance business in the Tegion as may be pregeribed,

(3) For the purpose of enabling t¢ effectively to discharge

"its duties, any Regional Committee may constitute, in the pres-

cribed manner, such sub-committees ag it may think Ait, whe-

‘ther consisting of members of the Regional Committee or not,

(4) It shall be the duty. of every Regional Committee to ad-

“vise the Advisory Committee on an 'Y question connected with the

fixation of rates, advantages, terms and conditions for risks
im its region which ‘may be referred to it by the Advisory

‘ Committee for advice, and in addition, evety’ Regional Com.

mittee shall perforrh such other functions as may be delegated
to it by the’ Advisory Committee by regulations made by it with
the previous approval of the Central Government.

(5) Where, in the exercise of any functions delegated to it
under this section, any Regional Committee oy any sub-conimit-
tee thereof restrains ‘an insurance agent from procuring or
causing to be procured general insurance business in any area,
such agent may prefer an appeal to the Central Government
against stich order within thirty days from the date of service
of that order on him and the Central Government may, after

giving such agent an opportunity of being heard, 9458 such
| orders thereon’ as it may think fit and the orders made by the
‘Central Government on such appeal shall be final,

Property
to the
Advisory
Com.
Iniitee,

Power

of the
Advisory
Com-
mittee to
constitute
Tegional
commit.
tees,



Levy of

fees by
the. Advi-
sory Com-
milteg.

Power
to Te-
move
difficul-
ties.

Power
of Cone
troller ty

8

(6) ‘Notwithstanding: anything contained in this section,
ever? Regional’ Council and every Sectional or othe Committee
of such Régiénal Council, in existente iminédiately before the
commencement of the Insurance (Amenduiéit) A’ct; 1968, shall
until it is abolished by the Advisory Cornmittee, be Heettied to be
a Regional Conmmittee of sub-committee as the cas¢ may be,
est&blished in accordance with the provisions of this séction and
shal] function as such and shall have all the powers ahd res-
ponsibilities which it had immediately before such commence-

. niin, aid if the teri Of any such Council or committee expires

etigtelne®; guich terns shall be deéméd to have béen validly ex-

tended up to the time when such Regional Committees and sub-
cominitives ave éstablisted

64UK. (1) Every insurer shall annually before the preserib-
ed date make payment to the Advisory Committee in the pres-
eribed mamhér of stich fées, not excéetling one-third of one per
cenit: of the prédiiuin intotie, net of reinsurance’ of - i
in the précedinig. year, ag wisy be specified by the Advisory
Committee for the pturposes of this Part

(६2) If an insurer fails to make payment within the prescrib-
ett date of छाए fee réquiréd to be paid under sitb-section (1) he
ghall bé déémed to have failed to comply with the provisions of
this Act .

(3) The Controllef may, so long as an application to the

- Court! under sub-section (5D) of séction 3 has not béeén 11808,

revive the registration which might have béen cancelled for

हु failure to make payment of the fee required’ to be madé under

sub-section (1), if the insurer makes payment of stich fee to-
gether with such penalty not exceeding the actual artount of fee
payable as the Controller may require.

64UL. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to tHe plovi-
sions of this Part, the Central Government may, by order, make
guth’ provisions or give such directions not inconsistent with
the provisions of this Act as may appear to it to be necéssary
or expedient for the removal of the difficulty

Providéd that no such powér shall be exercised after the
&pity of a péfidd of four years from the commiénicémentt’ of
this Part.

छत, (2) The Coniroller shall, after consultation with the
Advisory Committee, prepate and maintain a list of persons who
are approved by him to function as surveyors and loss assessors

i

°

15

20

25

30

4०



49

hereinatter referred to as approved surveyors or loss assessors) propare
end shall publish the list of approved surveyors and loss asses- ang
sors, as on the Ist day of January of each year, in the Official maintain

Gazette. list of
s (2) No claim requiring to be paid or settled ta India equal yors ang

to or exceeding twenty thousand rupees in value on any policy loss asses-

of insurance, arising or intimated to an insurer at any time after 5078.

the expiry of a period of one year from the commencement of

the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1968, shail, unless otherwise
7० directed by the Controller, be admitted for payment or settled by

the insurer unless it has been certified by an approved surveyor

or loss assessor.

i
surye-
|

(3) The Controller may, at any time, in respect of any claim
of the nature referred to in sub-section (2), call for an indepen-
15 dent certificate from any other approved surveyor or Joss asses-
sor specified by him and such surveyor or loss assessor shall fur-
nish such certificate to the Controller within such time as may be
- specified by the Controller or if no time limit has been specified
by him within a reasonable time and the cost of, or incidental io,
20 such certificate shall be borne by the insurer.

(4) The Controller may, on receipt of a certificate referred
to in sub-section (3), issue such directions as he may consider
necessary with regard to the settlement of the claim including
any direction to settle a claim at a figure less than, or more

a5 than, that at which it is proposed to settle it or it was settled
and the insurer shall be bound to comply with such directions:

Provided that where the Controller issues a direction for set
tling a claim at a figure lower than that at which it has already
been settled, the insurer shall be deemed to comply with such

30 direction if he satisfies the Controller that all reasonable steps,
With due regard to the question whether the expenditure involv-
ed is not disproportionate to the amount required to be recovered,
have been taken with due despatch by him:

Provided further that no direction for tire payment of a lesser
35 sum shall be made where the amount of the claim has already
been paid and the Controller is of opinion that the recovery of .
the amount paid in excess would cause undue hardship to the
insured: |

. Provided also that nothing in this section ghall relieve the
40. insurer from any ability, eivil or: criminal, to: which he would
‘ have been subject but. for the. provisions of this: slib-seation.

1760 (8) LS—7.,



Sufi-
ciency of
1 - assets.

90

(5) Any insurer aggrieved py any direction made by the
. Gontroller under. sub-section (4) may, within thirty days from
the date of such direction, prefer an appeal to the Central Gov-
ernment against such direction and the Central Government may
after giving the insprer a reasonable opportunity of being heard, 5
confirm, modify or reverse the direction made by the Controller.
(6) Ne insurer shall, after the expity of a period of one year
from the commencement of the Insurance (Amendment) Act,
1968, pay to any person any feeor remuneration for surveying,
verifying or certifying a claim of loss under a policy of insurance 10
unless the person making such survey, verification or certifica-
tion is an approved surveyor or loss assessor.

(7) If the Controller is satisfied that an approved surveyor

or logs assessor has been guilty of wilfully making a false state-
raent knowing it to be false or of heing knowingly a party to the 15

settlement of claim in a fraudulent menner, he may, after

_giving such surveyor or loss assessor an opportunity of being

heard, remove his nayne from the list of approved surveyors and

loss assessors with effect from such date as may be specified
by him and shall notify such removal in the Official Gazette. 20

(8) Any surveyor or loss assessor whose name has been
removed uuder sub-section (7) from the list of approved surve-
yors and Joss assessors shall not be eligible for the inclusion of
his name in the list of approved surveyors and loss assessors for
a period of three years from the date on which the removal of 25
his name is notified in the Official Gazette,

(9) The Controller may in respect of any claim of value of
less than twenty thousand rupegs 97 an tasurance policy, if the
claim has not been or ig not proposed to be certified by 9
surveyor or loss assessor, direct that such elaim 8921 be certified 30
by an approved surveyor or loss assessor and where the Con-
troller makes such direction, the provisions of sub-sections (3)
and (4) shall apply in respect of such claim.

PART HC

SOLVENCY MARGIN, ADVANCE PAYMENT OF PREMIUM AND RESTRICTIONS ON 30
THR OPENING OF A NEW PLACE OF BUSINESS
@gVA, (1) An insurer shall, at all times, maintain an excess
of the valuo of his assets over the amount of his jiabilities of
not tess than two million rupees or twenty per cent. of his total
premiurn ineame, less re-insurances, daring the preceding 40
twelve months, whichever ig greater:
Provided that where a number of insurers occupying the
status of-parent-and subsidiary companies prepare, under the

i
1
|
|



51

laws of origin of the parent company, a consolidated balance-
sheet, the prévisiotis of this sub-section shall apply to such of
them as aré वा momiers of any group as if they constituted
a 81216 insurer, with the modification that the attiount of two
million rupees shall 88 construed ag a sum éqilal to the nuraber
of such ingtirers fiultiplied by two milion rupeés:

Provided further that if ta respect of any insurer the
Central Government is satisfied that either by reason of an
unfavourable clairn experience or’ begause of a sharp increase
in the volume of new business, or for any other réason, com-
pliance with the provisions of this sub-section would cause un-
due hardship to the insurer, it may direct that for such period
and subject to such conditions as it may specify, the provisions
of this sub-section shall apply to that insurer with the modifica-
tion that instead of the proportion of twenty per cent. mentioned
herein,.such other percentage being not less than ten per cent. as
ray be specified by that Government shall be applicable to that
insurer:

Provided also that ih the case of a insurer carrying on
insurance business at the commencement of the Insurance
(Amendment) Act, 1968, it shall be sufficient compliance with.
the provisions of this sub-section until the 31st December, 1972
or until such suosequent date, riot being later than 31st
December, 1976, as the Central Goverhmeérit may, at its discre-_
tion, allow for any particular insurer, if he progressively brings
up the excess of the value of his assets over the amount of his
liabilities, in such manner as may be prescribed, to the required
amount or percentage, as the case may be.

(2) An tishrer who does not comply with the provisions
of sub-section (1) shall be deemed to be insolvent and may be
wound up by the court.

(3) If at any time the value of the assets of an insurer does
not exceed the arnount of his liabilities by the amount or per-
centage, as the case may be, specified in sub-section (1), the
Controller, shall, after giving the insurer a reasonable |
opportunity of being heard, cancel, without prejudice to his
tight to apply to court under clause (b)-of sub-section (2)
of section 53, for the winding of the insurer, the registration
of such insttrer.

(4) The provisions of this section shall not apply to an
insurer specified in.sub-clause (c) of clause (9) of section 2.



(5) The: provisions of sub-section’ (7) shall apply. to any
insurer who-is a member, of a group’ subject to the modifica
tion that the amount of two million rupees specified in that sub-
section shall be construed as a sum equal to that proportion of
two million rupees as the share of the risk on each policy borne
by such insurer bears to the total risk on the policy,

(6) The Central Government may, by rules, reduce the x
sum of. two million rupees referred to in sub-section (1) to a :
lower figure not less than one hundred thousand rupees in
respect of a country craft insurer or .in respect of an insurer not 10
having a share capital and operating only among a restricted
portion of, and not with, the general public.

(7) For the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the a
provisions of this section,— ;

(i) assets shall be valued subject to any, reserves or 35
depreciation funds relating thereto, at values not exceeding
their market or realisable value and the assets hereafter
mentioned shall be excluded to the extent indicated, name- J
Ay: . <

(8) agents’ balances and outstanding premiums in 20
India, to the extent they are not realised within a
period of thirty days;

(9) agents’ balances and outstanding premiums
outside India, to the extent they are not realisable, un-

less they are adequately covered by bad or doubtful 25
debts reserves; ~

(c) sundry debts, to the extent they are not reali
able unless they are adequately covered by bad or
doubtful debts reserves;

(d) advances of an unrealisable character; 30

(९) furniture, fixtures, dead stock and stationery;
(f) deferred expenses;

(g) profit and loss account balance and any ficti-
tious assets other than pr¢psid expenses;

(६) a proper value shall be placed on every item of lia- 35
bility and liabilities in respect of share capital, general 10-
serve; and investment reserve, reserve for bad and doubt-
ful debts, and depreciation fund except in respect of such



10

20

25

30

35

40

53

items which are taken credit for as “assets” shall be exelud.
ed and liabilities hereafter mentioned shall be included
to the extent indicated, namely: -—

(a) provision, for dividends and unpaid dividends
in full;

(0) reserves for unexpired risks in respect of.

(i) fire and miscellaneous business, 40 per
cent.,

(8) marine cargo business, 40 per cent, and
ii) marine hull business, 100 per cent,,

of the premium, net of re-insurances, during the preced-
ing twelve months; ह

(2) outstanding claims in full;

(०) amount due to insurance companies carrying
on insurance business in full;

(९) amounts due to sundry creditors, in full;
(f) provision for taxation, in full,

RzplanationIf in respect of marine insurance
business an insurer prepares the marine insurance
business account on a three year basis and the provi-
sions for unexpired risks and outstanding claims are
included in the marine insurance business account, it
shall be sufficient compliance with the provisions of
sub-clauses (b) and (z). of clause (%) in respect of
marine insurance business, if the marine insurance busi-
2658 account is more than the total premium income,
less re-insurances, during the preceding twelve months
in respect of marine insurance business,

(8) Every insurer shall furnish to the Controller with his
returns under section 15 or ‘section 16, as the case may be, a
statement, certified by an auditor, of his assets and liahilities
assessed in the manner required by this section as on the 31st
day of December of the preceding year,

64VB. (1) No insurer shall assume any risk in India in res- No risk
pect of any insurance business on which premium is not ordi- to be
narily payable outside India unless and until the Premium ossumed
payable is received by him or is guaranteed to be paid by such “css

हि a : . Premium
Person in such manner and within such time ag may be prescrib-

; है is receiy~
ed or unless and until deposit’ of such amount as may be pres- ed in

eribed, is mado in advance in the preséribed manner: advance,



Ttestric-
tions on
the open-
ing ofa
new place
of busi.
Ness,

54

(2) For the purposes. of this. section, in the case of risks for
which premium can be ascertained in advance, the risk may be
assumed not earlier than the date on which the premitim has
been paid in cash or by cheque to the insurer,

Explanation.-Where the premium is tendered by postal
money order or cheque sent by post, the risk may be assumed on
the date on which the money order is booked or the cheque is
posted, ag the case may be.

(3) Any refund of premium which may becorne due to an
insured on account of the cancellation of a policy or alteration
in its terms and conditions or otherwise shall be paid by the in-
surer directly to the insured by a crossed or order cheque or
by postal money order and a proper receipt shail be obtained
by the insurer from the insured, and ‘such refund shall in no
case be credited to the account of the agent.

(4) Where an insurance agent collects a premium on a
policy of insurance on behalf of an insurer, he shall deposit with,
or despatch by post to, the insurer, the premium so collected in
full without deduction of his commission within twenty-four
hours of the collection excluding bank and postal holidays.

(5) The Central Government may, by rules, relax the re-
quirements of sub-section (1) in respect of particular categories
of insurance policies.

64VC. (0) No insurer shall, after the commencement of the
Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1968, open a new place of busines
in India or change otherwise than within the same city, town or
village, the location of an existing place of business situated in
India without obtaining the prior permission of the Controller,

(2) The Controller may grant permission under sub-section
(2) subject to such conditions as he may think fit te impose
either generally or with reference to any particular case,

(3) Where, in the opinion of the Controller, an insurer has,
at any time, failed to comply with any of the conditions imposed
on him under this section, the Controller may, by order in writ-
ing and after affording reasonable opportunity to the insurer
for showing cause against the action proposed to be taken
against him, revoke any perntission granted under this section.

Explanation—For the purposes of this section, “place of
business” inckudes a branch, sub-branch, inspectorate, organisa~
tion office and. any other office, by whatever name catled.’.

25

35

qo


55

30. In section 96 of the principal Act, the- words “Mutual Insur- Amend
ance Compantes and” shall he omitted, है ment of
section 96,

31. In section 97 of the principal Act, for the words and figures Amend-
“No Mutual Insurance Company incorporated after the 26th day of ment हे
5 January, 1937, and no Co-operative Life Insurance Society register- व Section
ed after that date”, the words and figures “No Co-operative Life °"
Insurance Society registered after the 26th day of January, 1937"
shall be substituted,

ti ५ Amend-
42, In section 98 of the principal Act,— met! of

10 (a) in sub-section (7), the words “Mutual Insurance Com. section 98,
pany and every” shall be omitted;

(5) in sub-section (3), the words “g Mutual Insurance
Company and” shalk be omitted. हैं

83, After section 101B of the principal Act, the following section Insection

15 shall be inserted, namely ;— of new
section
1010,
“1010, The Controller may, at any time,— Examing.
tion of
(2) call upon an insurer to submit for his examination wees ha
at the principal place of business of the insurer in India tee TE

all re-insurance treaties and other re-ingsurance contracts
20 entered into by the insurer;

(6) examine any officer of the insurer on oath in rela-
tion to any such document as is referred to in clause (०)
above; or

(०) by notice in writing, require any insurer to supply
25 him with copies of any of the documenta referred to in
clause (a), certified by a principal officer of the insurer.”,

34, In section 102 af the principal Act, after sub-section (1), Amend.
the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely: — ment of
800-

“(1A) Tf any person fails to produce any book, account or tion 102,
30 other document or to furnish any statement ar information
which, under sub-section (2) of section 38A or under sub-sec-
tion (3) of section 64UE, it is his duty to produce or furnish, or
to answer any question relating to the business of an insurer
which he is asked by an officer making an inspection under either
35 of those sections, he shall be. punishable with fine which may



Insertion
og new
section
107A.

Chair-
man, etc.
io be
public
servants,
Amend-
ment of
section.
109.

Insertion
of new
sections

1100, 1108

and 110F.

Certain
claims
for com-
pensation
barred,

Sections
278, 288,
33A, ete.
10 apply
10 genc-
wal insur.
ance busi-
ness of
the Life
Insurance
Corpora-
tion of
India,

56

extend to:two thousand: rupees in respect of each failure and if

the failure continues, to a further fine which may extend to one

hundred rupees for each day after the first, during which such

failure continues.”.

$5. After section 107 of the principal Act, the following section 5
shall be inserted, namely:— :

“107A, Every Chairman, director, auditor, liquidator, man-
ager and any other employee of an insurer shall be deemed to
be a public servant for the purposes of Chapter IX of the Indian

Penal Code.”. 10 45o0f1

86. Section 109 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered as sub-
section (1) thereof, and after sub-section {1} as so re-numbered,
the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—

(2) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punish-
able under sub-section (5) of section 34B or sub-section (1A) 15
of section 102 except upon complaint in writing made by an
officer of the Central Government generally or specially
authorised in writing, in this behaif by the Controller, and no
court inferior to that of a Presidency Magistrate or a Magis-
trate of the first class shall try any such offence.”, 20

37, After section 1100 of the principal Act, the following sections
shall be inserted, namely:—

*110D. No person shall have any right, whether in contract
or otherwise, to any compensation for any loss incurred ‘by
reason of the operation of any of the provisions contained in 25
section 34 or 34A or 34E or 387A or by reason of the compliance
by an insurer with any order or direction given to him under
this Act.

1108, Notwithstanding anything contained in the Life
Insurance Corporation Act, 1956, the provisions of sections 27B, 30
28B, 383A, 34, clauses (a) and (9) of sub-section (1) of section
34E, section 34F, sections 64U to 64UM (both inclusive}, "sec-
tions 64VA, §4VB, 6€VC and section 101C, shall also apply,
so far as may be, to and in relation to the general insurance
business carried on by the Life Insurance Corporation of India 35



1357

and the provisions af section 837A shall also apply to that Cor-
poration if-it becomes an acquiring insurer.

1107, ‘The provisions of sections 273, 283, 334, 34, clauses
(0) and (b) of sub-section (i} of section 34%, section 341", sec~
ticns 64U to 65UM (both melusive), sections 64VA, 64VB, 64VC

2 and section £01C shall, notwithstanding any excmption grant-
ed under section 118, also apply, so far 88 may be, to and jn vela-
tion to the general insurance )usiness carried on by the Central
Government or a State Government or a Government company

10 as defined in section 617 of Lhe Companies Act, 1956.7.

38. की secticn 1468 of the principal Act, for the ward, figures
and iciter “section 28A", the words, figures and letters “section 28A
or settion 28B” shall be substituted.

39. For clause (a) under Notes, below Forra F of Part WU of the
15 Thirel Schedule, the following shali be substituted, namely:—

“(a) This itera must include all expenses dircetly incurred
in relation 40 assessment of claims of the nature of survey
fees, fees for pclice reports, legal fees, court expenses and

other simular charges, but should not include any establishment
20 or administration expenses.".

4%, After the Seventh Schedule to the principal Act, the follow-
ing Schedule shall be inserted, namely: —

‘THE EIGHTH SCHEDULE
(See section 523)
PRINCIPALS OF COMPENSATION

। !

The compensation to be given under section’ 52J shall be an
amolint equal to the value of the asscts of the acquired insurer
as on the day immediately before the appointed day, computed
in accofdance with the provisions of Part I of this Schedule less

the total amount of liabilities thereof-as on that day, computed
in accordance with the provisions of Part 1[ of this Schedule,

Provisions
applicahle
to Stata
f3avern-
ments,

lc.

Amend-
mit of
section

1188,

Amend-
ment of
Form F
in Thirg
Schedule.

Tusertion
ol Eighth
Schedule.



58
- Parr I
Assets

For the purpuses of this Part “assets” means the total of
the following:--

(a) the market value of any land or buildings;

{b) the market valle of any securities, shares, deben.
tures, bonds and other investments, held by the acquired ine
surer,

Explonation—lor the Purposes of this clause,--

. {i) securities of the Central and State Govern-
ments [other than the securities specified in sub-clauses
(ii) and (iti) of this Explanation] maturing for redemp-
tion within five years from the appointed day shall be
valued at the face value or the market value, whichever
is higher;

{ii) securities of the Central Government, such as
Post Office Certificates and Treasury Savings Deposit
Certificates and any other securilies or certificates
issued or to be issued under the Small Savings Scheme
of the Central Government, shall be valued at their
face value or the encashable value as on the appointed
day, whichever is higher;

(iii) where the market value of any Government
steurtly such as the zamindart abolition bonds or other
similar security, in respect of which the, principal is
payable in instalments, is not ascertainable or is, for
any reason, not considered as reflecting the fair value
thereof or as otherwise appropriate, the security shall
be valued at such an amouny as is considered reason-
able, having regard to the instalments of principal and
interest remaining to be paid, the period during which
investments are payable, the yield of any security,
issued by the Government to which the security per-
tains and having the same or approximately the same
maturity, and other relevant factors;

i (9) where the market value of any security, share.
debenture, bond or other investment is not considered
reasonable by reason of its having been affected by
abnormul factors, the investment may be valued on the

2§

30



oe
basis of ils average market value over any Teasonable
period;

(०) where the market value of any security, shape,
debenture, bond or other investment is not ascertain-
able, only such value, if any, shall be taken into account
as ig considered reasonable, haying regard to the finan-
cial position of the issuing concern, the dividend paid by
it during the preceding five years and other relevant
factors;

(c) the total amount of the premiums paid by the
acquired insurer in respect of all leasehold properties,
reduced in the case of each such premium by an amount
which bears to such premium the same proportion as the
expired term of the lease in respect of which such premium
shall have been paid bears to the total term of the lease;

(d) the written down value as per books, er the realis-
able value, as may be considered reasonable, of all furni-
ture, fixtures and fittings;

(९) the amount of debits due to- the insurer, whether
secured ot unsecured, to the extent to which they are
reasonably considered to be recoverable;

(f) the. amount of cash held by the insurer whether in
deposit with a bank or otherwise; ह

(9) the market or realisable value, as may be appro~
priate, of other assets appearing on the books of the
insurer, no value being allowed for capitalised expenses,
such as share selling commission, organisational expenses
and brokerage, losses incurred and similar other items.

Part U
Liabilities

The total amount of the liabilities of the insurer shalt
inelude—
(i) Reserves for unexpired risk being not less than 58
per cent. of the premiums, less re-insurances received duz-
ing the period of twelve months, immediately preceding.



छः...

(ii) the tolal atridimi of aly other liabilities of the
insurer exising on the appointed day, “including ail
contingent liabilities wnich the Cenlraf Government or the
acquiring insurer may reasonably be’ expected to be required
10 méct out of jts own re.wurecs on or afler the appointed day.

fi

LA

COMPENSATION PAYABLE 40 SHAREHOLUFRS

Every sharehotdor of the acquired” insurer shatl be given
such amount as com jon as bears to the total compensa-
tion calculated in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 10
1 the same proportion as the amount of paid-up capital of the
shares held by that shareholder bears to tbe total. paid-up capital

“of the acquired’ insurer,

11. Ciztsny nrvrornng Nov 0 BE TAKEN INTO“ACCOUNT ~~
No separate compensation shall be payable for any 15
_rprofits or any dividend in respect of any period jmamediately
. preceding the appointed day, for which, in the ordinary course,
profits would have been transferred or dividend declared after
the appointed day.’. _

Amend. | 31. In se tion 32 of the Payment of Bomis Act, 1965, in clause 20
mentof (4), the words’ “employees employed by any insurer carrying on

ee general insurance business and the” shall he omitted,
0. 905, .



NT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

STATEME

| With a view to promoting tus development of general insurance
business on sound | 168७ and to eliminate undesirable practices - im
the business, this Bill provides for more effective supervision and
contro! over insurers. The main provisions are:—

{a} Restriction oy sharcholding and voting rights.

{h) Regulation of investments,
हि {c} Increase in the deposit to Rs. 20 lakhs for one or more
classes of insurance business.

(व) Maintenance by insurers of minimum solvency margin.

(९) Power to the Controlicr of Insurance to carry out rou-
tine or surprise inspections and issue directions.

(J) Power to the Controller of Insurance to appoint Direc-
tovs on the Baard of Direztors or Observers.

(g) Pewer to the Controfier of Insurance to enforce amal-
gamations of insurers,

(i) Power to the Central Government to take over an in-
surer.

(#}Power to the Controller of Insurance to regulate and
fix premium rates and for that purpose placing the Tariff Com-
mittee of the Generat Insurance Council under him.

(j) Requirement that all claims above a certain limit should
he surveyed by approved surveyors,

(k) Requirement that the appointment or removal of prin-
cipal officers should be approved by the Controller of Insurance.

{l} Reduction of agetits’ corpmission in Fire business.

A few other amendments of an urgent nature are .also incidental-
ly included.

The Notes on clauses explain briefly the reasons for the various
provisions in the Bill.

New Deut; MORARJI DESAI.
The lith March, 1968.

61



62

PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

{Copy of letter No. 51(23)-INS, 1/67 dated the 11th March, 1968
from Shri Morarji Desai, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of
Finance to the Secretary, Lok Sabha.] .

The President having been informed: of the subject of the pro~
posed Insurance (Amendment) Bill, 1968, recommends the intro-
duction of the Bill in the Lok Sabha under clause (1) of article 1179
and its consideration under clause (3) of article 117 of the Const
tution, हि



Notes on Clauses

Clause 2 is consequential to the amendments proposed under
clauses 6 and 15,

lause हे provides for increase of dhe fee for renewal of regis~
tration so ag to cover part of the increased cost of administration
couscquent ta the implementation of the proposals contained in this
Bill. है

Clauses 4 and 5 provide for the application of sections 6A and 6B
relating to restrictions on shareholding and voting righls to insurers
tarrying on general insurance business also.

Clause 6 seeks to increase the deposit to be made by an in-
surer to rupees two millions for one or more classes of generat insur-
ance business and permits existing insurers to make the deposit im
instalments. It also provides that insurers operating in a group
need only make the deposit as a single insurer. Tho conditions te
be fulfilled by a group for this purpose are also set out,

Clauses 7, 8 and 9 are consequential to the changes proposed to
be made in section 7 under which the deposit will be the game for
one or more classes of insurance business.

Clause 10—Consequential,

Clause 11—The new section 27B is on the same lines as the exist-
ing section 27A with appropriate modifications and seeks to make
the provisions of that section applicable to insurers, carrying on
general insurance business. The new section provides that the in-
vestments of the assets of general insurers carrying on general in-
surance business should be made only in approved investments ex-
cept for 25 per cent. or in certain special cases:

Clause 12 is consequential to clause 11 and provides for the
furnishing of returns by insurers to the Controller of Insurance to
enable the latter to verify compliance with the requirements of that
section.

Clause 13.—Consequential.

Clause 14 seeks to omit, from the seventh proviso to sub-sec-
tion (7) of section 31A, the discretion now vested in the Central
Government to decide the maximum bonus which an insurer ean
give to his employees. The object is to bring the matter of bonus
within the jurisdiction of Industrial Tribunals. This amendmené
has been necessitated by a decision of the Supreme Court in 3960,

63.



64

Clause 15 inserts provisions in the existing section 33 to empower
the Controller 10 carry out inspections of insurers whether on his own
initiative or on the direction of the Central Government with. provi-
sion for cancellation of the registration or applying for winding up
in certain circumstances

Clause 16 inserts new provisions, These are—

(i) pewer to the Controller to give dircetions to an insurer if
the public interest or ‘n the interests of better management.

(ii) restrictions on appointment, removal or on remuneration of
certain officers and directors of an insurer,

(iii) power to the Controller to remove managerial and cther
perscns from office in certain circumstances,

(iv) power to the Controller to appoint additiona) asrectors on
the Board of an insurer, हु oe

(v) power to the Controller to caution insurers, to prohibit parti-
cular transactions or to render advice to insurers, 10 appoint observ-
ers to watch the proceedings at Board Mectings end to require the
insurer to take cerlain steps considered necessary,

(७) power to the Controller to issue certain directions regarding
re-insurance treaties, है

(wii) power to the Controller to order closure ot uneconom
prejudicially cperating foreign branches, and

(vii) powor to the Controller to search premises and seize books
of accounts and other records belonging to an insurer in certain.
special circumstances.

Cluuse 17 inserts provisions to empower the Controller if he is
salislied that it is necessary to do so on certain grounds, to prepare
a scheme for the amalgamation of an insurer with another insurer
and after securing the suggestions or cbjections from both the in-
surers concerned, to place the scheme before the Central Govern-
ment. When the Central Government approves the schemic it sh
be final and legally binding and shal] take effect from the date speci-
Ged by the Central Government.

Clause 18 seeks tu reduce the emimmission payable to an in.

३162 agent on a fire insuzanece policy to 1 per cent. en tha first
rupees 40.000 of the premiura, § per cert. On next rupees tla
nil thereafter, Safeguards are incorporated to ensure that this provi-
sion is not got round by splitting a single policy hetween different
agents or between diftereni insurers.

Clause 19 is intended to clarify a doubt in regard ts he inter
pretetion af section 49C; the amendment seeks to dcfina more ore



©

कं og

tisely the expérises which need not be treated as expenses of manage-
ment for the purposes of the limitations imposed by the section,

‘Clause 20 vaises.the fees fur licence of an insurance agent ta
rupees 25 for a period of 3 years. The increase is intended to cover |
part of the additional.cost of administration which will result.as a
consequence of the implementation of the proposals contained in this
Bill, The other changes. made by the clause are minor.

Clause 21 seeks to delete section 48C of the prizi¢ipal Act which
has been rendered superfhicus by the provisions now being enacted
through clause 16 ह

Clause 22 empowers the Central Government to acquire the |
businéss of an insurer on payment of compensation, The circum-
stances-in which the business may, be acquired, the basis on . which
edimpenisation shall be paid,:and provisions for setting up a Tribunal
to resolve any dispute in regard to the amount of compensatio’
also set out, a

Clause.23 adds “the public interest generally” dy a ground “for
the Controller to apply for winding up an insurer, Also the Con-
trofler-is being. empowered to apply for winding up if the required

solvency margin is not maintained i

Clause 24—Consequential to the provisions of clause 6. 4 Lo
“Clause 25.4Conscquential to the provisions in clause 29.

Clause 26 is intended to clarify a doubt as to whether the
Executive Committee of the General Insurance Council has the power
to waive the ‘collection of-tees... The provision is being given refros-
pective effect, - ,

Clauses 27 and 28—Consequential

Clause. 29-—Two new; Patts ITB and IIC are now being inserted,
The former makes provisions for the setting up of a Statutory Body
by the name of the Tariff Advisory Committee and for transferring
thereto’all the’ assets and liabilities of.the existing Tariff Committee

‘of ‘the "General Insurance Council.” The-new .Coramittee will .con-

thiue the work which the Tariff Committee has been doing, bnt the
Cétitroller,’ as the Chairman, will now have ‘the. deciding.,.voice. in
Tegard to the rate-finally fixed. Fees will be: collected for, running
the Advisory Committee as the Tariff Committee has.'so far-been
doing. The factors to be given weight in fixing the rates are liad
down. Provisions are also included to ‘empower the Controller. te



maintain a pannel of approvel surveyors and: loss ‘assessors. Every
claim over rupees twenty thousand in value will have to be valued
by a surveyor ot loss assessor in the panel. The new Part IIC séeks
to give statutory effect to certain salutary provisions now being ob-
served by the insurers on a voluntary basis under a code of conduct,
The most important provision being inserted in this Part is the re-
quirement that every insurer shall maintain an excess of assets over
liabilities to the extent of two million rupees or twenty per cent. of
the net premium income, whichever is higher, failing which the
insurer will be deemed to be insolvent, Existing insurers are, how-
ever, given time to make up the required excess progressively. It
is also being provided that the premium should be received in ad-
vance before a risk is undertaken. Another provision is that the
opening of a new branch will now require the prior permission of
the Controller.

Clauses 30, 31 and 32 contain formal amendments of a verbal
nature only. The references to Mutual Insurance Companies in
sections 96, 97 and 98 are being omitted, with the object of making
quite clear, what is even now true, that such companies carrying on
general insurance business have to comply with the deposit require-
ments under section 7.

Clause 33 empowers the Controller to collect information
about re-insurance treaties.

Clause 34 lays down the penalty for certain offences commit-
ed in respect of the new provisions being inserted under this Bill.

Clause 35 seeks to make the employees of insurers public ser-
vants for the purposes of Chapter IX of the Indian Penal Code.

Clause 36 makes provision in regard to cognizance of offences
and competency of courts.

Clause 37.—A new section which is being added disallows corr
pensation for the operation of some of the newly added provisions.
‘Two other sections are added’ which make some of the main provi
sions now being inserted applicable to the general insurance busi-
ness carried on by the Life Insurance Corporation of India and by
the State Governments, :

Clause 38.—Consequential.

Clause 39 makes an amendment to the Revenue Account
Form F for the same reason as that mentioned in clause 18,



87 ~

Clause 40 inserts a new Schedule which scts out the method
of arriving at the amount of compensation payable to the share-
holders ef an acquired insurer.

Clause 41 seeks to make an amendment to section 32 of the
Payment of Bonus Act, 1963 whereby the provisions of that Act are
made applicable to the employees of general insurance companies
This is consequential to the provisions eontained in clause 14



tf Uo TRESS : veJFINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
The proposed amendments, particularly those relating to inspec-

हि tlons and’ regulation of the premium structure jn clauses: 15 and 29
‘ would throw considerable additional burden-on the Controller of In-
surante whose office will have to be substantially augmented, The
financial implication ‘of the augmentation of the office of the Control-
ler of Insurance would be finalised later, but the additional cost may
be about rupees 25 lakhs per annum, है

2. The additional cost is proposed to be met as under:

(a) The maximum fee leviable on an Insurance Agent is
now Rs. 10 for three years. It is proposed to increase the maxi-
rum to Rs, 25. Having regard to the number of active agents
of the Life Insurance Corporation and those in general insurance
business elsewhere, this is expected to yield an additional
amount of about rupees 10 lakhs per annum.

(9) The maximum fee naw leviable on insurers for renewal
of registration is rupees 1,000 for each class of business. It is
proposed to increase this to one quarter per cent, of the net
premium income, which is expected to yield an ‘additional
amount of rupees 17 lakiis per annum.

3. Clause 22 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Govern-
ment to acquire the undertaking of an insuter jn certain circums-
tances on payment of compensation. These provisions are however
only permissive and not mandatary. It is not possible to indicate at
this stage the recurring and non-recurring expenditure arising out
of these provisions. According to tentative estimates based on avail-
able information relating to the existing Indian insurers, the total
amant of compensation payable in accordance with the principles
set out in the Schedule in the event of all these insurers peing taken
over will be approximately rupees 30 crores, As regards the expen-
diture on the setting up of a Tribunal, this is likely to be incurred
only if such a Tribunal fs set up in the event af a specified percen-
tage of shareholders of the acquired insurer not accepting the com-
pensation. If the Tribunal is set up in respect of an acquired in-
surer, and is able to finish the work, within shout six months, the
non-recurring expenditure may wot be in excess of rupees 7,580,000
and no recurring expenditure will be involved.

68



OO j या 69 हु हि i

4, Tt is not possible at this stage to indicate when any insurer will ,
‘be taken over under the provisions of the Bill. It will be necessary
to watch, after the Bill has been passed into law, how far the in-
surers are working in accordance with the directions issued there-
under, and jt will also be necessary to give to any individual insurer
adequate opportunity to show cause before it is taken over, .It is
therefore unlikely that any insurer will be taken over in'the cur~
rent financial year. or during the year 1968-69 and no recurring and
“non-recurring expenditure on this account is therefore ‘anticipated
during the current financial year or during 1968-69. The provisions.
which will have to be made in any of the financial years 1969-70 on-
wards cannot also be settled or anticipated. In any case, no such
expenditure will be incurred by the Central Governinent ‘without
due appropriation made by Parliament from time to titne’in this
behalf.



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 11 seeks to empower the Central Government to pres-
eribe the assets which, subject to such conditions as may’ be pres-
cribed, will be deemed to be approved investments.

Clause 12 seeks to give power to the Central Government to
preseribe the form in which the returns of investments made under
Section 27B are to be furnished.

Clause 1h seeks to give discretion to the Controller of Insurance
to inspect insurers and also power to the Central Government to
order an inspection by the Controller in special cases. The mini-
mum information to be maintained by insurers for the purpose of
facilitating such inspections may be prescribed by the Central Gov-
ernment. हें

ग्रह

Clause 16 inter alia seeks to empower the Controller to search:
premises and seize records relating to the transactions of an insurer
in certain cireumstances. In this connection power is sought to be
vested in the Central Government to make rules with regard to the
procedure for entering into any premises and for the safe custody
of seized records. A

Clause 17 seeks to empower the Controller te make a scheme
with the approval of the Central Government for amalgamation of
one insurer with another.

Clause 19 seeks to clarify the items of expenses which may be
excluded for the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the pro-
visions of section 40C of the Act. In that context it seeks to pro-
vide that the percentage of gross direct premium. which may be ex-
eliaded on account of head office expenses and the method of caleu-
lating the proper share of managerial expenses to be excluded may
be prescribed by the Central Government.

Clause 22 seeks to insert provisions for the acquisition of the
undertakings of insurers in certain cases and for the transfer of the
undertaking of the acquired insurer to any corporation or company.
The clause also seeks to empower the Central Government to make
a scheme for carrying out the purposes of such acquisition, and
transfer the acquired insurer, if necessary, to a corporation or com-

. ज्ज्ज

pany. i
Te 70 soem



a) .

Clause 29 seeks to provide for the formation of a Tariff Advisory
Committee which will take over ali the functions of the existing
Tariff Committee of the Central Insurance Council. For this pur-
pose, power is sought to be vested in the Central Government to
make rules with regard to a number of matters of procedural detail.

The clause also secks to ernpower the Tariff Advisory Committee
to make rules, with the previous approval of the Central Govern-
ment on certain matters of procedural detail. 7

The clause further seeks inter alia to enact provisions for main-
tenance of a minimum solvency margin and for advance payment
of premiums before risks are assumed and to empower the ‘Central
Government to make rules with regard to these matters.

All these are matters of procedural detail, The delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.



Registra<
tion.

Renewal
of Regis-
tration,

Deposits.

- ANNEXURE
Faerract FROM THE IVSURANCE Act, 1988
: (६.0 1938)
« * है oe पु

9, (2) * * * ca ;

(4) The Controller shall cancel the registration of an insurer
either. wholly-or in’ so far-as i€ relates to a particular class of insur-
ance business, as the case may be-— oes

oS पक oe मे | * क्र
(d) if the whole of the deposit made in respect .of a class
of insurance business has been returned to the.insurgr. under
section 9, of :

i Ps % *

3 AL (1) * * = * * : a

19) An application for the renewal of a registration for any year
shall be made by the insurer to-the Controller before the . 31st: day
of December of the preceding year, and shall be accompanied as
provided in sub-section (8) by evidence of payment of: the - pres-
cribed fee which shall not exceed one thousand rupées for each
class of insurance business, but may vary according to the volume
of business done by the insurer in India in each class of insurance
pusiness to which the tegistration relates.

* * * * * *

7. (1) Every insurer not being an insurer specified in sub-clause
(c) of clause (9) of section 2 shail, in respect of the surance busi-
ness carried on by him in India, deposit and keep deposited with the
Weserve Bank of India in one of the offices in India of the Bank
for and on behalf of the Central Government the amount hereafter
specified, either in cash or jn approved securities estimated at the
market value of the securities on the day of deposit, or partly in
cash and partly in approved securities so estimated,—

(a) where the business done or to be done is life msurance
only, two hundred thousand rupees;

(9) where the business done or to be done is fire insurance
only, one hundred and fifty thousand rupecs;

(०) where the business done or to be done is marine insur-
ance only, one hundred and fifty thousand rupees;

(व) where the business done or to be done is miscelianeous
insurance only, one hundred and filty thousand rupees;

(2) where the business done or fo be done is life insu-
rance and any one of the three classes specified in clauses
(8), (०) and (6), three hundred thousand rupees of which two
hundred thousand rupees shall be the deposit for life insurance
business;

72



73 i

(f) where the business done or to be done fs life insurance
and any two of the three classes specified in clauses (b), (e)
and (६), four hundred thousand rupees of which two hundred
thousand rupees shall be the deposit for life insurance bust-
ness;

(9) where the business done or to bo done is life insu.
ance and all three classes’ specified in clauses (9) , (०) and
(d), four hundred and fifty thousand rupees of which two hund-
red thousand rupecs ghall he the deposit for life insurance busi-
ness;

(2) where the business done ot to be done. does not include
life insurance but is any two of the classes specified in clauses
(b), (०) and (व), two hundred and fifty thousand rupees;

(0) where the busincss done or ta be done does not include
life insurance but is ail three classes specified in clauses {b),
(c) and (व), three hundred and fifty thousand rupees:

Provided that, where the business done or to be done is marine
insurance only and rolates exclusively to country craft or its cargo
or both, the amount to be deposited under this sub-section shall be
ten’ thousand rupees only.

(2) Where the insurer is an insuver specified in sub-clause (c)
of clause (9) of section 2, he shall be deemed to have complied with
the provisions of this section as to deposits, if in respect nf any class
of “insurance business carried of by him in India under a stand-
ing contract of the nature referred to in stib-clause (c) of clause
(9) of section 2 a deposit of an amount one-and-a-half times that
specified in sub-section (1) as the deposit for that class of insurance
business has been made in the Reserve Bank of India in one of the
offices in India of the Bank for and on behalf of: the Central Gov-
ernment in cash or approved securities estimated at the market
value of the securities on the day of deposit by or on behalf of the
underwriters who are memhers of the Society of Lloyd’s with whom
he has his standing contract,

(3) Where the deposit is to be made by an insurer incorporated
before, or carrying on the business of insurance in India hefore, the
27th day of January, 1937, the deposit referred to in sub-section
(1) may be made in not more than seven instalments, of: which the
first shall be not less than one-fourth of the total amount of the
deposit and shall be paid before the application for registration is
maade, the second shall be not less than one-sixth of the balance of
the deposit and shall be paid before the expiry of four months from
the commencement of this Act, and the subsequent instalments shall
be of not less than the minimum amount required as the second in-



Refund of
deposits.

“the case of an insurer to whom that sub

. 74
stalment and shall be paid before the first day of January of each

succeeding year:

Provided that in the case of insu,
business only, the deposit may be ma
ments, of which the first shall be not less than one-fourth of the
total amount of the deposit, and shall be paid before the application
for registration is made, the second shall be not 1088 then onc-ninth
of the balance of the deposit, and shall be paid before the expiry of
four months from the commencement of this Act, and the subsequ-
ent instalments shall be of not Jess than the minimum amount Te-
quired as the second instalment, and shall be. paid before the tst day
of January of each succeeding year.

(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3), in
section applies, not being an
insurer specified in sub-clause (a) (४) or sub-clause (b) of clause,

(9) of section 2, the deposit roferred to in sub-section (1 ) shal, be
made in two instalments of which the first shall be not Jess than one-
half of the total amount of the deposit and shall be made before the
application for registration is made, and the second shall be made be-

yer carrying on life insurance
de in not more than ten instal-

- fore’ the expiry of one year from the date of registration.

(5) Where the deposit is to he made by an insurer neither incor-
porated before, nor carrying on insurance business in India before,
the 27th day of January, 1937 the deposit may be made in instal-
ments of not less than one-fourth the total amount before the-ap-
plication for registration is made, not less than one-third the ha-
lance before the expiry of one ycar from the commencement of
business in India, and not less than one-half the residue before the
expiry of two years from the commencement of business in India,
and the balance before the expiry of thvec years fram the com-
mencement of business in India:

Provided that in the case of any insurer not being an insurer
specified in sub-clause (a) (i) or sub-clause (9) of clause {9) of
section 2, the deposit shall be made in full before the application for
registration js made.

(6) No class of insurance business in addition to the class or clas-
ses in respect of which an insurer is already Hable te make a de-
posit under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall be undertaker
by the issurer until the deposit to which he is already liable has
been made in full, and the additional deposit required in respect of
the additional class of business or yo much thereof as under the pro-
visions of sub-section (3}, (4) or (5) is to he made before the
application for registration, has alsa been made in full.

& ik a * *
: 9. (1) Where an ingsuter has ceased to carry on in India any
lass of insurance business in-respect of which a deposit has heen


15
niade under section 7 or section 98 and his liahilities in India in res-
pect of business of that class have been satisfied or are otherwise
provided for, the Court may, on the application of the insurer, order
the return to the insurer of sa much of the deposit as does not re-
late to the classes of insurance, if any, which he continues to earry

on.

10. (2) Where the insurer carries on business af more than one
of the classes specified in clauses (a), (b), (०) and (क) of sub-
section (2) of section 7, he shall keep a separate account of all
receipts and payments in respect of each such class of insurance
business and where the insurer carries on business of the class speci-
fied in clause (d) of that sub-section whether alone or in conjunc-
tion with business of another class, he shall, unless the Controller
waives this requiremet in writing, keep a separate account of all
receipts and payments in respect of each such sub-class of the class
specified in clause (d) as may be prescribed in this behalf.

Provided that no sub-class of the class of insurance business spe-
cified in clause (0) of sub-section (7) of section 7 shall be prescrib-
ad under this sub-section if the insurance business comprised in the
sub-class consists of insurance contracts which are terminable by
the insuror at intervals not exeeoding twelve months and under
which, if a claim arises, the insurer’s liability to pay benefit ceases

within one year of the date on which the claim arose.
= * * 3

* %

11, (1) Every insurer; in the case of an insurer specified in sub-
clause (a) (ii) or sub-clause (b) of clause (9) of section 2 in res-
pect of all insurance business transacted by hitn, and in the case of
any other insurer in respect of the insurance business transacted
by him in India, shall at the expiration of each calendar year pre-
pare with reference to that year—

* ie cd 1k * . +

(b) in accordance with the regulations contained in Part
L of the Second Schedule, a profit and loss account in the forms
set forth in Part II of that Schedule, except where the insurer
carries on business of one class only of the classes specified in
clauses (a), (b) and (2) of sub-section (7) of section 7 and
no other business: है

* * *k

21, (1) If it appears to the Controller that any return furnished
to him under the provisions of thin Act is inaccurate or defective

in any respect, he may—
हि * ca के * #

* ae i

(d) decline to acecpt any such return unless the inaceu-
racy has been corrected or the deficiency has been stipplied be-

Separa-
tion of
accounts
and
funds.

Accounts
and
balance-
sheet,

Powers of
Controller
regarding
returns,



Liability
of direc-
tors, ete.,
for lass
due to
contra-
ventions
of sections
27, 27A
and 29.
Provisions
relating to
managers,
ete.

Power of
investi-
Bation,

76
fore the expiry of one month from the date on which the Tequi-
sition asking for correction of the inaccuracy or supply of’ the
deficiency was delivered to the insurer or of such further time
as the Controller may specify in the requisition and if he de=
clines to accept any such return, the insurer shall be deemed to
have failed to comply with the provisions of section 15 or sec-
tion 16 or section 28 or section 28.5 relating to the furnishing of
returns,
* * * * ak i

30. If, by reason of a contravention of any of the provisions of
section 27, section 27A or section 29, any loss is sustained by the
insurer or by the policy-holders, every director, manager, managing
agent, officer or partner who is knowingly a party to such contra-
vention shail, without prejudice to any other penalty to which he
may be liable under this Act, be jointly ond severally liable to
make good the amount of such loss.

at ® * * ® *

313. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary: contained in
the Indian Companies Act, 1913, or in'the articles of association of
the insurer, if'a comipany, or jn any contract or agreement, no in-
sufer shall affer the expizy of one year from the commencement of
the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1950,— हि

हि (०) be managed by a company or a firm, or

x * # at *

Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall be deemed
to prohibit—
* * + * * *

(vii) the paymient of bonus in any year on a uniform
basis to all salaried employces or any class of them by way
of additional remuncration, such bonus, in the case of any
employee, not exceeding in amount the equivalent of his
salary for a period which, in the opinion of the Central

Government, is reasonable having regard to the circum-
stances of the case.

* के + * का *

Investigation

33. (7) + * *
(2) It shall be the duty of every m
other officer of the insurer
miske the investigation und

* * Ld
anager, managing director or
to produce before the person directed to
ev sub-section (2) all such books of ac-
documents in his custody or power and

€ said person May require of him within

‘uch time as the said Person may specify,



7

(3) Any person, directed to make an investigaliva under sub-
section (1), may examine on oath, any manager, managing director
‘or other officer of the insuror in relation to lis business and may”
administer oaths accordingly,

(4) On receipt of any report under sub-section (7), the Central
Government may, after giving such opportur
make a representation in connection
‘of the Central Government, seems v

nity to the insurer to
with the report as, in the opinion
easonable, by order in writing,—~

(6) require the insurer to take
any matter arising out of the re
may think fit; or

(b) direct the Controller t
insurer; or

(c) direct the Controller to apply to tho Court for the
winding up of the insurer, if a company, whether the registra~
tion of the insurer has been cancelled under clause (b) or not,

such action in respect of
port as the Central Government.

0 cancel the registration of the

* cd क्र * *
408, (7) * * * * * * Limitation
(3) No person shail pay or contract to pay to an insurance of excen-

agent, and no insurance agent shall receive or
by way of commission ot remuneration in an
any policy of general insurance issued in India by an insurer after
the commencement of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1950 and
effected through an insurance agent, an amount exceeding—
(a) where the policy relates to.
Surance, fifteen per
and

contract to receive, citure on

form, j spec commis-
'y form, in respect of sion.

fire or miscellaneous in-
cent of the premium payable on tho policy,

(b) where the policy relates to marine insuta:
cent. of the premium payable on the policy,
* * * 7

40C. (1) After the 3150 day of December, 1949, no insurer shal], Limitation
in respect of any class of general insurance business transacted by ore ae ene
him in India, spend in any calendar year 88 expenses of manago- manage-
ment including commission ‘or remuneration for procuring business ‘ment in
an amount in excess of the prescribed limits and jn prescribing any general
Such limits regard shall be had to the size-and age of the insurer: bushes

710९, ten per

* * ca

Provided that where an insurer h
any year an amount in excess of the
sub-section, he shall not be deemed t,
a sions of this section, if the excess am
4 limits as may be fixed in respect

as Spent as such expenses in
amount permissible under this
0 have contravened the provi-
cunt so spent is within such
of the year by the Controller after



Licensing
of Insur-
ance
agents.

nb
éonsultation with the Executive Committee of the General Insur-
ance Council constituted under section 64F, by which the actual ex-
penses incurred may exceed the expenses permissible under this
sub-section.

(2) Every insurer as aforesaid shall incorporate -in the revenue
account a certificate signed by the chairman and two directors and
by the principal officer of the insurer, and by an auditor certifying
that all expenses of management wherever ineurred, whether
directly or indirectly, in respect of the business referred to in this
section, have been fully debited in the revenue account as expenses.

Explanation —In this section,—
* * * हि * *

(b) “expenses of management” means all charges, wher-
ever incurred whether directly or indirectly, including com-
mission paymlents of all kinds and, in the case of an insurer
having his principal place of business outside India, a proper
share of head office expenses, which shall not be less than such
percentage as May be preseribed, of his gross premium income
(that is to say, the premium income without taking into account
premiums on re-insurance ceded or accepted) written direct in
India during the year;

* * * हि R 4

"42, (£2) The Controllet or an officer attthorised hy him in this be-
haif shall, in the prescribed manner and on payment of the pres-
eribed fee which shall not be more than ten rupees, issue to any
person making an application in the prescribed manner थे licence
to act 88 an insurance agent for the purpose of soliciting or procur-
ing insurance business:

& x & = * =

(3) A licence issued tunder this section, alter the commencement
of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1950, shall remain in force for
a period of three years only from the date of issue, but shall, if the
applicant, being at individual does not, or being a company or firm
any of its directors or partners does nof, suffer from. any of the dis-
qualifications mentioned in clauses (b), (c) and (da) of sub-section
(4) and'the application for renewal of the licence reaches the issu- . ~
ing authority at least thirty days before the date on which the
licence ceases to remain in farce, be renewed for a period of, three
years at any ohe time on payment of the prescribed fee which shall
not be more than ten rupees, and an additional fee of a prescribed



moe 10

amount, not exceeding three Tupees by way of penalty, if the appli-
cation for renewal of the licence does not reach the issuing authority
at Jeast thirty days before the date on which the licence ceases to
remain in force,

(8A) No application for the renewal of a licence under this. 88९०
tion shall be entertained if the application does not reach the issu-
ing authority before the licence ceases to remain in force:

Provided that the Controller may, if satisfied that undue hard-
ship would be caused otherwise, aceopt any application in contra-
vention of this sith-section on payment by the applicant of a penalty
of thirty rupees, ~

7 * * = ad a *

480. The Central Government may, in the case of an insurer
specified in sub-clause (9) of clause (9) of section 2, appoint for
such period and subject to such terms and conditions as it thinks
fit, not more than two persons to be directors in addition to the
directors already existing and the insurer shall pay to such addi-
tional director .or directors the same fees and allowances as are

payable to the other directors.

* ® * of *

WinvInc UP

53. (7) नि 93 * * * *

; (2) In addition to the grounds on which such an order msy he
based, the Court may order the winding up of an insurance com-
pany—

* * ® * * *

(9) if the Controller, who is hereby authorised to do so,
applies in this behalf to the Court on any of the following
grounds, namely:—

* * + * * Sd

Appoint.
ment of
additional
directors,

Winding
up by
the Court,

(४४) that, it appears from; the returns furnished under

the provisions of this Act or from the results of any inves-
tigation made thereunder that the corapany is insolvent, or

| that the continuance of the company is prejudicial
to the interests of the policy-holders. .

* * * * * *



Schemes
for par-
tial wind-
ing ap of
insurance
camp3-
nies,

Authori-
ties of Lhe
Life In-
surance
Canneil
and the
General
Insurance
Council.

Functions
of
Executive
Committce
af General
Insurance
Council,

Power of
General
Insurance
Ceunci? to
regulate
rates of
insuranee,
छाए.

80

58. (7) * * s x

(%) When making an order confirming a scheme under this 88९-
tion, the Court may make such orders as it considers necessary for
the disposal of so much of the deposit made by the company under
section 7 or section 98 as does not relate fo. the. classes of. insurance
business, if any, which the company continues to carry on.

4. * + can * 8

64198, The authorities of the Life Insurance Council and. the Gene-
tal Insvrance Council shall be the Executive Gormmittees; the. Tariff
Committee and the other Committees thereof constituted in- the
manner provided in this Part. :

* की झा ५ * * मे

64L, (7) * oo कै हि * a”

(2) For the purpose of enabling it effectively to discharge ‘ its
functions, the Executive Committee of the General Insurance Coun-
cil may collect such fees as may be prescribed from. all insurers
carrying on general insurance business.

* : te x Eg cd कै

640, (1) The General Insurance Council may, by regulations
made in this hehalf and approved by the Central Government, con-
trol and regulate the rates, advantages, termg and conditions that
may he offered by its members and. associate members, in respect of
gencral insurance business, and all such regulations sha]l be bind-
ing on all its members,

(2) Any regulations made under sub-section (7) may delegate
to a Tariff Committee, appointed for such peridd and consisting of
such persons as: may be specified. in such regulations, any power
of contro] and regulation vested in the General Insurance Council.

(3) Where an insurer iy guilty of contravening any regulation
made under sub-section (1) by which he js bound, the Tariff Com-
mittee, if any, appointed under sub-section (2) may take such dis-
ciplinary action against him as may be prescribed,

(4) The Central Government may preseribe the cases in which
an appeal shall lie in respect of any action taken under sub-section
{3), and any such’ appeal shall be preferred to the Central Govern-
ment within thirty days of the date on which such action was
taken, |



31

81

5) The General Insurance Council shall meet at least once a
year to review the work-done by. the TarifiCommitiee appointed
under sub-section; (2) Soy aon Loge न dias

(6) For the purpose of enabling the Tariff Committee to effec-
tively discharge its functions under this section, the General Insur-
ance Council may, by regulations made in this behalf and approved
by the Central Government, fix the amount of fees payable by in-
surers carrying on genera] insurance business, and the Tariff Com-
mittee appointed under sub-section (2) may collect such fees either
directly or.through Regional Councils constituted as hereinafter
provided, . . है

Explanation—For the purposes of section 640, section 647 and
section 64Q, the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, specify that any insurer or class of insurers, shall

insurance business, and any insurer so specified shall not take part
in any meeting of the General Insurance Council in which any
discussion of atiy matter deali' with’ in the said’ sections takes place,

64P. (1) The General Insurance Council may constitute such
Regional Councils as and when it deers fit for one or more of the
prestribed region:

(2) Each Regional Council shall consist of seven persons elected
by such groups of insurers carrying on general insurance business in
the region as may be prescribed

44Q.. (1) The Regional. Councils-shail ‘perform: such: functions as
may -be. delegated: to therm: by-the General Insurance Council

(2) For, the purpose of enabling it. effectively to discharge its
duties, any Regional Council may in the prescribed manner consti-
tute such Committees thereof as it may think fit, whether consist-
ing of members of the Regional Council or otherwise.

{3) Where in the exercise of any functions delegated to it under
this section, any Regional Council or any Committee thereof res-
trains a ptincipal agent or an insurance agent from procuring oF
causing to.be procured general insurgnce busigess from any. area
any such principal agent or insurance agent may appeal to the
Central Government within such time as may be prescribed and the
Central Government may pass such orders thereon as it thinks fit

not be deemed to be included amongst insurers carrying on general —

Regional
Councils.

Funetions
of the
Regional
Councils.



General
powers of
Life In-
surance
Council
and
General
Tagurance
Cauncil.

Applica.
tion of
Act to
Mutual
Insurance
Compa-
nites and
Ca-opera-
tive Life
Insurance
Societies.

Working
capital of
Mutua)
Insurance
Companie
and Co-
operative
Life
Insurance
Sacisties.

Deposits
to be
made by
Mutual
Insurance
Co-opcra-
Compa-
nies and
tive Life
Insurance
Societies,

. 82

648. (7) * * ‘ *

(2) The Life insurance Council or the General Insurance Coun-
cil may authorise the Executive Committee concerned or the Tariff
Committee appointed under section 640 ta cxercise any of the
powers conferred on the Life Insurance Council or the General In-
surance Council, as the case may be, under clause (a), clause (b)
or clause (८) of sub-section (1). है

के x * हू * a

96, The provisions of sections G and 7 and of sub-section (2) of;

section 20, so far as these provisions are inconsistent with the pro-

visions of this Part, shall not apply, and the, provisions of this Part

shall apply, to Mutual Insurance Companies and Co-operative Life
Insurance Societies. ,

97. No Mutual Insurance Company incorporated after the 26th
day of January, 1937, and no Co-operative Life Insurance Society
registered after that date under the Co-operative Societies Act, 1912,
or under an Act of a State Legislature governing the registration
of co-operative socicties shall be registered under this Act, unless
it has as working capital a sum of fifteen thousand rupees, exclu-
sive of the deposit ta be made before or at the time of application
for registration in accordance with sub-section (2) of section 98 of
this Act and of the preliminary expenses, if any, incurred in the
formation of the company or society.

98. (2) Every Mutual Insurance Company and every Co-opera-
tive Life Insurance Society shall, in respect of the life insurance
business carried on by it in India deposit and keep deposited with
one of the offices in India of the Reserve Bank of India, for and on
behalf of the Central Government, a sum of two hundred thousand
rupees in cash or in approved securities estimated at the market
value of the securities on the day of deposit.

* * * oJ *

(2) The provisions of sub-section (7) of section 7 shall apply in
respect of a Mutual Insurance. Company and a Co-operative Life
Insurance Society as if for the words “under the foregoing provi-
sions of this section” the words and figures “under the provisions

of section 987 were substituted
ae r a a a a

2of 191



- 1168, The Central Government shall every year cause ty be Summary -
‘published, in such manner as it may direct, a summary of the a potas
accounts, balance-shects, statements, abstracts and other returns published.
under this Act or purporting to be under this Act which have been
furnished in pursuance of the provisions of this Act to the Control-

‘ler duving the year preceding the year of publication, and may ap-
pend to such summary any note of the Controller or of the Central
Government and any correspondence:

Provided that nothing in this section shall require the publica-
tion of the statement referred to in sub-section (2) of section 10 or
the returns referred to in sub-section (2) of section 28 or section
28A, or the statements referred to in sub-section (2) of section 318
or section 48.

e * * % * me



Act not to
apply to
certain
classes of
emplo-
yees.

eat ttn we ५ » Sunt HE, THIRD SCHEDULE |
(See section 11}

REGULATIONS AND FORMS YOR THE PREPARATION OF Revenue ACcoUNTS

x * a * * *

PART II—Ferms
* * * ° ह * aK +
. ¥ Form की *

Form of Revenue Account applicable to Fire Insurance Business,
marine Insurance Business and Miscellaneous Insurance Busi-
ness.

Notes है
(a) This heading must include all expenses directly incurred in

' settling claims.

a + * * * *

Extract FROM THE Payment 08 Bonus Act, 1965

(21 of 1965)

* * * * * *

32, Nothing in this Act shall apply to—

(i) employees employed by any insurer carrying on gene-
ral insurance business and the employees employed by the Life
Insurance Corporation of India; :

" * * * * *


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Insurance Act, 1938, 30 as to provide for
the extension of social control over insurers carrying on
general insurance business and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto and also to amend the
Payment of Bonus Act, 1965. ;

(Shri Morarji Desai, ह
Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister of Finance.) ,