5 
o 
5 
As INTRODUCED IN LoK SAIIH.A 
• 
'- ~ . . ~. .,: ~~. 
Bill No. 31 of 1884. 
THE MOGUL LINE LIMITED (ACQUISITION OF SHARES) BILL, 1984. 
A 
BILL 
to provide, in the public interest, fOr the acquisition of certain shares of 
the Mogul Line Limited in order to serve betlter tite shipping MecU 
of the nation and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-~fth Year of the Ro.pubUc 
of India as follows:-
, . 
1. This Act may be called the Mogul Line Limited (Acquisition of Short 
Shares) Act, 1984. title. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "appointed day" means the date on which this Act comes =.i. 
into force; 
(b) "Company" means the Mogul Line Limited, being a company 
within the meaning of the Companies Act, 1956, and having its 
registered office at 16, N. G. N. Vaidya Marg (Bank Street), Bom-
bay; 
(c) "share" means a share in the capital of the Company, and 
includes a share pledged by any shareholder with any bank or other 
creditor; 
(d) "shareholder" means a person who, immediately before the 
appointed day, was registered by the Company as the holder of any 
}.. sh~ a~d includes his legal representativ~; 

Transfer 
and 
vesting of 
certain 
ahares 
of the 
Company 
In the 
Central 
Govern-
ment. 
Manale-
mental 
the 
.. Company. 
.-' 
Paya»Dt 
of 
amounts. 
(e) words and expressions used herein and not defined but 
defined in the Companies Act, 1956, have the meanings respectively 
assigned to them in that Act. 
lof 1958. 
3. (1) On the appointed day, all the shares of the Company which are 
not held by the Central Government shall, by virtue of this Act, stand 5 
transferred to, and shall vest in, the Central Crllvernment. 
(2) The Central Crllvernment shall be deemed, on and from the 
appointed day, to have been registered in the Register of members of the 
Company as the holder of each share which stands transferred to, and 
vested in, it by virtue of the provisions of sub-section (1). 10 
(3) All the shares which have vested in the Central Crllvernment 
under sub-section (1) shall, by foree of such vesting, be freed and dIs-
charged of all trusts, liabilities, obligations, mortgages, charges, liens and 
other encumbrances affecting them, and any attachment, injunction or 
any decree or order of the court, tribunal or other authority restricting J 5 
the use of such shares in any manner, shall be deemed to have been 
withdrawn. 
(4) For the removal of doubts, it i'8 hereby declared that the provi. 
sions of sub-sections (1) and (2) shall not be deemed to affect-
(a) any right of the Company subsisting, immediately before ao 
the appointed day, against any shareholder to recover from such 
shareholder any sum of money on the ground that the shareholder 
has not .paid or credited to the Company the whole or any part of ," 
the value of the shares held by him, or on any other ground what. 
soever; or 25 
(b) any right of the shareholder subsisting, immediately before 
the appointed day, against the Company to receive any dividend or 
other payment due from the Company. 
4. For the purposes of enabling the Company to function as a Govern-
,,-""( 
.J.. 
ment company in which the entire share capital is held by the Central 30 r-
Government, the Central Crllvernment may, by nottification in the Official 
Gazette, make such provisions (including amendments in the memornn-
dum and articles of association of the Company) as it may consider 
necessary and the provisions SO made shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything contained in the Companies Act, 1956. 35 1 of 1958. 
.. . S.: (1) Every ~ whose "res in 1M cDritai of the Company 
are transferred to, and vested in, the Central Government under section 
3 shaH. for such tranl!Ifer and 1'estmg, be given by that Government, j,n 
cash and in the........ specified in sectioo 6, an amount calculated at 
the rate of rupees tea per share. 
(2) The anaoun.t pay1IIIIe to a shareholder under sub-section (1) shall 
: ' amy . simple i...... at the rate of five and a haft per ce.:'It. per annum 
.. for ~ period eommeJIICinK on the appointed day and ending on the date 
on which payment of such amount is made by the Central Government 
tn flae sJunholder 01' where such amouRt .... been deplO5ited l1Dc1ft' sub-
sedion (4) ~ sedion 6, ~ the d_ 0-. which it is $0 depo$itecl. ...~ 

3 
6. (l) The amounts payable to a shareholder in accordance with the 
provisions of section 5 shall be given to him in cash to be paid by cheque 
drawn on the Reserve Bank of India. 
(2) A shareholder may make an application, in writing, to the Central 
5 Government for the payment of the amounts payable to him. 
(3) On the receipt of an application under su~section (2), the Central 
Government shall, after making such investigation as may, in its opinion, 
be necessary, make the pa~ent. 
(4) If any 'dispute arises as to the person entitled to receive the 
10 amounts payable in respect of any shafe, the Central Government shall 
deposit the amount in the principal civil court of original jurisdiction 
within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the registlered office of the 
Company is situated for being paid to the person or persons entitled to 
be paid. 
15 7. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding any-
thing inconsiSitent therewith contained in any other law for the time 
being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtUe of any law, 
other than this Act, or in any decree or order of any court, tribunal or 
other authority. 
!.to 8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act 
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of 
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
25 may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, 
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session 
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule shO'Uld not 
be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form 
30 or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modi-
fication or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of any-
thing previously done under that rule. 
MlUulerof 
payment 
of 
amounts. 
Act to 
have 
overrid-
ing 
effect. 
Power to 
make 
rules. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Mogul Line Limilted. is a public sector undertaking in the field 
of shipping functioning under the aegis of the Ministry of Shipping and 
Transport. At present, the Company is operating certain important ser-
vices, such as, the Haj Passenger Service, Konkan Passenger Service, 
Coastal Cargo SerVice, Bombay.Red Sea Cargo Service and the Overseas 
Tramp Service. The value of the net assets of the Company at present, 
that is, investment and working capital, is much less than the amount 
of its loan liabilities. 18,94,483 shares of the Company (which constitute 
99.6/> per cent. of the tot&.l shares of the Company) are held by the Presi-
dent of India, whilist the remaining 6,707 shares (0.35 per cent. of the 
total shares of the Company) are held by private individuals/institutions. 
2. With a view to dealing effectively with the problems faced by the 
Company t\l1d thereby to enable the undertakings of the Company to 
serve better the shipping needs of the nation, it is considered necessary 
in the public interest to make the Company a fully owned Government 
company. Efforts to acquire by private negotiations the small per cent. 
of the shares of the Company which are held by the priva~ individuals/ 
institutions have for various reasons not. borne fruit. It is accordingly 
proposed to acquire the said shares. 
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW DELm:; K. VIJAYA BHASKARA REDDY. 
The 20th Feb1'uary, 1984. 
4 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
'. I 
Sub-clause (1) of clause 5 of the Bill provides for payment of an 
amount calculated at the rate of Rs. 10 per share to every shareholder 
of the Company. The number of shares which are proposed to be 
acquired under the provisions of this Bill is 6,707. Accordingly, the ex-
penditure for acquiring the said shares will be RI .. 67,070. However, 
the actual expenditure may be less than the above amount as many of 
the shareholders may not tu,rn up to lodge their claim in view of the 
fact that the whereabouts oi some of the shareholders are not known. 
2. Sub-clause (2) of clause 5 of the Bill provides that the amount 
payable to a shareholder under sub-clause (1) shall carry simple interest 
at the rate of &t per cent. per annum for the period commencing on the 
appointed day and ending on the date 0:'1 which payment of such amount 
is made by the Central Government to the shareholder or where such 
amount has been deposited under sub-clause (4) of clause 6, on the date 
on which it is so deposited. It is not possible to estimate at this stage 
the amount that may have to be paid by way of interest for that will 
depend upon the time within which various shareholders may apply for 
the amount. 
3. No expenditure is likely to be involved in connection with the 
work involved in the distribution of the amount as this work Is proposed 
to be managed with the existing machinery of the Government. 
4. The B1l1, if enacted, is not likely to involve any other recurring or 
non-recurring expenditure. 
5 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules 
for carrying out the provisions of the Bill. The matters in respect of 
which rules may be made would relate to matters of procedure and 
administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the 
Bill itself. The delegation of . legislative power is, therefore, of a normal 
character. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide, in the public interest, for the acquisition of certain shares of 
the Mogul Line Limited in order to serve better the shipping needs of 
the nation and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
(Shri K. Vi;aya Bhcuk4fa Reddy, 
Mi:niatJer oj Shipping and Tra7t8pOTt.) 