1 8 APR 1964 
", ,," 
~. '~ 
l /9J(J} ')\) 
\. II --t,-:-i'4 ' 
8m \Ite.;iI ol,"t ../ 
THE ADVOCATES (AMENDMEN1) BIlL, 1964 
" BILL 
further to amend the Advocates Act, 1961. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Advocates (Amendment) Act, abort title, 
1964. 
25 of 1961. 5 2. In section 3 of the Advocates Act, 1961 (hereinafter referred Amend-
38 of 1921, 
to as the principal Act) ,- ment of 
.ect1onl. 
(a) In sub-section (2). in clause (b), for the words "roll of 
the State Bar Council" the words "electoral roll of the State 
Bar Council" shalt be substituted; 
10 (b) to sub-section (2), the following proviso shall be 
IS 
20 
added, namely:-
"Provided that as nearly as possible one-half ot such 
elected members shall, subject to any rules that may be 
xnade in this behalf by the Bar Council of India, be persons 
who have for at lealit ten years been advocates on a State 
roll, and in computing the said period of ten ye8lll In rela-
tion to any such person, ,there shall be included any period 
during which the person has been an advocate enrolled 
under the Indian Bar Councils Act, 1926."; 
(c) after sub-section (3), the following sub-sections shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"(4) An advocate shall be disqualified from voting at 
an election under sub-section (2) or for being chosen ai, 
196 (B) LB-1. 

Amend-
mentof 
.ection 4. 
Amend"; 
ment of 
section 8. 
Substitu-
tion of 
new sec-
tion for 
section 9. 
Discipli-
nary 
Commit-
tees. 
and for being, a member of a State Bar Council, unless he 
possesses such qualllications or satisfies such conditions as 
may be prescribed in this behalf by the Bar ~ouncil 01 
India, and subject to any such rules that may be made, an 
electoral roll shall be prepared and revised from time to 5 
time by each State Bar Council. 
(5) Nothing in the proviso to sub-section (2) shall 
affect the term of office of any member elected before the 
commencement of the Advocates (Amendment) Act, 1964, 
but every election after such commencement shall be held 10 
in accordance with the provisions of the rules made by the 
Bar Council of India to give effect to the said proviso.". 
~ In section 4 ¢ the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the 
following sub~ection shall be inserted, namely:-
"(3) The term of office of a member of the Bar Council of 15 
India elected by the State Bar Council shall,-
(i) in the case of a member of a State Dar Council 
who holds .office ex ojJicio, be two years from the date of 
his election; and 
(ii) in any other case, be for the period for which he 20 
holds office as a member of the State Bar Council: 
Provided that every such member shall continue to hold 
office as a member of the Bar Council of India umil his suc-
cessor is elected.". 
4. In section 8 of the principal Act,- 25 
(a) for the words "Bar Council", the words "State Bar 
Council" shall be substituted; 
(b) for the words "elected to each such Council", the words, 
brackets and figures "elected to each such Council (reconstituted 
on the expiry of the term of office of the elected 30 
members of the State Bar Council under section 54)" shall be 
substUuted. 
5. For section 9 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be substituted, namely:-
"9. (1) A Bar Council shal~ constitute o~e or more disci- 35 
plinary committees, each of whIch shall consIst of three persons 
of whom two shall be persons elected by the Council from 
amongst its members and the other shall be a person co-opted 
by the Council from amongst advocates who possess the qualifi-

~ 
cations spectfted in the proviso to sub-sectian (2) ot M'ction 3 
and who are not members of the Council, and the senior-most 
advocate amongst the members of a disciplinary committee 
shall be the Chairman thereof. 
S (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section 
(1), any disciplinary committee constituted prior to the com-
mencement of the Advocates (Amendment) Act, 1964 may 
dispose of the proceedings pending before it as if this section 
had not been amended by the said Act.". 
10 6. After section 10 of the principal Act, the following section shall Insertion 
, be inserted, namely:- of new sec-
tiOI1 lOA. 
"lOA. An elected member of a Bar Council shall be deemed Diequali-
to have vacated his office if he is declared by the Bar Councfl fication of 
of which he is a member to have been absent without suft\cient members 
IS excuse .from three consec,utive meetin~s of such Council, or it ~~~:~il. 
his name is, for any cause, removed from the roll of advocates 
or if he is otherwise disqualified under any rule made by the 
Bar Council of India.". 
7. In section 15 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2) ,- Amend. 
ment of 
20 (a) for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted, section 15. 
namely:-
"(a) the election of members of the Bar Council includ-
ing the conditions subject to which pfrsons can exercise the 
right tp vote, the preparation and revision of electoral rolls, 
2S the manner in which election shall be held and the manner 
in which results of election shall be published;"; 
(b) in clause (e), for the words "Bar Council", the words 
"State Bar Council" shall be substituted. 
8. In section 16 o,f the principal Act, to sub-section (4), the follow- Amend-
;,ItJ ing proviso shan be added, namely:- ment of 
section 18. 
"Provided that where any such senior advocate makes an 
applicatiorf befOO'e the 31st December, 1965 to the Bar Council 
maintaining the roll in which his name has been entered that 
he does not desire to continue as a senior advocatE', the Bar 
35 Council may grant the application and the roll shall be altered 
accordingly.". 
9. In section '17 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), for the Amend-
words "and such seniority shall be determined", the words "and, ment of 
subject to any rule, that may be madEfby the Bar Council of India in section IT. 
':;0 this behalf, such seniority shall be determined" shall be substituted. 

4 
AmeA4- Ie. In section 18 of the principal Act, to sub-section (1), the fol-
ment of lowing proviso shall be added, namely:-
eectioD 18. 
AmacL 
mmt of 
MCtlcm :&0. 
"Provided that where any such application for transfer is 
made !by a person against whom any disciplinary proceeding is 
pending or where for any other reason it appears to the Bar S 
Council of India that the application for transfer has not been 
made bona fide and that the transfer should not be made, the 
Bar Council of India may, after giving the person making the 
application an opportunity of making a representation in this 
behalf, reject the application.". 10 
11. In section 20 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), for the 
words uEntries in each part of the common roll shall be maintained 
of seniority and such seniority shall be detennined as follows", the 
words uEntries in each part of the common roll shall be maintained 
In such manner as the Bar Council of India thinks fit and the seniority IS 
of an advocate an the common roll shall be determined as follows" 
Ihall 'be substituted. 
8ubGltu- U. For section 22 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
tfon of new' be substituted namely:-8eC't1on for ' 
leetion22. 
Cert.UlcatAI 
fII. enrol-
ment. 
"22. There shall be issued a certificate of enrolment, in the 20 
prescribed fonn-
(i) by the State Bar Council to every person whose 
name is entered in the common roll without his name hav-
under this Act; and 
(ii) by the Bar Council of India to every person whose 2, 
name is entered in the common roll without his name hav-
ing already been entered in any State roU.". 
13. In section 24 of the principal Act,-
(A) in sub-section (1) ,-
(a) in clause (e) ,-
(0 in sum-clause (tii) , the words "or elsewhere" 
shall be omitted; 
(ii) after sub-clause Eiii), the following sub-clause 
shall be inserted, namely:-
• .. (iv) in any other case, from any University 35 

10 
IS 
20 
3S 
outside the territory of India, if the degree is recog-
nised for the purposes of this Act by the Bar Council 
of India; or"; 
(b) in clause (d) ,-
(i) the words "after such tra.irung" shall be omitted; 
(ii) in the proviso, for paragraph (i), the following 
paragraph ghall be substituted, namely:-
"(i) a person who has Obtained a degree in law 
from any University in India on the results of an 
examination held before the 31st day of March, 1964 
or such other later date as may be prescribed, or a 
barrister who was called to the Bar before such date. 
or a barrister who, having qualified after that date, 
has received such practical training in law as may 
be recognised in this behalf by the Bar Council of 
India;"; 
(B) in sub~ection (2), for the words "a vakil, pleader or an 
attorney who is a law graduate, or who is not a law graduate but 
was entLtled to be enrolled as an advocate of a High Court 
immediately before the appointed day under any law. then in 
force", the words "a vakil or a pleader who is a law graduate" 
shall be substituted; 
(e) after sub-BeCtion (2), the following sub-sections shall 
·be inserted, namely:-
"(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section 
(1), a person who-
(a) before the 31st day of March, 1964, has, for at 
least three years, been a vakil or a pleader or a mukh-
tar, or was entitled at any time to be enrolled under 
any law then in force as an advocate of a High Court 
(including a High Court of a form~r Part B State) or 
of a Court of Judicial Commissioner in ~ny Union terri-
tory; or 
(b) before the 15th day of August, 1947, has been 
an advocate of any High Court in any area which was 
comprised within India as defined in the Government of 
India Act, 1935; or 
(c) 'before the Igt day of April, 1937, has been an 
advocate of any High Court in any area which was com-
prised within Burma as defined in the Government of 
India Act, 1935; or 

Amend-
ment of 
section 28. 
e 
(d) is entitled to be enrolled as an advocate under 
any trUle made by the Bar Council of India in this be-
half, may be admitted as an advocate on a State roll if 
he-
(i) makes an application for sueh enrolment in 5 
accordance with the provisIons of this Act; and 
(ti) fulfils the conditions specified in c1aus£'S (n), 
(b), (e) and (f) of sub-section (1). 
(4) Notwithstandin~. anythinR contained in sllb-~ection 
(1), a person who has been an attorney of a·ny High Court 10 
may be admitted as an advocate on a State roll if he makes 
an application for such enrolment in aceordance with the 
provisions of this Act and fulfils the conditions specified in 
·clauses '(a), (b), (e) and (n of sub-section (1), but the 
right of such a person to plead or to act on the ori~nal ~ide 15 
of the High COl.I.rl at Calcutta or the High Court at Bombay 
shall be subject to any rules that may be made in that be-
half by that High Court." 
14. In section 26 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1). after the words, brackP1:~ anti firures 20 
"sub-sections (2) and (3)", the words "and to anv direc-tion that 
may be given in writing by the State Bar Council in this behalf" 
shall be inserted; 
(b) to sub-section (1), the following proviso shall be added, 
namely:-
"Provided that the Bar Council of India may, if satisfied, 
either on a reference made to it in this behalf or otherwise, 
that any person has got his name entered on the roll C1f 
advocates by misrepresentation as to an essential faci or by 
fraud or undue influence, !'emove the name of such person 30 
. from the roll Of advocates after giving him an opportu-
nity of being heard."; 
(e) after sub-section (3), the followin,g su'b-seciion shall be 
inserted, namely:-
" (4) Where the enrolment committee of a State Bar 35 
Council has refused any application for ~mission as an 
advocate on its roll, the State Bar Council shall. as soon as 
may be, send intirhation to all other State Bar Councils about 
such refusal stating the name, address and qualifications of 
the person whose application was refused and the grounds 40 
for the refusa1."~ 

S 
t 
15. After section 26 of the principal Act, the fOillowmg seCtion Insertion 
shall be inserted, namely: _ of new see-
tion26A. 
"26A. The Bar Council of India or any State Bar Council Power to 
may remove from the common roll or the State roll, 0 the case remove 
ma.y be, the name of any advocate who is dead or from whom a ~ames 
request has been lI'eceived to that effect!'. r:O:: 
16. In section 28 of the principal Act, in clause (b) of sub-section Amend-
(2), the words "after such training" shall be om.iJtted. ment of 
lection 28. 
17. To section 35 of the principal Act, the follOWing Explanation Amend-
10 shall be added, namely: - ment of 
" . section 35. 
Explanation.-In this section, the expressions "Advocate-
General" and "Advocate-General of the State" shall, in relation 
to the Union territory of Delhi, mean the Additional Solicitor 
General of India.". 
. 18. In section 37 of the principal Act, in sulb-section (1), for the Amend 
IS words, brackets and figures "under sub-section (3) of section 35", the men.t of 
words and figures "under section 35" shall be substituted. sechon 37. 
20 
30 
3S 
19. After section 48 of the principal Act, the following sections Insertion 
sha:! be inserted, namely: - of new sec-tions 48A 
and 4813. 
"48A. (1) The Bar Council of India may, at any time, call for Power of 
the record of any proceeding under this Act which has been revision. 
disposed of by a State Bar Council or a Conunittee thereof, and 
from which no appeal lies, for the PUlfPose of satisfying itself as 
tQ the legality or propriety of such disposal and may pass such 
orders in relation there.to as it may think nt. 
(2) No order which prejudicially affects any person shall be 
passed under this section without giving him a reasonable oppor-
tunity of being heard. 
48B. (1) For the proper and efficient discharge of the func- Powerto 
tionsof a State Bar Council or any Committee thereof, the Bar give direc-
Council of India may, in the exercise of ita power, of general tiolll. 
supervision and control, give such directions to the State Bar 
Council or any Committee thereof as may appear to it to be 
necessary, and the State Bar Council or the Committee shall 
comply with such directions. 
(2) Where a State Bar Couneil is unable to perform its 
functions for any lI'easoD whatsoever,· the Bar Council of India 

Amend. 
ment of 
lection49. 
• , 
may, wi1hout prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powet'. 
give such directions to the ex ot1icio member thereof as may 
appear to it to be necessary, and such directions shall have effect, 
notwithstanding anything conv.lined in the rules made by the 
State Bar Council.". S 
20. In section 49 of the principal,-
(a) for clause (a), the following clauses shall be substitut-
ed, namely:-
"(a) the conditions subject to which an advocate may 
be entitled to vote at an election to the State Bar Council 10 
including the qualifications or disqualifications of voters, 
and the manner in which an electrical roll of voters may be 
prepared and revised by a State Bar Council; 
(ab) qualifications for membership of a Bar Council 
and the disqualifi~ations for such membership; IS 
(ac) the time within which and the manner in which 
effect may be given to the proviso to sub-section (2) of 
aection 3; 
(ad) the manner in which the name of any advocate 
may be prevented from being entered in more than one 20 
State roll; 
(ae) the manner in which the seniority among advo-
cates- may be determined; 
(af) the category of persons who may be exempted 
from undergoing a course of training and passing an exami- 25 
nation prescribed under clause (d) of sub-section (1) of 
section 24; 
(ag) the class or category of persons entitled to be en-
rolled as advocates; 
(all.) the conditions subject to which an advocate shall 30 
have the right to practise and the circumstances under which 
a person shall be deemed to practise as an advocate in a 
court;"; 
(b) for clause (i), the following clauses shall be substituted, 
namely: - . 35 
"(i) general pri~ciples for guidance of State Bar Coun-
cils and the manner in which directions issued or orders 
made by the Bar Council of India may be enforced; 
(j) any other matter which may be prescribed: ". 

s 
10 
20 
30 
3S 
21. ·After section 49 of the principal Ad, the followm- sectio 
& n Inaertion ahall be inserted, namely:- of newlec-
.... nit. (1) Th C al G tion 49A. _.n. e entr overnment may, by notification in p 
the Official Gazette, make rules for carryirig out the purposes of C~~~~Of 
this Act including rulu with respect to any matter for which the Govern-
Bar Council of India or a State Bar Council has power to make ment to 
rules. make 
rule •. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of " 
the foregoing power, such rules may provide for-
(a) qualiftcations for membership of a Bar Council and 
disqualifications for such membership; 
(b) the manner in which the Bar Council of India may 
exercise supervision and control over State Bar Councils 
and the manner in which the directions issued or orders 
made by the Bar Council of India may be enforced; 
(c) the. class or category of persons entitled to be e1'll'ol-
led as advocates under th.ia Act; . 
(d) the category ot persons who may be exempted from 
undergoing a course of training and passing an examination 
prescribed under clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 24; 
(e) the manner in which seniority among advocate. 
may be determined; 
(1) the procedure to be followed by a disciplinary com-
mittee of a )jar Council in hearing cases and the procedure 
to be followed by a disciplinary committee of the Bar Council 
of India in hearing appeals; 
(9) any other matter which may be prescribed. 
(3) Rules under this section may be made either for the 
whole of India or for all or any of the Bar Counclli. 
(4) If any provision of a rule made by a Bar COWlcil is 
repugnant to any provision of a rule made by the Central Gov-
errunent under tws section, then, the rule under this sectiun, 
whether made before or after the rule made by the Bar Caunell, 
shall prevwl and the rule made by the Bar Cowacil shall, to the 
extent of the repugnancy, be void. 
(5) Every rule made under this Act shall ,be laid, as soon as 
may be alter it 15 made, before each House of l'arllament wlllle 
it is m session for a total period of twrty days which may be 
comprised in one 88SSlon or in two succfMISive sessions, and if 
186 (B) LS-a. 

AmeD4. 
ment 01 
teCtionM. 
~f) 
before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the 
Session immediately following, both Houses agree in making 
any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule 
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in 
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may' be, so S 
however, that any such modification or annulment $hall be with-
out prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule.". 
zz. In section 54 of the principal Act,-
(i) the worda Uthe Bar Council of India and" shall be omit- 10 
ted and shall be deemed always to have been omitted; 
(ii) the following proviso shall be inserted and shall be 
deemed always to have been inserted, namely: - . 
"Provided that such members shall continue to hold 
office until the State Bar Council is reconstituted in accord- IS 
ance with the provisions of this Act.". 
Amend- Z3~- In section 55 of the principal Act, for clause (c), the follow-
ment of ing clauses shall be substituted, namely:-
l18Ction &I. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 58. 
Insertion 
of new 
~ 
58A 
and 58B. 
Special 
provisionl 
with res-
~to 
certaJD 
advocate.. 
"(c) every mukhtar practiSing as such immediately before 
the said date by virtue of the provisions of the Legal Practi- 20 
tioners Act, 1879, or any other law, who does not elect to be, or is 
not Qualified to be, enrolled as an advocate under this Act; 18 of 1879. 
(d) every revenue agent practising 88 such immediately be-
fore the said date by virtue of the provisions of the Legal Practi-
tioners Act, 1879, or any other law;". 25 
24. In section 58 of the principal Act, in sub-section (4), for the 18 of 187G. 
words "the issue and renewal", the words "the renewal or the issue 
by way of renewal" shall be substituted. 
15. After section 58 of the prinCipal Act, the following sections 
shall be inserted, namely:-
"58A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, 
all advocates who, immediat.ely before the 26th day of July, 
1948, were entitled to practise in the High Court in Allahabad 
or the Chief Court in Oudh and who under the provisions of the 
United Provinces High Courts (Amalgamation) Order, 1948 were 35 
reco~ as advocates entitled to practise in the new High 
Court of Judicature at Allahabad but whose names were not for-
mally entered on the roll of advocates of that Hiih Court merely 

5 
18011926. 
10 
IS 
sa of 1926. 
38 of 1926 
30 
3S 
of 1926. 40 
11 
by reason of the non-payment of the fee payable to the Bar 
Council of the said High Court, and all advocates who were 
enrolled as such between the said date and the 26th day of May, 
1952, shall, for the purposes of clause (a) of sub-section (I) of 
section 17, be deemed to be persons who were entered as advo-
cates on the roll of the said High Court under the Indian Bar 
Councils Act, 1926 and every such person may, on an application 
being made in this behalf, be admitted as an advocate on the 
State roll of Uttar Pradesh. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, all 
advocates who, immediately before the 10th day of October, 1952 
were entitled to practise in the High Court of Hyderabad but 
whose names were ~t formally entered on the roll of advo-
cates of that High Court merely by reason of the non-payment 
of the fee payable to the Bar Council of the said High Court shall, 
for the purposes of clause (a) of sub-section (I) of ~ection 17, 
be deemed to be persons who were entered as advocates on the 
roll of the said High Court under the Indian Bar Councils Act, 
1926 and every such person may, .on an application being made 
in this behalf, be admitted as an advocate on the State roll of 
Andhra Pradesh or of Maharashtra. 
(3) NotWithstanding anything contained in this Act, all 
advocates who, immediately before the 1st day of May, 1960 
were entitled to practise in the High Court of Bombay and who 
applied to get their names entered on the roll of advocates of the 
High Court of Gujarat under the provisions of section 8 of the 
Indian Bar Councils Act, 1926 but whose names were not so en-
tered by reason of the repeal of the said provision shall, for 
the purposes of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section IT, be 
deemed to be persons who were entered as advocates on the roll 
of the High Court of Gujarat under the said Act and every such 
person may, on an applieation being made in this behalf, be 
admitted as an advocate on the State roU of Gujarat. 
(4)' Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, all per-
sons who, immediately before the 1st day of December, 1961, 
were advocates on the roll of the Court of Judicial Commissioner 
in any Union territory under any law in force in that territory 
shaU, for the purposes of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 
17, be deemed to ·be persons who were entered as advocates on 
the roll of a High Court under the Indian Bar Councils Act, 
1926 and every such person may, on an application made in this 
behalf be admitted as an advocate on the State roll maintained , 
In respect of that Union territory. 

8peclal 
proviaion 
rel.tln. 
to certain 
discipli-
nary pro-
ceedings. 
58B. (1) AA from the 1st day of September, 1983,. f!'Iery 
proceeding in respect of any disciplinary matter in relation to 
an existing advoeate of a High Court shall, save as provided in 
the first proviso to sub-section (2), be disposed of by the State 
Bar Council in relation to that High Court, as if the existing S 
advocate had been enrolled as an advocate on its roll .. 
(2) If immediately before the said date, there is any pr~ 
ceeding in respect of any disciplinary matter in relati01ll to an 
existing advocate pending before any High Court under the 
Indian Bar Councils Ad, 1926, Such proeP.edinQ; shJlll ~t8nd trans- 10 38 of 1128. 
ferred to the State Bar Council In relation to that High Court, 
as' if it were a proceeding pending before the eorresponding Bar 
Council under clause (e) of sub-sectron (1) of section 56: 
Provided that where in resoect of any web pl'OC'eedln~ the 
Hi~h Court has received the findin~ of a Tribunal constituted IS 
under section 11 of the Indian Bar Councils Act, 1926, the Hi~h S8otl1l28. 
Court shall dispose of the case and it shall be lawful for the High 
Court to exercise for the purpose all powers conferred on it 
under section 12 of the said Act as if that section had not been 
repealed: 20 
Provided further that where the High Court has referred 
back any case for further inquiry under sub-section. (4) of sec-
tion 12 of the said Act, the proceeding shall stand transferred 
to the State B~r Council in relation to the High Cnurt as if It 
were a proceeding pending before the corresponding Bar Council :as 
under clause. (c) of su.b~ection (1) of section 58. 
(3) If immediately before the said date there is any pro-
ceeding in respect of any disciplinary matter pending in relation 
to any pleader, vakil, mukhtar or attorney, who has been enrol-
led as an advocate on any State roll under the Act, such pro- 30 
ceedlng shall stand transferred to the State Bar Council on the 
roll of which he has been enrolled and be dealt with und~ this 
Act. as If,it .were a proceeding ariSing against him thereunder. 
(4) In this section "existin~ advocate" meAns a J)erson who 
was enrolled as an advocate on tbe roll of any High Court under 35 
the Indian Bar Councils Act, 1926 and who, at the time whf'n any Hot 112ft 
proeeedin~ in respect of any discipUnary matter is initiated 
. a~fncrt: him, is not enrolled as an adT0c8te on a State ron under thIs Act. , ... '" , . 
(5) The provisions of this section shall have effect, notwith- 40 
standing anything eontained ba thJa Aet. ". 

STATEMENT OF"()BJECTS AND REASONS 
The working of the Advocates Act, enacted in May, 1961, hal 
revealed .certain practical difficulties and representations in this be-
half have been received from various State Bar Councils and other 
associations. The Bar Council of India has also suggested certaIn 
amendments to the Act. Difficulties were being experienced mainly 
in regard to the functioning of the Bar Councils and the Committees 
thereof and also in regard to the enrolment as advocates of certain 
classes of persons who may not fall strictly within the scope of .ec-
tions 17 and 24 of the Act. It is considered necessary that the' Act 
should be suitably amended for removing such difficulties and for 
facilitating the implementation of its provisi~ns. ' 
2. ~e Act provides for the general supervision and control of 
the Bar Council of India over all State Bar Councils in order that 
they may, in the exercise of their powers, follow a uniform all-India 
policy. The powers given to the Bar Council of India in this behalf 
are, however, inadeqUate and it is considered necessary to enlarge 
its powers. It is therefore proposed to empower the Bar Council of 
India to issue appropriate directions to a State Bar Council or a 
Committee thereof, and also to exercise powers of revision In reta-
tion to any proeeeding disposed of by a State Bar Council. tt is also 
proposed to enlarge the appellate jurisdiction of the Bar Council of 
Indt.a. It is further proposed to give wider rule making powers to 
the Bar Council of India. For the efficient and smooth working of 
the Act, it is also considered necessary to vest in the Central Govern-
ment powers to make rules in respect of matters which may be 
considered necessary. 
3. 'nte State Bar Councils have been given Wide powers under 
the Act in respect of various matters, including disciplinary matten. 
It is considered that, in the interests of efficient functioning of 8 
State Bar Council, it should consist of some advocates who have at 
least ten years' standing. There was such a provision in the Indian 
Bar Councils Act, 1926. It is accordingly proposed to provide that, 
as nearly as possible one-half of the elected. members of every State 
Bar Council should be advocates of not less than ten years' standing. 
'nte other principal amendments proposed in the Bill are-
(1) that the term of offtce of a member of the Bar Conn cD 
of IncUa elected by a State Bar Council should normally be for 
13 

14 
the same period for which he holds om.ee as a member of a State 
Bar Council: 
(2) that the Bar Council of IndJa should be empowered to 
form more than one disciplinary committee, and that the disci~ 
plinary 06mmittee of a Bar Council should consist of three . 
members only, one of whom should ,be a c()..()pted member; 
(3) that the Bar Council of India should be empowered to 
refuse, in suitable cases, the applications for the transfer of 
the name of an. advocate from one State roll to another; 
(4) that the Bar Council of India should be permitted to 
prepare and maintain the common roll in such manner as it 
thinks At; 
(5) that certain categories of persons who may not at pre-
sent be entitled to be enrolled as advocates should be so entitled; 
(6) that the State Bar Council should have more effective 
control over its enrolment committees: and 
(7) that the disciplinary jurisdiction of State Bar Councils 
should be extended to certain proceedings which are Dot at pre-
sent covered by the Act. 
4. The Bill seeks to achieve these objects. Opportunity has also 
been taken to make certain other amendments of a minor character. 
5. The notes on clauses appended to the Bill explain the provi-
sions thereof. 
NEW DI:LHI; A. K. SEN. 
The 11th March, 1D84. 

Not., on. claus" 
CIaUle 2.-Under sub-section (2) of section 3 of the Act, the 
membertl of a State Bar Council are elected from amongst the 
advocate~ on its roll, and every advocate is entitled to seek election 
to the Bar Council. The State Bar Councils have been given wide 
powers \tIlder the Act in respect of various matters, including disci-
plinary luatters. It is considered that, in the interests of efficient 
function JUg vf a State Bar Council, it should consist of some ad-
vocates who have at least ten years' standing. There was such a 
provisic..n in the Indian Bar Councils Act, 1926. It is accordingly 
proposed t:, providt:. that, as nearly as possible, one-half of the elected 
members of every State Bar Council should be advocates of not less 
than tea years' standing. 
It is also proposed to empower the Bar Council of India to make 
rules in regard to the disqualification of. an advocate from votin, 
at an e1~ctlon or for being chosen as, or for ·being, a member of • 
State Bar Council. 
This clause ~ks to amend section 3 for the purp06e. 
-Clauaes 3, 4 and 22.-These clauses seek to amend sections 4, 8 
and 54 of the Act. Under section 8 of the Act, the term of office 
of elected members of the Bar Council of India and of State Bar 
Councils is six years, and one-third of the members has to l'etire on 
the expiIation of every second year. The Bar Council of India 
consists Dlainly of elected representatives of State Bar Councils, lUld 
the principle of rotation which has been introduced, both in the Bar 
Council of India and the State Bar Councils, may enable a mem1.ler 
of the .Bar Council of India to continue in office even after he haa 
ceased to be a member of the State Bar Council This is an ano-
malous position. Clause 3 seeks to amend section 4 to provide that 
the term of oftice of a member of the Bar Council of India elected by 
a State Ber Council should be for the same period for which he 
holds office as a member of a State Bar Council. It further pro-
vides that where the Advocate-General of a State who is an ez.. 
ofji.cio member of the State Bar Council, is elected. to the Bar Council 
of India, he should hold offiee for two years only from the date of 
his election. 
The existing section 8 provides for the term of office of members 
of the Bar Council of India as also of the State Bar Councils. In view 
of the aNl.endment made by clause 3 relating to the term of office 
of the members of the Bar Council of India, clause 4 restricts the 
a})plication of this &ection to State Bar Council. only. 

IS 
Under section 54 of the Act, the term. of office of elected melDbeti 
of a State Bar Council constituted for the first time is two years. 
Clawse 4 fb) seeks to make it clear that the provisions of ,section 8 
shall apply to a State Bar Council when it is reconstituted on the 
expiry of the term of office specified in section 54 . . 
In view of the amendment made to section 4, the provisions oi 
section 54 have also been restricted to State Bar Councils onI],- The 
61ection to the various State Bar Councils would not be completed 
before the expiry of the term of their members under section. 54. 
To overcome this difficulty, it has been provided in clause 22 that 
the elected. memberi of 6 State Bar Council shall continue to hold 
omce until it is reconstituted in accordance with the provisiona of 
the Act. ... 
Clause 5.-Under section 9, the disciplinary committee of • Bar 
Council is to consist of five members. It .is felt that this makes the 
committee unwieldy. The strength of the committee is therefore 
proposed to be reduced to three. Out of three members, two shall 
be elected and the third member shall be co-opted. Ii is also pro-
1'osed that the co-opted member should be an advocate of ten years' 
standing. 
It is further considered desirable that the Bar Council 01 India 
Wlould also have the power to constitute more than one disclpli.uary 
committee. Section 9 is being amended for the purpose. 
CLause 6.-There is no provision ill. the Act relating. to disq\ali-
1lcatioo. of members. The proposed section lOA specifies the circum .. 
. tances under which an elected member of a Bar Council shall be 
Qeemed to have vacated his office. 
Clause 7.-Section 15 deals with the power of a Bar Council to 
make rules. This clause seeks to amend this section to make It 
clear that the rules may lay down the conditioDi subject to whlch 
persons can exeDCise the right to vote. 
Cl4uH S.-By virtue of sub-section (4) of section 1& of the- Act, 
the advocates of the Supreme Court who were senior a.vueates on 
1st De<:ember, 1961 automatically became senior advocates under 
the Act. The senior advocates are subject to certain restrictions in 
the matter of practice as may be prescribed by the ~ Council of. 
India. It is proposed to give such advocates an option to relinquish 
their status as senior advocates and become ordinary advocaMl of 
the Supreme Court. . 

11 
Clauae lO.-Section 18 of the Act provides for the transfer of the 
name of an advocate from one State roll to another. When a person 
makes an application for such transfer, the Bar Council of India has 
no discretion in the matter and it has to issue necessary directions 
for such ·transfer. There may be cases where the transfer oi the 
name of a person from one State roll to another is undesirable and 
the Bar Council of India should be empowered to reject an appucli. 
tion for transfer in suitable cases, after giving the applicant a reason-
able opportunity of representing his case. This clause seeks to 
amend the section for the purpose. 
Clause ll.-Under section 20 of the Act, the :Bar Council of India 
has to prepare and maintain a common roll of advocates in the order 
of seniority. The Bar Councill:>f India has pointed out that prepara-
tion of the common roll after fixing inter Be seniority of advocate. 
all over India will be a laborious task and that the preparation of 
the common roll may therefore be delayed. This clause seeks to 
amend section 20 to enable the Bar Council of India to decide the 
manner in which the common roll shall be maintained. 
Clause 12.-Section 22 deals with the issue of certificate of enrol-
ment. In cases where the State Bar Councils have issued the certi-
ficates of enrolment, there may be no necessity for the Bar Council 
of India to issue a fresh certificate again. This clause seeks tu 
amend the sectWn to that effect. 
CZause 13.-Section 24 of the Act prescribes the qualiflc:atioIll 
which a person is required to possess for enrolment as a new ad-
vocate. It has been brought to the notice of Government that cer-
tain classes of persons who were treated as advocates or who were 
entitled to be enrolled as advocates before the commencement of 
Cbapter III of the Advocates Act would not strictly fall within the 
scope of section 24. It is also oonsidered necessary to enlarge the 
scope of section 24 to cover certain other classes of persons 8.l> well 
who by reason of their training or experience should be eligIble for 
enrolment whether they are law graduates or not. The proposed 
sUb-sections (3) and (4). of section 24 specify the various classes of 
persons who should be eligible for enrolment as advocates. They 
are as follows:-
(i) advocates on the roll of Judicial Commissioners' Courts, 
(U) attorneys of High Cc.urts, 
(ill) advocates of the Chief Court of Sind before 15th 
August, 1947, : 
(iv) advocates of Rangoon High Court before 1st April, 1937, 
195 (B) LS-3. 

(v) allpenons who were entitled to be enrolled as advocate. 
of a High Court (including Q High Court of a former Part B 
State), or of a Judicial Commissioner's Court, and 
(vi) all pleaders and mukhtare who have put in tme. yeara. 
of practice before 31st March, 196~ 
'!be Act was amended by the Act 32 of 1962 exempting law gradu-
ates who passed the final law examination before the 28th Febl'\llU'y., 
1963. from undergoing training and passing the examination COll-
ducted by the Bar Council. Since the necessary arrangements for 
the implementation of the scheme of training could noi be com-
pleted by all the State Bar Councils, it is propoeed to extend the 
said period of exemption from 28th February, 1963 to 31st March, 
1964 or to such other later date as may be prescribed. It is also 
proposed to enable the lew graduates to pass the examination eYeD 
during the course of trainiJ1.g. 
Other amendments are of a clarificatory nature. 
Clause 14.-Section 10 of the Act provides for the constitution of 
an enrolment committee and section 26 deals with the functions of 
the enrolment committee. As a committee of the State Bar Council, 
the enrolment committee should carry out the functions subject to 
any rules that may be made or any directions that may be given by 
the Bar Council. It is proposed to make the position clear. 
It is further proposed to have a specific pr:ovision to the effect that 
in all cases when a person gets himself eorolled as an advoc.ate by 
misrepresentation or fraud or undue influence, the Bar Council of 
India may remove his name from the roll of advocates, after givinl' 
him an opportunity of being heard. Provision has- also been made 
for sending due intimation to all other State Bar Councils in caees 
when there has been a refusal of the application for enrolment. 
This clause seeks to amend section 26 to achieve the purpose. 
Clause 1S.-It is thought necessary to have a provision enablilla 
the Bar Councils to remove the name of any advocate who is dead 
or who seeks to have his name removed. New Clause 26A is intend,.. 
ed to achieve the purpose. 
Clause 18.-Section 37 of the Act provides for an appeal from an 
order of the disciplinary committee of a State Bar Council made 
under sub-section (3) of section 35. It is proposed to enlarge the 
scope of the provision so as to give the right of appeal even in cases 
where the disciplinary committee summarily rejects the complaint 
under BU\).section (2) of section 35. 

19 
1Clc:wae -19 and 20.-Under-section 7(g) of the Act, the Bar Council 
at.India has to exercise.general supervision and control over the State 
Bar Councils. In'order that these powers maybe properly exercised, 
it is proposed that the Bar Council of IncUa should be empowered to 
iuue directions to the State Bar Councils and also to call for the 
reeord of any non -appealable case disposed of by a State Bar Council 
·or a committee thereof and to issue appropriate orders thereon. 'nle 
Bar Council of India should also have the power to make rules for 
·enforcement of such directions and orders. Proposed new sections 
4&A ,and 48Bare intended to achieve the purpose. 
1"or the smooth working of the Act, it is proposed to vest wider 
rule-making power in the Bar Council of India in relation to the 
functioning of State Bar Councils and the enrolment of advocates. 
Clauae 21.-Under the Act, the power of the Central Government 
to 'make rules is very limited. This power can be exercised only 
when rules have not been made by a State Bar Council. It is proposed 
to empower the Central Government to make rules in respect of all 
matters which may be deemed necessary. including those matterS 
in relation to which the Bar Councils have power to make rules. 
subject to the usual provision for laying the rules before ParliamE!llt. 
New section 49A is intended to achieve the purpose. 
Clause 24.-As the Act provides for one class of legal practitioners 
only, namely. advocates. it is proposed to make it clear that ur:der 
section 58 (4), there should not be any fresh enrolment of pleaders or 
other class of legal practitioners. Certificates may, however, be 
issued to existing legal practitioners by way of renewal. 
Clauaf! 2S.-The Chief Court of Oudh and the High Court of 
Allahabad were amal~amated by an order made in 1948 ::Ind a new 
High Court of Al1ahabad was constituted. The advocates of both 
the High Courts were recognised as advocates of the new High Court. 
but they were required to pay ten rupees each for enrolment as 
advocates in the new Hillh Court. Many advocates did not pay thi!!! 
amount and they were not formally enrolled as advocates of the new 
High Court of Allahabad was constituted. The advocates of both 
rates of the former State of Hyderabad as well. Simi-
larly on the reorganisation of the Bombay State in May, 1960 a new 
High Court of Gujarat was constituted and many (f the advocates of 
the Bombav High Court who opted for Gujarat {'ould not get them-
selves enrolled within the prescribed time. It is necessary to mak. 
suitable provision to enable these persons to get enrolled as advocate.. 
Proposed new section 58A is intended to achieve thJs purpoM. 

20 
Chapter V of the Act deals with disciplinary jurisdiction of the 
Bar Councils and it has been brought into force from 1st September, 
1963. Under the Chapter, a disciplinary committee of a State Bar 
Council can take action only against those advocates who Ilre on the 
State roll. The State rolls are not complete and there are many 
advocates who have not yet been enrolled as advocates under the 
new Act. It is necessary to make suitable provision relating to 
disciplinary matters in respect of them. It is also necessary to 
make suitable provision for the disposal of disciplinary proceedings 
pending at the commencement of Chapter V. A Removal of Diffi-
culties Order was issued at the time of enforcement of that Chapter. 
It is proposed to incorporate the provisions of that Order in the Act 
10 that the validity of the Order may not be challenged in a court of 
law. Proposed new section 58B is intended to achieve the purpoSe. 
It is also proposed to treat all advocates on the roll of the court of 
Judicial Commissioner in any Union territory immediately before 
1st December, 1961 as advocates of High Court for the purpose of 
clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 17. 
The other amendments are of a formal or consequential nature 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to amend section 15 of the Act which 
deals with the rule-making power of the Bar Councils. It is proposed 
to make it clear that the rule may also lay down the conditions sub-
ject to which persons can exercise the right to vote. Clause 11 pur-
ports to amend section 20 of the Act leaving it to the Bar Council of 
India to decide the manner in which common roll shall be maintained. 
Clause 20 of the Bill seeks to amend section 49 so as to confer wider 
rule-making powers on the Bar Council of India for the smooth and 
efficient working of the Act. The matters in respect of which such 
rules may be made relate to the conditions subject to which an 
advocate may be entitled to vote at an election of the State Bar 
Council and the qualification and disqualification of membership of 
such Bar Council, the time within which and the manner in which 
effect may be given to the proviso to sub-section (2) of section 3 and 
the manner in which directions issued and orders made by the Bar 
Council of India may be enforced. The Bar Council of India has also 
been empowered to make rules in respect of other minor matters. 
Clause 21 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 49A which em-
powers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the 
purposes of the Act including rules with respect to any matter for 
which the Bar Council of India or a State Bar Council has power to 
make rules. The rules made by the Central Government shall be 
laid before both Houses of Parliament and shall be subject to the 
scrutiny of Parliament. The matters in respect of which rules may 
be made are of an administrative or procedural nature. 
I. The delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 

StateBu 
Couneu., 
Term 01 
otftce of 
memben 
of Bar 
Councfi, 
Dilcipll-
nary com-
mitteel, 
• 
• 
3. (1) 
'ErraAcrs 'nOM THE ADvOCATIS ACT, 1961 
(25 or 1981) 
• • '. 
CHAPTER n 
BAR CO'UlfCIL8 
• • • 
• • • 
.. 
• 
• 
(2) A State Bar Council shall consist of the foUowiDg memben, 
namely:-
(a) in the case of the State Bar Council of Delhi, the Addi-
tional Solicitor-General of India, e:c-ofJicio; and in the case of 
any other State Bar Council, the Advocate-General of the State, 
e:c-of}i.cio; 
(b) in the case of the Bar Council of Assam, the Bar 
Council of Orissa and the Bar Council of Delhi, fifteen members 
and in every other case, twenty members, elected in accordance 
with the system of proportional representMion by means of the 
single transferable vote from amongst advocates on the roll of 
the State Bar Council . 
• '. '. • 
8, The term of oft\ce of the elected members of a Bar Councfl 
shall be six years, but as nearly as possible one-third of the members 
first elected to each such Council shall retire on the expiration of 
every second year in the prescribed manner, and the vacancies 10 
caused shall De filled by the election. of new members in the prea-
cribed manner. 
9. (1) A State Bar Council shall constitute one or more discipli-
nary committees, each of which shall CIOnsist of five persons of whom 
three shall be persons elected by the Council from amongst its mem-
bers and two shall be persons elected by the Council from amongst 
advocates on its roll who are not members of the Council. 

is 
(Z). The Bar CouDd.l of lQdia ·lhall coDStitute a disc1pllnary com .. 
mittee cans:latiq, of five persons of whom.three ahall be pel"SOD8 elec-
~ed ,by the Council irom.amoogst its members and two shall be per-
.ons elected by the Council from amongst advocates on the. common 
roll who are not members of the Council. 
• • • • • 
• • • • • 15. (1) Power to 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the genemlity 01 the make 
foregoing power, such rules may' provide for- ruleL 
(4) the manner in which the election of memben of the 
Bar Council shall be held and'the manne!' in which ftIJUlti of 
elections sball be published; 
• • • • • 
(e) the manner in which the order of retirement by rotat.toa 
of the members of the Bar Council shall be determined; 
• • • • • 
CHAPTER III 
ADMISSION AND ENROLMENT OF ADVOCATES 
• • • • • 16. (1) SenJorand 
(4) An advocate of the Supreme Court who was a senior advocate otherad-
01 that Court immediately before the appointed day shall, for the vocatu. 
purposes of thi:s section, be deemed to be iii sandor 8dvocat~. 
17. (1) • • • • • State Bar 
Councnato 
(3) Entries in each part of the roll of advocates prepared and maintain 
ma.iIDiained. by a State Bar Council under this section shall be in roll of 
the order of seniority, and such seniority shall be detennined as advocates. 
follows:- I 
(0) the seniority of an advocate referred to in clause (a) 
of su,b-section (1) shall be detennined in accordance with hia 
date of ellrolment\; under the Indian Bar Councils Act, 1926; 
(b) the seniority of any person who was a senior advocate 
of the Supreme Court immediately before the appointed day 
shall, for the purposes of the first part of the State roll, be 
detennined in accordance with such principles as the Bar 
Council of India may specify; 
(c) notwithstanding anything contained in clause (a), the 
seniority of a vakil, pleader or an attorney who has enrolled u 
an advocate immediately before the appointed day, or who 11 

Transfer of 
name from 
one State 
roll to 
another. 
Common 
roll of 
advocate •. 
enrolled 18 an advocate after that day, shall be determined in 
accordance with the date of his entry in the register of vakils, 
pleaders or attorneys, as the case may be; 
(d) the seniority of any other persoiD. who, on or after the 
appointed dey, is enrolled asa senior advocate or 11 admitted as 
an advocate shall be determined by the date of such enrolment 
or admission, as the case may be. 
• • • • • 
18. (1) NotWithstanding anything contained. in section 17, an~ 
person whose name is entered as an advocate on the roll of any State 
Bar Council may make an application in the prescribed form to the 
Bar Council of India for the transfer of his name from the roll of that 
State Bar Council to the roll of any other State Bar Council and, OD 
receipt of any such application the Bar COWlCil of India shall direct 
that the name of such 'person shall, without the payment of any fee, 
be removed from the roll of the first meDitioned State Bar Council and 
entered in the roll of the other State Bar Council and the State Bar 
Councils concerned shall comply with such direct jon. 
• • • • • 
ZOo (1) • • • • 
(3) Entries in each part of the common roll shall be in the order 
of seniority and such seniority shall be determined as follows:-
(a) the seniority of an advocate enrolled in a State roll shall 
be determined in accordance with his seniority in that roll; 
(b) the seniority of any person who was a senior advocate 
of the Supreme Court immediately 'before the appointed day 
and whose name is not entered m QD.y State roll shall, for the 
purposes of the first part of the common roll, be determined 
in accordance with such principles as the Bar Council of India 
may specify in this behalf; 
(c) the seniority of any person who was an advocate (but 
not a senior advocate) of the Supreme Court immediately before 
the appointed day and whose name is not entered in any State 
roll shall, for the purposes of the second part of the common roll, 
be determined in accordance with the date of his enrolment 81 
an advocate of the Supreme Court. 
• • • • • 
CenUlcate 2.2. There shall be issued a certificate of enrolment in the prell-
of enrol- \!ribed form to every person whose name is entered in any roll of 
ment. advocates maintained under this Act. 
• • • • • 

If· (1) Subject to the proviaioos of this Act, and the rules made Persons 
ther«mdel', a person shall be qualified. to 'be admitted 81 an advocate who may 
on a State roll, if he fulfils the following conditions, namely: _ be admit-
• • • • • ted as 
• 
(c) he has obtained a degree in law-
• • • • 
(iii) after the 28th day of February, 1963, from any 
University ill the territory of India or elsewhere, if the 
dep-ee is recoantaed for the purpoees of this Act by the Bar 
Council of India; or 
he is a barrister; 
(d) he has undergone a coune of training in law and peJ6ed 
anexarnination after sueh training both of which shall be pres-
cribed by the State Bar COQneU: 
• 
Provided. that this claUle sball not apply tor-
(i) a barrister who bas nceived praotical training in 
En~dor • ponon who has obtained a d~sree in law from 
4my UntvenPty in India before the 28th day of February, 
1963; 
• • • • 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained. in sub-section (1), a 
vakil, pleader or an attorney who is a law graduate, or who is not 
a law graduate but was entitled to be enrolled as an advocate of a 
Hi.h Court immediately before the llppointed day under any law then 
in force, may ,be admitted as an advocate on a Sw.te .roll if he-
(_) 1Mk4& an appliQation for $Uch en.t"olment in accordance 
with the provisions of this Act, not later than two years £foro the 
appointed day; and 
. (b) fulflll the conditions . specified in clauses (a), (b), (e) 
and· (1), of sub-section (1). 
• • • • • 
advocates 
on a State 
roll. 
. 2ft (1) A State Bar CO':lIlcil shall refer every application for Disposal of 
Ildmissipn as all advocate to its enrolment cOmmittee, and IUibtect to applica-
the provisions of ~~iona (2) and (3), such c&mmittee shall tion~ f?r 
dispose of the appU~ation in the' preeeribed manner. ~::SIOl' 
• • • • • advocate . 
• • Z8. (1) • • • Power k 
(Z) In particular, and wi1hout prejudice to the generality of the make 
foregoing power. such rules. may provide fol'- rut(!f. 
• • • • • 
195 (B) L&--4. 

Punish-
ment of 
advocates 
for mis-
conduct. 
Appeal to 
the Bar 
Council 
of India. 
28 
(b) a course of practical training in law and the examina-
tion to be passed after such training for admission as an advocate 
on the roll of the Bar Council; 
• • • • • 
CHAPI'ER V 
COlmUCT OF ADVOCATBS 
35. (1) Where on receipt of a complaint or otherwise a State Bar 
Council has reason to believe that any advocate on its roll has been 
guilty of professional or other misconduct, it shall refer the case for 
disposal to its disciplinary committee. 
(2) The disciplinary committee of a State Bar Council, if it does 
not summarily reject the complaint, shall fix a date for the hearing 
of the case and shall cause a notice thereof to be given to the advocate 
concerned and to the Advocate-Gel1eral of the State. 
(3) The disciplinary committee of a State Bar Council after giving 
the advocate concerned and the Advoeate-General an opportunity of 
being heard, may make any of the following orders,' namely:-
(a) dismiss the complaint or, where the proceedings were 
initiated at the instance of the State Bar Council, direct that 
the proceedings be filed; 
(b) reprimand the advocate; 
(c) suspend the advocate from practice for such period as 
it may deem fit; 
(d) remove the name of the advocate from the State roll of 
advocates. 
(4) Where an advocate is suspended from practice. under clause 
(c) of sub-section (3), he shall, during the period of suspension, be 
debarred from praotising in any court or !before any authority or 
person in India. 
·(5) Where any notice is ~ to. the Advocate-General under 
sub-section (2), the Advocate-General may appear hefore the disci-
plinary committee of the State Bar Council either in person or 
through any advocate appearing on his behalf. 
• • • • • 
. 37. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order of the disciplinary 
committee of a State Bar Council made under"sub-section (3) of 

is of 1879. 
18 of 1879. 
BOlnbay 
Actxvn 
of 1920. 
?:1 
SectiOlll 35, may, within sixty days of the date of the communication 
of the order to him, prefer an appeal to the Bar Council of India. 
• • • • • 
49. The Bar Council of India may make rules for discharging its General 
functions under this Act, and, in particular, such rules may prea- power of 
cribe- the Bar COUDcLlof 
. India to 
(4) ,the manner m which the name of an advocate may be make rules 
prevented from being entered in more than one State roll. 
• • • • • 
(i) general principles for guidance of State Bar Councils: 
Provided that no rules made with reference to clause (e) shall 
have effect unless they have been apprOVed by the Central Govern-
ment. 
• • • • • 
CHAPTER VII 
TEMPORARY AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS 
• • • • 
54. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the term of Term of 
office of the elected memlbers of the B8!l' Council of India and a State office of 
Bar Council constituted for the first time shall be two years from members 
the date of the first meeting of the Coun~il. ~farftrst 
55. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act,-
• • • • • 
(c) every muklhtar and revenue agent practising as such 
immediately before the said date by virtue of the provisions of 
the Legal Practitioners Act, 1879, or any other law; 
shall, notwithstanding the repeal by this Act of the relevant provi-
sions of the Legal Practitioners Act, 1879, the Bombay Pleaders Act, 
1920, or OIther law, continue to enjoy the same rights as respects 
practice in any court or revenue oftice or before any authority or 
Council of 
India and 
State Bar 
Councils. 
Rights of 
certain 
existing 
legal prac-
titioners 
not 
a1'lected. 

Special 
prOYit1om 
duriDI the 
transitional 
period. 
" penon and be eu.bject to the djaciplinary ju~iQD. of the same 
au~y wni~ he eQjoy9(i QIr', ,.. ta. CNe may, ... to 1'1bJ.e1l ~ ""'N 
subject immediately before the said date and accordingly the relevant 
provisions of the Acts or law aforesaid shall have effect in relation 
to such persons ~ if th~ bad not been r~led. 
• • • • • 
58. (1) • • • • • • (4) Notwithstanding the repeal by sub-section (2) of section 50 18 of 1879 
of the provisiOllS of the Legal PracUtlOllel"8 A.ot, 18'19 or of the Bom-
bay Pleaders Act, 1920, or of any other law relating to the admission Bombay A( t 
and enrolment of legal practitioners, the provisions of the Acts and XVII 01 
law aforesaid and any rules made thereunder in so far as they relate 19200 
to the iaIue and renewal of a certificate to a legal pracmtioner auth(>. 
rising him to practise shall have effect until Chapter :w cwnes j.nto 
force an4, accordingly, every certiftcate issued OJ' renewed to a legal 
practitioner (who is not enrolled as an advocate under this Act) 
which is or purports to be issued or renewed under the provisions of 
either of the aforesaid Acts or of the other law during the period 
beginninc with the 1st day of DeetQJ.lNtr, 1961 and ending with the 
date on which Chapter IV comes into force, shall be deemed to have 
been validly iSlUed or renewed. 
• • • • • 

LOKSABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Advocates Act, 1961. 
(Sian Asoke K. Sen, 
Minister of LafD.) 