As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA ON 
1t 2 MAR 1990 
Bill No. 31 of 1990 
.. "'~:a.. 
THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1990 
A 
BILL 
fu.rther to amend the Code oj Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
BE it enacted. by Parliament in the Forty-first Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Code of Criminal Procedure 
(Amendment) Act, 1990. 
5 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 19th day of 
)0 
15 
February, 1990. 
!. In the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafte,r referred to 
as the Code of Criminal Procedure), in Chapter XII, after section 166, 
the following sections shall be inserted, namely:-
"166A (1) If, in the course of an investigation into an offence, 
the investigating oOicer or an office,r superior in rank to the investi-
gating officer, has reason to believe that evidence may be available 
in a country or place outside India, he may issue a letter of 
request-
(i) to the authority competent to investigate such offence 
in that country or place to examine orally any person· supposed 
to be acquainted with. the facts and circumstances of'the case and 
to reduce into writing any statement made in the cour!e of such 
Short 
title 
and com-
menCE!. 
ment. 
Insertion 
of 'new 
8ections 
lOOA and 
l6SE, 
Lctter of 
request to 
competent 
authority 
for inves 
tig:lt.ion 
in a 
country 
or place 
outside 
India. 

Letter of 
request 
from a 
count'ry 
or place 
outside 
India 
to a 
Court or 
an autho-
rity for 
investiea-
tion in 
India. 
2 
examination and also to require such person or any other person 
to produce any document or thing whkh may be in his posses-
sion pertaining to the case; or 
(ii) to the authority competent to direct such an investi-
gation in that country or place to cause it to be made in like 5 
manner, 
and to forward all the evidence so taken or collected or the authen-
ticated copies thereof or the thing so collected to the officer issuing 
such letter. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), if, 10 
in the course of an investigation into an offence. an application is 
made by the investigating officer or any officer superior in rank to the 
investigating officer that evidence may be available in a country or 
place outside India, any Criminal Court may issue a letter of request 
to a Court or an authority in that country or place competent to exa- 15 
mine orally any person supposed to be acquainted with the facts and 
circumstances of the case and also to require such person or any 
other person to produce any document or thing which may be in his 
possession pertaining to the case and to forward all the evidenCe so 
tak~ or co\lected or the authenticated copies thereof or the thing 20 
so collected to the Court issuing such letter. 
(3) The letter of request shall be transmitted in such manner 
as the Central Government may specify in this behalf. 
(4) Every statement recorded or document or thing received 
under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall be deemed to be the 25 
evidence collected during the course of b:lvesttgation 1.lnder this 
Chapter. 
166B. (1) Upon receipt of a letter of request u-om a Cow-t or an 
authority in a country or place outside India competent to issue 
such letter in that country or place for the examination of any 30 
person or production of any document or thing in relation to an 
offence under investigation in that country or place, the Central 
Government may, if it thinkc; fit.-
(i) forward the same to the Chief Metropolitan Ma,is$rate 
or Chief JudiCial Magistrah~ or su('.h Metropolitan. ~trate or 35 
Judicial Magistrate as he may appoint in this behalf, who shall 
thereupon sdmmon the person before him and record his state-
ment or cause the document or thing to be produced: or 
(~>. send the letter. to any police o~r for investiffltion.. 
who aJaall thereI.\Pon investipte into tbe offence in the same 40 
maJUler, 
as if the offence had been committed within India. 
(Z) .AJl the evid.ence taken or collected under sub-8t'ction (1). or 
.II.L~tN ~opies th~r.eof Ofthe~( so ~llected •. spall be far-
wardAd. by the. Magj$trate or police 'o~cer, as the case may be, to the .5 

Ord. 
1 of 199()' 
3 
Central Government for transmiRsion to the Court or the authority 
issuing the lette.r of request, in such manner as the Central Govern-
ment may deem fit."_ 
3. (1) The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Ordinance, Hepcal 
5 1990 is hereby repealed. and 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal. anythin~ done or any action taken 
under the Code of Criminal Procedure, as amended by the said Ordi-
nance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the Code of 
Criminal Procedure. as amended by this Act. 
SQvtne. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The investigating authorities in India were handicapped in collecting 
evidence, available in a foreign country or place. in respect of a crime 
committed by a citizen of India outside the country, due to the absence 
of a specific provision in the Code of Criminal Procedure. 1973. Hence 
an Ordinance was promulgated on the 19th February, 1990 to amend the 
Code for the purpose. 
2. A new section 166A had been inserted in the Code to enable the 
investigating authorities and the Criminal Courts to issue letter of request 
to their counterparts in foreign countries to collect evidence and transmit 
the same to the authority or Court issuing such letter. Every evidence 
so collected shall be deemed to be eVidence collected during the course 
of investigation. 
3. Having regard to the principle of reciprocity, another section. 
namely. section 166B. had also been inserted in the Code for facilitating 
letters of request to be sent by foreign investigating agencies or Courts 
to their counterparts in India fo.r similar purposes, 
4. The Bill seeks to replace the aforesaid Ordinance. 
NEW DELln; MUFTI MOHAMMED SA YEED. 
The 6th March, 1990. 
4 j , ~ 
;.. 
, 

i· .. 
• • 
, 
LOK SABRA 
BILL 
.,~ 
" 
further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
(Shn Mufti Mohom",., S0tleed, Minister of Home AB"',.) 