TIIE TRADE AND MERCHA1~DISE MARKS BILL, 1958 
CLAUSES 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSBS 
CHAPTER I 
PRl:LIMINARY 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions and interpretation. 
3. High Court having jurisdiction. 
CHAPTER II 
THE REGISTER AND CONDmONS FOR RKGUiTRATION 
4. Registrar of Trade Marks. 
5. Trade Marks Registry and branches thereof. 
6. The Register of Trade Marks. 
7. Part A and Part B of the register. 
8. Registration to be in respect of particular goods. 
9. Requisites for registration in Parts A and B of the register. 
10. Limitation as to colour. 
11. . Prohibition of registration 0: certain marks. 
12. Prohibition of registration of identical or deceptively simil.r 
trade marks. 
13. Prohibition of registration of names of chemical elements. 
14. Use of names and representations of living persons or persons 
recently dead. 
15. Registration of parts of trade marks and of trade marks 81 a 
series. 
16. Registration of trade marks as associated trade marks. 
17. Registration of trade marks subject to disclaimer. 

CLAUSE$ 
tv 
CHAPrJ!:R Vln 
CERTIFICATION TRADE MARKS 
60. Certain provisions of this Act not applicable to certification 
trade marks. 
61. Registration of certifioation trade marks. 
62. Applications for registration of certification trade marks. 
63. Consideration of applications for registration by Central Gov-
ernment. 
64. Opposition to registration of certification trade marks. 
65. Deposit of regulations governing the use of a certification 
trade mark. 
66. Rights conferred by registration of certification trade marks. 
67. Infringement of certification trade marks. 
68. Acts not constituting infringement of certification trade marks. 
69. Cancellation or varying of registration. 
70. Decisions of Central Government to be final. 
CHAPTER IX 
SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR TEXTILE GOODS 
71. Textile goods.' 
72. Restriction on registration of textile goods. 
73. Refused Textile Marks List. 
74. Stamping of piece goods, cotton yarn and thread. 
75. Determination of character of textile goods by' sampling. 
CHAPTER X 
OFFENCES, PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE 
76. Meaning of applying trade marks and trade descriptions. 
77. Falsifying and falsely applying trade marks. 
78. Penalty for applying false trade marks and trade descriptions, 
etc), 
'i'D. Penalty for selling goods to which a false trade mark or false 
trade description is al'plied. 
80. Penalty for removing piece goods, etc., contrary to section 74. 

CLAt1S~ 
81. Penalty for falsely representing a trade mark as registered. 
82. Penalty for improperly describing an office as the Trade Marks 
Office. 
83. Penalty for falsification of entries in the register. 
84. No offence in certain cases. 
85. Forfeiture of goods. 
86. Exemption of certain persons employed in ordinary course of 
business. 
87. Procedure .where invalidity of registration is pleaded by the 
accused. 
88. Cognizance of certain offences. 
89. Courts competent to try offences. 
90. Evidence of origin of goods imported by sea. 
91. Costs of defence or prOiecution. 
92. Limitation of prosecution. 
93. Information as to commission of offence. 
94. Punishment of abetment in India of acts done out of India. 
95. Instructions by Central Government as to permissible varia· 
tions to be observed by criminal courts. 
CHAPTER XI 
MIscELLANEOUS 
96. Implied warranty on sale of marked goods. 
97. Powers of Registrar. 
98. Exercise of discretionary power by Registrar. 
99. Evidence before the Registrar. 
100. Death of party to a proceeding. 
101. Extension of time. 
102. Abandonment. 
103. Preliminary advice by the Registrar as to distinctiveness. 
104. Procedure before Central Governn'lent. 
105. Suit for infrin8ement, etc, to be instituted before District 
Court. 
106. Reliefs in suits for infringement or for passing off. • 
107. Application for rectification of register to be made to High 
Court in certain cases. 

CLAUSES 
108. Procedure for application for rectification before a Hilh Court. 
109. Appeals.! 
110. Power of High Courts to make rules. 
111. Stay of proceedings where the validity of registration of the 
trade mark is questioned, etc. 
112. Appearance of Registrar in legal proceedings. 
113. . Costs of Registrar in proceedinss before High Court. 
114. Registered user to be impleaded in certain proceedings. 
115. Revisional powers of the Registrar. 
116. Evidence of entries in register, etc., and things done by the 
Registrar. 
117. Registrar and other officers not compellable to produce 
register, etc. 
118. Power to require goods to show indication of origin. 
119. Power to require information in respect of imported goods 
bearing false trade marks. 
120. Certificate of validity ~ 
121. Groundless threats of legal proceedings. 
122. Address for service. 
123. Trade usage, etc., to be taken into cOIUlideration. 
124. Agents. 
125. Indexes. 
126. Documents open to public inspection. 
127. Fees. 
128. Savings in respect of certain matters in Chapter X. 
129. Declaration as to ownership of trade mark not registrable 
under the InQ.ian Registration Act, 1908. 
130. Government to .be bound. 
131. Special provisions relating to applications for registration 
from citizens of convention countries. 
132. Provision as to reciprocity. 
133. Power of Central Government to make rules. 
134. Rules to be placed bef~re Parliament. 
135. Amendments. 
136. Repeals and savin,s.! 
THE SCHEDULE 

Bill No. 31 of 1958 
THE TRADE AND MERCHANDISE MARKS BILL, 1958 
(To BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to provide for .the registration and better protection of trade marks 
and for the prevention of the use of fraudulent marks on mer-
chandise.! 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Ninth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
S 1. (1) This Act may be called the Trade and Merchandise Marks Short title. 
10 
IS 
20 
Act, 1958. extent and 
(2) It extends to the whole of India .. 
. (3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Gov-
ernment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
commence-
ment. 
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- Definitions 
and inter-
(a) "assignment" means an assignment in writing by act of pretation. 
the parties concerned; 
(b) "associated trade marks" means trade marks deemed to 
be, or required to be, registered as associated trade marks under 
this Act; 
(c) "certification trade mark" means a mark adapted in 
relation to any goods to distinguish, in the course of trade, 
goods certified by any person in respect of origin, material, 
mode of manufacture, quality, accuracy or other characteristic, 
from goods not so certified and registrable as such under the 
provisions of Chapter VIII in respect of those goods· in the name, 
as proprietor of the certification trade mark, of that person; 

2 
(d) "deceptively similar":-A trade mark shall be deemed 
to be deceptively similar to another trade mark if it so nearly 
resembles that other trade mark as to be likely to deceive or 
cause confusion; 
(e) "District Court" has the meaning assigned to it In the S 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908; S of 1908. 
(f) "false trade description" means-
(0 a trade description which is untrue or misleading in 
a material respect as regards the goods to which it is 
applied; or 
(ii) any alteration of a trade description as regards the 
goods to which it is applied, whether by way of addition, 
effacement or otherwise, where that alteration makes the 
description untrue or misleading in a material respect; or 
10 
(iii) any trade description which denotes or implies IS 
that there are contained, as regards the goods to which it is 
applied, more yards or metres than there are contained 
therein standard yards or standard metres; or 
(iv) any marks or arrangement or combination thereof 
applied to goods in such manner as to be likely to lead 20 
persons to believe that the goods are the manufacture or 
merchandise of some person other than the person whose 
. merchandise or manufacture they really are; or 
(v) any false name or initials of a person applied to 
goods in such manner as' if such name or initials were a 25 
trade description in any case where the name or initials-
(a) is or are not a trade mark or part of a trade 
mark; and 
(b) is or are identical with or deceptively similar 
to the name or initials of a person carrying on business 30 
in connection with goods of the same description and 
who has not authorised the use of such name or initials; 
and 
(c) is or are either the name or initials of a ficti-
tious person or of some person not bona fide carrying 3S 
on business in connection with such goods; 
and the fact that a trade description is a trade mark or part of 
a trade mark shall not prevent such trade description being a 
false trade description within the meaning of this Act; 

(g) "goods" means anything which is the subject of trade 
or manufacture; 
(h) "High Court" means the High Court having jurisdiction 
under section 3; 
S (i) "limitations" (with its grammatical variations) means 
any limitations of the exclusive right to the use of a trade mark 
given by the registration of a person as proprietor thereof, in-
cluding limitations of that right as to mode of use, ~s to use in 
relation to goods to be sold or otherwise traded in within India, 
10 or as to use in relation to goods to be exported to any market 
outside India; 
(j) "mark" includes a device, brand, heading, label, ticket, 
name, signature, word, letter or numeral or any combination 
thereof; 
IS (k) "name" includes any abbreviation of a name; 
(1) "package" includes any case, box, container, covering, 
folder, receptacle, vessel, casket, bottle, wrapper, label, band, 
ticket, reel, frame, capsule, cap, lid, stopper and cork; 
(m) "permitted use", in relation to a registered trade mark, 
20 means the use of a trade mark-
(i) by a registered user of the trade mark in relation to 
goods-
(a) with which he is connected in the course of 
trade; and 
(b) in respect of which the trade mark remains 
registered for the time being; and 
(c) for which he is registered as registered user; and 
(ii) which complies with any conditions or restrictions 
to which the registration of the trade mark is subject; 
30 (n) "prescribed" means, in relation to proceedings before a 
High Court, prescribed by rules made by the High Court, and 
in other cases, prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(0) "register" means the Register of Trade Marks referred 
to in section 6~ 
3S (p) "registered" (with its grammatical variations) means 
registered under this A<:t, 

(q) "registered proprietor", in relation to a trade mark, 
means the person for the time being entered in the register as 
proprietor of the trade mark; 
(r) "registered trade mark" means a trade mark which is 
actually on the register; 5 
(s) "registered user" means a person who is for the time 
being registered as such under section 49; 
(t) "Registrar" means the Registrar of Trade Marks referred 
to in section 4; 
(u) "trade description" means any description, statement 10 
or other indication, direct or indirect,-
(i) as to the number, quantity, measure, gauge or weight 
of any goods; or r 
(ii) as to the standard of quality of any goods, accord-
ing to a classification commonly used or recognised in the IS 
trade; or 
(iii) as to fitness for the purpose, strength, performance 
or behaviour of any goods, being "drug!?" as defined in the 
Drugs Act, 1940, or "articles of food" as defined in the Pre- 23 or 194°· 
vention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954; or 20 37 of 1954. 
(iv) as to the place OI" country in which or the time at 
wpich any goods were made or produced; or 
(v) as to the name and address or other indication of 
the identity of the manufacturer or of the person for whom 
the goods are manufactured; or 25 
(vi) as to the mode of manufacture or producing any 
goods; or 
(vii) as to the material of which any goods are composed; 
or I 
I 
(viii) as to any goods being the subject of an existing 30 
patent, privilege or copyright; 
and includes--
(a) any description as to the use of any mark which 
according to the custom of the trade is commonly taken to 
be an indication of any of the' above matters; 
(b) the description as to any imported goods contained 
in a bill of entry or shipping bill; 
35 

s 
10 
20 
• 
(c) any other description which is likely to be mill-
understood or mistaken for all or any of the said matters; 
(v) "trade mark" means-
(i) in relation to Chapter X (other than section 81), a 
registered trade mark or a mark used in relation to goods 
for the purpose of indicating or so as to indicate a connec-
tion in the course of trade between the goods and some 
person having the right as proprietor to use the mark; and 
(ii) in relation to the other provisions of this Act, a 
mark used or proposed to be used in relation to goods for 
the purpose of indicating or so as to indicate a connection in 
the course of trade between the goods and some person 
having the right, either as proprietor or as registered user, 
to use the mark whether with or without any indication of 
the identity of that person, and includes a certification trade 
mark registered as such under the provisions of Chapter 
VIII; 
(w) "transmission" means transmission by operation of 
law, devolution on the personal representative of a deceased 
person and any other mode of transfer, not being assignment; 
(x) "tribunal" means the Registrar or, as the case may be, 
the High Court before which the proceeding concerned is 
pending.! 
(2) In this Act, any reference-
2S (a) to the use of a mark shall be construed as a reference to 
the use of a printed or other visual representation of the mark; 
(b) to the use of a mark in relation to goods shall be con-
strued as a reference to the use of the mark upon, or in any 
physical or in any other relation whatsoever, to such goods; 
30 (c) to a registered trade mark shall be construed as includ-
ing a reference to a trade mark registered in Part A of the 
register or Part B of the register as the case may be; 
(d) to the Registrar shall be construed as a reference to 
any officer when discharging the functions of thp. Registrar in 
35 pursuance of sub-section (2) of section 4; 
(e) to the Trade Marks Registry shall be construed as in-
cluding a reference to any branch office of the Trade Marks 
Registry. 

8 
Hig.h C?u~t 3. The High Court having jurisdiction under this Act shall be 
~r~~.,un8- the High Court within the limits of whose appellate jurisdiction the 
Trade Marks Registry referred to in each of the following cases is 
situate, namely:-
(a) in relation to a trade mark on the Register of Trade Marks S 
at the commencement of this Act, the Trade Marks Registry 
within whose territorial limits the principal place of business 
in India of the proprietor of the trade mark as entered in the 
register at such commencement is situate; 
(b) in relation to a trade mark for which an application for 10 
registration is pending at or is made on or after the commence-
ment of this Act, the Trade Marks Registry within whose terri-
torial limits the principal place of business in India of the 
applicant as disclosed in his application is situate; 
(c) in relation to a trade mark registered in the names of 15 
joint proprietors before the commencement of this Act, the 
Trade Marks Registry within whose territorial limits the 
principal place of business of the proprietor whose name is en-
tered first in the register at such commencement as having such 
place of business is situate; 20 
(d) in relation to a trade mark for which an application for 
registration in the names of joint proprietors is pending at or 
is made on or after the commencement of this Act, the Trade 
Marks Registry within whose territorial limits the principal 
place of business in India of the proprietor whose name is first 25 
mentioned in the said application as having such place of busi-
ness is situate; 
(e) where the registered proprietor or the applicant for 
registration as aforesaid has no place of business in India or 
where none of the jointly registered proprietors or none of the 30 
joint applicants as aforesaid has any place of business in India, 
the Trade Marks Registry within whose territorial limits-
(i) in reletion to a trade mark on the Register of Trade 
Marks at the commencement of this Act, the place mentioned 
in the address for service in India as entered in the register 3S 
at such commencement; 
(ii) in relation to a trade mark for which an application 
for registration is pending at or is made on or after such 
commencement, the place mentioned in the address for 
service in India as specified in the application; 40 
is situate. 

, 
CHAPTER II 
THE REGISTER AND CONDITIONS FOR REGI.STRATION 
4. (1) The person for the time being appointed by the Central Registrar ot 
Government to perfonn the functions of the Controller of Patents Trade Marlts 
5 and Designs shall be the Registrar of Trade Marks for the purposes 
of this Act and shall be known as the Controller-General of Patents, 
Designs and Trade Marks. 
(2) The Central Government may appoint as many Deputy 
Registrars and Assistant Registrars of 'frade Marks and other 
10 officers with such designations as it thinks fit for the purpose of dis-
charging, under the superintendence and direction of the Registrar, 
such functions of the Registrar under this Act as he may from time 
to time authorise them to discharge. 
5. (1) For the purposes of this Act there shall be e6taMished a Trade 
15 Registry which shall be known as the Trade Marks Registry. Marks Re-
gistry and 
(2) The head office of the Trade Marks Registry shall be at ~"!::r~ 
Bombay, and for the purpose of facilitating the registration of trade 
marks, there shall be established at Calcutta and at such 
other places as the Central Government may think fit branch offices 
20 of the Trade Marks Registry. 
(3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, define the territorial limits within which a Trade Marks 
Registry may exercise its functions. 
(4) There shall be a seal of the Trade Marks Registry. 
25 6. (1) For the purposes of this Act, a record called the Register Th R . e egis-
of Trade Marks shall be kept at the head office of the Trade Marks ter of Trade 
Registry, wherein shall be entered all registered trade marks with Marks. 
the names, addresses and descriptions of the proprietors, notifications 
of assignments and trensmissions, the names, addresses and descrip-
30 tions of registered users, disclaimers, conditions, limitations and such 
other matters relating to registered trade marks as may be 
prescribed. 
(2) No notice of any trust, express or implied or constructive, 
shall be entered in the register and no such notice shall be receiv-
35 eble by the Registrar. 
(3) Subject to the superintendence and direction of the Central 
Government, the register shall be kept under the control and 
management of the Registrar. 

Part A IDd 
Pan BOl 
the register. 
8 
(4) There shall be kept at each branch of the Trade Marks 
Registry a copy of the register and such of the other documents 
mentioned in section 126 as the Central Government may, by notifi-
cation in the Official Gazette, direct. 
7. (1) The register referred to in section 6 shall be divided into 5 
two Parts called respectively Part A and Part B. 
(2) The Register of Trade Marks existin"g at the commencement 
of this Act shall be incorporated with and form part of Part A of 
the register, and this Part shall comprise all trade marks entered 
in the Register of Trade Marks existing at the commencement of 10 
this Act and all trade marks which after such commencement may 
be entered in Part A of the register. 
(3) Part B of the register shall comprise all trade marks which 
after the commencement of this Act may be entered in Part B of 
the register. 15 
R~~n a. (1) A trade mark may be registered in respect of any or all of 
~ ;;:ti: the goods comprised in a prescribed class of goods. 
cular goode. (2) Any question arising as to the class within which any goods 
Requisites 
for rePtra-
cion in Pane 
AandBof 
the reaister. 
fall shall be determined by the Registrar whose decision in the 
matter shall be final. 20 
9., (1) A trade mark shall not be registered in Part A of the 
register unless it contairu; or consists of at least one of the following 
essential particulars, namely:-
(4) the name of a company, individual or firm represented 
in a special or particular manner; 25 
(b) the signature of the applicant for registration or some 
predecessor in his business; 
(c) one or more invented words; 
(d) one or more words having no direct reference to the 
character or quality of the goods and not being, according to its 30 
ordinary signification, a geographical name or a surname or a 
personal name or any common abbreviation thereof or the name 
of a sect, caste or tribe in India; 
(e) any other distinctive mark. 
(2) A name, signature or word, other than such as fall within 35 
the descriptions in clauses (4), (b), (c) and (d) of sub-section (1) 
shall not be registrable in Part A of the register except upon evi-
dence of its distinctiveness. 

• 
(3) For the purposes of this section, the expression Udistinctive" 
in relation to the goods in respect of which a trade mark is propos-
ed to be registered, means adapted to distinguish goods with which 
the proprietor of the trade mark is or may be connected in the course 
S of trade from goods in the case of which no such connection subsists 
either generally or, where the trade mark is proposed to be register-
ed subject to limitations, in relation to use within the extent of the 
registration. 
(4) A trade mark shall not be registered in Part B of the 
10 register unless the trade mark in relation to the goods in respect 
of which it is proposed to be registered is distinctive, or is not dis-
tinctive but is capable of distinguishing goods with which the pro-
prietor of a trade mark is or may be connected in the course at 
trade from goods in the case of which no such connection subsists, 
IS either generally or, where the trade mark is proposed to be register-
ed subject to limitations, in relation to use within the extent of the 
registmtion. 
(5) In determining whether a trade mark is distinctive or is 
capable of distinguishing as aforesaid, the tribunal may ha\"'e regard 
~ to the extent to which-
(4) a trade mark is inherently distinctive or is capable of 
distinguishing as aforesaid; and 
(b) by reason of the use of the trade mark or of any other 
circumstances, the trade mark is in fact so adapted to dis-
as tinguish or is in fact capable of distinguishing as aforesaid. 
(6) SU9ject to the other provisions of this se<:tion, a trade mark 
in respect of any goods-
(a) registered in Part A of the register may be registered 
in Part B of the register; and 
30 (b) registered in Part B of the register may be registered 
in Part A of the register; 
in the name of the same proprietor of the same trade mark or any 
part or parts thereof. 
10. (1) A trade mark may be limited wholly or in part to one Limitation 
35 or more specified colours, and any such limitation shall be' taken .a to colour. 
into consideration by any tribunal having to decide on the distinctive 
eharacter of the trade mark. 
(2) So far as a trade mark is registered without limitation of 
eolour it shall be deemed to be registered for all colours. 
40 11. A mark- Prohibition 
of regist rl-
• dOD of cer-(a) the use of whlch would be likely to deceive or cause tain mara. 
COftfua1onj or 

10 
(b) the use of which would be contrary to any law for the 
time being in force; or 
(c) which comprises or contains scandalous or obscene 
matter; or 
(d) which comprises or contains any matter likely to hurt 5 
the religious susceptibilities of any class or section of, the 
citizens of India; or 
(e) which would otherwise be disentitled to protection in • 
court; 
shall not be registered as a trade mark. 10 
~r::!~~ 12. (1) Save as provided in sub-section (3), no trade mark shall 
t!0n of iden- be registered in respect of any goods or description of goods which 
;:!~~velY is identical with or deceptively similar to a trade mark which is 
aimilar trade already registered in the name of a different proprietor in respect 
marks. of the same goods or description of goods. 15 
Prohibition 
of registra-
tion of 
names of 
chemical 
elements. 
(2) Where separate applications are made by different persons 
to be registered as proprietors respectively of trade marks which 
are identical or nearly resemble each other in respect of the same 
goods or description of goods, the Registrar may defer the con-
sideration or acceptance of the application or applications bearing 20 
a later date until after the determination of proceedings in respect 
of the earlier application. 
(3) In case of honest concurrent use or of other special circum-
stances which, in the opinion of the Registrar, make it proper so to 
do, he may permit the registration by more than one proprietor 25 
of trade marks which are identical or nearly resemble each other 
(whether any such trade mark is already registered or not) in res-
pect of the same goods or descriptIon of goods, subject to such con-
ditions and limitations, if any, as the Registrar may think fit to 
impose. 30 
13. (1) No word which is the commonly used and accepted name 
of any single chemical element or single chemical compound (as 
distinguished from a mixture) shall be registered as a trade mark 
in respect of a chemical substance or preparation, and any such 
registration shall, notwithstanding anything in section 32, be deemed 3S 
for the purposes of section 56 to l>e an entry made in the register 
without sufficient cause or an entry wrongly remaining on the regis-
ter, as the circumstances may require. 
(2) ThIs section shall not apply to a word which is used to 
denote only a brand or make of the element or compound 'Is· made 40 

S 
11 
by the proprietor or a registered user of the trade mark, as dis-
tinguished from the element or compound as made by others, and 
in association with a suitable name or description open to the 
public use. 
14. Where an application is made for the registration of a trade Use o~and 
mark which consists of or contains the name or a representation of =:enta-
a living person or of a person whose death took place within twenty ?ona of Uv-
. h d f li . f . t' f th d mg penons years pnor to t e ate 0 app catlOn or reglstra lon 0 e tra e or penons 
10 mark, the Registrar may, before he proceeds with the application, d:=crtly 
require the applicant to furnish him with the consent in writing of 
such living person or, as the case may be, of the legal representative 
of the deceased person to the name or representation appearing on 
the trade mark, and may refuse to proceed with the application un-
less the applicant furnishes the Registrar with such consent. 
15 15. (1) Where the proprietor of a trade mark claims to be entitled Registration 
to the exclusive use of any part thereof separately, he may apply ~~S:r:.:;~8 
to register the whole and the part as separate trade marks. and of trade 
mark ••• a 
(2) Each such separate trade mark shall satisfy all the conditions series. 
applying to, and have all the incidents of, an independent trade 
20 mark. 
(3) Where a person claiming to be the proprietor of several trade 
marks in respect of the same goods or description of goods which, 
while resembling each other in the material particulars thereof, yet 
differ in respect of-
lS (a) statements of the goods in relation to which they are 
respectively used or proposed to be used; or 
(b) statements of number, price, quality or names of places; 
or 
(c) other matter of a non-distinctive character which does 
30 not substantially affect the identity of the trade mark; or 
(d) colour; 
seeks to register those trade marKs, they may be registered as a 
aeries in one registration. 
16. (1) Where a trade mark which is registered, or is the subject Registration 
3S of an application for registration, in respect of any goods is identi- :::.de 
cal with another trade merk which is registered, or is the subject as associated 
of an application for registration, in the name of the same trade marks. 
proprietor in respect of the same goods or description of 
goods or so nearly resembles it as to be likely to deceive 
40 or cause confusion if used by a person other than the proprietor, the 
Registrar may, ,at any time, require that the trade marks shall be •. 
entered on the register as associated trade marks. 

RqiatntiaD 
Of trade 
marb sub 
feet to diJ.. 
claimer. 
13 
(2) Where a trade mark and any part thereof are, in aecordanee 
with the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 15, registered u 
separate trade marks in the name of the same proprietor, they mall 
be deemed to be, and shall be registered as, associated trade marks. 
. (3) All trade marks registered in accordance with the provisioDi 5 
of Bub-section (3) of section 15 as a series in one registration shall 
be deemed to be, and shall be registered as, associated trade marlu. 
(4) On application made in the prescribed manner by the regis-
tered proprietor of two or more trade marks registered as associat-
ed trade marks, the Registrar may dissolve the association as res- 10 
pects any of them if he is satisfied that there would be no likelihood 
of deception or confusion being caused if that trade mark were 
used by any other person in relation to any 'of the goods in respect 
of which it is registered, and may amend the register accordingly. 
1'1. If a trade mark-
(a) contains any part-
(i) which is not the subject of a separate application by 
,the proprietor for registration as a trade mark; or 
(ii) which is not separately registered by the proprietor 
IS 
as a trade mark; or 20 
(b) contains any matter which is common to the trade or 
is otherwise of a non-distinctive character; 
the tribunal, in deciding whether the trade mark shall be entered 
or shall remain on the register, may require, as a condition of its 
being on the register, that the proprietor shall either disclaim any 25 
right to the exclusive use of such part or of all or any portion of 
such matter, as the case .may be, to the exclusive use of which the 
tribunal holds him not to be entitled, or .make such other disclaimer 
as the tribunal may consider necessary for the purpose of defining 
the rights of the proprietor under the registration: 30 
Provided that no disclaimer shall affect any rights of the pro-
prl .... tor of a trade mark except such as arise out of the registration 
of the trade mark in respect of which the disclaimer is made. 

.' CHAPTERIU 
PROCEDURE FOR AND DURATION OF REGISTRATION 
18. (1) Any person claiming to be the proprietor of a trade mark Applic;~tIOD 
used or proposed to be used by him who is desirous of registering it ~O~n,.el1l[Ia­
S shall apply in writing to the Registrar in the prescribed manner 
for the registration of his trade mark either in Part A or in Part B 
of the register. 
(2) An application shall not be made in respect of goods com-
prised in more than one prescribed class of goods. 
10 (3) Every application under sub-section (1) shall be filed in the 
Trade Marks Registry within whose territorial limits the principal 
place of business in India of the applicant or in the case of joint 
applicants the principal place of business in India of the applicant 
whose name is first mentioned in the application, as having a place 
15 of business in India, is situate: 
Provided that where the applicant or none of the applicants 
carries on business in India, the application shall be flIed in the 
Trade Marks Registry within whose territorial limits the place 
mentioned in the address for service in India as disclosed in the 
30 application, is situate. 
(4) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Registrar may refuse 
the application or may accept it absolutely or subject to such amend-
ments, modifications, conditions or limitations, if any, as he rna, 
think fit. 
~s (5) In the case of an application for registration of a trade mark 
(other than a certification trade mark) in Part A of the register, the 
Registrar may, if the applicant so desires, instead of refusing the 
application, treat it as an application for registration in Part B of 
the regilter and deal ~th the application accordingly. 
30 (6) In the case of a refusal or conditional acceptance of an eppli-
eation the Registrar shall, if so required by the applicant, state in 
writing the grounds for such refusal or conditional acceptance and 
the materials used by him in arriving at his decision. 
19. Where, after the acceptance of an application for registration Withdrawal 
35 of a trade mark but before its registration, the Registrar is satisfted- :!!.ccept-
(a) that the application has been accepted in error; or 
(b) that in the circumstances of the case the trade mark 
should not be registered or should be registered subject to con-
ditions or llmitat10llS or to conditions additional to or different 

Advertise-
ment of 
application. 
Oppositioll 
to replt:a-
tiOD. 
1. 
from the conditions or limitations subject to which the applica-
tion has been accepted; 
the Registrar may, after hearing the applicant if he so desires, with-
draw the acceptance and proceed as if the application had not 'been 
accepted. 5 
20. (1) When an application for registration of a trade mark hu 
been accepted, whether absolutely or subject to conditions or limi-
tations, the Registrar shall, as soon as may be after acceptance, cause 
the application as accepted together with the conditions or limita-
tions, if any, subject to which it has been accepted, to be advertised 10 
in the prescribed manner: 
Provided that the Registrar may cause the application to be 
advertised before acceptance if it relates to a trade mark to which 
sub-section (2) of section 9 applies or in any other case where it 
appears to him that it is expedient by reason of any exceptional 15 
circumsmnces so to do. 
(2) Where---
(a) an application has been advertised before acceptance 
under sub-section (1); or 
(b) after advertisement of an application- 30 
(i) an error in the application has been corrected; or 
(ii) the application has been permitted to be amended 
under section 22; 
the Registrar may in his discretion cause the application to be adver-
tised again or, in any case falling under clause (b) may, instead of 2S 
causing the application to be advertised again, notify in the pres-
cribed manner the correction or amendment made in the applica-
tion. 
21. (1) Any person may, within three months from the date of 
the advertisement or re-advertisement of an application for regis- 30 
tration, give notice in writing in the prescribed manner to the Regis-
trar, of opposition to the registration. 
(2) The Registrar shall serve a copy of the notice on the· appli-
cant for registration and, within two months from the receipt by 
the applicant of such copy of the notice of opposition, the applicant 3S 
shall send to the Registrar in the prescribed manner a counter-state-
ment . of the grounds on which he relies for his application, and if he 
dcfesnot do so he shall be deemed to he\'\! abandoned. his appiicatton. 

US 
(3) If the applicant sends such counter-statement the Registrar 
shall serve a copy thereof on the person giving notice of opposition. 
(4) Both the opponent and the applicant shall be given an oppor-
tunity to submit in the prescribed manner the evidence upon which 
5 they rely and to be heard by the Registrar if they so desire. 
(5) The Registrar shall, after hearing the parties, if so required, 
and considering the evidence, decide whether and subject to what 
conditions or limitations, if any, the registration is to be permitted, 
and may take into account a ground of objection whether relied upon 
to by the opponent or not. 
(6) Where a person giving notice of opposition or an applicant 
sehding a counter-statement after receipt of a copy of such notice 
neither resides nor carries on business in India, the Registrar may 
require him to give security for the costs of proceedings before him, 
15 and in default of such security being duly given, may treat the 
opposition or application, as the case may be, as abandoned. 
ZZ. The Registrar may on such terms as he thinks just-
(a) at any time, whether before or after acceptance of an 
application for registration under section 18, permit the correc-
tion of any error in or in connection with the application or 
permit an amendment 'of the application; or 
(b) permit correction of any error in, or the amendment of, 
a notice of opposition or a counter-statement under section 21. 
Correction 
and amend-
ment. 
23. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 19, when an applica- Registration. 
25 tion for registration of a trade mark in Part A or Part B of the 
register has been accepted and either-
(a) the application has not been opposed and the time for 
nptice of opposition has expired~ or 
(b) the application has been opposed and the opposition has 
30 been decided in favour of the applicant; 
the Registrar shall, unless the Central Government otherwise directs, 
register the said trade mark in Part A or Part B of the register, as 
the case may be, and the trade mark when registered shall be regis-
tered'as of the date of the making of the said application and that 
35cb.te shall, subject to the provisions of section 131, be deemed to be 
the date of registration. 

18 
(~) On the registration of a trade mark, the Registrar shall issue 
to the applicant a certificate in the prescribed form of the regiatra. 
tion thereof. sealed with the seal of the Trade Marks Registry. 
(3) Where registration of a trade mark is not completed within 
twelve months from the date of the application by reason of default 5 
on the part of the applicant, the Registrar may, after giving notice 
to the applicant in the prescrioed manner, treat the application as 
abandoned unless it is completed within the time specified in that 
behalf in the notice. 
(4) 'I1le Registrar may, on 8ueh terms as he thinks just, amend 10 
the register or a certificate of registration for the purpose of correct-
ing a clerical error or an obvious mistake. 
J= trade U. (1) Save as provided in sub-section (2). nothing in this Act 
~ub. shall authorise the registration of two or more persons who use a 
trade mark independently, or propose so to use it, as joint prol'rie- 15 
tors thereof. • 
(2) Where the relations between two or more persons interested 
in a trade mark are such that no one of them is entitled as between 
himself and the other or others of them to use it except-
(a) on behalf of both or all of them; or 20 
(b) in relation to an article with which both or all of them 
are' connected in the course of trade; 
those persons may be registered as joint proprietors of the trade 
mark, and this Act shall have effect in relation to any rights to the 
use of the trade mark vested in those persons as if those rights had 25 
been vested in a single person. 
Duration. 15. (1) The re~stration of a trade mark shall be for a period of renewal and . dan rettgration seven years, but may be renewed from time to tune in accor ce 
of repra· with the provisions of this section. tion. 
(2) The Registrar shall, on application made by the registered 30 
proprietor of a trade mark in the prescribed manner and within the 
prescribed period and subject to the prescribed conditions, renew 
the registration of the trade mark for a period of seven years from 
the date of e¥piration of the original registration or of the last rene-
wal of registration, as the case may be (which date is in this section 35 
referred to as the expiration of the last registration). 
(3) At the prescribed time before the expiration of tile lut regis-
tration of a trade mark the Registrar shall send notice in the pres. 
cribed manner to the registered proprietor of the date of expiratlol'l 

1'1 
and the conditions as to payment of fees and otherwise upon which 
a renewal of registration may be obtained, and, if at the expiration 
'Jf the time prescribed in that behalf those conditions have not been 
duly complied with, the Registrar may remove the trade mark from 
S the register. 
(4) Where a trade mark has been removed from the register for 
non-payment of the prescribed fee, the Registrar may, within one 
year from the expiration of the last registration of the trade mark, 
on receipt of an application in the prescribed form, if satisfied that 
10 it is just so to do, restore the trade mark to the register and renew 
the registration of the trade mark either generally or subject to 
such conditions or limitations as he thinks fit to impose, for a period 
of seven years from the expiration of the last registration. 
26. Where a trade mark has been removed from the register for :0: g-
IS failure to pay. the fee for renewal, it shall nevertheless, for the pur- ~l1Ierfor 
pose of any application for the registration of another trade mark pay~ %r 
during one year next after the date of the removal, be deemed to be renewal. 
a trade mark already on the register, unless the tribunal is satisfied 
either-
~o (a) that there has been no bona fide trade use of the trade 
mark which has been removed during the two years immediately 
preceding its removal; or 
(b) that no deception or confusion would be likely to arise 
from the use of the trade mark which is the subject of the appll-
~5 cation for registration by reason of any previous use of the trade 
mark which has been removed.. 
CHAPTER IV 
EFFECT OF REGISTRATION 
27. (1) No person shall be entitled to institute any proceeding to No ~ 
30 prevent, or to recover damages for, the infringement of an unregis- !":n~ 
tered trade mark. unregistered 
trade mark. 
(2) Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to affect rights of action 
against any person for passing oft goods as the goods of another 
person or the remedies in respect thereof. 
3S 28. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the registration ~!? bCOD-
of a trade mark in Part A or Part B of the register shall, if valid, give ~traJOD. 
to the registered proprietor of the trade mark the exclusive right 
to the use of the trade mark in relation to the goods in respect of 
which the trade mark is registered and to obtain relief in respect of 
40 infringement of the trade mark in the manner provided by thi8 Act. 

18 
(2) The exclusive right to the use of a trade mark given under 
sub-section (1) shall be subject to any conditions and limitations to 
which the registration is subject. 
(3) Where two or more persons are proprietors of trade mara 
registered un~er this Act, which are identical with or nearly resem- 5 
ble each other, the exclusive right to the use of any of those trade 
marks shall not (except so far as their respective rights are subject 
to any conditions or limitations entered on the register) be deemed 
to have been acquired by anyone of those persons as against any 
other of those persons merely by registration of the trade marks but 10 
each of those persons has otherwise the same rights as against other 
persons (not being registered users using by way of permitted use) 
as he would have if he were the sole registered proprietor. 
I~ 21. (1) A regiatered trade mark is infringed by a person who, not 
= 1DUb. being the registered proprietor of the trade mark or a registered IS 
user thereof using by way of permitted use, uses a mark which Is 
identical with, or deceptively similar to, the trade mark, in the course 
of trade, in relation to any goods in respect of which the trade mark 
is registered. 
(2) In an action for infringement of a trade mark registered in 20 
Part B of the register an injunction or other relief shall not be grant-
ed to the plaintiff if the defendant establishes to the satisfaction of 
the court, that the use of the mark of which the plaintiff complains 
is not likely to deceive or cause confusion or to be taken as indicating 
a connection in the course of trade, between the goods in respect of 25 
which the trade mark is registered and some person having the right, 
either as registered proprietor or as registered user, to use the trade 
mark. 
Acta net 30. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the 
=~ following acta do not constitute an infringement of the right to the 30 
• .n. use of a registered trade. mark:-
(a) where a trade mark is registered subject to any condi-
tions or limitations, the use of the trade mark in any manner 
in relation to goods to be sold or otherwise traded in, in any 
place, or in relation to goods to be exported to any market, or 3S 
in any other circumstances, to which, having regard to those 
conditions or limitations, the registration does not extend; 
(b) the use by a person of a trade mark in relation to goocla 
connected in the course of trade with the proprietor or a regi8-
tered user of the trade mark If, 88 to thoee goods or a bulk of 40 

5 
10 
IS 
which they form part, the registered proprietor or the registered 
user conforming to the pennitted use has applied the trade 
mark and has not subsequently removed or obliterated it, or has 
at any time expressly or impliedly consented to the use of the 
trade mark; 
(c) the use of a trade mark by a person in relation to goods 
adapted to form part of, or to be acceBSOry to, other goods in 
relation to which the trade mark has been used without infringe-
ment of the right given by registration under this Act or might 
for the time being be so used. if the use cd the trade mark is 
reasonably necessary in order to indicate that the goods are so 
adapted, and neither the purpose nor the etJect of the use of 
the trade mark is to indicate, otherwise than in accordance with 
the fact, a connection in the course of trade between any person 
and the goods; 
(d) the use of a registered trade mark, being one of two or 
more trade marks registered under this Act which are identical 
or nearly resemble each other, in exercise of the right to the use 
of that trade mark given by registration under this Act. 
20 (2) Where the goods bearing a registered trade-mark are lawfully 
acquired by a person, the sale of or other dealings in those goods by 
that person or by a person claiming under or through him is not an 
infringement of the trade mark by reason only of the trade mark 
having been assigned by the registered proprietor to some other 
25 person after the acquisition of thOle goods. 
31. (1) In all legal proceedings relating to a trade mark regis- . . 
tered under this Act (including applications under section 56) I the !c~tr.tJofI 
original registration of the trade mark and all subsequent auign- tri-focU 
ments and transmissions of the trade mark shall be prima facie :ltd?; of 
30 evid~nce of the validity thereof. 
(2) In all legal proceedings as aforesaid a trade mark registered 
in Part A of the register shall not be held to be invalid on the ground 
that it was not a registrable trade mark under section 9 except upon 
evidence of distinctiveness and that such evidence was not submitted 
to the Registrar before the date of registration, if it is proved that 
35 the trade mark had been so used by the registered proprietor or his 
predecessor in title as to have become distinctive at the date of rep-
tration. 

JO 
RqiatratiOD U. Subject to the provisions of section 35, in all legal proceed· 
~~vebe uco~u. ings relating to a trade mark registered in Part A of the register 
validity after (including applications under section 56), the original registration 
lCVeD yeua. of the trade mark shall, after the expiration of seven years from the 
date of such registration, be taken to be valid in all respects unle&l 5 
it la proved-
(4) that the original registration was obtained by fraud; or 
(b) that the trade mark was registered in contravention of 
the provisions of section 11 or offends against the provisions of 
,thatlection on the date of commencement of the proceedings; or 10 
(c) that the trade mark was not, at the commencement of 
the proceedings, distinctive of the goods of the registered 
proprietor. 
Savina for 33. Nothing in this Act shall entitle the proprietor or a registered 
Vetted riahtl. user of a registered trade mark to interfere with or restrain the use IS 
by any person of a trade mark identical with or nearly resembling 
it in relation to goods in relation to which that person or a predeces-
sor in title of his has continuously used that trade mark from a date 
prior-
(a) to the use of the first-mentioned trade mark in relation 20 
to those gooda by the proprietor or a predecessor in title of his; 
or 
(b) to the registration of the first-mentioned trade mark in 
respect of those goods in the name of the proprietor or a prede-
cessor in title of his; 3, 
whichever is the earlier, and the Registrar shall not refuse (on such 
use being proved) to register the second-mentioned trade mKk by 
reason only of the registration of the first-mentioned trade mark. 
Sa::! for 34. Nothing in this Act shall entitle the proprietor or a registered 
:: name, user of ,a registered trade mark to interfere with any bona fide use 30 
or dr:'.:riP- by 9. person of his own name or that of his place of business; or of 
don of pods. the name, or of the name of the place of business, of any of his 
predecessors in bUSiness, or the use by any person of any bona fide 
description of the character or quality of his goods. 
Saving for 35. (1) The registration of a trade mark shall not be deemed to 3' 
word. wed have become invalid by reason only of any use after the date of the u name or 
delCriptiOD registration of any word or words which the trade mark contains or 
of &nb8rticle of which it consists as the name or description of an article or sub-or au stance. 
stance: 

21 
Provided that, if it is proved either-
(0) that there is a well-known and established use of the 
said word as the name or description of the article or substance 
by a person or persons carrying on a trade therein, not being 
5 use in relation to goods cOIUlected in the course of trade with the 
proprietor or a registered user of the trade mark or (in the 
case of a certification trade mark) goods certified by the proprie-
tor; or 
(b) that the article or substance was formerly manufactur-
10 ed under a patent, that a period of two years or more after the 
cesser of the patent has elapsed, and that the said word is the 
only practicable name or description of the article or substance; 
-the provisions of sub-section (2) shall apply. 
(2) Where the facts mentioneq in clause (a) or clause (b) of the 
I,provlso to sub-section (1) are proved with respect to any words, 
then-
(a) for the purposes of any proceedings Wlder section 56-
(i) if the trade mark consists solely of such words, the 
registration of the trade mark, so far as regards registration 
in respect of the article or substance in question or of any 
goods of the same description, shall be deemed to be an 
entry wrongly remaining on the register; 
(ii) if the trade mark contllins such words and other 
matter, the tribunal in deciding whether the trade mark 
shall remain on the register, so far as regards registration in 
~5 respect of the article or substance in question and of any 
goods of the same description, mey, in case of a decision in 
favour of its remaining on the register, require as a condition 
thereof that the proprietor shall disclaim any exclusive right 
to the use in relation to that article or substance and any 
30 goods of the same description, of such words: 
Provided that no disclaimer shall affect any rights of the 
proprietor of a trade mark except such as arise out of the regis-
tration of the trade mark in respect of which the disclaimer is 
3' made; 
(b) for the purposes of any other legal proceeding relating 
to the trade mark,-
(i) if the trade mtBrk consists solely of such worciJ, all 
rights of the proprietor under this Act or any other law to 
40 the use of the trade mark in relation to the article or JUb-
Itance in question or to any goods of the same deaeriptiOD; 
or 

22 
(ii) if the trade mark contains such words· and other 
matter, all such rights of the proprietor to the use of such 
words, in such relation as aforesaid; 
shall he deemed to have ceased on the date at which the use men-
tioned in clause (a) of the proviso to sub-section (1) first became 5 
well-known and established, or at the expiration of the period of 
two years mentioned in clause (b) of the said proviso. 
'. _. ".( 
CHAPTER V 
AssIGNMENT AND TRANSMISSION 
hwcr of rc- 36. The person for the time being entered in the register as pro- 10 
=or to prietor of e trade mark shall, subject to the provisions of this Act 
~ ~ and to any rights appearing from the register to be vested in any 
other person, have power to assign the trade mark, and to give 
effectual receipts for any consideration for such assignment. 
Aui.ubility 37. (1) Notwithstanding anything in any other lew to the con- IS 
:: trary, a registered trade mark shall, subject to the provisions of this 
o~ft8lam::s! Chapter, be assignable end transmissible, whether with or without 
t c . the goodwill of the business concerned and in respect either of all 
the goods in respect of which the trade mark is registered or of some 
only of those goods. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (3) end (4), an 
assignment of a registered trade mark without the goodwill of the 
business made after the commencement of this Act shall be invalid 
20 
if a mark identical with, or deceptively similar to the trade mark, 
continues to be used by the assignor after the assignment in relation 25 
to goods not belonging to the assignee, where there exists a connec-
tion in the course of trade between those goods and the assignor and 
where those goods are the same or of the same description in respect 
of which the trade mark has been assigned, or of such a d~cription 
dlat the public is likely to be deceived by the use of the trade mark 30 
by the assignor and assignee upon their respective goods. 
(3) An assignment of a trade mark made after the commence-
ment of this Act shall not be invalid if at the date of the institution 
of any proceedings in which the validity of the assignment is called 
in question, the trade mark has come to denote to the public a con- 35 
n«tion in the course of trade· between the goods and the assignee 
to the f'xclusion of all other persons, or, if the I"egistration is limited 
10 a specified area, to the exclusion of all other persons within that 
....... 

» 
(4) An assignment of a trade mark shall not be held to be 
invalid except in proceedings instituted within three years after the 
registration of the assignment. 
(5) All rights subsisting in a registered trade mark, whether 
5 under this Act or otherwise, on the date of the assignment of the 
• trade mark shall. subject to the conditions and limitations, if any, of 
the assignment, be deemed to be assigned upon the registration of 
the assignment of the tmde mark. 
38. (1) An unregistered trade mark shall not 
10 transmissible except along with the goodwill 
concerned. 
be assignable or !::iIitJ 
of the businea mlllibiitJ 
ofUDftlil-
terecl tndc 
mub. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), an 
unregistered trade mark may be assigned or transmitted otherwise 
than along with the goodwill of the business concerned 1£-
(a) at the time of assignment or transmission of the unregis-
tered trade mark, it is used in the same business as a regIs-
tered trade mark; and 
(b) the registered trade mark is assigned or transmitted 
at the same time and to the same person as the unrelfstered 
20 trade mark; and 
(c) the unregistered trade mark relates to goods in respect 
of which the registered trade mark is assigned or transmitted. 
39. (.1) Notwithstanding anything in section 37 and section 38, a Ilauictiaas 
trade mark shall not be assignable or transmissible in a case in :ID~-
2S which as a result of the assignment or transmission there would in trmwnt-;r 
the circumstances subsist, whether under this Act or any other law, ;~':c-:a':; 
~xclusivf rights in more than one of the persons concerned to the bclt~d 
nse, in relation to the same goods or description of goods, of trade . 
marks nearly resembling each other or of identical tnlde rwks, if. 
30 having regard to the similarity of the goods and of the trade1harb, 
the use of the trade marks in exercise of those rights would be likely 
to deceive or cause confusion: 
Provided that an assignment or transmission shell not be deemed 
to be invalid under this sub-section if the exclusive rights 8ubsfltlng 
'5 as a result thereof in the persons concerned respectively are, having 
regard to limitations imposed thereon, such as not to be exercisable 
by two or more of those persons in relation to goods to be sold, or 

otherwise traded in, within India otherwise than for export there-
from, or in relation to goods to be exported to the same market 
ou tside India. 
(2) The proprietor of a registered trade mark who proposes to 
assign it may submit to the Registrar in the prescribed manner a S 
statement of case setting out the circumstances and the Registrar 
may issue to him a certificate stating whether, having regard to the 
sinlilarity of the goods and of the trade marks referred to in the 
case, the proposed assignment would or would not be invalid under 
sub-section (1), and a certificate so issued shall, subject to appeal and 10 
unless it is shown toot the certificate was obtained by fraud or mis-
representation, be conclusive as to the validity or invalidity under 
sub-section (1) of the assignment in so far as such validity or invalI-
dity depends upon the facts set out in the case, but, as regards a 
certificate in favour of validity, only if epplication for the registra- I, 
tion under section 44 of the title of the person becoming entitled 
is mad~ within six months from the date on which the certificate fa 
issued. 
Rcatric:tiOlll 40. Notwithstanding anything in section 37 and section 38, a 
=_~- trade mark shall not be assignable or transmissible in a cue in 20 
tlmllllillion which as a result of the assignment or transmission there would tn 
::Ori~- the circumstances subsist, whether under this Act or any other law, 
would be an exclusive right in one of the persons concerned to the use of the 
::::.:n trade mark limited to use in reletion to goods to be sold, or other-
e of wise traded in, in any place in India and an exclusive right in 2S 
L another of these persons to the use of a trade mark nearly resembl-
ing the first-mentioned trade mark or of an identical tMde mark in 
relation to the same goods or description of goods limited to use in 
relation to goods to be sold, or otherwise traded in, in any other place 
in India: 30 
Provided that in any such case, on application in the prescribed 
manner by the proprietor of a trade merk who proposes to assign it, 
or by a person who claims that a registered trade mark has been 
transmitted to him or to a predecessor in title of his since the com-
mencement of this Act, the Registrar, if he is satisfied that in all 35 
the .circumstances the use of the trade mark in exercise of the said 
rights would not be contrary to the public interest, may approve the 
assignment or transmission, and an assignment or transmission 80 
approved shall not, unless it is shown that the approval VMS obtained 
by fraud or misrepresentation, be deemed to be invalid under thb 40 
section or section 39 if application for the registration under section 
44 of the title of the person becoming entitled is made within six 
months from the date on which the approval is given or, in the cue 
ofa trensmlssion, was made before that date. 

41. Where an assignment of a trade mark, whether registered or Condit;ioDs 
unregistered, is made otherwise than in connection with the goodwill :~:t·~f~­
of the business in which the mark is used, the assignment shall not ~i.e than 
take effect unless the assignee, not later than the expiration of six ~o:=:-
5 months from the date on which the assignment is made or within the goodwill 
such (:xt£'nded period, if any, as the Registrar may allow, applies to of a buaineaa. 
the Registrar for directions with respect to the advertisement of 
the assignment, and advertises it in such form and manner and 
within such period as the Registrar may direct. 
10 Explanation.-For the purposes of this section an assignment of 
- a trade mark of the following description shall not be deemed to be 
an assignment made otherwise than in connection with the goodwill 
of ihe business in which the mark is used, namely:-
(a) an assignment of a trade mark in respect only of some 
15 of the goods for which the trade mark is registered accompanied 
by the transfer of the goodwill of the business concerned in 
those goods only; or 
(b) an assignment of a trade mark which is used in relation 
to goods exported from India if the assignment is accompanied 
~o by the transfer of the goodwill of the export business only. 
., 
42. A certificetion trade mark shall not be assignable or trans- Aisignabili-
missible otherwise than with the consent of the Central Government, ~i:i~i~ft~s­
for which application shall be made in writing in the prescribed oT certifica-
manner through the Retristrar hon trade e,. • marks. 
25 43. Associated trade marks shall be assignable and transmissible Assignability 
only as a whole and not separately, but, subje'ct to the provisi<lns of :!~bili:; 
this Act, they shall, for all other purposes, be deemed to have been of aaaociated 
registered as separate trade marks. trade marks. 
\ 
·14. (1) Where a person becomes entitled by assignment or trans.- Registration 
30 mission to a registered trade mark, he shall apply in the prescribed of asslgn-r 
manner to the Registrar to register his title, and the Registrar shall, ~e:~i~ 
on receipt of the application and on proof of title to his satisfaction, sions. 
register him as the proprietor of the trade mark in respect of the 
goods in respect of which the assignment or transmission has effect, 
3S and fhall cause particulars of the assignment or tMIlsmission to be 
entered on the register. 
(2) Except for the purpose of an application before the Registrar 
under Rub-section (1) or an appeal from an order thereon, or an 
application under section 56 or an appeal from an order thereon, a 
40 -Jocument or instrument in respect of which no entry has been made 

Propoaed 
usc of trade 
mark by 
company to 
be formed. 
26 
in the relister in accordance with sub-section (1), shall not be 
admitted in evidence by the Registrar or any court in proof of title 
to the trade mark by assignment or transmission unless the Re,utrar 
or the court, as the case may be, otherwise directs. 
CHAPI'ERVI 
USE OF 'l'RADE MARKS AND REGISTERED USERS 
5 
.s. (1) No appliootion for the registration of a trade mark in 
respect (If any goods shall be refused, nor shall permission for such 
registration be withheld, on the ground only that it appears that the 
applicant does not use or propose to use the trade mark, if the 10 
Registrar is satisfied that a company is about to be formed and 
registered under the Companies Act, 1956, and that the applicant I of 19,6 
intends to assign the trade mark to that company with a view to 
the use thereof in relation to those goods by the company. 
(2) The tribuool may, in a case to which sub-section (1) applies, 15 
require the applicant to give security for the costs of any proceedings 
relative to any opposition or appeal, and in default of such security 
being duly given may treat the application as abandoned. 
(3) Where in a cese to which sub-section (1) applies, a trade 
mark in respect of any goods is registered in the name of an appli- 20 
cant who relies on intention to assign the trade mark to a company, 
then, unless within such period as may be prescribed, or within such 
further period not exceeding six months as the Registrar may, on 
application being made to him in the prescribed manner, allow, the 
company has been registered as the proprietor of the trade mark in 25 
respect of those goods, the registration shall cease to have effect in 
respect thereof at the expiration of that period, and the Registrar 
shall amend the register accordingly. 
Removal 46. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 47, a registered trade 
from relJis- mark may be taken off the register in respect of any of the goods in 30 
:=:8::nl~- respect of which it is registered on application in the prescribed 
limitations manner by any person aggrieved to a High Court or to the Registrar, on 'found of h . Don-usc. on t e ground elther-
(a) that the trade mark was registered without any bona. 
fide intention on the part of the applicant for registration that 35 
it should be used in relation to those goods by him or, in a case 
to which the provisions of section 45 apply, by the company con-
cerned, and thtat there has, in fact, been no bona fide use of the 
traae mark in relation to those goods by any proprietor thereof 
for the time being up to a date one month before the date of 40 
the application; or 

(b) that up to a date one month before the date of the 
application, a continuous period of five yearli or longer had elaps-
ed during which the trade mark was registered and during 
which there was no bona fide use thereof in relation to those 
5 goods by any proprietor thereof for the time being: 
Provided that, except where the applicant has been permitted 
under sub-section (3) of section 12 to register an identical or nearly 
resembling trade mark in respect of the goods in question or where 
the tribunal is of opinion that he might properly be permitted so to 
10 register such a trademark, the tribunal may refuse an application 
under clause (a) or clause (b) in reletion to any goods, if it is shown 
that there has been, before the relevant date or during the relevant 
period, as the case may be, bona fide use of the trade mark by any 
proprietor thereof for the time being in relation to goods of the 
15 same description, being goods in respect of which the trflde mark 
is registered. 
(2) Where in relation to any goods in respect of which a trade 
mark is registered-
(a) the circumstances referred to in clause (b) of sub-
section (1) are shown to exist so far as regards non-use of the 
20 trade mark in relation to goods to be sold, or otherwise traded 
in, in a particular place in India (otherwise than for export from 
India), or in relation to goods to be exported to a particular 
market outside India; and 
30 
(b) 6 person has been permitted under sub-section (3) of 
section 12 to register an identical or nearly resembling trade 
mark in respect of those goods under a registration extending to 
use in relation to goods to be so sold, or otherwise traded in, or 
in relation to goods to be so exported, or the tribunal is of 
opinion that he might properly be permitted so to register such 
a trade mark; 
on applioation by that person in the prescribed maIUler to a HIgh 
Court or to the Registrar, the tribunal may impose on the registra-
tion of the first-mentioned trade mark such limitations as it thinks 
35 proper for securing that that registration shall cease to extend to 
such use. 
(3) An applicant shell not be entiUed to rely for the purpose 
of clause (b) of sub-section (1) or for the purposes of sub-section 
(2) on any non-use of a trade mark which is shown to have bet>n 
40 due to special circumstances in the trade. and not to any intention 
to abandon Ot not to use the trade mark in relation to the goods to 
which the application relates. _' .... [ .~. 

• 
Defensive 47 (1) Where a trade mark consisting of any invented. word has 
registration b 11 kn d' I' hich of well- ecome so we - own as respects any goo s m re atlOn to w . it 
known trade is registered and has been used, toot the use thereof in relation to 
marks. other goods would be likely to be taken as indicating a connection 
in the course of trade between those goods and a person entitled to 5 
use the trade mark in relation to the first-mentioned. goods, then, 
notwithstanding that the proprietor registered in respect of the first-
mentioned goods does not use or propose to use the trade mark in 
reletion to those other goods and notwithstanding anything in sec-
tion 46, the trade mark may, on application in the prescribed man- 10 
ner by such proprietor, be registered in his name in respect of those 
other goods as a defensive tl'ade mark, and while so registered, shall 
not be liable to be taken off the register in respect of those goods 
under the said sectien. 
(2) The registered proprietor of !R trade mark may apply for I 5 
the registration thereof in respect of any goods as a defensive trade 
mark notwithstanding that iti! already registered in his name in 
respect of those goods otherwise than as a defensive trade mark, or 
JIlIQy apply for the registration thereof in respect of any goods 
otherwise than as a defensive trade mark notwithstanding that it 20 
is already registered in his name in respect of those goods as a 
defensive trade mark, in lieu in each case of the existing registration. 
(3) A trade mark registered as a defensive trade mark and that 
trade mark as otherwise registered in the name of the Sl8me pro-
prietor shall, notwithstanding that the respective registrations are 25 
in respect of different goods, be deemed to be and shall be register-
ed as, associated trade marks. 
(4) On QPplication in the prescribed manner by any person 
aggrieved to a High Court or to the Registrar, the registration of a 
trade mark as a defensive trade mark may be cancelled on the 30 
ground that the requirements of sub-section (1)' are no longer 
satisfied in respect of !Rny goods in relation to which the trade mark 
is registered in the name of the same proprietor otherwise than as 
a defensive trade mark, or may be cancelled as re~pects. any goods 
in relation to which it is registered as a defensive trade mark on the 3S 
ground that there is no longer any likelihood that the use of the 
trade mark in relation to those goods would be taken as .giving the 
indication mentioned in sub-section (1). 
(5) The Registrar may at !Rny time -cancel the registration as a 
defensive trade mark of a trade mark of which there is no longer 40 
any registration in the name of the same proprietor otherwise than 
as a defensive trade mark. 

• 
(6) Except as otherwise expressly provided in this section, the 
f.irov~sions of this Act shall apply in respect of the registration of 
trade marks as defensive trade marks and of trade marks so regis-
.tered as they apply in other cases. 
5 48. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 49, a person other Registered 
than the registered proprietor of a trade mark may be registered users. 
as the registered user thereof in respect of any or all of the goods in 
respect of which the trade mark is registered otherwise than as a 
defensive trade mark; but the Central Government may, by rulf'S 
10 made in this behalf, provide that no application for registration as 
such shall be entertained unless the agreement between the parties 
is in writing and complies with the conditions laid down in the rules 
for preventing trafficking in trade marks. 
(2) The permitted use of a trade mark shall be deemed to be use 
15 by the proprietor thereof, and shall be deemed not to be use by a 
person other than the proprietor, for the purposes of section 46 or 
for any other purpose for which such use is material under this Act 
or any other law. 
49. (1) Where it is proposed that a person should be registered ~pplicaition . . .or rea stra-
20 as a registered user of a trade mark, the reglstered proprIetor and the tion.a regia-
25 
30 
35 
proposed registered user shall jointly apply in writing to the tered user. 
Registrar in the prescribed manner, and every such appliCIIBtion shall 
be accompanied by-
(i) the agreement in writing or a duly authenticated copy 
thereof, entered into between the registered proprietor and the 
proposed registered user with respect to the permitted use of the 
trade mark; and 
(ii) an affidavit made by the registered proprietor or by some 
person authorised to the satisfaction of the Registrar to act on 
his behalf,-
(a) giving particulars of the relationship, existing or 
proposed, between the proprietor and the proposed register-
ed user, including particulars showing the degree of control 
by the proprietor over the permitted use which their relation-
ship will confer and whether it is a term of their relationship 
that the proposed registered user shall be the sole registered 
user or that there shall be any.other restriction as to persons 
for whose registration as registered users application may 
be made; 
(b) stating the goods in respect of which registration .. 
proposed; 

Restrictions 
on up_tra-
tion u re-
.ittered ... en. 
(c) stating the conditions or restrictions, if any, proposed 
with respect to the characteristics of the goods, to the mode 
or place of permitted use, or to any other matter; 
(d) statmg whether the pennitted use is to be for a 
period or without limit of . period, and, if for a period, the 5 
duration thereof; 
and by such further documents or other evidence as may be required 
by the Registrar or as may be prescribed. 
(2) When the requirements of sub-section (1) have been com-
plied with to his satisfaction, the Registrar shall forward the applica- 10 
tion together with his report and all the relevant documents to the 
Central Government. 
(3) On receipt of an application under sub-section (2), the Cen-
tral Government, having regard to all the circumstances of the case 
and to the interests of the general public, and the development of any 15 
industry, trade or commerce in India, may direct the Registrar-
(a) to refuse the application; or 
(b) to accept the application either absolutely or subject to 
any conditions, restrictions or limitations which the Central 
Government may think proper to impose; 20 
Provided that no direction for refusing the application or for its 
acceptance conditionally shall be made unless the applicant has been 
liven an opportunity of being heard. 
(4) The Registrar shall dispose of the application in accordance 
with the directions issued by the Central Government under sub- 2S 
section (3). 
(5) The Central Government and the Registrar shall, if so 
requested by the applicant, take steps for securin'g that information 
given for the purposes of an application under this' section (othe:-
than matters entered in the register) is not disclosed to rivals in 30 
trade. 
(6) The Registrar shall issue notice in the prescribed manner of 
the registration of a person as a registered user, to other. registered 
users of the trade mark, if any. 
SO. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 48 and 49,35 
and subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), the registration of a 
registered user shall not be pennissible in a case in which as a 
result of the registration there would in the circumstances subsist, 

31 
rights of permitted use in more than three persons concerned in 
relation to goods to be sold or otherwise traded in, within India, in 
respect of the same trade mark, or nearly resembling trade marks 
registered in the name of the same proprietor: 
5 Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall affect the rights of 
a registered user already registered as such at the commencement of 
this Act. 
(2) Sub-section (1) shall not apply in a case where the Registrar 
is satisfied that-
10 (a) the proposed registration of registered user is intended 
solely in relation to goods for export from India; or 
(b) that there is common control hletween the business of 
the registered proprietor and that of the proposed registered user. 
51. (1) Subject to any agreement subsisting between the parties, ;e~is~~:d 
15 a registered user of a trade mark shall be entitled to call upon the user to ~ake 
proprietor thereof to take proceedings to prevent infringement ~~~:~:~ 
thereof, and if the proprietor refuses or neglects to do so within three fringement. 
months after being so called upon, the registered user may institute 
proceedings for infringement in his own name as if he were the pro-
20 prietor, making the proprietor a defendant. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, a 
proprietor so added as defendf<nt shall not be liable for any costs 
unless he enters an appearance and takes part in the proceedings. 
52. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 56, the ~~~~~~ 
25 registration of a person as a registered user- to vary or 
cancel regis-
tration as 
registered 
(a) may be varied by thp. Registrar as regards the goods in user. 
respect of which or any conditions or restrictions subjec~ to 
which, it has effect, on the application in writing in the prescrib-
ed manner of the registered proprietor of the trade mark to the 
30 Central Government; 
(b) may De cancelled by the Registrar on the application in 
writing in the prescribed manner of the registered proprietor or 
of the registered user or of any other registered user of the trade 
mark; 

I 
J 
32 
(c) may be cancelled by the ReGistrar on the application in 
writing in the prescribed manner d any person on any of the 
following grounds, namely:-
(i) thAt the registered uscr has used the trade mark 
otherwise than by way of the permitted use, or in such a 5 
way as to cause 0r to be likely to cause, deception or confu-
sion; 
(ii) that the proprietor or the registered user mis-
represented, or failed to disclo~e, some fact material to the 
application for registration, that if accurately represented or 10 
disclosed would have justified the Registrar in refusing the 
application for registration of the registered user; 
(iii) that the circumstances have changed since the date 
of registration in s'.lch a way that at the date of such appli-
cation for cancellation they would have justified the Registrar IS 
in refusing an application for registration of the registered 
user; 
(iv) that the registration ought not to have been effected 
/ having regard to rights vested in the applicant by virtue of 
a contract in the performance of which he is interested; 20 
(d) may be cancelled by the Reg~strar of his own motion or 
on the application in writing in the prescribed manner of any 
person, on the ground that any stipulation in the agreement 
between the registered proprietor and the registered user regard-
ing the quality of the goods in relation to which the trade mark 25 
is to be used is either not being enforced or is not being complied 
with; 
(e) may be cancelled by the' Registrar in respect of any 
goods in relation to which the trade mark is no longer registered. 
(2) The Registrar shall issue notice in the prescribed manner of 30 
every application under this section to the registered proprietor and 
each registered user (not being the applicant) of the trade mark. 
53. Nothing in this Act shall confer on a registered user of a trade. 
mark any assignable or transmissible right to the use thereof. 
Regi8tered 
user not to 
have right 
of assign-
mento~ 
transmission. Explanation I.-The right of a registered user of a trade mark 3S 
shall not be deemed to have been assigned or transmitted within the 
meaning of this section in the following cases, namely:-
(a) where the registered user being an individual enters into 
a partnership with any other person for carrying on the business 
concerned; but in any such case the firm may use the trade mark, 40 
if otherwise in force, only for so long as the registere<i user il I 
member of the firm; 

31 
(b) where the registered user being a firm subsequenUy 
undergoes a change in its constitution; but in any such case the 
reconstituted firm may use the trade mark, if otherwise in force, 
only for so long as any partner of the original firm at the time 
5 of its registration as registered user, continues to be a partner of 
the reconstituted firm. 
Explanation 2.-For the purposes of Explanation i, "firm" has 
the same meaning as in the Indian Partnership Act, 1932. 
54. (1) Whete under the provisions of this Act use of a registered Usc of one 
10 trade mark is required. to be prov~ for any purpose, the tribunal ~~ :~b~~ 
may, if and so far as it shall think right, accept use of a registered ~ iden-
associated trade mark, or of the trade mark with additions or altera- !.rlt~::~i. 
tions not substantially affecting its identity, as an equivalent for the valent to use 
use required to be proved. of another. 
IS (2) The use of the whole of a registered trade mark shall for 
the purposes of this Act be deemed to be also a use of any trade mark 
being a part thereof and registered in accordance with sub-section 
(1) of section 15 in the name of the same proprietor. 
55. (1) The application in India of a trade mark to goods to be Usc of trade 
20 exported from India and any other act done in India in relation to mark for 
goods to be so exported which, if done in relation to goods to be sold ~~rtand 
ot otherwise traded in within India would constitute use of a trade Ulfi e whfen d . ormotrae mark therein, shall be deemed to constItute use of the trade mark in connection 
relation to those goods for any purpose for which such use is material changes . 
. 2S under this Act or any other law. 
(2) The use of a registered trade mark. in relation to goods 
between which and the person using the mark any form of connec-
tion in the course of trade subsists shall not be deemed to be likely 
to cause deception or confusion on the ground only that the mark 
30 has been or is used in relation to goods between which and the 
said person or a predecessor in title of that person a different form of 
connection in the course of trade subsisted or subsists. 
CHAPTER VII 
RECTIFICATION AND CORRECTION OF THE REGISTER 
35 56. (1) On application in the prescribed manner by any person Power to 
aggrieved to a High Court or to the Registrar, the tribunal may make =~~_ 
such order as it may think fit for cancelling or varying the registra- tration and 
tion of a trade mark on the ground of any contravention, or failure coh ~Yt 
to observe a condition entered on the register in relation thereto. 
t e ...... e ... 

Correction of reaiater. 
34 
(2) Any person aggrieved by the absence or omission from the 
register of any entry, or by any entry made in the register without 
sufficient cause, or by any entry wrongly remaining on the 
register, or by any error or defect in any entry in the register, may 
apply in the prescribed manner to a High Court or to the Registrar, S 
and the tribunal may make such order for making, expunging or 
varying the ~ntry as it may think fit. 
(3) The tribunal may in any proceeding under this section decide 
any question that may be necessary or expedient to decide in connec-
tion with the rectification of the register. 10 
(4) The tribunal, of its own motion, may, after giving notice 'in 
the prescribed manner to the parties concerned and after giving them 
an opportunity of being heard, make any order referred to in sub-
section (1) or sub-section (2). 
(5) Any order of the High Court rectifying the register shaIlIS 
direct that notice of the rectification shall be served upon the 
Registrar in the prescribed manner who shall upon receipt of such 
notice rectify the register accordingly. 
(6) The power to rectify the register conferred by this section 
shall include the power to remove a trade mark registered in Part A 20 
of the register to Part B of the register. 
57. (1) The Registrar may, on application made in the prescribed 
manner .by the registered proprietor-
(a) correct any error in the name, address or description of 
the registered proprietor of a trade mark, or any other entry 25. 
relating to the trade mark; 
(b) enter any change in the name, address or description of 
the person who is registered as proprietor of a trade mark; 
(c) cancel the entry of a trade mark on the register; 
(d) strike out any goods or classes of goods from those in 30 
respect of which a trade mark is registered; 
(e) enter a disclaimer or memorandum relating to a trade 
mark which does not in any way extend the rights given by the 
existing registration of the trade mark; 
and may make any consequential amendment or alteration in the 3.5 . 
certificate of registration, and for that purpose, may require the 
certificate of registration to be produced to him. 
(2) The Registrar may, on application made in the prescribed 
manner by a registered user of a trade mark, and after notice to the 

registered proprietor, correct any error, or enter any change, in the 
name, address or description of the registered user. 
58. (1) The registered proprietor of a trade mark may apply in Alteratioo 
the prescribed manner to the Registrar fo~ leave to .add to ?r alter ':J.d1::::: s the trade mark in any manner not substantIally affectmg the ldentity 
thereof, and the Registrar may refuse leave or may grant it on such 
terms and subject to such limitations as he may think fit. 
(2) The Registrar may cause an application under this section to 
be advertised in the prescribed manner in any case where it appears 
10 to him that it is expedient so to do, and where he does so, if within 
the prescribed time from the date of the advertisement any person 
gives notice to the Registrar in t'he prescribed manner of opposition 
to the application, the Registrar shall, after hearing the parties if so 
required, decide the matter. 
IS (3) Where leave is granted under this section, the trade mark as 
altered shall be advertised in the prescribed manner, unless the 
application has already been advertised under sub-section (2). 
59. (1) The Registrar shall not, in exercise of any power conferred Adaptation 
on him by rules made with reference to clause (a) of sub-section (2) ofc::nttrieSt in regIs er 0 
20 of section 133, make any amendment of the register which would amended 
have the effect of adding any goodS or classes of goods to those in ~:ds~~~J3: 
respect of which a trade mark is registered (whether in one or more cation of 
classes) immediately before the amendment is to be made or of goods. 
ante-dating the registration of a trade mark in respect of any goods: 
2S Provided that this sub-section shall not apply when the Registrar 
is satisfied that compliance therewith would involve undue com-
plexity and that the addition. or ante-dating as the case may be, 
would not affect any substantial quantity of goods and would not 
substantially prejudice the rights of any person. 
30 (2) A proposal so to amend the register shall be notified to the 
3S 
registered. proprietor of the trade mark affected. and advertised. in 
the prescribed manner t and may be opposed. before the Registrar 
by any person aggrieved on the ground that the proposed amend-
ment contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1). 
CHAPTER vm 
CERTIFICATION TRADE MARKS 
80. The following provisions of this Act shall not apply to certi- Certain pro-
ft d visions of cation tra e marks, that is to say,- this Act not 
(a) section 9' appliCl!ble , to certi1ica-
(b) sections 18, 20 and 21, except as expressly applied by this tion~~de Cha ta'. mar .... p , • 

36 
(c) sections 28, 29, 30, 39, 40, 41, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 51, 62, 53 
and sub-section (2) of section 55; 
(d) Chapter X except section 81; 
(e) any provision the operation of which is limited by the 
terms thereof to registration in Part B of the register. 5 
Regiatration 61. (1) A certification trade mark shall be registrable only in 
d~~~a- Part A of the register. 
marks. 
(2) A mark shall not be registrable as a certification trade mark 
in the name of a person who carries on a trade in goods of the kind 
certified. 
(3) In determining whether a certification trade mark is adapted 
to distinguish in accordance with the provisions of clause (c) of 
sub-section (1) of section 2, the tribunal may have regard to the 
extent to which-
10 
(a) the mark is inherently so adapted to distinguish in re- 15 
lation to the goods in question; and 
(b) by reason of the use of the mark or of any other cir-
cumstances, the mark is in fact so adapted to distinguish in re-
lation to the goods in question. 
Applic!,rions 62. (1) An application for the registration of a mark as a certi- 20 
~f~:~r~- fication trade mark shall be made to the Registrar in writing in the 
fication prescribed manner by the person proposed to be registered as the 
trade marks. proprietor thereof, and accompanied by a draft of the regulations to 
be deposited und(>r section 65. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of section 61, the provisiOns of sub- 25 
sections (1), (2), (3), (4) and (6) of section 18 and of sections 19 
and 22 shall apply in relation to an application under this section as 
they apply in relation to an application under section 18, subject to 
the modification that references therein to acceptance of an appli-
cation shall be construed as references to authorisation to proceed 30 
with an application. 
(3) In dealing under the ~aid provisions with an application 
under this section, the tribunal shall have regard to the like eon-
siderations, so far as relevant, af! if the application were an appli-
cation under section 18 and to any other considerations, not being 3S 
matters within the competence of the Central Government uncler 

Y, 
• 
,..1 • 
''fl,. 
?~ 
.. . .~ 
""""',, 
" 
'\ .-
'r • 
87 
section 63 relewnt to applications under this section, including the 
desirability of securing that a certification trade mark shall com-
prise some indication that it is a certification trade mark. 
63. (1) When authorisation to proceed with an application under Considera-
5 section 62 has been given, the Registrar shall forward the application ti0tin of appy-ca ons .or to the Central Government. registration 
10 
by Central 
(2) The Central Governm.ent shall consider the application so Govern-
forwarded with regard to the following matters, namely:- ment. 
(a) whether the applicant is competent to certify the goods 
in respect of which the mark is to be registered; 
(b) whether the draft of the regulations to be deposited 
under section 65 is satisfactory; 
(c) whether in all the circumstances the registration applied 
for would be to the public advantage; 
IS and may either-
(i) direct that the application shall not be accepted; or 
(ii) direct the Registrar to accept the application and approve 
the said draft of the regulations either without modification and 
unconditionally or subject to any conditions or limitations, or to 
20 any amendments or modification of the application or of the 
regulations, which it thinks requisite having regard to any of the 
said matters. 
(3) Except in the case of a direction for acceptance and approval 
without modification and unconditionally, the Central Government 
25 shall not decide any matter under sub-section (2) without giving to 
the applicant an opportunity of being heard. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the 
Central Government may, at the request of the applicant made with 
the concurrence of the Registrar, consider the application with re-
30 gard to any of the matters referred to in sub-section (2) before 
authorisation to proceed with the application is given, but the 
Central Government shall be at liberty to reconsider any matter on 
which it has given a decision under this sub-section if any amend-
ment or modification is thereafter made in the application or in the 
35 draft of the regulations. 
M. (1) When an application has been accepted, the Registrar Oppositlon 
shall, as soon as may be thereafter, cause the application as accepted ~o~e:t:'-_ 
to be advertised in the prescribed manner, and the provisiOns of tification 
section 21 shall apply in relation to the registration of the mark as trade marts. 
40 they apply in relation to an application under sectlon 18. 

Deposit of 
regulations 
governing 
the use of 
a certifica-
tion trade 
mark. 
Riahta con-
ferred by 
regiltranon 
01 cerd1ica-
don trade 
marks. 
38 
(2) In deciding any matter relating to opposition proceec:linas 
under the provisions aforesaid the tribunal shall have regard only 
to the considerations referred to in sub-section (3) of section 62, and 
a decision under the said provisions in favour of the applicant 
shall be conditional on the determination in his favour by the Central 5 
Government under sub-section (3) of this section of any opposition 
relating to any of the matters referred to in section 63. 
(3) When notice of opposition is given relating to any of the 
matters referred to in section 63, the Central Government shall, after 
hearing the parties if so required, and considering any evidence, de- 10 
cide whether, and subject to what conditions or limitations, or amend-
ments or m.odifications, if any, of the application or of the regulations 
to be deposited under section 65, registration is, having regard to 
those matters, to be permitted. 
65. (1) There shall be deposited at the Trade Marks Registry in 15 
respect of every mark registered as a certification trade mark re-
gulations approved by the Central Government for governing the 
use thereof, which shall include provisions as to the cases in which 
the proprietor is to certify goods and to authorise the use of the 
certification trade mark, and may contain any other provisions which 20 
.the Central Government may, by general or special" order, require 
or permit to be inserted therein (including provisions conferring a 
right of appeal to the Registrar against nny refusal of the proprietor 
to certify goods or to authorise the use of the certification trade mark 
in accordance with the regulations); and regulations so deposited 25 
·shall be open to inspection in like manner as the register. 
(2) The regulations so deposited may on the application of the 
registered proprietor be altered by the Registrar with the consent 
of the Central Government. 
(3) The Central Government may cause such application to be 30 
advertised in any case where it appears to it expedient so to do, and 
where it does so, if within the time specified in the advertisement 
any person gives notice of opposition to the application, .the Central 
Government shall not decide the matter without giving the parties 
an opportunity of being heard. 35 
86. (1) Subject to the provisions of sections 33, M and 68, the 
registration of a person as proprietor of a certification trade mark in 
respect of any goods shall, if valid, give to that person the exclusive 
right to the use of the mark in relation to those goods. 

39 
(2) The exclusive right to the use of a certification trade mark 
given under sub-section (1) shall be subject to any conditions and 
limitations to which the registration is subject. 
17. The right conferred by section 66 is infringed by any person Infringe-
5 who, not being the proprietor of the certification trade mark or a ~C:ti:ncer­
person authorised by him in that behalf under the regulations de- trade marks. 
posited under section 65, using it in accordance therewith, uses a 
mark which is identical with, or deceptively similar to, the certi-
fication trade mark in the course of trade, in relation to any goods 
to in respect of which it is registered, and in such manner as to render 
the use of the mark likely to be taken as being use as a certification 
trade mark. 
68. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the follow- :~:J~~ 
ing acts do not constitute an infringement of the right to the use of a infringeme~t 
15 registered certification trade mark'- ~f certifica-• . tlon trade 
(a) where a certification trade mark is registered subject to 
any conditions or limitations entered on the register, the use of 
any such mark in any mode, in relation to goods to be sold or 
otherwise traded in any place, or in relation to goods to be ex-
ported to any market or in any other circumstances, to which 
having regard to any such limitations, the registration does not 
extend; 
(b) the use of a certification trade mark in relation to goods 
certified by the proprietor of the mark if, as to those goods or a 
25 bulk of which they form part, the proprietor or another in 
accordance with his authorisation under the relevant regulations 
has applied the mark and has not subsequently removed or 
obliterated it, or the proprietor has at any time expressly or 
impliedly consented to the use of the mark; 
30 (c) the use of a certification trade mark in relation to goods 
adapted to form part of, or to be accessory to, other goods in re-
lation to which the mark has been used without infringement 
of the right given as aforesaid or might for the time being be 
so used, if the use of the mark is reasonably necessary in order 
35 to indicate that the goods are so adapted and neither the pur-
pose nor the effect,of the use of the mark is to indicate otherwise 
than in accordance with the fact that the goods arecertifled 
by the proprietor. 
(2) Clause (a) of sub-section (I) shall not apply to the case of 
40 use consisting of the application of a certification trade mark to 
goods, notwithstanding that they are such goods as are mentioned 
marks. 

40 
In that clause if such application is contrary to the regulations re-
ferred to in that clause. 
(3) Where a certification trade mark is one of two or more trade 
marks, registered under this Act, which are identical or nearly re-
semble each other, the use of any of those trade marks in exercise 5 
of the right to the use of that trade mark given by registration, shall 
not be deemed to be an infringement of the right so given to the use 
of any other of those trade marks, 
Cance~tionf 69. (1) The Central Government may, on the application in the 
or VarytDg 0 'bed f . ed th d rqiltradon. prescn manner 0 any person aggnev or on e recommen - 10 
ation of the Registrar, and after giving the proprietor an opportunity 
of opposing the application or recommendation, make such order 
as it thinks fit for expunging or varying any entry in the register 
relating to a certification trade mark, or for varying the deposited 
regulations, on any of the following grounds, namely:- IS 
(a) that the proprietor is no longer competent, in the case 
of any of the goods in respect of which the mark is registered, 
to certify those goods; I 
(b) that the proprietor has failed to observe any provision 
of the deposited regulations to be observed on his part; 20 
(c) that it is no longer to the pub1ic advantage that the mark 
should remain registered; 
(d) that it is requisite for the public advantage t118t, if the 
mark remains registered, the regulations should be varied; 
and neither a High Court nor the Registrar shall have any jurisdiction 25 
to make an order under section 56 on any of those grounds. 
(2) The Registrar shall rectify the register and the deposited re-
gulations in such manner as may be requisite for giving effect to 
an order made under sub-section (1). 
Decisions of 70. Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Chapter, every 30 
~~:!ment decision of the Central Government under this Chapter shall be 
to be final. final. . I 
Textile 
goods, 
CHAPTER IX 
SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR TEXTILE GOODS 
'11. The Central Government may prescribe classes of goods (in 35 
this Chapter referred to as textile goods) to the trade marks used in 
relation to which the provisions of this Chapter shall apply; and 

subject to the said provisions, the other provisions of this Act aball 
apply to such trade marks as they apply to trade marks used in re-
lation to other classes of goods. 
72. (1) In respect of textile goods being piece goods-
5 
Ileatric:tion 
onrepua-
(a) no mark consisting of a line heading alone shall be re- tion of tex-tile JOOdt. gistrable as a trade mark; 
(b) a line heading shall not be deemed to be adapted to dis-
tinguish; 
(c) the registration of a trade mark shall not give any ex-
10 elusive right to the use of a line heading. 
(2) In respect of any textile goods, the registration of letters or 
numerals, or any combination thereof, shall be subject to such c0n-
ditions and restrictions as may be prescribed. 
73. (1) Trade marks in respect of textile goods of which registr- :ie~~ex-
15 ation has been refused. shall, on application being made in the pres- IJat. 
cribed manner and on payment of the prescribed fee, be entered by 
the Registrar in a list called the Refused Textile Marks List, ad 
shall remain therein for a period of seven years from the date of 
application to register. 
20 (2) The entry in the Refused List as aforesaid may be continued 
in the list each time for a further period of seven years on application 
made in the prescribed manner and on payment of the prescribed 
fee. 
74. (1) Piece goods, such as are ordinarily sold by length or by 
~5 the piece, which have been manufactured, bleached, dyed, printed :=P~~ 
or finished in premises which are a factory, as defined in the Factor- cotton yam 
ies Act, 1948, shall not be removed for sale from the last of such and thrad. 
premises in which they underwent any of the said processes with-
out having conspicuously stamped. in international form of Indian 
30 numerals on each piece the length thereof in standard yards, or in 
standard yards and a fraction of such a yard, or in standard metres 
or in standard metres and a fraction of such a metre, according 
to the real length of the piece, and, except when the goods 
are sold from the factory for export from India, without being 
35 conspicuously marked on each piece with the name of the manu-
facturer or of the occupier of the premises in which the piece was 
finally processed or of the wholesale purchaser in India of the piece. 
(2) Cotton yarn such as is ordinarily sold in bundles, and cotton 
thread, namely, sewing, darning, crochet or handicraft thread, which 
40 have been manufactured, bleached, dyed, or finished in any premises 

not exempted by the rules made under section 75 shall not be temoveci 
for sale from those premises unless, in accordance with the said 
rules in the case of yarn-
(a) the bundles are conspicuously marked with an indica.;. 
tion of the weight of yarn in the English or the metric system 5 
in each bundle; and 
(b) the count of the yarn contained in the bundle and in 
the case of thread each unit is conspicuously marked with the 
length or weight of thread in the unit and in such other manner 
as may be required by the said rules; and 10 
(c) except where the goods are sold from the premises for 
export from India, unless each bundle or unit is conspicuously 
marked with the name of the manufacturer or of the wholesale 
purchaser in India of the goods: 
Provided that the rules made under section 75 shall exempt all 15 
premises where the work is done by members of one family with 
or without the assistance of not more than ten other employees, 
and all premises controlled by a co-operative society where not more 
than twenty workers are employed in the premises. 
Determina- 75. (1) For the purposes of this Chapter, the Central Govern- ao 
dOD of eha- ment may make rules-ncter of tex- ' tile goodJ by , 
aampq. (a) to provide, with respect to any goods which purport or 
are alle~ed to be of uniform number, quantity, measure, gauge 
or weight, for the number of samples to be selected and tested 
and for the selection of the sampl~s; zs 
(b) to provide for the manner in which for the purposes of 
section 74 cotton yarn and cotton thread shall be marked with 
the particulars required. by that section, and for the exemption 
of certain premises used for the manufacture, bleaching, dyeine 
or finishing of cotton yarn or cotton thread from the provisions 30 
of that section; and 
(c) declaring what classes of goods are included in the 
expression "piece goods such as are ordinarily sold by the length 
or by the piece" for the purpose of section 74 or section 18 of 
the Sea Customs Act, 1878. 
(2) With respect to any goods for the selection and testing of 
aamples of which provision is not made in any rules for the time 
being in force under sub-section (I), the court or ofticer of customs, 
35 1 of 1871. 

as the case may be, having occasion to ascertain the number, 
quantity, measure, gauge or weight of the goods, shall, by order in 
writing, determine the number of samples to be selected and tested 
and the manner in which the samples are to be selected. 
5 (3) The average of" the results of the testing in pursuance of 
rules under sub-section (1) or of an order under sub-section (2) 
shall be prima facie evidence of the number, quantity, measure, 
gauge or weight, as the case may be, of the goods. 
(4) If a person having any claim to, or in relation to, any goods 
10 of which samples have been selected and tested in pursuance of 
rules under sub-section (1), or of an order under sub-section 
(2), desires that any further samples of the goods be selected and 
tested, such further samples shall, on his written application and on 
the payment in advance by him to the court or officer of customs, 
15 as the case may be, of such sums for defraying the cost of the further 
selection and testing as the court or officer may from time to time 
require, be selected and tested to such extent as may be permitted 
by rules to be made by the Central Government in this behalf or as, 
in the case of goods with respect to which provision is not made in 
20 such rules, the court or officer of customs may determine in the 
circumstances to be reasonable, the samples being selected in the 
manner prescribed under sub-section (1), or in sub-section (2), as 
the case may be. 
(5) The average of the results of the te6ting r~ferred to in sub-
25 section (3) and of the further testing under sub-section (4) shall 
be conclusive proof of the number, quantity, measure, gauge or 
weight, as the case may be, of the goods. 
CHAPTER X 
OFFENCES, PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE 
30 76. (1) A person shall be deemed to apply a trade mark or mark ~i;:: of 
or trade description to goods who- trade marks 
aDd trade 
(a) applies it to the goods themselves; or descriptions. 
(b) applies it to any package in or with which the goods are 
sold, or exposed for sale, or had in possession for sale or for any 
35 purpose of trade or manufacture; or 
(c) places, encloses, or annexes any goods which are sold, 
or exposed for sale, or had in possession for sale or for any 
purpose of trade or manufacture, in or with any package or 
other thing to which a trade mark or mark or trade description 
40 has been applied; or 

(d) uses a trade mark or mark or trade description in any 
manner reasonably likely to lead to the belief that the goods in 
connection with which it is used are designated or described by 
that trade mark or mark or trade description; or 
(e) in relation to the said goods uses a trade mark or trade S 
description in any sign, advertisement, invoice, catalogue, 
business letter, business paper, price list, or other commercial 
document, and goods are delivered to a person in pursuance of 
a request or order made by reference to the trade mark or trade 
description as so used. 10 
(2) A trade mark or mark or trade description shall be deemed 
to be applied to goods whether it is woven in, impressed on, or 
otherwise worked into, or annexed or affixed to, the goods or to any 
package or other thing. 
~ 77. (1) A person shall be deemed to falsify a trade mark who, IS 
!d falIe1Y either,-
=~ (4) without the assent of the proprietor of the trade mark 
makes that trade mark or a deceptively similar mark; or 
(b) falsifies any genuine trade mark, whether by alteration, 
addition, effacement or otherwise. 20 
(2) A person shall be deemed to falsely apply to goods a trade 
mark who, without the assent of the proprietor of the trade mark,-
(a) applies such trade mark or a deceptively similar mark, 
to goods or any package containing goods; 
(b) uses any package bearing a mark which is identical 25 
with or deceptively similar to the trade mark of such proprietor, 
for the purpose of packing, filling, or wrapping therein any goods 
other than the genuine goods of the proprietor of the trade mark. 
(3) Any trade mark or mark falsified as mentioned in sub-
section (1) or falsely applied as mentioned in sub-section (2), is in 30 
this Act referred to as a false trade mark. 
(4) In any prosecution for falsifying a trade mark or falsely 
applying a trade mark to goods, the burden of proving the assent of 
the proprietor shall lie on the accused. 
78. Any person who,- 35 
(4) falsifies any trade mark; or 
(b) falsely applies to goods any trademark or a deceptively 
similar mark; or 

(c) makes, disposes of, or has in his possession, any die, 
block, machine, plate or other instrument for .the purpose of 
falsifying, or of being used for falsifying, a trade mark; or 
(d) applies any false trade description to goods; or 
S (e) applies to any goods to which an indication of the coun-
try or place in which they were made or produced or the nanle 
and address of the manufacturer or person for whom the goods 
are manufactured is required to be applied under section 118. 
a false 'indication of such country, place, name or address; or 
10 <f) tampers with, alters or effaces an indication of origin 
which has been applied to any goods to which it is required to 
be applied under section 118; or 
(g) causes any of the things above mentioned in this section 
to be done;. 
IS shall, unless he proves th~t he acted without intent to defraud, be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two 
years, or with fine, or with both: 
Provided that where the offence under this section is in relation 
to goods or any package containing goods which are "drugs" as 
20 defined in clause (b) of section 3 of the Drugs Act, 1940, or "food" 
as defined in clause (v) of section 2 of the Prevention of Food 
Adulteration Act. 1954, the offender shall be punishable with im-
prisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with 
fine, or with both. 
~S 79. Any person who sells, or exposes for sale, or has in his Pe~alty for . sell~good. 
possession for sale or for any purpose of trade or manufacture, any to which a 
goods or things to which any false trade mark or false trade descrip- (al8k trat.e 
tion is applied or which, being required under section 118 to have ~r!~e d~s­
applied to them an indication of the country or place in which they cripl~iodn i. app Ie • 
30 were made or produced or the name and address of the manu-
35 
facturer or the person for whom the goods are manufactured, are 
without the indication so required, shall, unless he proves,-
(a) that, having taken all reasonable precautions against 
committing an offence against this section, he had at the time 
of the commission of the alleged offence no reason to suspect 
the genuineness of the trade mark or trade description or that 
any offence had been committed in respect of the goods; and 
(b) that, on demand by or on behalf of the prosecutor, he 
gave all the information in his power With respect to the person 
from whom he obtained such goods or things; or 

46 
(c) that otherwise he had acted innocently; 
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
two years, or with fine, or with both: 
Provided that when the offence against this section is in relation 
to goods or any package containing goods which are "drugs" as 5 
defined in clause (b) of section 3 of the Drugs Act, 1940, or "food" ~3 of 1940. 
as defined in clause (v) of section 2 of the Prevention of Food Adul-
teration Act, 1954, the offender shall be punishable with imprison- 37 of 19S4. 
ment for a term which may extend to tkree years, or with fine, or 
with both. 10 
Peaalt~ for 80. If any person removes 'or attempts to remove or causes or 
rc:mov~ attempts to cause to be removed for sale from any premises referred 
::C~ contra~ to in section 74, or sells or exposes for sale or has in his possession 'W' 
~.to section for sale or for any purpose of trade or manufacture piece goods or 
cotton yarn or cotton thread which is not marked as required by that IS 
section, every such piece and every such bundle of yarn and all such 
thread and everything used for the packing threof shall be forefeited 
Peoalty for 
falsdy rc-
prescntiDa I 
trade mark 
u registered. 
to Government and such person shall be punishable with fine which 
may extend to one thousand rupees. 
81. (1) No person shall make any representation- 20 
(a) with respect to a mark not being a registered trade 
~k, to the effect that it is a registered trade mark; or 
(b) with respect to a part of a registered trade mark not 
being a part separately registered as a trade mark, to the effect 
that it is separately registered as a trade mark; or 25 
(c) to the effect that a registered trade mark is registered 
in respect of any goods in respect of which it is not in fact 
registered; or 
(d) to the effect that the registration of a trade mark gives 
an exclusive right to the use thereof in any circumstances in 30 
which, having regard to limitations entered on the register, the 
registration does not in fact give that right. 
(2) If any person contravenes any of the provisions of sub-
section (1), he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to six months"or with fine which may extend to 3S 
five hundred rupees, or with both. 
(3) For the purposes of this section, the use in India in relation 
to a trade mark of the word "registered", or of any other expression 
-.; 

referring, whether expressly or impliedly to registration, shall be 
deemed to import a reference to registration in the register, except-
(a) where that word or other expression is used in direct 
association with other words delineated in characters at least as 
5 large as those in which that word or other expression is 
delineated and indicating that the reference is to registration as a 
trade mark under the law of a country outside India being a 
country under the law of which the registration referred to is 
in fact in force; or 
10 (b) where that other expression is of itself such as to indi-
cate that the reference is to such registration as is mentioned 
in clause (a); or 
(c) where that word is used in relation to a mark registered 
as a trade mark under the law of a country outside India and in 
15 relation solely to goods to be exported to that country. 
82. If any person uses, in connection with his business, words ~ena::: if 
.which would reasonably lead to the belief that his oftlce is, or is ::'ib:i 
officially connected with, the Trade Marks Office, he shell be punish- ~e~::s 
able with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, Mark. 
20 or with fine, or with both. Office. 
83. If any person makes, or causes to be made a false entry in r~tY ~or 
the register, or a writing falsely purporting to be a copy of an entry of en:~cm 
in the register, or produces or tenders, or causes to be produced or in ~e 
d d ··d h 't' len . th . regtster. ten ere , m eVl ence any suc wrl mg, owmg e entry or wnt-
ing to be false, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
25 which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
84. The provisions of sections 77, 78 and 79 shall, in relation to a ~o offen~e . m certam registered trade mark or proprIetor of such mark, be subject to the cases. 
rights created or recognised by this Act, and no act or omission shall 
be deemed to be an offence under those sections if the same were 
30 lawful or permitted under this Aet. 
85. (1) Where a person is convictP.d of an offence under section Forfeiture of 
78 or section 79, or is acquitted of an offence under section 78 on soods. 
proof that he acted without intent to defraud, or under section 79 
on proof of the matters specified in clauses (a), (b) and (c) of tbBt 
35 section, the court convicting or acquitting him may direct the for-
feiture to Government of all goods and things by means of, or in 
relation to which, the offence has been committed, or but for such 
proof as aforesaid would have been committed. 
(2) When a forfeiture is directed on a conviction and an appeal 
40 lies against the conviction, an appeal shall lie against the lorfeiture 
also. 

Exemption 
ofcenain 
penons 
eJnp'loyed in 
ordinary 
coune of 
business. 
Procedure 
where in-
validity of 
reaistration 
i. pleaded 
by the 
accuaed. 
4ij 
(3) When a forfeiture is directed on an acquittal and the Joocit 
or things to which the direction pelates are of value exceeding fifty 
rupees, an appeal against the forfeiture may be preferred, within 
thirty days from the date of the direction, to the court to which in 
appealable cases appeals lie from sentences of the court which 
directed the forfeiture. I 5 
(4) When a forfeiture is directed on a conviction the court, before 
whom the person is convicted, may order any forfeited articles to be 
destroyed or otherwise disposed of as the court thinks fit. 
86. Where a person accused of an offence under section 78 proves-
(a) that in the ordinary course of his business he is employ- 10 
ed on behalf of other persons to apply trade marks or trade 
descriptions, or, as the case may be, to make dies, blocks, 
machines, plates, or other instruments for making, or being 
used in making, trade marks; and 
(b) that in the case which is the subject of the charge he IS 
was so employed, and was not interested in the goods or other 
thing by way of profit or commission dependent on the sale of 
such goods; and : 
(c) that he took all reasonable precautions against com-
mi~ting the offence charged; and 
(d) that he had, at the time of the 
alleged offence, no reason to suspect the 
trade mark or trade description; and 
commission of the 
genuineness of the 
20 
(e) that, on demand made by or on behalf of the prose-
cutor, he gave all the information in his power to the persons as 
on whose behalf the trade mark, or trade description was 
applied~ 
he shall be acquitted. 
17. (1) Where the offence charged under section 78 or section 79 
is in. relation to a registered trade mark and the accused pleads that 30 
the registration of the trade mark is invalid, the following procedUf'e 
shall be followed:-" 
(a) If the magistrate is satisfied that such defence is prima 
facie tenable, he shall not proceed with the charge but shall 
adjourn the proceeding for three months from the date on which 35 
the plea of the accused is recorded to enable the accused to file 

49 
an application before the High Court under this Act, for the 
rectification of the register on the ground that the reeistration is 
invalid. 
(b) If the accused proves to the magistrate that he has made 
5 such application as is mentioned in sub-section (2) within the 
time so limited or within such further time as the magistrate 
may for sufficient cause allow, the further proceedings in the 
prosecution shall stand stayed till the disposal of such applica-
tion for rectification and of the appeal, if any, therefrom. 
10 (c) If within a period of three months or within such ex-
tended time as may be allowed by the magistrate the accused 
fails to apply to the High Court for rectification of the register, 
the magistrate shall proceed with the case as if the registration 
were valid. 
15 (2) Where before the institution of a complaint of an offence 
referred to in sub-section (1), any application for the rectification 
of the register concerning the trade mark in question on the ground 
of invalidity of the registration th~reof has already been properly 
made to and is pending before the tribunal, the magistrate shall 
20 stay the further proceedings in the prosecution pending the disposal 
of the application aforesaid and shall determine the charge against 
the accused in conformity with the result of the· application for 
rectification. 
88. No court shall take cognizance of an offence under section 81, Cognizapcc 
25 .ection 82 or section 83 except on complaint in writing made by the ~~:~ 
Registrar or any officer authorised by him in writin,. 
89. No court inferior to that of a sessions judge, presidency Courts 
magistrate or magistrate of the first class shall try an offence under competent to try 
this Act. otIencel. 
30 to. In the case of goods brought into India by sea, evidence of E~4ence of 
the port of shipment shall, in a pro~ecution for an offence under o~~ i:!-
this Act or section 18 of the Sea Customs Act, 1878, be prima facie gorted by 
evidence of the place or country in which the goods were made or sea. 
produced. 
35 91. (1) On any such prosecution as is mentioned in section 90, Costs of 
d . b th defence or the court mayor er costs to be paId to the defendant y e prose- prosecution. 
cutor or to the prosecutor by the defendant, having regard to the 
information given by and the conduct of the defendant and prose-
cutor respectively. 

Limitation 
of prosecu-
tioa. 
(2) Such costs shall, on application to the court, be recoverable 
as if they were a fine. 
-92. No prosecution for an offence under this Act or under section 
18 of the Sea Customs Act, 1878, shall be commenced after the 
- expiration of three years next after the commission of the offence 5 
charged, or one year after the discovery thereof by the prosecutor, 
whichever expiration first happens. 
Information 
as to aml-
million of 
offence. 
93. An officer of the Government whose duty it is to take part 
in the enforcement of this Chapter, shall not be compelled in any 
court to say whence he got any information as to the commission of 10 
any offence against this Act. 
Punishment 94. If any person, being within In~ia, abets the commission, with-
f!~:~~ft out India, of any act which, if committed in India, would, under this 
lets done Act, be an offence, he may be tried for such abetment in any place 
out of India. in India in which he may be found, and be punished therefor with 15 
the punishment to which he would be liable if he had himself com-
mitted in that place the act whi~h he abetted. 
Instructions 95. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
by Central Gazette, issue instructions for the limits of variation, as regards 
Government b t·t . ht h· h t b as to per- num er, quan 1 y, measure, gauge or weig ,w IC are 0 e recog-
mi~sil?le nised by crimin8.l courts as permissible in the case of any goods. 20 Vllnatlons to 
be observed 
by criminal 
courts. CHAPTER XI 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Implied 96. On the sale or in the contract for the sale of any goods to 
" :~~~ty OD which a trade mark or mark or trade description has been applied, 
marked the seller shall be deemed to warrant that the mark is a genuine 25 
Ioods. mark and not falsely applied, or that the trade description is not a 
false trade description within the meaning of this Act, unless the 
contrary is expressed in some writing signed by or on behalf of the 
seller and delivered at the time of the sale or contract to and ac-
Powen of 
Registrar. 
cepted by the buyer. 30 
97. In all proceedings under this Act before the Registrar-
(a.) the Registrar shall have all the powers of a civil court 
for the purposes of receiving evidence, adminiGtering oaths, en-
forcing the attendance of witnesses, compelling the discovery 
and production of documents and issuing commissions for the 35 
examination of witnesses; 
B of I87B. 

51 
(b) the Registrar may, subject to any rules made in this 
behalf under section 133, make such orders as to costs as he 
considers reasonable, and any such order shall be executable as 
a decree of a civil court:· 
5 Provided that the Registrar shall have no pow8r to award 
costs to or against any party on an appeal to him against a re-
fusal of the proprietor of a certification trade mark to certify 
goods or to authorise the use of the mark; 
(c) the Registrar may, on an application made in the pry-
[0 cribed manner, review his own decision. 
IS. Subject to the provisions of section 101, the Registrar shall E~erci~e of 
t . d' t' th t d' h' b discretlon-no exerc1se any 1scre lOnary or 0 er power ves e m 1m Y ary power 
this Act or the rules made thereunder adversely to a person apply- b).ReliatraT. 
ing for the exercise of that power without (if so required by that 
IS person within the prescribed time) giving to that person an oppor-
tunity of bein~ heard. 
99. In any proceeding under this Act before the Registrar, evi- Evidence 
dance shall be given by affidavit: before the Ileliltrar. 
Provided that the Registrar may, if he thinks fit, take oral evi-
20 dence in lieu of, or in addition to, such evidence by aftldavit. 
100. If a person who is a party to a proceeding under this Act Death of 
(not being a proceeding in a court) dies pending the proceeding, partYedto.a proce Jnl. 
the Registrar may, on request, and on proof to his satisfaction of 
the transmission of the interest of the deceased person, substitute 
25 in the proceeding his successor in interest in his place, or, if the 
Registrar is of opinion that the interest of the deceased person is 
sufficiently represented by the surviving parties, permit the pro-
ceeding to continue without the substitution of his successor in 
Interest. 
30 101. (1) If the Registrar is satisfied, on application made to him Ext~nsjoD 
. th 'b d d . d b h 'b f of time. In e presCfl e manner an accompame y t e preser1 ed ee, 
that there is sufficient caus~ for extending the time for doing any 
act (not being a time expressly provided in the Act), whether the 
time so specified has expired or not, he may, subject to such condi-
35 tions as he may think fit to impose, extend the time and notify the 
parties accordingly. 
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall be deemed to require the 
Registrar to hear the parties before disposing of an application for 

At.andon-
ment. 
Preliminary 
,dvice by 
the Regil-
trar aa to 
diltinc-
tiveBell. 
5% 
extension of time, and no appeal shall lie from any order of the 
Registrar under this section. 
102. Where, in the opinion of the' Registrar, an applicant' is in 
default in the prosecution of an application filed under this Act or 
any Act relating to trade marks in force prior to the commencement S 
of this Act, the Registrar may, by notice require the applicant to 
remedy the default within a time specified and after giving him, if 
so desired, an opportunity of being heard, treat the application as 
abandoned, unless the default is remedied within the time specified 
in the notice. 
103. (1) The Registrar may, on application made to him in the 
prescribed manner by any person who proposes to apply for the 
registration of 'a trade mark in Part A or Part B of the register, 
give advice as to whether the trade mark appears to him prima facie 
10 
to be inherently adapted to distinguish, or capable of distinguish- IS 
ing, as the case may be. 
(2) If on an application for the registration of a trade mark as 
to which the Registrar has given advice as aforesaid in the affirma-
tive, made within three months after the advice was given, the 
Registrar, after further investigation or consideration, gives notice 20 
to the applicant of objection on the ground that the trade mark 
is not adapted to distinguish, or is not capable of distinguishing, 
as the case may be, the applicant shall be entitled, on giving notice 
of withdrawal of the application within the prescribed period, to 
have. repaid to him any fee paid on the filing of the application. 25 
Procedure 104. In all proceedings under this Act before the Central Gov-
" ~~~~J Gaw ernment, evidence shall be given by affidavit: 
YCiDment. 
Suit for 
infri~ent. 
etc., to be 
instituted 
before Oil· 
tricl Court. 
Provided that the Central Government may, if it thinks fit, take 
oral evidence in lieu of, or in addition to, such evidence by 
aftldavit, and shall for that purpose have all the powers of a civil 
court referred to in clause (a) of section 97. 30 
105. No auit-
(4) for the infringement of a registered trade mark; or 
(b) relating to any right in a registered trade mark; or 

53 
(c) for passing off arising out of the use by the defendant 
of any trade mark which is identical with or deceptively similar 
to the plaintiff's trade mark, whether registered or unregistered; 
shall be instituted in any court inferior to a District Court having 
5 jurisdiction to try the suit. 
106. (1) The relief which a court may grant in any suit for Re.li~ in . • . .,. SUIts lor 
mfnngement or for passmg off referred to In sectIon 105 Includes infringement 
an injunction (subject to such terms, if any, as the court thinks fit) or f~r f[ passmg 0 • 
and at the option of the plaintiff, either damages or an account of 
10 profits, together with or without any order for the delivery up of 
the infringing labels and marks for destruction or erasure. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the 
court shall not grant relief by way of damages (other than nominal 
damages) or an account of profits in any case-
15 (a) where in a suit for infringement of a trade mark, the 
infringement complained of is in relation to a certification 
trade mark; or 
(b) where in a suit for infringement or passing off the 
defendant satisfies the court-
20 (i) that at the time he commenced to use the trade mark 
complained of in the suit he was unaware and had no reason-
able ground for believing that the trade mark of the plaintiff 
was on the register or in use; and 
(ii) that when he became aware of the existence and 
25 nature of the plaintiff's trade mark, he forthwith ceased to 
use the trade mark in relation to goods in respect of which 
it was registered or was used by the plaintiff. 
107. (1) Where in a suit for infringement of a registered trade ~pplict.tion . • lor rectlfica-
mark the vahdity of the registration of the plaintiff's trade mark tion of re;;is-
30 is questioned by the defendant or where in any such suit the defen- terdto be ma e to 
ciant raises a defence under clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section !"ligh C<?urr 
30 and the plaintiff questions the validity of the registration of the ~~A~~~[RIII 
defendant's trade mark, the issue as to the validity of the registra-
tion of the trade mark concerned shall be detennined only on IUl 

application for the rectification of the register, and notwithstanding 
anything contained in section 46, sub-section (4) of section 47 or 
section 56;0 such application shall be made to the High Court and not 
to the Registrar. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), where an appli- S 
cation for rectification of the register is made to the Registrar under 
section 46 or sub-section (4) of section 47 or section 56, the Registrar 
may, if he thinks fit, refer the application at any stage of the proceed-
ing to the High Court. 
PrJ(edu.re 108. (1) An application for rectification of the register made to a 10 
t~~~ 1o~I:'!t- High Court under section 46, sub-section (4) of section 47 or section 
fication be- 56 shall be in such form and shall contain such particulars as may be 
fore a High 'be . Cour!. prescn d. 
Appeal8. 
(2) Every such application shall be heard by a single Judge of 
the High Court: IS 
Provided that any such Judge may, if he thinks fit, refer the 
application at any stage of the proceedings for decision to a Bench 
of that High Court. 
(3) Where any such application is heard by a single Judge of the 
High Court, an appeal shall lie from the order made by him on the 20 
apDliC'ation to a Bench of the High Court. 
(4) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made 
thereunder, the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, shall s of. 
apply to applications to a High Court under this section. 
(5). A certified copy of every order or judgment of the High Court 2S 
or by the Supreme Court, as the case may be, relating to a registered 
trade mark under this section shall be communicated to the Registrar 
by that Court and the Registrar shall, give effect to the order of the 
Court and shall. when so directed, amend the entries in, or rectify 
the register in accordance with such order. 30 
109. (1) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, au 
appeal shall lie within the period prescribed by the Central Govern-
ment, from any order or decision of the Registrar under this Act or 
the rules made thereunder, to the High Court. 
(2) Every such appeal shall be preferred by petition In writing 3S 
and shall be in such form and shall contain such particulars as may 
be prescribed. 
(3) Every such appeal shall be heard by a single Judge of the 
High Court: 

Provided that any such Judge may, if he so thinks fit, refer the 
appeal at any stage of the proceedings to a Bench of the High Court. 
(4) Where an appeal is heard by a single Judge, a further appeal 
shall lie to a Bench of the High Court. 
5 (5) The High Court in disposing of an appeal under this section 
shall have the power to make any order which the Registrar could 
make under this Act. 
(6) In an appeal by an applicant for registration against a decision 
of the Registrar under section 17 or section 18 or section 21, it shall 
10 not be open, save with tbe express permission of the court, to the 
Registrar or any party opposing the appeal to advance grounds other 
than those recorded in the said decision or advanced by the party in 
the proceedings before the Registrar, as the case may be, and where 
any such additional grounds are advanced, the applicant for registra-
IStion may, on giving notice in the prescribed manner, withdraw his 
application without being liable to pay the costs of the Registrar or 
the parties opposing his application. 
(7) Sl\bject to the provisions of this Act and of the rules made 
, of 190& thereunder, the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, shall 
• 
20 apply to appeals before a High Court under this Act. 
110. The High Court may make rules consistent with this Act as Power of 
to the conduct and procedure of all proceedings under this Act High kCourlS . to ma e 
before It. . rules. 
111. (1) Where in any suit for the infringement of a trade mark- Stay of 
proceedings 
2S (a) the defendant pleads that the registration of the plain- ~~e!~idily 
tiff's trade mark is invalid; or ofregistra-tion of the 
(b) the defendant raises a defence under clause (d) of sub- ~rade m~rk 
IS quesllon-
section (1) of section 30 and the plaintiff pleads the invalidity ed. etc. 
of the registration of the defendant's trade mark; 
30 the court trying the suit (hereinafter referred to as the court), 
shall,-
(i) if any proceedings for rectification of the register in 
relation to the plaintiff's or defendant's trade mark are pending 
before the Registrar or the High Court, stay the suit pending 
3S the final disposal of such proceedings; 
(ii) if no such proceedings are pending and the court is satis-
fied that the plea regarding the invalidity of the registration of 
the plaintiff's or defendant's trade mark is prima facie tenable, 
raise an issue regarding the same and adjourn the case for a period 

58 
of three months from the date of the framing of the issue in 
order to enable the party concerned to apply to the High Court 
for rectification of the register. 
(2) If the party concerned proves to the court that he has made 
any such application as is referred to in clause (b) (ii) of sub-sec- J 
tion (1) within the time specified therein or within such extended 
time as the court may for sufficient cause allow, the trial of the suit 
shall stand stayed until the final disposal of the rectification pro-
ceedings. 
(3) If no such application as aforesaid has been made within the 10 
time so specified or within such extended time as the court may 
allow, the issue as to the validity of the registration of the trade mark 
concerned shall be deemed to have been abandoned and the court 
shall proceed with the suit in regard to the other issues in the case. 
(4) The final order made in any rectification proceedings referred 15 
to in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall be binding upon the 
parties and the court shall dispose of the suit conformably to such 
order. 
(5) The stay of a suit for the infringement of a trade mark under 
this section shall not preclude the court making any interlocutory 20 
order (including any order granting an injunction, directing accounts 
to be kept, appointing a receiver or attaching any property), durina 
the period of the stay of the suit. 
Apoearance 112. (1) The Registrar shall have the right to appear and be 
of Re,is- h 
trar in legal eard- 25 
proceedings. 
(a) in any legal proceedings before a High Court in which 
the relief sought includes alteration or rectification of the regis-
ter or in which any question relating to the practice of the 
Trade Marks Registry is raised; 
(b) in any appeal to the High Court from an order of the 30 
Registrar on an application for registration of a trade mark-
(i) which is not opposed, and the application is either 
refused by the Registrar or is accepted by him subject to 
any amendments, modifications, conditions or limitations, 
or 35 
(ii) which has been opposed and the Registrar considers 
that his appearance is necessary in the public interest; 
and the Registrar shall appear in any case if so directed by the court. 

rr 
(2) Unless the High Court otherwise directs, the Registrar may, 
in lieu Qf appearing, submit a statement in writing signed by him. 
giving such particulars as he thinks proper of the proceedings before 
him relating to the matter in issue, or of the grounds of any decision 
S .given by him affecting it, or of the practice of the Trade Marks 
Registry in like cases, or of other matters relevant to the issues and 
within his knowledge as Registrar, and such statement sball be 
evidence in the proceeding. 
113. In all proceedings under this Act before a High Court the COItI of 
10 costs of the Registrar shall be in the discretion of the High Court, ~q:i~~:" 
mpr~· 
but the Registrar shall not be ordered to pay the costs of any of the in,s befcn 
parties. High CoUft. 
114. In every proceeding under Chapter VII or under section 109, Regiltered 
every registered user of a trade mark using by way of permitted UIIe, ~!~l!~d: 
15 who is not himself an applicant in respect of any proceeding under in cenai~ 
that Chapter or section, shall be made a party to the proceeding. proceedmp. 
115. The Registrar may, in any case where no appeal has been Revisional 
preferred under section 109, either on his own motion or on appUoa- ih':ers of 
ticm made in the prescribed manner and within the prescribed time, Registrar. 
20 call for and examine the record of any proceeding under this Act in 
which an order has been passed by any Deputy Registrar or Assistant 
Registrar or other officer for the purpose of satisfying himself as to 
the legality or propriety of such order or as to the regularity of such 
proceeding, and may pass such order in relation thereto as he thiDks 
25 fit: 
Provided that he shall not pass any order affecting adversely any 
person without giving that person an opportunity of being heard in 
the matter. 
\\ 
116. (1) A copy of any entry in the register or of any document Evidence of 
30 referred to ilJ sub-section (1) of section 126, purporting to be certi- ent~iel in 
fled b h Re · ed regl8ter etc. y t e glStrar and seal with the seal of the Trade Marks and thi~,. • 
Registry, shall be admitted in evidence in all courts and in all don~ by the 
proceedings without further proof or production of the original. ReJlltrar. 
(2) A certificate purporting to be under the hand of the Registrar 
3S as to any entry, matter or thing that he is authorised by thiS ~ct or 
the rules to make or do shall be prima facie evidence of the entry 
having been made, and of the contents thereof, or of the matter or 
thing having been done or not done. 

B8 
Jleaill!u 117. The :Reifstrar or any other officer of the Trade Marks Registry ana Other . 
officers not shall not, in any legal proceedings to which he is not a party, be 
comrodpellable compellable to produce the register or any other document in his 
~p ~ . . re.iltcr, ctc. custody, the contents of which can be proved by the productIon of a 
Power to 
require 
.oodlto Ibowindi-
·cation of 
orilin. 
.' 
certified copy issued under this Act or to appear as a witness to 5 
prove the matters therein recorded unless by order of the court made 
for special cause. 
118. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, require that goods of any cless specified in the 
notification which are made or produced beyond the limits of India 10 
and imported into India, or which are made or produced within the 
limits of India, shall from such date as may be appointed by the 
notification not being less than three months from its issue, have 
applied to them an indication of the country or place in which they 
were made or produced, or of the name and address of the manu- IS 
facturer er the person for whom the goods were manufactured. 
(2) The notification may specify the manner in which such indi-
cation shall be applied, that is to say, whether to the goods them-
selves or in any other manner, and the times or occasions on which 
the presence of the ~dication shall be necessary, that is to say, 20 
whether on importation only, or also at the time of sale, whether 
by wholesale or retail or both. I I 
(3) No notification under this section shall be issued, unless 
application is made for its issue by persons or associations sub-
stantially representing the interests of dealers in or manufacturers, zs 
producers, or users of the goods concerned, or unless the Central 
Government i.a otherwise convinced that it is necessary in the 
public interest to issue the notification, with or without such in-
quiry as the Central Government may consider necessary. 
(4) The provisions of section 23 of the General Clauses Act, 1897, 3010 of 1897. 
Ihall apply to the issue of a notification under this section as they 
apply to the making of a rule or bye-law the making of which is 
wbject to the condition of previous publicatiOn. 
(5) A notification under this section, shall not apply to goods made 
or produced beyond the limits of India and imported into India, if 35 
in respect of those goods, the Chief Customs Officer is satisfied at 
the time of importation that they are intended for exportation whe-
ther after transhipment in or transit through India or otherwise. 

59 
119. (1) Where goods; which are prohibited to be imported into Po~e~~~ re-qwre llUor-
India under clause (d) of section 18 of the Sea Customs Act, 1878, and mation 
i.re liabl~ to detention and confiscation on importation under that ~~8~:dt of 
Act, are Imported into India the Chief Customs Officer if, upon re- ,ood& bear-
S presentation made to him, is satisfied that the trade mark corn- ~~!s~a1r:rk •. 
plained of is used as a fabe trade .mark, he may require the im-
porter of the goods, or his agent, to produce any documents in his 
possession relating to the goods and to furnish information as to the 
name and address of the person by whom the goods were consigned 
10 to India and the name and address of the person to whom the gooda 
were sent in India. I· 1 
(2) The importer or his agent shall, within fourteen days, comply 
with the requirement as aforesaid, and if he fails to do so he may 
be punished with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees. 
IS (3) Any information obtained from the importer of the goods or 
20 
his agent under this section may be communicated by the Chief 
Customs Officer to the registered proprietor or registered user of 
the trade mark which is alleged to have been used as a false trade 
mark. I I 
no. If in any legal proceeding for rectification of the r@gister Certiftcate 
before a High Court a decision is on contest given in favour of of YaliditJ.1 
the registered proprietor of the trade mark on the issue as to the 
validity of the registration of the trade mark, the High Court may 
grant a certificate to that effect, and if such a certificate is granted, 
2S then in any subsequent legal proceeding in which the said validity 
comes into question the said proprietor on obtaining a final order or 
judgment in his favour shall, unless the said final order or judgment 
for sufficient reason directs otherwise, be entitled to his full costs, 
charges and expenses as between legal practitioner and client. 
30 121. (1) Where a person, by means of circulars, advertisements or Groundless 
otherwise, threatens a person with an action or proceeding for in- =;n:l 
fringement of a trade mark which is registered, or alleged by the ceedinga. 
first-m~ntioned person to be registered, sr some other like proceed-
ing, a person aggrieved may, whether the person making the threats 
3S is or is not the registered proprietor or the registered user of the 
trade mark, bring a suit against the first-mentioned person and may 
obtain a declaration to the effect that the threats are unjustifiable. 
and an injunction against the continuance of the threats, and may 
recover such damages (if any) as he has sustained, unless the first-
40 mentioned person satisfies the court that the trade mark is registered 
and that the acts in respect of which the proceedings were threatened 
constitute, or, if done, would constitute, an infringement of the trade 
mark 

10 
(I) The last preceding sub-section does not apply if the registered 
p1'Opl'ietor of the trade mark, or a registered user acting in pur-
suance of su.~on (1) of section 51, with due diligence com-
mences and prosecutes an action against the person threatened for 
infringement of the trade mark S 
(3) Nothing in this section shall render a legal practitioner or a 
registered trade marks agent liable to an action under this section 
in respect of an act done by him in his professional capacity on be-
half of a client. : 
(4) A suit under sub-section (1) shall not be instituted in any 10 
court inferior to a District Court. 
ttt (1) An address for service stated in an application or notice 
of opposition shall, for the purposes of the application or notice of 
opposition, be deemed to be the address of the applicant or opponent, 
as the case may be, and all documents in relation to the application 15 
or notice of opposition may be served by leaving them at or sending 
them by post to the address for service of the applicant or opponent, 
as the case may be. ' 
(2) An address for service may be changed by notice in writing 
to the Registrar. ' I 20 
(3) The registered proprietor of a trade mark shall from time to 
time notify the Registrar in writing of any change in his address, and 
request him in the prescribed manner to enter the change in the re-
gister, and the Registrar shall alter the register accordingly. 
(4) The address of the registered proprietor of a trade mark, u zS 
appearing for the time being in the register shall for all purposes 
under this Act be deemed to be the address of the registered pro-
prietor. " - ,~ "--r 
Trade IJtIIIe, 123. In any suit or other proceeding relating to a trade mark, the 
:ec~~ in- tribunal shall admit evidence of the usages of the trade concemed 30 
t'? consider.- and of any relevant trade mark or trade name or get up legitimately 
tlon. used by other persons.' ' 
Alent •. IX. Where by or under this Act, ~y act, other than the making 
of an affidavit is required to be done before the Registrar by any 
person, the act may, subject to the rules made in this behalf, be done, 35 
instead of by that person himself, by a person duly authorised in the 
prescribed manner, who is-
(a) a legal practitioner, or 

61 
(b) a person regiltered in the prescribed manner as a trade 
iDaJ7ks agent, or 
(c) a person in the sole and regular employment' of the 
principal I 
S 125. There shall be kept under the direction and supervision of Indexes. 
the Registrar,- . 
(a) an index of registered trade marks, 
(b) an index of trade marks in respect of which applications 
for registration are pending, 
10 (c) an index of the names of the proprietors of registered 
trade marks, and 
(d) an index of the names of registered users. 
126. (1) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (5) of Documenu open to pub-section 49,- lie inspec-
tion. 
IS (a) the register, and any document upon which any entry 
in the register is based; 
(b) every notice of opposition to the registration of a trade 
mark, application for rectification before the Registrar, counter-
statement thereto, and any affidavit or document filed by the 
20 parties in any proceedings before the Registrar; 
(c) all regulations deposited under section 65, and all 
applications under section 69 for varying such regulations; 
(d) the Refused Textile Marks List; 
(e) the indexes mentioned in section 125; and 
(f) such other documents as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, specify; 
shall, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, be open to 
public inspection at the Trade Marks Registry. 
(2) Any person may, on application to the Registrar and on pay-
30 ment of such fees as may be prescribed, obtain a certified copy of 
any entry in the register or any document referred to in sub-
section (1). 
127. (1) There shall be paid in respect of applications and regis- Fees. 
tration and other matters under this Act such fees as may be pres-
3S crlbed by the Central Government. 

Savings in 
respect of 
certain mat-
ters in 
Chapter X. 
(2) Where a fee is payable in respect of the doing of an act by 
the Registrar, the Registrar shall not cio that act until the fee has 
been paid. 
(3) Where a fee is payable in respect of the filing of a document 
at the Trade Marks Registry, the document shall be deemed not to 5 
have been filed at the Registry until the fee has been paid. 
128. Nothing in Chapter X shall-
(a) exempt any person from any suit or other proceeding 
which might, but for anything in that Chapter, be brought 
against him, 10 
(b) entitle any person to refuse to make a complete dis-
covery, or to answer any question or interrogatory in any suit 
or other proceeding, but such discovery or answer shall not be 
admissible in evidence against such person in any such prosecu-
tion for an offence under Chapter X or under section 18 of the J 5 
Sea Customs Act, 1878, or 8 of 1878• 
(c) be construed so as to render liable to any prosecution or 
punishment any servant of a master resident in India who in 
good faith acts in obedience to the instructions of such master, 
and, on demand made by or on behalf of the prosecutor, has 20 
given full information as to his master and as to the instructions 
which he has received from his master. 
Declaration 129. NotwithstandinG anything contained in the Indian Registra-
:~i~ of~~:J; tion Act, 1908, no document declaring or purporting to declare the 16 of 190 8. 
llUI~k not ownership or title of a person to a trade mark other than a registered 25 reSlStrable . under the trade mark shall be regIstered under that Act. 
Indian 
Reaistration 
'Act, 1908. 
~b:=:~ 130. The provisions of this Act shall be binding on the Government. 
Special pro-
visions re-
lating to 
applications 
for registra-
tion from 
citizens of 
conTention 
'Duntries. 
131. (1) With a view to the fulfilment of a treaty, convention or 
arrangement, with any country outside India which affords to citizens 
of India similar privileges as' granted to its own citizens, the Central 30 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare such 
country to be a convention country for the purposes of this Act. 
(2) Where a person has made an application for the registration 
of a trade mark in a convention country and that person, or his legal 
representative or assignee, makes an application for the registration 35 
of the trade mark within six months after the date on which the 
application was made in the convention country, the trade mark 
shall, if registered under this Act, be registered as of the date on 

which the application was made in the convention country and that 
date shall be deemed for the purposes of this Act to be the date of 
registration. 
(3) Where applications have'been made for the registration of a 
S trade mark in two or more convention countries, the period of six 
months referred to in the last preceding sub-section shall be reckoned 
from the date on which the earlier or earliest of those applications 
was made. 
132. Where any country specified by the ,Central Government in Provisio~ 
10 this behalf by notification ia the Official Gazette does not accord to ~~~i~;~I­
citizeIUI of India the same rights in respect of the registration and 
protection of trade marks as it accords to its own nationals, no I 
national of such country shall be entitled, either solely or jointly 
with any other person-
IS (a) to apply for the registration of or be registered as the 
proprietor of a trade mark in Part A or Part B of the register, 
(b) to be registered as the assignee of the proprietor of a 
registered trade mark, or 
(c) to apply for registration or be registered as a registered 
20 user of a trade mark under section 49. 
133. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Power of 
Official Gazette and subject to the condition of ..... revious publication, CGentral t y overnmen 
make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. to make" 
rules. 
2S (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the 
following matters, namely:-
(a) the classification of goods for the purpose of the registra-
tion of trade marks, and the empowering of the Registrar to 
amend the register so far as may be necessary for the purpose 
30 of adapting the entries therein to any amended or substituted 
classification; 
35 
(b) the making "of duplicates of trade marks and other 
documents connected therewith; 
(c) the securing and regulating the publication, sale or 
distribution of copies of trade marks and other documents con-
nected therewith; 
(d) the additional matters to be entered in the reglster; 

It 
(e) the conditions and restrictions IUbjed to which the 
register, the Refused Textile Marks List and other documenta 
may be inspected; 
(f) the for~ of certificates of registration; 
(g) the further documents, information or evklence which 5 
should accompany an application under sub-section (1) of 
section 49; 
(h) the prescribing of classes of goods as textile goods for 
the purposes of section 71; 
(i) the awarding of costs by the Registrar under section 97; 10 
(j) the conditions subject to which a person may be regifter-
eel as a trade marks agent, and the conditions subject to which 
an a«ent referred to in section 124 may act; 
(k) the fees to be paid under this Act; 
(1) the establishment of branches of the Trade Marks 15 
Registry for facilitating the working of this Act, the territorial 
jurisdiction of the head office and branch offices of the Trade 
Marks Registry and the preparation of the copies of the register 
to be kept at the branch offices;' 
, (m) the transfer of applications and proceedings pending at 20 
the commencement of this Act in any office of the Registry to 
the appropriate office of the Registry; 
(n) the manner in which, in proceedings under this Act 
before the Central Government or the Registrar, applications 
shall be made, notices given and matters advertised; 25 
(0) the times or periods required by this Act to be prescribed; 
(p) the regulation generally of the business of the Trade 
Marks Registry and of the branches established under clause (1) 
and the regulation of all things by this Act placed under the 
direction or control of the Central Government or the Registrar; 30 
(q) the number of samples to be selected and tested and 
for the selection of the samples for the purposes of section 75; 
(r) the manner in which cotton yam and cotton thread shall 
be marked with the particulars required by section 74, and the 
exemption of certain premises from the provisions of that section; 35 
(s) the classes of goods included in the expression "piece 
ioods, such as are ordinarily sold by the length or by the piece" 

5 
for the purposes of section 74, and clause <f) of section 18 of 
the Sea Customs Act, 1878; 
(t) any other matter which is required to be or may be 
prescribed. 
134. All rules made under this Act shall be laid before each House Rules to be 
of Parliament as soon as may be after they are made and shall be placcpd be).-
b · t t h d'fi t' P I' k . h i fore ar ,a-su Jec 0 suc mo 1 ca Ions as ar lament may rna e m t e sess on ment. 
in which they are so laid or the session immediately following. 
135. The enactments specified in the Schedule shall be amended Amend-
10 in the manner specified therein. menta. 
136. (1) The Indian Merchandise Marks Act, 1889, and the Trade Repeal. and 
Marks Act. 1940, are h~reby repealed, savinrs. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in the General 
Clauses Act. 1897, with respect to repeals. any notification, rule, 
IS order. requirement, certificate, notice, decision, determination, direc-
tion, approval, authorisation. consent, application, request or thing 
made, issued. given or done under the Trade Marks Act, 1940, shall, if 
in force at the commencement of this Act. continue in force and 
have effect as if made. issued, given or done under the corresponding 
20 provision of this Act. 
(3) The provisions of this Act shall apply to any application for 
registration of a trade mark pending at the commencement of this 
Act and to any proceedings consequent thereon and to any regis-
tration granted in pursuance thereof. 
25 (4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, any legal 
3S 
proceeding pending in-any court at the commencement of this Act 
may be continued in that court as if this Act had not been passed. 
Year No. 
1860 
THE SCHEDULE 
AMBNDMENTS 
(S •• section 135) 
.... - ----- •... -----.--------~---------.---
Short title Amendment 
The Indian Penal Code. (i) In the heading to ChaRter XVIII. 
the words "TllADE OR shan be 
omined ; 
(ii) in the heading above section 
478, the word "'radl," Ihan be 
omined ; 
(iiI) section. 478 and 480 shall be 
omined ; 

II 
-------.--------~:--------------
Year No. 
8 
Short title 
The Specific Relief Act, 
1877. 
The Sea Customs Act, 
1878. 
Amendment 
(iv) m 1ICdGD..sa, the WOIdI .., 
faJae trade awt or" ebI1l be omitted . . . 
(0) In section 48~, the words .. trade S 
mark.aor" shill be omitted; 
(lIi) for section 485, the following 
section shall be substituted, 
namely;-
Making or pos-
session of any 
instrument for 
counterfeiting 
"485. Whoever 10 
makes or haa 
in his pos-
session any die, 
plate or other 
instrument for I S 
a property 
mark. 
the purpose 
of counterfeiting a property mark, 
or has inlhil possession a property 
mark for the purpose of denoting 
that any goods belong to a penon to 20 
whom they do not belong, ,hall be 
: pu.lished with imprisonment of 
. either description for a term which 
: may extend to three yean, or with 
fine, or with :both"., 2S 
(w) in section 486, for the'!words 
"Whoever sells, or exposes, or 
bas in possession for sale or any 
purpose of trade or manufacture, 
any goods or things with a ooun- 30 
terfeit trade mark or peoperty 
mark", the words "Whoever 
sells, or exposes, or bas ill pol-
seasion for sale, any goods or 
things with a counterfeit property 35 
marl' shall be lubstituted". 
In section 54, the Explonation and 
Illustration (w).&t.lhall be omined. 
In lec:tioaI8,-
(,) for claule (4), the following claUICII 40 
shall be substituted. namely;-
"(4) goods having applied there-
to a false trade mark within 
the meaning of aection 77 
of the Trade and Merc:han- 4S 
dise Marks Act, 1958; 
(dd) goods having applied 
thereto a falle trade des.:rip-
tion within the meanina 
of clause (j) of sub-aection SO 
(I) of section 2 of the 
Trade and Merchandise 
MarbYAct, 1958, other-
wise than in relation 
to any of the manera 5S 
8p'ecified in lub-clauaea 
(ll) and (iii) of claUIC 
(u) of that aub-aectioD"; 
----"~------------

5 
)0 
15 
20 
35 
45 
so 
55 
Short title Amendment 
(il) in clause (f), in sub-clause (is), 
for the words "standard yards", 
the words "standard yards 
or in standard metres" shall 
be sub.stituted; 
(iii) for clause (h), the following 
clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"(h) goods which are required 
by a notification under 
section lIB of the Trade 
and Merchandise Marks 
Act, 195B, to have applied 
to them an Indication of the 
country or place in which 
they were made or produced 
or the name and address 
of the manufacturer or the 
penon for whom the goods 
were manufactured, unless 
such goods Ihow such 
indication app!ied in the 
manner spcdfted in the 
notification." • 
(itI) in clause (I), in sub-clause (il), 
for the figures and words 
"under section 20 of the Indian 
Merchandise Marks Act, 1889". 4 of r889. 
the words and figures "under 
section 75 of the Trade and 
Merchandise Marks Act, 1958" 
shall be substituted. 
(v) in clause (J), in aub-clause (il), 
for the words and flaures "under 
section 20 of the Indian Mer-
chandise Marks Act, 1889", 4 of 18B9. 
the words and filures "under 
section 75 of the Trade and 
Merchandise MuD Act, 195B" 
shall be substituted. 
The Code of r.riminal In Schedule 11,-
Procedure, 189B. 
(i) in the heading to Chapter XVIII, 
the words "TltADB OR" 
shall be omitted. 
(n) in the heading above section 482, 
the words "traM and" shall 
be omitted. 
(iit) in the second column of the 
entry relating to section 482, 
the words "trade or" shall be 
omitted. 
(iv) in the second column of the 
entry relating to section 483, the 
words "trade or" shall be 
omitted ; 
----------- ------- ---------------------

• 
Year No. Short title Amendment 
---1-----------------------
(0) in the secOnd column of the 
entry relating to section 48S, 
the word~ "or trade" shall be 5 
omitted; 
<"i) in the second column of the 
entry relatin, to section 486, the 
word. "or trade" shall be 
omitted. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
With the increase in trade and commerce since the Trade Marb 
Act, 1940, was enacted, the need has been felt for revising that 
statute so as to provide for more effective protection of trade marks. 
It has been represep.ted to Government that many valuable trade 
marks in use are now denied the benefits of registration on the 
ground that these marks do not satisfy the test of distinctiveness 
prescribed under the existing Act and that it is necessary to en-
large the field of registrability so as to entitle them to registration. 
This will also avoid the difficulties now experienced by Indian 
merchants in securing registration of these marks in foreign coun-
tries where the production of a certificate of home registration is 
a condition precedent to obtaining the foreign registration. Again, 
the working of the Trade Marks Act, 1940, has emphasised the need 
for providing better facilities for registration of trade marks by 
merchants in the distant parts of the country and for combining the 
Trade Marks Registry and the Patent Office under a common head 
so as to ensure better co-ordination of the administration of the 
different branches of the law relating to industrial property. The 
working of that Act has also indicated the necessity for removing 
the existing uncertainties as to the jurisdiction of the High Court 
to hear appeals from the Registrar's decisions and for introducing 
certain other changes in that Act for the purpose of removing 
ambiguities and for improving the law. 
The criminal laws relating to trade marks and trade des-
criptions, which are contained in Chapter XVIII of the Indian 
Penal Code and the Indian Merchandise Marks Act, 1889, respec-
tively, were enacted at a time when commercial advertising in this 
country had not been much developed. With the increase both in 
appeal and power of modern advertisements, a fresh approach 
to matters relating to false trade marks and false trade descrip-
tion has become necessary. It is proposed to strengthen the law 
reltating to these matters by enhancing the punishment for offences 
relating to trade and merchandise marks, particularly where the 
offences are in relation to drugs and articles of food, on grounds 
of public interest and public health, and by expanding the defini-
tions of "trade description" and "false trade description" so as to 
make punishable the use or application of certain types of false 
trade descriptions, not now punishable under the Indian Merchan-
dise Marks Act, 1889. It is also proposed to empower the Central 
,- -89 

'70 
Government to require that goods notified should have indicated on 
them the name and address of the manufacturer or of the person 
for whom the goods are made. 
In view of the extensive amendments necessitated in the Trade 
Marks Act, 1940, and the Indian Merchandise Marks Act, 1889, it 
has been thought fit to consolidate the law relating to trade and 
merchandise marks now found in the Trade Marks Act, 1940, the 
Indian Merchandise Marks Act, 1889, and the Indian Penal Code. 
The notes on clauses explain the provisions of the Bill wherever 
necessary. 
NEW,DELHl; MORARJI DESAI. 
The 18th March, 1958. 

Notes on clauses 
Clause 2.-The definitions in section 2 of the Trade Marks Act, 
1940, have been amplified by the inclusion of certain additional 
matters. The definition of "trade mark" is now enlarged so as to, 
include certification trade marks for the purposes of registration, 
and to comprise registered and unregistered trade marks in use 
for the purposes of Chapter X of the Bill, which deals with the 
criminal law. A new definition of the expression "High Court" for 
the purposes of this Bill has been incorporated. The definition of 
"trade description" in section 2 of the Indian Merchandise Marks 
Act, 1889, has been expanded by including the following matters, 
namely, (a) descriptions as to quality of any goods, and of per-
fo"mance and behaviour in respect of drugs and articles of food, 
(b) name and address of the manufacturer, or dealer, (c) customs 
entry and (d) any description which is likely to be mistaken or 
misunderstood for a trade description. Similarly the definition of 
"false trade description" has been expanded by including mislead-
ing descriptions and by combining the matters set forth in sub-
section P) of section 2 and section 4 of the existing Merchandise 
Marks Act, 1889. A comprehensive definition of "package" is in-
cluded. 
Clause 3.-The jurisdiction of the High Court is to be deter-
mined with reference to the Trade Marks Office within whose terri-
torial limite; the place of business of the proprietor of the mark is 
situate. 
Clause 4.-The Trade Marks Registry and the Patent Office ere 
to be combined under a common head as in other countries. This 
would facilitate co-ordination of the administration of the difter-
ent branches of laws relating to industrial property and result in 
greater efficiency and economy. 
Clause 5.-For facilitating the registration of trade marks, it is 
proposed to establish branch offices of the Registry. The territorial 
limits within which the offices of the Trade Marks Registry are to 
function are to be notified by the Central Government. 
Clause 6.-The Register of Trade Marks is to be kept at the head 
office under the control of the Registrar and copies of the register and 
71 

certain other documents are to be kept at each branch of the 
Registry. 
Clause 7.-The Register of Trade Marks is to be divided into 
two Parts. The existing register will be incorporated with Part A 
register. which will c,)mprise marks which are already on the 
register ::t the commencement of t~le AcL and marKs which may 
be registered in Part A after the commmcement of the Act. Part 
B register will contain trade marks regi:;tered in the Part after 
the commencement of the Act. 
Clause a.-This clause reproduces the provision of section 5 of the 
Trade Marks Act, 1940, with a minor amendment. 
Clause 9.-The requisites for registration in Parts A and B of 
the register are laid down in this clause. A mark which is distinc-
tive, that is to say, acmpted to distinguish, is registrable in Part A 
of the register. A less stringel}.t test is proposed for registration in 
Part B register. A trade mark which is not distinctive but which 
is capable of distinguishing may be registered in Part B of the 
register. The establishment of the Part B register will bring on 
the register many valuable trade marks which are in use but are 
not registrable, and facilitate the registration of these Indian own-
ed marks in foreign countries where a certificate of home registra-
tion is a condition precedent to registration. Such a provision is 
essential in view of the expanding export trade of this country. 
The provision contained in the proviso to section 6 (3) of the 
Trade Marks Act, 1940, has been omitted from this clause for pur-
poses of clarity and as being no longer necessary in view of the 
introduction of the Part B register. 
Registration of a trade mark by the proprietor in either Part 
of the register does not preclude t~e registration in the other Part. 
Clause 10.-This clause is the same as section 7 of the Trade 
Marks Act, 1940. 
Clause H.-This clause which corresponds to section 8 of the Trade 
Marks Act, 1940, removes the ambiguity in that section, and is Bome-
what wider in scope. . 
Cla'UB.e 12.-This clause prohibits the registration by a person 
of a trade mark which is identical or deceptively similar to a trade 
mark already registered by a different proprietor. There is a new 
provision which empowers the Registrar in cases where separate 

applications for registration of the same or similar mark are made 
by different persons, to defer acceptance of a later n~bered appU-
I!ation for registration until the earlier numbered conflicting applica-
tion is disposed of. This will remove the difficulties experienced 
under the present section 10 (3) of the Trade Marks Act, 1940. The· 
provision in clause 12 (3) for concurrent registration is tne same as 
in section 10 (2) of the Trade Marks Act, 1940. 
Clause 13.-This clause reproduces the provisions of section 9 of 
the Trade Marks Act, 1940. 
Clause 14.-This is a new provision, which gives statutory 
recognition to an existing practice in the Registry, and Is made 
more specific and clear. 
Clauses 15 and 16.-These clauses are the same as sections 11 and 
12 respectively of the Trade Marks Act, 1940. 
Clause 17.-This clause which corresponds to section 13 of the 
Trade Marks Act, 1940, as now worded, removes ambiguity. 
CZause IS.-This clause deals with the procedure for making an 
application for registration. Necessary changes are made in the 
provisions of section 14 of the Trade Marks Act, 1940, in view of the 
introduction of the Part B register and the establishment of branch 
offices for filing applications. 
Clause 19.-This is a new provision empowering the Registrar 
to withdraw his order of acceptance of an application for registra-
tion in certain exceptional circumstances after giving notice and 
hearing the party 1£ so desired. 
Clause 20.-Sub-clause (1) corresponds to sub-section (1) of 
section 15 and the first part of the proviso to that sub-section of the 
Trade Marks Act, 1940. Sub-clause (2) contains the provision for 
readvertisement of an application for registration when it is adver-
tised before acceptance or after it is permitted to be amended or 
corrected by the Registrar, the latter being a new provision. 
Clause 21.-This clause reproduces the provisions of section 
15 (2), (3), (4) and (5) of the Trade Marks Act, 1940, and incorpo-
rates in the clause itself the period within which notice of opposi-
tion and counter-statement have to be filed. This is considered 
essential in order to minimise large delays which now occur in the 
disposal of oppositions to applications. It also includes a new pro-
vision that the Registrar may take into account a ground of objec-
tion whether relied upon by the opponent or not, in order that the 
purity of the register may be maintained. 

74 
Claus*, 22.-This clause is new and empowers the Registrar to 
amend or correct an application for registration or notice of opposi-
tion or counter-statement. 
Clause 23.-This clause corresponds to section 16 of the Trade 
Marks Act, 1940, with an additional provision empowering the 
Registrar to correct the register or the certificate of registration in 
case of clerical errors or obvious mistakes. 
Clause 24.-This clause is the same as section 17 of the Trade 
Marks Act, 1940. 
Clause 25.-The period of renewal which is now 15 years has 
been reduced to 7 years. This will eliminate from the register 
marks which have gone out of use, and will also increase the 
revenue of the Registry so as to make it self-supporting. Sub-
clause (4) contains a new useful provision. 
Cltwse 26.-This clause is the same as section 19 of the Trade 
Marks Act, 1940. 
Clause 27.-The proviso in favour of refused "old" trade marks 
contained in section 20 of the Trade Marks Act, 1940, is now deleted, 
as it n,ow serves no useful purpose and is ambiguous and otiose. 
Clause 28.-The references to Part A register are consequential 
to the introduction of Part B register. The words "if valid" which 
were deleted previously have now been reintroduced in this clause 
so as to provide explicitly that a defendant in an action for infringe-
ment may question the validity of the plaintiff's registration. But 
in such cases the issue as to validity must be determined by rectifi-
cation proceedings in accordance with clause 111 of this Bill. The 
latter part of section 21 of the Trade Marks Act, 1940, which deals 
with what constitutes infringement, has been made the subject of a 
separate clause 29. Sub-clause (2) corresponds to the first part of 
section 22 (I) of the Trade Marks Act, 1940. Sub-clause (3), which 
is new, clarifies the law as to the rights of registered proprietors, 
where the same mark is registered by two or more different persons. 
Clause 29.-This clause incorporates the latter part of section 21 
of the Trade Marks Act, 1940, but omits the provision contained in 
paragraph (b) of that section, as this provision is ambiguous and 
has received judicial strictures. Sub-clause (2), which is a new 
provision, provides that in an action for infringement in respect of 
Part B registration, if the defendant proves that the use of the mark 
complained of is not likely to deceive or cause confusion, no injunc-
tion or other relief will he granted. 

'1~ 
Clause 30.-Sub-clause (1) of this clause corresponds to section 22 
01 !.he Trade Marks Act, 1940, with verbal changes. A new provi-
sion has been inserted in sub-clause {~) of this clause providing 
that the sale or other dealings in goods bearing a registered trade 
mark and lawfully acquired by a person, is not an intringement by 
reason only of the assignment of the mark by the registered 
proprietor subsequent to the acquisition of those goods. 
Clause 31.-An explicit reference to section 56 is included in 
l:iub-clause (1) of this clause so as to clarify the law that this clause 
applies also to applications for rt!ctification under clause 56. Sub-
clause (~) is a new provision which is in accordance with judicial 
decision. 
Clause 32.-The scope of the provision in section 24 of the Trade 
Marks Act, 1940, is enlarged and the ambiguity in that section is 
removed. 
Clauses 33, 34, 35 and 36.- The provisions of these clauses repro-
duce the provisions of sections 25, 26, 27 and 28 respectively of the 
Trade Marks Act, 1940, with minor changes in clause 33. 
Clause 37.-This clause which follows section 29 of the Trade 
Marks Act, 1940, contains certain additional new provisions for 
safeguarding the rights of assignee. 
Clause 3B.-This clause corresponds to section 30 of the Trade 
Marks Act, 1940. 
Clauses 39 and 4O.-These clauses are the same as sections.31 and 
32 respectively of the Trade Marks Act, 1940. 
Clause 41.-This clause follows section 33 of the Trade Marks 
Act, 1940. Two important exceptions are, however, introduced by 
the explanation which states that advertisement of the assignment 
is not necessary where the assignrrent is for part' only of the 
registered goods together with the goodwill concerned in those 
goods, or where the assignment is for goods used in the export trade 
together with the goodwill of the business concerned in the export 
trade only. 
Clauses 42 to 47.-These clauses replace the provisions of 
sections 34, 35, 36, 37 and 38 of the Trade Marks Act, 1940, with lome 
minor amendments. 
Clause 48.-This clause corresponds to section 39 of the Trade 
Marks Act, 1940. Sub-clause (1) contains an additional new provi-
lion that no application for registration of registered user shall be 

ehtertained unless the agreement between the parties is in writinj 
and complies with the conditions laid down in the rules for prevent-
ing trafficking in trade marks. 
Clause 49.-As questions of public policy are involved, the 
responsibility for permitting registration of registered user has been 
vested with the Central Government instead of with the Registrar 
as at present. The Registrar has to pass orders of acceptance or 
conditional acceptance or refusal of an application only after 
receiving the necessary directions from the Central Government. 
The Central Government, however, will not issue any directions 
against an applicant without giving him an opportunity of being 
heard. 
Clause 50.-The registration of a multiplicity of different 
registered users of the same trade mark tends to create confusion 
in the minds of the public as to the true trade origin of the goods. 
Accordingly, it is proposed to fix a permissible maximum limit to 
the number of registered users on the register at any time in fe,o;:-
pect of the same registered trade mark for the same goods, except 
in relation to goods for export from India, and where there is a 
common control between the business of the registered proprietor 
and the registered user. 
Clause 51.-This clause is the same as section 40 of the Trade 
Marks Act, ; 940. 
Clause 52.-This clause which deals with Registrar's power to 
vary or cancel registration as registered user, provides for giving 
notice to all the registered users, on an application by the registered 
proprietor to vary or cancel registration and removes a lacuna in 
the Trade Marks Act, 1940. It also contains a new provision that 
non-compliance by a regist~red user of the conditions of the agree-
ment for quality control might be a ground for cancellation of the 
regisL"1ltion of the licence. 
Cla'lLle 5S.-Explanation 1 is a new provision specifying expressly 
the circumstances where the subsequent formation of a partnershIp 
by a legistered user or a change in the constitution of the registered 
user firm, will not be deemed to constitute an assignment of the 
licence. 
Clauses 54 to 59.-These clauses replace the provisions of sections 
44, 45, 46, 47, 48 and 49 of the Trade Marks Act, 1940. The power 01 
the tribunal to rectify the register includes the power to remove a 
trade mark registered in Part A register to Part B register. 

ctauses 60 to 69.-These provisions are the same as in the section. 
50 to 59 of the Trade Marks Act, 1940, with minor and consequential 
amendments. A certification trade mark may be registered in Part 
A of the register only. 
Clauses 70, 71 and 72.-These clauses are the same as sections 61, 
62 and. 64 respectively of the Trade Marks Act, 1940. 
Clause 73.-This clause deals with an existing provision for 
entering refused textile marks in the Refused Textile Marks List 
(section 65 of the Trade Marks Act, 1940) but contains a necessary 
new provision fixing the renewal period as seven years and making 
the continuance of a mark in the Refused. Textile Marks List after 
the expiration of each renewal period subject to payment of renewal 
fee. . 
Clause 74.-This clause reproduces with minor amendments the 
~rovisions of sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 12 of the Indian 
Merchandise Marks Act, 1889, and includes a reference to standard 
metres in view of Government's decision to introduce the metric 
system of linear measurement. 
Clause 75.-This clause corresponds to sections 20 and 19 of the 
Indian Merchandise Marks Act, 1889. 
Clause 76.-The provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 
5 of the Indian Merchandise Marks Act, 1889, are combined and 
expanded so as to include both trade marks and trade descriptions, 
with slight verbal changes. Paragraph (e) of sub-clause (1) of this 
clause contains en important new provision. Hitherto the supply of 
false goods in response to an order given by reference to a registered. 
or unregistered trade mark is not an offence under the Indian Penal 
Code, or the Indian Merchandise Marks Act, 1889. Such supply is 
now made an offence under Chapter X of this Bill. 
Clause 77.-The clause expands the definition in section 480 of the 
Indian Penal Code and contains comprehensive definitions of falsify-
ing and falsely applying trade marks. It is expressly provided. that 
in any prosecution for any of these offences the burden of proving the 
assent of the proprietor is on the accused. 
Clause 78.- This clause combines the proviSions of section 6 of 
the Indian Merchandise Marks Act, 1889, relating to penalty for 
applying false tmde description and sections 480, 482. 484 and 485 
of the Indian Penal Code, dealing with offences relating to trade 
marks, and is further enlarged and made more comprehensive. The 
penalties are enhanced to two years and/or fine and are made 

, 
Uniform. Where the offences are in relation to goods being "drugs" 
or "articles of food" the punishment is made still higher as ques-
tions of public health are involved. 
Clause 79.-This clause combines the provisions of section 7 oL 
the Indiwl Merchandise Marks Act, 1889, and of section 486 Of the 
Indian Penal Code. The penalty for the offences has been increased 
and made the same as under clause 78. The scope of the clause is 
expanded by including as offences, failure to indicate, or indication 
of false descriptions as to, address of manufacturer or the person for 
whom the goodS are manuiactured where such indications are 
required under clause U8. Penalties in respect of offences in rela-
tion to goods being drugs or articles of food are enhanced to three 
years and or fine as under clause 78. 
Clause 80.-This clause reproduces the provision of section 12 (J) 
of the Indian Merchandise Marks Act, 1889. 
Clause 81.-This clause follows section 68 of the Trade Marks Act, 
1940. The provision in sub-section (4) of section 68 has been 
omitted, as it is no longer necessary. 
Cla-use 82.-This is a new provision for making the improper des-
cription by a person of his office as the Trade Marks Oftice, or the 
use of words which would reasonably lead to that belief an offence 
punishable under this Act. 
Claus€ 83.-This clause follows section 67 of the Trade Marks 
Act, 1940. 
Clause 84.-This is a new provision designed to protect the acts 
by the accused which IQre lawfully permitted under this Act, as, for 
instance, where there is concurrent registration or where having 
regard to the conditions and limitations the complainant's registra-
tion does not extend to the alleged use by the accused. 
Cluuse 85.-This clause reproduces the provision of section 9 of 
the Indian Merchandise Marks Act, 1889. Sub-clause (4) is a new 
provision. 
Clause 86.-This clause reproduces with mere verbal changes the 
provisions of section 8 of the Indial1- Merchandise Marks Act, 1889. 
Clause 87.-This clause sets down the procedure to be follow2Cl 
in a case where the accused charged with an offence under clause 78 
or 79 sets up a defence that the registration of the trade mark is 
invalid. The pr..ocedure is similar to that in civil suits where a similar 
defence is raised by the defendent under clause 111. 

Clauses 88 and 89.-These are new provisions introduced on 
account of the inherent difficulties involved in the trial of trade mark 
offences. 
Clause 90.-This clause corresponds to section 13 of the Indian 
Merchandise Marks Act, 1889. 
Cla'U.'~f> 9l.-This clause corresponds to section 14 of the Indian 
Merchandise Marks Act, 1889. 
Cla1"o;e 92.-This clause corresponds to section 15 of the Indian 
Merchandise Marks Act, 1889, but introduces certain changes in 
order to remove the existing ambiguity which has given rise to 
conflicting decisions by the courts and to make it clear that the com· 
mission of the offence as well as the discovery thereof both refer to 
the eommission of the offence charged. 
Clauses 93, 94, 95 and 96.- These clauses reproduce sections 21, 22, 
16 and 17 respectively of the Indian Merchandise Marks Act, 1889, 
with minor changes. 
Clauses 97, 98 and 99.-The provisions of these clauses reproduce 
the provisions of section 70 of the Trade Marks Act, 1940. Sub· 
clause 97 (c) contains a new, but useful, provision that the Registrar 
may review his own decision on an application made before him. 
Cta1L.':e 100.-This is a new provision for bringing on record in a 
proceeding under the Act the successor in interest of the deceased 
person. 
Clause 10l.-This is a new provision for regulating the practice 
with regard to grant of extension of time. 
Clause 102.-This is a new provision. 
CtatUlC 103.-This is a new provision empowering the Registrar to 
give preliminary advice, when so requested, as to whether a trade 
merk is inherently adapted to distinguish for the purposes of registra-
tion in Part A register, or capable of distinguishing for purposes of 
registration in Part B register. This provision will be of great help 
to the intending applicants for registration. The clause provides for 
the refund of the fee if after approval of the mark the Registrar 
raises objection subsequently when an application for its registration 
is made. 
Clause 104.-This clause is the same as section 71 of the Trade 
Marks Act, 1940. 
Clause 105.-The provision as to forum in section 73 of the Trade 
Marks Act, 1940, in respect of suits for infringement is extended to 
passing off suits in general. 

80 
Clause l06.-The reliefs available in an action for infringement 
or for passing off are specified in this clause. These are injunction, 
account of profits or damage and delivery-up. In case of innocent 
infringement damages (other than nominal damages) or account of 
profits are not to be granted. 
Clauses 107 and 108.-These clauses contain new provisions pres-
cribing the procedure for applications for rectification of the register 
and appeals from the Registrar's orders and for infringement suits. 
The issue as to validity of registration shall be determined only on 
an application for rectification of the register before the High Court 
where such issue is raised in an infringement action. The orders of 
the High Court relating to rectification of the register are to be 
.communicated to the Registrar, who shall carry out the Court's 
directions. 
Clause 109.-This clause corresponds to section 76 of the Trade 
Marks Act, 1940, and provides for an appeal from any order or 
decision of the Registrar. The clause prescribes also the procedure 
to be followed in such appeals. 
Clause 110.-This clause replaces the provisions of section 77 of 
the Trade Marks Act, 1940. 
Claus,e 111.-This clause whicn is new provides for stay of pro-
ceedings where the validity of registration is attacked by either 
party in an action for infringement. The party raising the issue 
should apply to the High Court for rectification of the register and 
the order made on the application for rectification is binding on 
both the parties. Interim reliefs may, however, be granted by the 
trial court passing the stay order. 
Clause 112.-This clause specifies the types of cases in which the 
Registrar will be entitled to appear and be heard before.a court. 
Clause 113.-This clause is the same as section 74A of the Trade 
Marks Act, 1940. 
Clause 114.-This is a new provision for removing a lacuna in 
the Trade Marks Act, 1940. 
Clause 115.- This is a new provision which is considered neces-
sary and useful. 
Clause 116.-This clause is the same as section 75 of the Trade 
Marks Act, 1940. 
Clame 117.-This is a new provision which is designed to avoid 
inconvenience to the officials of the Registry, caused by frivolous 
requests made by parties to produce the original official records in 
legal proc~ngs. 

81 
Clause 118.- This clause reproduces the provisions of section 
12A of the Merchandise Marks Act, 1889, with. an additional provi-
sion empowering Government to require that certain goods or 
classes of goods which are notified should contain an indication of 
the name and address of the manufacturer, or the person for whom 
the goods are manufactured. 
Clause 119.-This is a new useful provision and will assist the 
registered proprietor to trace the source of manufacture of the 
infringing goods. 
Clause 120.-This clause corresponds to section 78 of the Trade 
Marks Act, 1940, and is modijied to remove the existing ambiguity. 
Clause 121.-This clause contains a new useful provision to pre-
vent groundless threats -by unscrupulous persons. 
Clause 122.-This is a new provision and is in accordance with 
the existing practice of the Registry. 
Clause 123.-This clause reproduces section 79 of 'the Trade 
Marks Act, 1940, and is enlarged by the inclusion of "trade name". 
Clause 124.- This clause corresponds to section 80 of the Trade 
Marks Act, 1940, and contains an additional provision tbat any per-
son in the sole and regular employment of the principal may also 
act in lieu of the principal. 
Clause 125.-This is a new useful provision which will facilitate 
search for conflicting marks by the Registry and by the public, see 
clause 126. 
Clause 126.-This is a new provision which specifies what docu-
ments of the Registry are open to public inspection, and provides 
that certified copies of such documents may be obtained from the 
Registry on payment of the prescribed fees. 
Clause 127.-This clause prescribes that fees shall be paid in 
respect of all proceedings under the Act and that the Registrar 
shall not do any act unless the fee payable in respect of doing ot 
the act, is paid. 
Clause 128.-This clause reproduces section 18 of the Indian 
Merchandise Marks Act, 1889. 
Clause 129.-For removing any possibility of confusion, this new 
clause has been added which prohibits the registration of declara-
tion of ownership of trade marks under the Indian Registration Act, 
1908, unless such mark is registered as a trade mark. 

a 
Clause 130.-This clause is the same as section 82 of the Trade 
Marks Act, 1940. 
Clauses 131 and 132.-These replace section 83 of the Trade 
Marks Act, 1940, and contain new provisions as to convention appli. 
cations and as to reciprocity. 
Clause 133.-This clause contains the provisions of section 84 of 
the Trade Marks Act, 1940, and includes necessary changes conse-
quential on the incorporation of the proyisions of the Indian 
Merchandise Marks Act, 1889, in the Bill. 
Clauses 134, 135 and 136.-These clauses are self-explanatory. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
A Trade Marks Registry already exists at Bombay with branches 
at Calcutta and Bangalore to administer the Trade Marks Act, 1940, 
but tht! Registry will ne~ to be considerably strengthened in order 
to cope with the additional functions contemplated under the new 
Bill for amending the law relating to the registration of trade 
marks. For example, a new register called "Part B register" has 
to be maintained and this would mean an increase in the number 
of marks to be registered, and consequent additional staff. Also a 
few more branches of the Registry would have to be opened to 
facilitate the convenience of the public and additional staff would 
be necessary for these branches. 
The average annual expenditure for the last three years in con-
nection with the working of the Trade Marks Registry has been 
Rs. 8'1 lakhs. The average of the fees realised during the said 
period is Rs. 4' 9 lakhs. The passing of this Bill will necessarily 
involve some additional expenditure, but it is anticipated that all 
the expenditure of the Registry will be balanced by the fees to be 
realised on new items for which fees have been prescribed, the 
anticipated increase in revenue consequent on the introduction of 
Part B register, and the resultant economy consequent on the 
amalgamation of the Patent Office and the Trade Marks Registry. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 65 which is a reproduction of section 56 of the Trade 
Marks Act, 1940, provides for the regulation by the Central Govern-
ment by general or special order of regulations made by users of 
certification marks respecting the cases in' which goods are to be 
certified or the authorisation of the use of such marks. The nature 
of the regulatory power which will be exercised by the issue of 
general or special orders is generally indicated in the clause itself. 
Clause 75 corresponding to sections 19 and 20 of the Indian Mer-
chandise Marks Act, 1889, provides for rules being made with res-
pect to the testing of goods, selection of samples for such testing, the 
manner in which textile goods shall be marked and for precisely 
defining whJlt is meant by the expression "piece goods ordinarily 
sold by the length or by the piece". This definition necessarily will 
have to be left flexible. It is also necessary for the purposes of 
muse 74 to vest power in the Central Government to exempt pre-
mises of a factory used for the manufacture, bleaching, dyeing or 
ftnishing of cotton yarn or cotton thread from the provisions of that 
clause. 
Clause 95 corresponding to section 16 (2) of the Indian Merchan-
dise Marks Act, 1889, authorises the Central Government to issue 
instructions for the limits of variation as regards number, quantity, 
measure, gauge or weight which should be recognised by criminal 
courts as permissible variations. This is necessary both for the pur-
pose of preventing harassment and for the purpose of affording 
guidance to criminal courts in the matter of permissible variations. 
Clause 110 authorises the High Court to make rules consistent 
with this law as to the conduct and procedure of all proceedings 
before it. Such a rule-making power is generally vested in the High 
Courts. 
Clause 133 deals with the rule-making power of the Central Gov-
ernment generally. The matters in respect of which rules may be 
made are set out in that clause and all the matters set out therein 
are purely ancillary to the proper implementation of this law. 
(Sub-clause (2) (h) authorises the Central Government to pres-
cribe the classes of textile goods to the trade marks used in relation 
to which Chapter IX will apply. A rigid definition will not be suit-
able. In giving this power to the Central Government clause 71 
M 

85 
fullows the pattern of the existing law as contained. in section 62 of 
the Trade Marks Act, 1940. Sub-clause (2) (8) authorises the Cent-
ral Government to prescribe the classes of goods which are to be 
included. in the expression "piece goods such as are ordinarily sold 
by the length or by the piece", aM reference has already been made 
to this in the paragraph dealing with clause 75. 
The rule-making powers sought to be conferred. are of a normal 
character. 

88 
(d) where it is probable that pecuniary compensation aannot 
be got for the invasion; 
(e) where the injunction is necessary to prevent a multipli-
city of judicial proceedings. '-, 
Explanation.-For the purpose of this section a trademark is pro-
perty. 
Illustrations 
• • • • 
(w) A improperly uses the trademark of B.B may obtain an 
injunction to restrain the user, provided that B's use of the trade-
mark is honest. 
• • • • 
EXTRACTS FROM THE SEA CUSTOMS ACT, 1878 (8 OF 1878) 
• • • • 
CHAPTER IV 
PROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS OF IMPORTATION AND EXPORTATION 
18. No goods specified in the following clauses shall be brought, 
whether by l~d or sea, into India:-
'. • • • • 
(d) goods having applied thereto a counterfeit trade-mark 
within the meaning of the Indian Penal Code, or a false trade- 45 of IB60. 
description within the meaning of the Indian Merchandise Marks f 88 
Act, 1889; 4 0 r 9. 
• • • • 
(f) piece-goods manufactured outside India, such as are 
ordinarily sold by length or by the piece, if each piece has not 
been conspicuously marked- . 
• 
(i) with the name of the manufacturer, exporter, or 
wholesale purchaser in India, of the goods, and 
(ii) with the real length of the piece in standard yards, 
inscribed in the international form of numerals; 
• • • 
(h) goods which are required by a notification under section 
12A of the Indian Merchandise Marks Act, 1889, to have appUed 4 of r8Bp. 
to them an indication of the country or place in which they were 
made or produced, unless such goods show sueh indication 
applied in the manner specified in the notification; 

4 of 1889· 
4 uf r889. 
89 
(i) cotton yam manufactured outside India, such as is ordi-
narily imported in bundles, if each bundle containing such yarn 
has not been conspicuously marked-
(i) with the oome of the manufacturer, exporter, or 
wholesale purchaser in India, of the goods, and 
(ii) with an indication of the weight and the count of 
the yarn contained in it, in accordance with the rules made 
under section 20 of the Indian Merchandise Marks Act, 1889; 
(j) cotton sewing, darning, crochet or handicraft thread 
manufactured outside India, if each of the units in which the 
thread is supplied has not been conspicuously marked-
(i) with the name of the manufacturer, exporter, or 
wholesale purchaser in India, of the goods, end 
• 
(ii) with the length or weight of the thread contained in 
it and in such other manner as is required by the rules made 
under section 20 of the Indian Merchandise Marks Act, 1889. 
• • • • 

EXTRACfS 
'ROM 
TID 
CoDB 
OF 
CluMIHAL 
PRoc:BDURB, 
1898 
(Acr 
NO. 
S 
OP 
1898) 
. 
. 
-. 
. 
. 
SCHEDULE 
II 
TABULAR 
STATBMlINT 
OP 
OFPBNCBS 
EXPLANATORY 
NOTE 
:-The 
entries 
in 
the 
second 
and 
seventh 
columns 
of 
this 
schedule, 
headed 
res~ctively 
"Offence" 
and 
"Punishment 
under 
the 
Indian 
Penal 
Code" 
are 
not 
intended 
as 
definitions 
of 
the 
offences 
and 
. punish-
ments 
described 
in 
the 
several 
corresponding 
sections 
of 
the 
Indian 
Penal 
Code, 
or 
even 
abstractS 
of 
those 
sections, 
but 
merely 
as 
references 
to 
the 
subject 
of 
the 
section, 
the 
number 
of 
which 
is 
given 
in 
the 
first 
column. 
I 
Sec-tion. 48% 
The 
third 
colwnn 
of 
this 
schedule 
applies 
also 
to 
the 
police 
in 
the 
tOWns 
of 
Calcutta 
and 
Bombay. 
CHAPTER 
XVlII.-OPPBNCBS 
RELATING 
TO 
DOCUMENTS 
AND 
TO 
TRADB 
OR 
PROPERTY 
MAus 
% 
Oft'eDce. 
• 
3 
Whether 
the 
police 
may 
arrest 
without 
warrant 
or 
DOt. 
• 
4 
Whether 
a 
warrant 
or 
a 
summons 
shall 
ordinarily 
issue 
in 
the 
first 
instance. • 
5 
Whether bailable or 
not. 
• 
6 
Whether 
compoundable 
or 
not. • 
OJ 
IratU 
tmd 
~ty 
mark.. 
Using 
a false 
trade 
Sba1I 
not 
arrest 
Warrant. 
or 
property 
mark 
without 
warrant. 
with 
intent 
to 
deceive 
or 
inJure 
any 
person. 
Bailable. 
Compoundable 
when 
permission 
is 
given 
by 
the 
Court 
before 
which 
the 
proee-
ClItion 
is 
pending. 
7 
Punishment 
under 
the 
Indian 
Penal 
Code. 
• 
Imprisonment 
of 
either 
.description 
for 
~ 
year, 
or 
fine, 
or 
both. 
• 
8 
By 
what 
Court 
uiable. 
• 
Presidency 
Magi 
.. 
trate 
or 
Magi 
.. 
trate 
of 
the 
fint 
or 
second 
clan. 
8 

I Z 3 4 5 6 7 
Sec- Offence. Whether the Whether a Whether Whether Punishment under By what Court 
tion. police may warrant or a bailable compoundable or thelndian triable. 
arrest without summons sball or not. not. Penal Code. 
warrant or not. ordinarily issue 
in the first 
instance. 
483 Q)unterfeiting a Sball not arrest Warrant. Bailable. Compoundable when Imprisonment of Presidency Magia-
trade or property without warrant. permission is given either description trate or Magi stt1Ite 
mark used by by the Court before for z years, or . of the first or 
another, with which the v·"OSecu- fine, or both. secondcl .... 
intent to CIlltSe tion is pending. 
damage or injury. .. • • .. .. • • • 
485 Fraud,dently marking Shall not arrest Summons. Bailable. Not compoundable. Imprisonment of Court of Session, \0 
or having posses- without .ar- either deacrip- Presidency Magia- -sion of any die, rant. tion for 3 years, trate or M";:-
plate or other or fine, or both. trate of the t 
instrument for class. 
counterfeiting any 
public or private 
property or trade-
mark. 
486 Knowingly selling Dino. Ditto. Ditto. Compoundable with Imprisonment of Presidency Magi--
goods marked permission of either description trate or Magis-
with a counter- the Court before for I year, or trate of the first 
feit property or which the pro- fine, or both. or . second ela ... 
trade-mark. aecution is pend- • ing . 
• • • .. .. • • • 

• 
LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the registration and better protection of trade 
marks and for the prevention of the use of fraudulent 
marks on merchandise. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (3) of article 117 of 
the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha, 
the consideration of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri Morarji Desai, 
MinistEr of Commerce 
and Industry.) 