As Inrropucen Iv Lox SatHa =
| I MAR 18%

ESAS “peed Bill No. 31 of 1992
a नमन «न.

THE PUBLIC LIABILITY INSURANCE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1992

A
BILL

to amend the Public Liability Insurance Act, 1991.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-third Year of the Republic
of India as follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Public Liability Insurance (Amend- Short

ment) Act, 1992. title
and com-

(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 31st day of mence-
_January, 1992. f =e

2. In section 2 of the Public Liability Insurance Act, 1991 (herein- Amend-
after referred to as the principal Act),— ment of

section
6) for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted,
10 namely: —

“(a) “accident” means an accident involving a fortuitous,

or sudden or unintended occurrence while handling any hazar-
* dous substance resulting in continuous or intermittent or repeated
exposure to death of, or injury to, any person or damage to any
15 property but does not include an accident by reason only of war

or radio-activity;’; gh के; Eatin ch he



2
(8) for clause (9), the following clause Shall be substituted,
namely;

“(9) “owner” means a person who owns, or has control over
handling, any hazardous Substance at ‘the time of accident and
ड़ includes,— fi
(7) in the case of a firm, any of its partners;
(ii) in the case of an association, any of its members;
and

(#) im the case of a company, any of its directors,
managers, Secretaries or other officers who is directly in 19
charge of, and is responsible to, the company for the conduct
of the business of the company;’;

(it) after clause (h), the following clause shalj be inserted,
namely:—

ee
“(ha) “Relief Puna” means the Environmental Reliet Fund 15
established under ection TAS,

Amend- 3In section 4 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the follow-

Meat of ing sub-sections shal be inserted, namely;—

seetion

4.
shall be for &n amount less than the amount of the Paid-up capital of 20
the undertaking handling any hazardous substance and owned or.
controlled by that Owner, and more than the amount, not exceeding
fifty crore rupees, as may be prescribed,

Explanation Foy the purposes of this sub-section, “paid-up
capital” means, in the case of an owner not being a company, the 25
market value of all assets and Stocks of the undertaking on the date
of contract of insurance.

(2B) The liability of the insurer under one’ insurance policy
shall not exceed the amount specified in the terms of the contract
Of insurance in that insurance Policy, 30

(2C) Every owner shall also, together with the amount of pre-
mium, pay to the insurer, for being credited to the Relief Fund
established under section 7A, such further amount, not exceeding the
sum equilent tu the amount of Premium, as may be prescribed,

pee 4 In section 7 of the principat Act —
section (a) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be substi-
7. tuted, namely:—

+(3) When an award is made under this section, —
(4) the insurer, who jis Tequired to pay any amount in 45
terms of such award and to the extent specified in sub-section
(2B) of section 4, shall, within a period of thirty days of the 4
date of announcement of the award, deposit that amount in
such manner as the Collector may direct;


coo 1

3 Pet २ ० oe

(b) the Collector shall arrange to pay from the Relief
Fund, in terms of such awatd and in accordance with the
scheme made under section 7A, to the person ot persons referred

to in sub-section (1) such amount as may be specified in that
scheme;

(०) the owner shall, within such period. deposit such
amount in such manner as the Collector may direct.”;

(0) after sub-section (7), the following sub-section shall be
inserted, namely:— | |

“(8) Where an owner is likely to remove or dispose of his
property with the object to evading payment by him of any
amount of the award, the Collector may, in accordance with the
provisions of rules 1 to 4 of Order XXXIX of the First Schedule
to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, grant a temporary injunction
| to restrain such act.”, i

5, After section 7 of the principal Act, the following section shall he
inserted, namely:—

“7A. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, establish
a fund to be known as the Environmental Relief Fund.

(2) The Relief Fund shall be utilised for paying, in accordance with
the provisions of this Act and the scheme made under sub-section
(3), relief under the award made by the Collector under section 7.

(3) The Central Government may, by notification, make a
scheme specifying the authority in which the Relief Fund shall vest,
the manner in which the Relief Fund shall be administered, the
form and the manner in which money shall be drawn from the
Relief Fund and for all other matters connected with or incidental to
the administration of the Relief Fund and the payment of relief
therefrom.”. : के

30 6. In section 14 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words,
rackets and figures, ‘sub-section (1) or sub-section (2)”. the words, bra-
ckets, figures and letters “sub-section (2) or sub-section (2) or sub-section
(2A) or sub-section (2C)” shall be substituted.

7, In Section 23 of the principal Act,—
35 (a) in sub-section (2),—

(i) clause (a) shall be re-lettered as clause (ac):

(ii) before clause (ac), as so Te-letterad, the following clauses
shall be inserted, namely:—

“(a) the maximum amount for which an insurance policy
40 may be taken out by an owner under sub-section (2A) of sec-
tion 4;

(aa) the amount required to be paid by every owner for
being credited to the Relief Fund under sub-section (20) of
section 4;

Insertion
of new
section 7A,

Establish-
ment of
Environ-
mental
Relief
Fund.

Amend-
ment of
section
14.

Amend-
ment of
section
23,


4
(ab) the manner in which and the period within which
the amount receiveg from the owner is required to be re-
mitted by the insurer under sub-section (2D) of section;”;

(6) in sub-section (8), for the word “Tule”, wherever it occurs,

the words “rule or scheme” shal] be substituted,
Repeal 8. (1) The Public Liability Insurance (Amendment) Ordinance,
and 1992 is hereby repealed. {

saving.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken
under the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be
deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act, as amended 10
by this Act,



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Public Liability Insurance Act, 1991 was enacted with the ob-
| of providing immediate relief to the victims of accidents that might
occur while handling hazardous substances. The owner who has control
over handling hazardous substances is required under the Act to pay
specified amounts to the victims as interim relief based on no fault lia~
bility. It is mandatory for every owner handing hazardous substances
to take out insurance policies for the purpose.

2, The aforesaid Act could not, however, be implemented on account
of the insurance companies not agreeing to give insurance policies for
unlimited liability of the owners. Tt was, therefore, felt that the liabi-
lity of the insurance companies should be limited to the amount of the
insurance policy, though the owner's liability shall continue to be un-
limited under the Act. It was considered appropriate to create an En-
vironmental Relief Fund with the additional money collected from the
owners having control over handling of hazardous substances. This fund
would be used to meet the requirement of providing immediate relief to
the victims. The minimum and maximum limits of the insurance amount
in an insurance policy also needed to be specified for ensuring payment
of adequate relief. Certain definitions were also to be suitably modified
to make the meaning more explicit. It was felt necessary to prevent
any transfer of property by the owner in case he intended to do so for

evading his liability to pay compensation. "

3. To achieve the above objective, the Public Liability Insurance
(Amendment) Ordinance, 1992, was promulgated by the President on
Bist January, 1992 as the owners handling hazardous substances had to

take insurance policies by 31st March, 1992.

4. The Bill seeks to replace the said Ordinance and to achieve the
aforesaid objects. के ,

New DELHI; : KAMAL NATH

The 17th February, 1992. x i


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to crapower the Central Government to
make a scheme with respect to the Environmental Relief Fund.

2. Clause 7 empowers the Central Government to prescribe the
maximum amount of an insurance policy, the amount required to be paid
by an owner to the Relief Fund and the manner in whien and the period
within which the money as collected is to be remitted to the Relief Fund
by the insurer,

3. The matters in respect of which the Central Government has
been empowered to make a scheme and ru'es relate to matters of proce-
dure and detail. The delegation of legislative power ‘is, therefore, of a
normal character, +


है नह ANNEXURE

Exracts FRoM THe Pustic Lraprerty Insurance Acr, 1991

(6 oF 1991)

» * * * *

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) “accident” means an accident or incident occurring while
handling ny hazardcus substance;
. + * * मु

(9) “owner” means a person who has control over handling any
hazardous substance;
* * * * =

2) * * * * .

(3) When an award is made under this section, the owner or the
insurer, as the case may be, who is required to pay any amount in terms
of such award shall, within thirty days of the date of announcement of
the award, deposit the entire amount so awarded in such manner as the

Collector may direct.
. . * . .

44, (1), Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of sub-section
(1) or subsection (2) of section 4 or fails to comply with any direction
issued under section 12, shall be puaishable with’ imprisonment for
a term which shall not be less than one year and six months but which
may extend to six years, or with fine which shall not be less than one

lakh rupees, or with both.
. . * के *
23. (1) * * के ‘ * 2

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following
matters, namely:— |

(०) establishment and maintenance of fund under sub-section
(3) of section 4;
. * * * *

Defini-
tions.

Award of
relief.

Penalty
for
contra~
vention
of sub-
section
(1) or
sub-
section
(2) of
section
Aor fail-
ure to
comply
with
direc=
tions
under
section
12,

Power to
make
tules,


हे oa 8

(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be Jaid, as soon as may
be after it is’ made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in ses.
sion for total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one
session or in two or more Successive sessions, and if, before the expiry
of the session immetifately following the session or the successive ses-

shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done
under that rule,

* * * * *


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to amend the Public Lis ility Insurance Act, 1991

(Shri Kamal Nath, Minister of State of the Ministry of
Environment and Forests)