AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

~ 2 JUN 1998

Bill No. 31 of 1998
| SCRUTINY OF ASSETS OF MINISTERS, MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT AND
_ PUBLIC SERVANTS BILL, 1998
By
‘Suet Prapru Daya KarHerta, M.P.
A
BILL

provide for scrutiny of assets of Ministers, Members of Parliament and Public
Servants.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as

_1. This Act may be called the Scrutiny of Assets of Ministers, Members of Parliament
Public Servants Act, 1998.

(0 “asset” includes all properties, both movable and immovable, held by the
Ministers or by the Members of Parliament or by the Public Servants or by their
dependents, legally or in benami within the country and/or abroad;

Shorttitle.

सा जब


Declaration of
assets by Minis-
ters and Mem-
bers of Parlia-
ment,

Declaration of
‘Assets by Pub-
lic Servants,

Submission of
‘annual returns,

Retums filed by
Ministers and
Members of
Parliament to be
made available
to the public

Returns filed by
the Public ser-
vants to be laid
before the
Houses of Par-
tiament.

Announcement
of names of
Ministers and
Members of
Parliament who
fail to submit re-
‘tums,

(ii) “Chairman” means the Chairman of the Council of the States;

(iii) "Public Servant” means and includes a person appointed to public services
and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union and who draws a basic salary
of rupees five thousand or more per month;

(iv) “dependent” includes spouse, parents, sons and unmarried daughters;

(v) “Member of Parliament” means Member of the Council of States or of the
House of the People, as the case may be:

(vi) "Minister" means Cabinet Minister of the Union Government and includes
the Prime Minister, Minister of State and Deputy Minister;

(vii) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(viii) “Speaker” means the Speaker of the House of the People.

3. (1) Every Minister shall, within one month of his appointment as such Minister,
submit to the Speaker or the Chairman, as the case may be, a return of all the assets
possessed by him and his dependents, in such manner and form, as may be prescribed:

Provided that where the Minister is not a Member of cither House of Parliament, he
shall submit a return of all the assets, ed by him and his dependents to the Speaker
within one month of the swearing in as such Minister.

(2) Every Member of Parliament shall within one month of the date of his clection
as such member, submit to the Speaker or the Chairman, as the case may be, a return of all
the assets possessed by him and his dependents in such manner and form, as may be
prescribed.

4, Every Public Servant shall, within a period of one month from the coming into
force of this Act, furnish the particulars of all the assets possessed by him and his
dependents to the prescribed authority, in such manner and form, as may be prescribed.

5. (1) It shall be incumbent on the part of every Minister and every Member of
Parliament to submit a return of the assets held by him and his dependents, within one
month of the beginning of the next financial year, to the Speaker or the Chairman, as the
case may be.

(2) Every Public Servant shall, throughout the term of his office, submit annual
returns of the assets held or acquired by him and any of his dependents, within one month |
of the beginning of the next financial year, to such authority of the Union Government, as
may be prescribed,

6 A copy of the returns filed by Ministers and Members of Parliament shall be
made available to any member of public on payment of such fee, as may be prescribed.

7. (1) A copy of the returns filed by Public Servants under sub-section (2) of section
5 shall be submitted to the President who shall cause the same to be laid before each
House of Parliament.

(2) A copy of all the declarations made by the Public Servants under this Act shall
be made available to any member of public on payment of such fee, as may be prescribed.

8. The Speaker or the Chairman, as the case may be, may announce the name of the,
Minister or Member of Parliament who fails to submit the returns according to the provisions
of this Act.


, Any Public Servant who fails to submit the returns according to the provisions of
Act shall be subject to such action, as may be prescribed.

10. The Central Government shall constitute a Committee comprising of a former
of the Supreme Court as its Chairman and four other Members.

11. The Committce shall examine the assets held by the Ministers, the Members of
nt. and the Public Servants within the country and abroad and the contributions
cived by them or their family members from abroad.

12. All the illegal assets or contributions possessed/received by a Minister, Member
arliament and a Public Servant shall be seized and transferred to the Government

13, Any Minister or a Member of Parliament or Public Servant found to possess
ral assets or received illegal contributions, shall be punishable with imprisonment for
erm which shall not be less than ten years.

any of the following matters:—
नर (i) the form in which the declaration of assets shall be furnished;
(ii) the manner in which the declaration shall be scrutinised;

(iii) the action to be taken in case of declaration of assets furnished by a
Member of Parliament or by Minister or by a Public Servant is found false;

(iv) the action to be taken in case of delayed declaration of assets by
Public Servants; and

(v) any other matter that is necessary to carry out the provisions of this
Act.

Action against
public servants
who fail to sub-
mit retums.

Constitution of
a Committee.

Examination of
assets by the
Committee.

Seizure and
confiscation of
illegal assets.

Punishment,

Power to make
rules.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

‘The last few years have witnessed the increase in political corruption. The involvement
of names of Ministers and Legislators, not only at the Central level but also at the State
levels, in corruption cases, has not only brought disgrace and discredit to the esteemed
organisations like Parliament, Central Executive, State Legislatures and State Governments
but worst of all, has forced people to doubt the integrity and honesty, the basic tenets of the
institution of democracy, of people associated with the political system. The faith of public
in the institution of democracy is on the decline. To restore public faith in the political
system, it is necessary that Ministers and Members of Parliament declare their assets
regularly. Such a step will not only prohibit the misuse of political power but will also set
an example for public morality which can be emulated by others. The Members of Parliament
are the representatives of the people. They should carry clean image before the public.
Going by the prevailing political culture in India and the moral degeneracy that has of late
set in our public life, there is a need for a law that makes periodic declaration of assets by
all Ministers and Members of Parliament compulsory.

The Public servants have also amassed assets disproportionate to the known sources
of their income. Very often, such assets are held in benami or in the name of their family
members. The arm of law does not extend to them in many cases. The departmental
requirement of furnishing returns of property by public servants is neither adequate nor
effective. In any case, once a person chooses to work as a public servant, his assets should
be known to the Legislature and through them to the public whom the public servants are
supposed to serve. The Bill, therefore, provides for annual declaration of assets held or
acquired by Ministers, Members of Parliament and public servants as well as by their
dependents in India or abroad in order to let the people know that their representatives in
Parliament and public servants do not have assets disproportionate to their knowm sources
of income.

Hence this Bill.

New Deut, PRABHU DAYAL KATHERIA
March 31, 1998.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

10 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall constitute a

of the Supreme Court and four other members to
the assets held by Ministers, Members of Parliament and Officers within the
/abroad and contributions received by them from abroad. The Bill, therefore, if
will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India in respect of expenses
on the Committee and also on allowance, etc. that will be payable to the Chairman
‘Members of the Committee. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about
five lakh is likely to be involved per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.

non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five lakh is also likely to be involved.



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to frame rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules to be framed will relate to matters of detail only,
the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for scrutiny of assets of Ministers, Members of Parliament and Public
Servants,

(Shri Prabhu Dayal Katheria, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—86LS—6-5-1998.