    AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 31 of  2022
THE  CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
SHRI JAMYANG TSERING NAMGYAL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
           BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of
India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022.
2. In the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution,  the existing entries 3 to 22 shall be re-
numbered as entries from 4 to 23, respectively, and before entry 4 as so re-numbered, the
following entry shall be inserted, namely:
         “3. Bhoti.”
Short title.
Amendment
of the Eighth
Schedule.5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Language is not only a medium of communication, but also a sign of respect. It reflects
the history, culture, people, system of governance, ecology, politics etc. ‘Bhoti’ is a mass
language; the language of the people who have struggled for centuries, the language of
the Himalayans that has blessed and bestowed the world with wisdom and prosperity, the
language of the saints and poets, the language of the hills and valleys which have treasured
the beauties of the nature, the language which unites people by heart and mind, the language
of peace and compassion.
The Bhoti script was developed by Thomi Sambhota in the 7th century by modifying
the four vowels and thirty consonants of the Devanagari script and Panini Grammar written
in Sanskrit. Bhoti has a rich literature in different fields such as Medicines, Architecture,
Astrology, Music, Arts, Dance, Drama, Yoga, Philosophy, Tantra, Poetry and Grammar. The
collection of the rich literary treasure of the famous “Nalanda Parampara” along with
Buddha’s teachings compiled in the Tripitaka  and Tantra is available today only in the
Bhoti language in their original form.
Bhoti is dominantly spoken by the largest number of people in the entire Himalayan
region with several contiguous geographical zones having its own script and literature. It
is used among people of the Union Territory of Ladakh, Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal
Pradesh, Uttarakhand, West Bengal, Sikkim and Arunachal Pradesh. The glory and grace of
this language is not only confined to the Himalayan region of India but also extended to
Bhutan, Nepal, Tibet, China, Mongolia and Pakistan. This language is a symbol of “Unity
in Diversity”. People from different religions, regions, cultures and countries are using this
language. It is also in the interest of the national security of our country.
Bhoti is recognized as one of the official languages with its synonymous names in six
States of India viz. the erstwhile Jammu and Kashmir, Sikkim, West Bengal, Himachal Pradesh,
Uttarakhand and Arunachal Pradesh.
Being an ancient language of culture and heritage, Bhoti is also a resource language
for modernization. Developed in the 7th Century, it retains the ancient Indian heritage
containing all requisites. Even in contemporary time different schools, colleges and
universities throughout the world are imparting education in and for Bhoti language. All
India Radio broadcasts its news and other programmes in Bhoti through its different stations
such as Leh, Shimla, Gangtok, Karshang Darjeeling, Tawang and Delhi. More than fifteen
newspapers and magazines are available in this language and nearly 7000 monasteries of
the Himalayan region follow this language in their practices and functions.
In the era of globalization and liberalization, the Himalayan region is more vulnerable
and fragile to the economic, political, ecological and cultural forces from outside of the
harsh and aggressive world. Language is an important agent of connecting people and
continuity of culture. With the advancement of the harsh and hostile modern civilization
and anti-national forces, the language and culture of the Himalayan region is disappearing,
declining and getting degenerated very fast, which was developed over centuries. It reflects
the traditional wisdom and technology to live in harmony with Nature. The modern civilization
is preaching these peace-loving people to conquer over Nature, which results in irreparable
destructions and calamities.
The majority of the people who use this language practice Mahayana Buddhism for
two reasons, although it is a secular language. First, Bhoti is a systematic, scientific and
grammatically perfect language to be used, and second, it is rich with Mahayani culture and
literature in the Himalayan regions.
2

3
On 22nd May 1995 approximately 49 Members of our Parliament belonging to different
political parties had submitted a memorandum to Shri P. V . Narasimha Rao, the then
Prime Minister of India, appealing for the inclusion of Bhoti language in the 8th Schedule.
In view of above, in order to protect, promote and preserve the sanctity of Bhoti
language and to protect the culture and the traditions of the speakers of this language, and
also taking into consideration the importance of this language, it is necessary that Bhoti be
given due recognition by including it in the Eighth Schedule of our Constitution.
Hence, this Bill.
 NEW DELHI;                                                   JAMYANG TSERING NAMGYAL
7 February, 2022

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT  FROM THE  CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
EIGHTH  SCHEDULE
[Articles 344 (1) and 351]
Languages
1. Assamese.
2. Bengali.
3. Bodo.
4. Dogri.
5. Gujarati.
6. Hindi.
7. Kannada.
8. Kashmiri.
9. Konkani.
10. Maithili.
11. Malayalam.
12. Manipuri.
13. Marathi.
14. Nepali.
15. Oriya.
16. Punjabi.
17. Sanskrit.
18. Santhali.
19. Sindhi.
20. Tamil.
21. Telugu.
22.  Urdu.
* * * * *
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
.
————
(Shri Jamyang Tsering Namgyal, M.P .)