हो ॥ od
Book 5.

1: कर
४31९

Bill No. 31 of 2005

_ THEABOLITION OF CHILD LABOUR BILL, 2005
SHRI IQBAL AHMED SARADGI, M.P.
A
a - BILL |
is the child labour in the country and for matters connected therewith.

ne cted by Parliament in the Fifty-Sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
r is Act may be called the Abolition of Child Labour Act, 2005

exten to the whole of India.
s Il come into force at once.

act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
and in all other cases, the Central Government

: i
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

*
५

Short title,
extent and
commence-

ment.

Definitions.


2

(b) “child” means a boy or a girl who has not attained the age of eighteen years; —
and i
(c) “employer” means a person who engages a child in a job or in an employment

and who has absolute control over the affairs of an establishment in which the child
labour is engaged and includes work in a factory, trade, shop, house or engaged in any —

| work relating to agriculture | ः
Abolition of 3. Child labour, in any form in any establishment in the country, is hereby abolished.
child labour. | | | | जा
Punishment. 4. Any person, who engages a child in any employment, shall be punished with simple q
imprisonment which may extend to three years and a fine which may extend to rupees one ‘
lakh 1
Punishment to 5, Any parent or a lawful guardian of a child, who is found to have coerced his child
parents for into employment, shall be punished with simple imprisonment which may extend to one year
coercion.
| | and with fine which may extend to rupees fifty thousand
Closure of an 6. (1) Any organisation or establishment, which is found to have engaged children in

organisation/ —_q job or in an employment, shall remove the children from employment from that organisation — |:
establishment 4 establishment within a period of six months from the date of coming into force of this Act

engaging %

child labour. (2) After the expiry of the period prescribed in sub-section (1), if the organisation or —
the establishment concerned has not removed children from their employment, the appropriate
Government shall order closure of such organisation or establishment

Establishment 7. (1) Any child found engaged in a job or in any employment or found collecting rags

“) a and waste or found begging shall immediately be taken into custody by the police

ome an

rehabilitation. (2) Every child so picked up shall be sent to a children's home, which shall be established
in every district by the appropriate Government, where the child shall be provided with :
facilities like education and maintenance till such time as he/she has attained the age of
eighteen years. ।

Provision of 8. The provisions of this Act or rules made thereunder shall be in addition to and not ।

Act not to be in derogation of any other law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt

in derogation ith in this Act
of any other

law for the
time being 1...
force.

Power to 9. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for 4
make rules. carrying out the provisions of this Act



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

= India has the largest number of child labour in the world. The official figure is thirteen
_ million. But the actual number may be much higher. Indian children are the source of cheap

_ labour because they can be paid less wages or can be abused without provoking retaliation

५ These children work in industries manufacturing crackers, diamond polishing, glass,

. brassware, carpet weaving, bangle making, lock making and mica cutting to name just a few

j a A large number of children also work as domestic servants

3 Poverty is cited as a major cause of child labour, but it is not the only determinant.
__ Inadequate schools or even the expense of providing education leaves some of the children
_ with practically no option but to work. The attitude of parents also contributes to child

_ labour. Compulsory elementary education may help ameliorate this attitude. The problem of

. child labour cannot be eliminated in one stroke. Many countries have stopped buying
products of industries where children are employed.

Only multidimensional strategies including compulsory elementary education,
eradication of poverty, eradicating parental illiteracy, making child labour illegal will help in

_ achieving this objective. Stringent legal provisions, severe punishment for violation of laws.

a rehabilitation of children already engaged in work have to go along with abolition of child
. labour in the country. Therefore, it is high time that a stringent law for abolition of child

labour is enacted

Hence this Bill.

५. एज DELHI; IQBAL AHMED $
_ February 8, 2005. alas


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 7 provides for establishment of a children’s home in every district for
rehabilitation of children engaged in a job or employed in an establishment. The Central
Government would have to incur expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India for
establishment of children's homes in respect of Union territories. The State Governments
_ incur expenditure from their respective consolidated funds for children homes to be established _
in their respective States. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the ~
Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees
fifty crore per annum

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one crore is also likely to be involved



_ MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
_ the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative powers is of a normal character. |



LOK SABHA
!
: ;
BILL
to abolish the child labour in the country and 2
ह for matters connected therewith.
। \ | i © :
= oe a
we, Et,
fake
_(Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi, MP)
MGIPMRND—(S1)}—4359LS—21.02.2005.