AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA.

No. 72-F of 2000
—_—__—_

THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
By
Dr. (CoL.) Duan RaM SHANDIL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1, This Act may be called the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2000.

2. In section 167 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter referred to 85
| the Code). —

(i) in sub-section (2), in the proviso, in clause (a),—

(a) in sub-clause (i), for the words “ninety days”, the words “forty-five
days” shall be substituted;

(b) in sub-clause (ii), for the words “sixty days”, the words “thirty days”
shall be substituted.
ii) in sub-section (5), for the words “six months”, wherever they occur,
the words “three months” shall be substituted.

Short title.

Amendment of
section 167.


Amendment of
section 202.

Amendment of
section 230.

Amendment of
section 242.

‘Amendment of
section 256,

Amendment of
section 258,

Amendment of
section 289.

‘Amendment of
section 309.

Amendment of
section 468.

Omission of
section 473.

2

3. In section 202 of the Code, in sub-section (1), after the existing proviso, the
ing proviso shall be inserted, namely:—

“Provided further that no proceedings regarding issue of process shall be postponed
beyond a period of two months”.

4. In section 230 of the Code, the following proviso shall be added at the end, namely:

“Provided that the date so fixed by the Judge shall not be more than fifteen days from
the date of order to this effect.”.

5. In section 242 of the Code, in sub-section (1), the following proviso shall be
inserted at the end, namely:—

“Provided that the date so fixed by the Magistrate shall not be more than fifteen days
from the date of order to this effect.”,

6. In section 256 of the Code, in sub-section (1), before the existing proviso, the
following proviso shall be inserted, namely: —

“Provided that the hearing shall not be adjoumed for more than fifteen days.”,
7. In section 258 of the Code, the following proviso shall be added at the end, namely:—

“Provided that the proceedings at any stage shall not be stopped for a period
exceeding thirty days.”.

8. In section 289 of the Code, for the words “specified time reasonably sufficient”,
the words “specified time which shall not be more than thirty days”, shall be substituted,

9. In section 309 of the Code, in sub-section (2), for the first proviso, the following
proviso shall be substituted, namely:—

“Provided that no inquiry or trial shall be postponed or adjourned beyond fifteen
days”:

“Provided further that no Magistrate shall remand an accused person to custody
under this section for a term exceeding fifteen days.”.

10. In section 468 of the Code, in sub-section (2)—

(i) in clause (a), for the words six months, the words three months shall be
substituted;

(ii) in clause (0), for the words “one year, ifthe offence”, the words “six months,
if the offence” shall be substituted;

(iii) in clause (०), for the words “three years, if the offence”, the words “one
year, if the offence” shall be substituted.

11. Section 473 of the Code shall be omitted.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS.

Millions of cases of various nature are pending in several courts for a long time, Out
of them, many cases are pending to the extent that even the persons who have filed the
original cases are no more.

Cases are adjourned for petty reasons and in some cases, for a long time. There is a
maxim “Justice delayed is justice denied. Since it takes a longtime for disposal of 2 case,
the importance of the case is lowered and the victims are deprived of their due right. In
many cases, cause of action becomes irrelevant or infructuous.

‘The procedure followed in courts is a very lengthy one. Too many formalities are
observed even for admitting a suit. An attempt has been made, through this Bill, to reduce
the time taken for disposal of cases in order to make justice available to the deprived

persons speedily.

New Delhi; DHANI RAM SHANDIL.
March 14, 2000.


Procedure
when
investigation
cannot be
completed in
twenty-four
hours,

Postponement
of issue of
process.

ANNEXURE,

EXTRACTS FROM THE ९008 OF CRIMINAL ProceDurRE, 1973

. * * * *

167. (1) Whenever any person is arrested and detained in custody, and it appears that
the investigation cannot be completed within the period of twenty-four hours fixed by
section 57, and there are grounds for believing that the accusation or information is well-
founded, the officer in charge of the police station or the police officer making the investi-
gation, if he is not below the rank of sub-inspector, shall forthwith transmit to the nearest
Judicial Magistrate a copy of the entries in the diary hereinafter prescribed relating to the
case, and shall at the same time forward the accused to such Magistrate.

(2) The Magistrate to whom an accused person is forwarded under this section may,
whether he has or has not jurisdiction to try the case, from time to time, authorise the
detention of the accused in such custody as such Magistrate thinks'fit, for a term not ex-
ceeding fifteen days in the whole; and if he has no jurisdiction to try the case or commit it
for trial, and considers further detention unnecessary, he may order the accused to be for-
warded to a Magistrate having such jurisdiction

Provided that—

1[(8) the Magistrate may authorise the detention of the accused person, other-
wise than in the custody of the police, beyond the period of fifteen days, if he is
satisfied that adequate grounds exist for doing so, but no Magistrate shall authorise
the detention of the accused person in custody under this paragraph for a total period
exceeding, —

(i) ninety days, where the investigation relates to an offence punishable
with death, imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term of not less than
ten years;

(ii) sixty days, where the investigation relates to any other offence,

and, on the expiry of the said period of ninety days, or sixty days, as the case
may be, the accused person shall be released on bail if he is prepared to and does
furnish bail, and every person released on bail under this sub- section shall be deemed
to be so released under the provisions of Chapter XXXII] for the purposes of that
Chapter;]

* * ’ * .

(5) If in any case triable by a Magistrate as a summons-case, the investigation is not
concluded within a period of six months from the date on which the accused was arrested,
the Magistrate shall make an order stopping further investigation into the offence unless
the officer making the investigation satisfies the Magistrate that for special reasons and in
the interest of justice the continuation of the investigation beyond the period of six months
is necessary.

* . * * .

202. (1) Any Magistrate, on receipt of a complaint of an offence of which he is au-
thorised to take cognizance or which has been made over to him under section 192, may, if
he thinks fit, postpone the issue of process against the accused, and either inquire into the
case himself or direct an investigation to be made by a police officer or by such other
person as he thinks fit, for the purpose of deciding whether or not there is sufficient ground
for proceeding:

Provided that no such direction for investigation shall be made,—

(a) where it appears to the Magistrate that the offence complained of is triable
exclusively by the Court of Session; or

4


(b) where the complaint has not been made by a Court, unless the complainant
and the witnesses present (if any) have been examined on oath under section 200.

* * * * *

230. If the accused refuses to plead, or does not plead, or claims to be tried or is not
convicted under section 229, the Judge shall fix a date for the examination of witnesses, and
may, on the application of the prosecution, issue any process for compelling the attendance
of any witness or the production of any document or other thing.

* * * * *

242. (1) If the accused refuses to plead, or does not plead, or claims to be tried or the
Magistrate does not convict the accused under section 241, the Magistrate shall fix a date
for the examination of witnesses.

(2) The Magistrate may, on the application of the prosecution, issue a summons to
any of its witnesses directing him to attend or to produce any document or other thing .

(3) On the date so fixed, Magistrate shall proceed to take all such evidence as may be
produced in support of the prosecution:

Provided that the Magistrate may permit the cross-examination of. any witness to be
deferred until any other witness or witnesses have been examined or recall any witness for
further cross-examination.

* . . * .

256. (1) If the summons has been issued on complaint, and on the day appointed for
the appearance of the accused, or any day subsequent thereto to which the hearing may be
adjourned, the complainant does not appear, the Magistrate shall, notwithstanding anything,
hereinbefore contained, acquit the accused, unless for some reason he thinks it proper to
adjourn the hearing of the case to some other day:

* * * * *

Provided that where the complainant is represented by a pleader or by the officer
conducting the prosecution or where the Magistrate is of opinion that the personal attend-
ance of the complainant is not necessary, the Magistrate may, dispense with his attendance
and proceed with the case.

* * * * *

258. In any summons-case instituted otherwise than upon complaint, a Magistrate of
the first class or, with the previous sanction of the Chief Judicial Magistrate, any other
Judicial Magistrate, may, for reasons to be recorded by him, stop the proceedings at any
stage without pronouncing any judgment and where such stoppage of proceedings is made
after the evidence of the principal witnesses has been recorded, pronounce a judgment of
acquittal, and in any other case, release the accused, and such release shall have the effect of
discharge.

* * * * *

289. In every case in which a commission is issued under section 284, the inquiry,
trial or other proceeding may be adjourned for the specified time reasonably sufficient for
the execution and retum of the commission.

* * * . *

309 (1) In every inquiry or trial, the proceedings shall be held expeditiously as possi-
ble, and in particular, when the examination of witnesses has once begun, the same shall be
continued from day to day until all the witnesses in attendance have been examined, unless
the Court finds the adjournment of the same beyond the following day to be necessary for
reasons to be recorded.

Date for
prosecution
eviderice

Evidence for
prosecution,

Non-
appearance or
death of
complainant

Power to stop
proceedings in

certain case,

Adjournment
of proceeding.

Power to
postpone or
adjourn
proceeding.


Bar to taking
cognizance
afier lapse of
the period of
limitation.

Extension of
period of limita-
tion in certain
cases,

6

(2 If the Court, after taking cognizance of an offence, or commencement of trial, _
finds it necessary or advisable to postpone the commencement of, or adjourn, any inquiry
or trial, it may, from time to time, for reasons to be recorded, postpone or adjourn the same
‘on such terms as it thinks fit, for such time as it considers reasonable, and may by a warrant
remand the accused if in custody:

Provided that no Magistrate shall remand an accused person to custody under this
section for a term exceeding fifteen days at a time:

* * e . .

468. (1) Except as otherwise provided elsewhere in this Code, no Court shall take
cognizance of an offence of the category specified sub-section(2), after expiry of the period
of limitation.

(2) The period of limitation shall be—

(2) six months, if the offence is punishable with fine only;

(89) one year, if the offence is punishable with imprisonment for a term not exceeding
one year;

(०) three years, if the offence is punishable with imprisonment for a term exceeding
one year but not exceeding three years,

* * . . ’

473. Notwithstanding anything contained in the forgoing provisions of this Chapter,
any Court may take cognizance of an offence after the expiry of the period of limitation, if
it is satisfied on the facts and in the circumstances of the case that the delay has been
properly explained or that it is necessary so to do in the interests of justice.

* * . . कं


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

(Dr. (Col.) Dhani Ram shandil, 08.7]

MGIP(PLU)MRNO—4639LS—10-04-2000.