1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI ANURAG SINGH THAKUR, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No.  31 of  2016
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. After clause ( 1) of article 72 of the Constitution, the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
“(1A) Save as otherwise provided in clause ( 1), the power referred to in
clause (1) shall be exercised by the President within a period of six months from the
date of receipt of the petition of mercy:
Provided that if the President does not exercise the power within the aforesaid
period, it shall be deemed that the petition of mercy has been declined and shall not
be resubmitted.
(1B) The power referred to under clause (1) shall not apply to the punishment or
sentence of any person convicted of any offence relating to—
(a) sedition or waging war against the State; and
(b) terrorist activities in any part of the country.”.
Amendment
of article 72.
5
10

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Article 72 of the Constitution empowers the President to grant pardons, reprieves,
respites or remissions of punishment or to suspend, remit or commute the sentence of any
person convicted of an offence mentioned in that article. Though, the President has been
bestowed with absolute powers in this regard, no time limit has been fixed within which
such power has to be exercised. As a result, the mercy petitions are kept pending for a long
period without any decision. As a fallout of this, the convicts are to be kept guarded in jails
and heavy expenditure is incurred upon them. It is burden on tax payer’s money and a drain
on national exchequer. In the present situation, attempts are being made both externally and
internally to hurt harmony and cohesiveness of our civil society in the form of terrorist
activities or other such heinous crimes. The persons who commit such heinous crimes
misuse the provision of mercy petition to delay the sentence as disposal of such petitions
take several years. It is high time that such inordinate delay in disposal of mercy petitions
be addressed to by providing that the power of the President to grant pardon, reprieve,
respite or remission of punishment etc. must be exercised within six months of the receipt of
the mercy petition in genuine cases and there is an urgent need to exclude specifically the
acts of terrorism from the purview of this article.
The Bill seeks to amend the constitution with a view to put a time limit to exercise the
pardoning power and excluding acts of sedition and terrorism from the pardoning power of
the President.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; ANURAG SINGH THAKUR
February 10, 2016

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *
72. (1) The President shall have the power to grant pardons, reprieves, respites or
remissions of punishment or to suspend, remit or commute the sentence of any person
convicted of any offence—
(a) in all cases where the punishment or sentence is by a Court Martial;
(b) in all cases where the punishment or sentence is for an offence against any
law relating to a matter to which the executive power of the Union extends;
(c) in all cases where the sentence is a sentence of death.
* * * * *
Power of
President to
grant pardons,
etc., and to
suspend, remit
or commute
sentences in
certain cases.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Anurag Singh Thakur , M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4262LS(S3)—24-02-2016.