As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA.

~ 3 MAY 202

Bill No. 31 of 2002

THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA (ESTABLISHMENT OF A
PERMANENT BENCH AT THIRUVANANTHAPURAM)
BILL, 2002

By
Suri Kopikunit Surest, M.P.
A
BILL

to provide for the establishment of a permanent Bench of the High Court of Kerala at
Thiravananthapuram.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows :--

1. This Act may be called the High Court of Kerala (Establishment ofa Permanent Shorttitle.
Bench at Thiruvananthapuram) Act, 2002.

5 2. There shall be established a permanent Bench of the High Court of Kerala at Establishment of
‘Thiruvananthapuram, and such judges of the High Court of Kerala, being not less than
five in number, as the Chief Justice of that High Court may, from time to time nominate,
shall sit at Thiruvananthapuram in order to exercise the jurisdiction and power for the
time being vested in that High Court in respect of cases arising in Thiruvananthapuram,

10 Quilon and Pathanamthitta districts of Kerala.

‘a permanent
Bench of High

Court of Kerala at
‘Thiruvananthaparam.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Thiruvananthapuram is the capital city of the State of Kerala. But unfortunately,
the High Court of Kerala is not located there. It is located at Cochin. In majority of the
States of the country, the principal bench of the High Court is located at the capital city
of the State. Only in few States like Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, the principal
bench of the High Court is located at a place other than the capital city.

Thiruvananthapuram is not only the capital city of Kerala but also a large city.
People residing in Thiruvananthapuram and nearby districts have to travel to Cochin in
connection with their cases. This is a time consuming and a costly affair.

Even when the Government of Kerala is involved in any case, the officials
concerned have to travel with all the papers and subsidiary staff. This leaves a huge
expenditure on the Government of Kerala. If by any chance, the case lingers on, then
the officials have to stay back with the result that not only it involves unnecessary money
but also their work back at Thiruvananthapuram gets stalled.

With a view to benefiting the litigant public and also the Government of Kerala, it
is proposed, through this Bill, to set up a permanent Bench of High Court of Kerala at
Thiruvananthapuram.

Hence this Bill.

New DELHI; KODIKUNNIL SURESH.
March 14, 2002.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the establishment of a permanent Bench of the High Court of Kerala |
Thiruvananthapuram. है

(Shri Kodikunnil Suresh, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—5897LS—21.03.2002.