As introduced in Lok Sabha
10
5
 
Bill No. 31 of 2024
THE RAILWAYS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024
By
Dr. Alok Kumar Suman, M.P.
a
BILL
further to amend the Railways Act, 1989.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—   
1. (1) This Act may be called the Railways (Amendment) Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.   
2. After section 24 of the Railways Act, 1989, the following section shall be  inserted, 
namely:—
“24A. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 22, 23 and 24 of the Act, 
the Central Government may, by notification, sanction the running or extension or 
diversion of super fast trains via Thawe junction in the State of Bihar by approving 
the proposal received from the Railway Division of the North-Eastern Region and 
extension of train no. 22411/22412 (Arunachal Express) via route Siwan-Thawe-
Kaptanganj-Gorakhpur.”.
Short title and 
commencement.
Insertion of new 
section 24A.
Special 
Provisions 
of railway at 
Thawe junction 
in the State of 
Bihar.
24 of 1989.

2
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The section of Varanasi division of North-Eastern Railway which comprises Thawe-
Gopalganj junction is facing number of challenges and disadvantage due to non-availability 
of superfast trains for various metropolitan cities of the country. To overcome such difficulties 
and to make railway connectivity from this neglected section by providing the train facilities 
would certainly provide ample revenue to railways. 
At Thawe junction in the Thawe-Gopalganj section, there is one of the most important 
and reverable religious peeth.  Seeing the rush of pilgrims during normal days and huge 
rush during auspicious days, and considering the fact that this area is the native to  lakhs 
of migrant labours who are working in different parts of country, especially, NCR and the 
States of Haryana, Punjab, J&K, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, 
Kerala, West-Bengal, Assam, Arunachal Pradesh etc., the train facilities to this junction is 
must. Apart from the above, people of this area depends on bigger cities of country for any 
specialized medical facilities and education too.  This section/area does not have any direct 
train for Delhi or any other metropolitan cities. 
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Railways Act, 1989 with a view to implement 
the proposal of North-Eastern Railway once received for approval without any further delay 
to augment the train services to cater the need of the neglected Thawe Junction which is a 
long awaited demand of lakhs of people of the various districts of the State of Uttar Pradesh 
and Bihar. 
Hence this Bill.
New Delhi;                                                      ALOK KUMAR SUMAN  
July 3, 2024.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill vide proposed section 24A seeks to provide diversion or extension 
of the superfast trains via Thawe junction by giving the approval of the proposal received 
from the railway division of the North-Eastern Region. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will 
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve an annual 
recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred and fifty crore from  the Consolidated 
Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees three hundred crore is also likely to be 
involved.
3

ANNEXURE
[Extract from the Railway Act, 1989] 
(24 of 1989)
*                             *                                 *                                *                                *    
21. No railway shall be opened for the public carriage of passengers until the Central 
Government has, by order, sanctioned the opening thereof for that purpose. 
22. (1) The Central Government shall, before giving its sanction to the opening of a 
railway under section 21, obtain a report from the Commissioner that— 
(a) he has made a careful inspection of the railway and the rolling stock that may 
be used thereon; 
(b) the moving and fixed dimensions as laid down by the Central Government have 
not been infringed; 
(c) the structure of lines of rails, strength of bridges, general structural character of 
the works and the size of, and maximum gross load upon, the axles of any rolling stock, 
comply with the requirements laid down by the Central Government; and 
(d) in his opinion, the railway can be opened for the public carriage of passengers 
without any danger to the public using it.
(2) If the Commissioner is of the opinion that the railway cannot be opened without any 
danger to the public using it, he shall, in his report, state the grounds therefor, as also the 
requirements which, in his opinion, are to be complied with before sanction is given by the 
Central Government. 
(3) The Central Government, after considering the report of the Commissioner, may 
sanction the opening of a railway under section 21 as such or subject to such conditions as 
may be considered necessary by it for the safety of the public.
23. The provisions of sections 21 and 22 shall apply to the opening of the following 
works if they form part of, or are directly connected with, a railway used for the public 
carriage of passengers and have been constructed subsequent to the giving of a report by the 
Commissioner under section 22, namely:— 
(a) opening of additional lines of railway and deviation lines; 
(b) opening of stations, junctions and level crossings; 
(c) re-modelling of yards and re-building of bridges; 
(d) introduction of electric traction; and 
(e) any alteration or reconstruction materially affecting the structural character of 
any work to which the provisions of sections 21 and 22 apply or are extended by this 
section. 
24. When an accident has occurred on a railway resulting in a temporary suspension of 
traffic, and either the original lines of rails and works have been restored to their original 
standard or a temporary diversion has been laid for the purpose of restoring communication, 
the original lines of rails and works so restored, or the temporary diversion, as the case may 
be, may, without prior inspection by the Commissioner, be opened for the public carriage of 
passengers, subject to the following conditions, namely:— 
(a) the railway servant incharge of the works undertaken by reason of the accident 
has certified in writing that the opening of the restored lines of rails and works, or of the 
temporary diversion will not in his opinion be attended with danger to the public; and 
(b) a notice of the opening of the lines of rails and works or the diversion shall be 
sent immediately to the Commissioner.
*                           *                               *                             *                             *  
4
Sanction of 
the Central 
Government to 
the opening of 
railway.
Formalities to 
be complied 
with before 
giving sanction 
to the opening 
of a railway.
Sections 21 and 
22 to apply to 
the opening of 
certain works.
Temporary 
suspension of 
traffic.

LOK SABHA
 
A
BILL
further to amend the Railways Act, 1989.
(Dr. Alok Kumar Suman, M.P .) 
