1
THE WILD LIFE (PROTECTION) AMENDMENT  BILL, 2017
By
SHRI GAURAV GOGOI, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighthYear of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Wild Life (Protection) Amendment  Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government  may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After Chapter IVC of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 (hereinafter referred to as
the principal Act), the following Chapter and sections thereunder shall be inserted, namely:—
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No.  31 of  2017
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
53 of 1972 5

"CHAPTER IVD
NATIONAL RHINO CONSERV ATION AUTHORITY
38ZA. In this Chapter,—
(a) "National Rhino Conservation Authority" means the Rhino Conservation
Authority constituted under section 38ZB;
(b) "Steering Committee" means the Committee constituted under section 38ZJ;
(c) "Rhino Conservation Foundation" means the foundation established under
section 38ZM;
(d) "Rhino Reserve State" means a State having rhino reserve; and
(e) "Rhino Reserve" means the area notified as such under section 38ZK.
38ZB. (1) The Central Government shall constitute an authority to be known as the
National Rhino Conservation Authority (hereinafter in this Chapter referred to as the
Rhino Conservation Authority), to exercise the powers conferred on, and to perform the
functions assigned to it under this Act.
(2) The Rhino Conservation Authority shall consist of the following members, namely:—
(a) the Minister in charge of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change—Chairperson;
(b)  the Minister of State in the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change—Vice Chairperson;
(c) two members of Parliament of whom one shall be elected by the House of the
People and one by the Council of States;
(d) four experts or professionals having prescribed qualifications and experience
in conservation of wildlife and welfare of people living in rhino reserve out of which at
least one shall be from the field of tribal development;
(e) Secretary, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change;
(f) Director General of Forests and Special Secretary, Ministry of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change;
(g) Director, Wild Life Preservation, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change;
(h) three Chief Wild Life Wardens from the rhino reserve States in rotation for
three years;
(i) an officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel from
the Ministry of Law and Justice;
(j) an officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary from the Ministry of
Home Affairs;
(k) Secretary, Ministry of Tourism;
(l) Secretary, Ministry of Tribal Affairs;
(m) Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment;
(n) Chairperson, National Commission for the Scheduled Tribes;
(o) Chairperson, National Commission for the Scheduled Castes;
(p) Secretary, Ministry of Panchayati Raj;
Insertion of
new Chapter
IV D.
Definitions.
Constitution
of National
Rhino
Conservation
Authority.
2
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(q) Inspector General of Forests or an officer of the equivalent rank having
at least ten years of experience in a rhino reserve or wildlife management, who shall be
the Member-Secretary,
to be notified by the Central Government, in the Official Gazette.
(3) It is hereby declared that the office of member of the Rhino Conservation Authority
shall not disqualify its holder for being chosen as, or for being, a member of either House of
Parliament.
38ZC. (1) A member nominated under clause (d) of sub-section (2) of section 38ZB
shall hold office for such period not exceeding three years:
Provided that a member may, by writing under his hand addressed to the
Central Government, resign from his office.
(2) The Central Government shall remove a member referred to in clause (d) of
sub-section (2) of section 38ZB, from office if he—
(a) is, or at any time has been, adjudicated as insolvent;
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the
Central Government, involves moral turpitude;
(c) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court;
(d) refuses to act or becomes incapable of acting;
(e) is, without obtaining leave of absence from the Rhino Conservation Authority,
absent from three consecutive meetings of the said Authority; or
(f) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, so abused his position as to
render his continuation in office detrimental to the public interest:
Provided that no member shall be removed under this sub-section unless he has been
given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.
(3) Any vacancy in the office of a member shall be filled by fresh appointment and such
member shall continue for the remainder of the term of the member in whose place he is
appointed.
(4) The Salaries and allowances and other conditions of appointment of the members
of the Rhino Conservation Authority shall be such as may be prescribed.
(5) No act or proceeding of  the Rhino Conservation Authority shall be questioned or
shall be invalid on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy or defect in the
constitution of the Rhino Conservation Authority.
38ZD. (1) The Rhino Conservation Authority shall have the following powers and
perform the following functions, namely:—
(a) to approve the Rhino Conservation Plan prepared by the State  Government
under sub-section (3) of section 38ZK of this Act;
(b) to evaluate and assess various aspects of sustainable ecology and disallow
any ecologically unsustainable land use such as, mining, industry and other projects
within the rhino reserves;
(c) to lay down normative standards for tourism activities and guidelines for
project rhino from time to time for rhino conservation in the buffer and core area of
rhino reserves and ensure their due compliance;
(d) to provide for management focus and to emphasise on co-existence in forest
areas outside the National Parks, sanctuaries or rhino reserve, in the working plan
Term of
Office and
Conditions of
service of
Members.
Powers and
functions of
the Rhino
Conservation
Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
code;
(e) to provide information on protection measures including future conservation
plan, estimation of population of rhino, status of habitats, disease surveillance, mortality
survey, patrolling, reports on untoward happenings and such other management aspects
as it may deem fit including future plan conservation;
(f) to approve, co-ordinate research and monitoring on rhino, habitat related
ecological and socio-economic parameters and their evaluation;
(g) to ensure that the rhino reserves and areas linking one protected area or
rhino reserve with another protected area or rhino reserve are not diverted for
ecologically unsustainable uses, except in public interest and with the approval of the
National Board for WildLife and on the advice of the Rhino Conservation Authority.
(h) to facilitate and support the rhino reserve management in the State for
bio-diversity conservation initiatives through eco-development and people's
participation as per approved management plans and to support similar initiatives in
adjoining areas consistent with the Central and State laws;
(i) to ensure critical support including scientific, information technology and
legal support for better implementation of the rhino conservation plan;
(j) to facilitate ongoing capacity building programme for skill development of
officers and staff of rhino reserves;
(k) to coordinate with foreign countries and international organizations regarding
conservation of rhinos and their habitat by technology sharing and monitoring methods
and also in regard to measures against poaching of rhinos;
(l) to promote awareness of greater one-horned rhinos and their importance as a
part of school education and conduct awareness campaigns across the country about
rhinos and their conservation; and
(m) to perform such other functions as may be necessary to carry out the purposes
of this Act with regard to conservation of rhinos and their habitat.
(2) The Rhino Conservation Authority may, in the exercise of its powers and performance
of its functions under this Chapter, issue directions in writing to any person, officer or
authority for the protection of rhino or rhino reserves and such person, officer or authority
shall be bound to comply with the directions:
Provided that no such direction shall interfere with or affect the rights of local people
particularly the Scheduled Tribes.
38ZE. (1) The Rhino Conservation Authority shall meet at such time and at such place
as the Chairperson may think fit.
(2) The Chairperson or in his absence the Vice-Chairperson shall preside over the
meetings of the Rhino Conservation Authority.
(3) The Rhino Conservation Authority shall regulate its own procedure.
(4) All orders and decisions of the Rhino Conservation Authority shall be authenticated
by the Member-Secretary or any other officer of the said authority duly authorised by the
Member-Secretary in this behalf.
38ZF. (1) The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament
by law in this behalf, make to the Rhino Conservation Authority grants and loans of such
sums of money as that Government may consider necessary.
(2) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the Rhino Conservation Authority
Fund and there shall be credited thereto—
(i) any grants and loans made to the Rhino Conservation Authority by the
Central Government;
(ii) all fees and charges received by the Rhino Conservation Authority under
this Act; and
Meetings of
the Rhino
Conservation
Authority and
its regulations.
Central
Government
to provide
grants to the
Rhino
Conservation
Authority and
constitution
of Rhino
Conservation
Authority
Fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
(iii) all sums received by the Authority from such other sources as may be
decided upon by the Central Government.
(3) The fund referred to in sub-section ( 2) shall be applied for meeting salary,
allowances and other remuneration of the members, officers and other employees of the
Rhino Conservation Authority and the expenses of the Rhino Conservation Authority
incurred in the discharge of its functions under this Chapter.
38ZG. (1) The Rhino Conservation Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other
relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be
prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India.
(2) The accounts of the Rhino Conservation Authority shall be audited by the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India at such intervals as may be specified by him and
any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Rhino
Conservation Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any other person appointed by
him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the Rhino Conservation Authority shall
have the same rights and privileges and authority in connection with such audit as the
Comptroller and Auditor-General generally has in connection with the audit of the Government
accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts,
connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect the office of the Rhino
Conservation Authority.
(4) The Accounts of the Rhino Conservation Authority as certified by the Comptroller
and Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf together
with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government by the
Rhino Conservation Authority.
38ZH. The Rhino Conservation Authority shall prepare in such form and at such time,
for each financial year, as may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of its
activities during the previous financial year and to forward a copy thereof to the Central
Government.
38ZI. The Central Government shall cause the annual report together with a
memorandum of action taken on the recommendations contained therein, in so far as they
relate to the Central Government, and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of
such recommendations, and the audit report to be laid, as soon as may be after the reports are
received, before each House of Parliament.
38ZJ. (1) The State Government may constitute a Steering Committee for ensuring
coordination, monitoring, protection and conservation of rhino in the rhino range State.
(2) The Steering Committee shall consists of—
(a) the Chief Minister—Chairperson;
(b) the Minister in-charge of Wildlife—Vice-Chairperson;
(c) the Minister of Home Affairs;
(d) the Dirctor General of Police;
(e) such number of official members not exceeding three including at least one
Field Directors of rhino reserve or Director of National Park and one from the State
Government's Department dealing with tribal affairs;
(f) two experts or professionals having qualifications and experience in
conservation of wildlife of which one shall be from the field of tribal development;
Maintenance
of Accounts
and Audit by
Comptroller
and Auditor
General of
India
Annual Report
of Rhino
Conservation
Authority.
Annual Report
and Audit
Report to be
laid before
Parliament.
Constitution
of the Steering
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
(g) one member from the State's Tribal Advisory Council;
(h) one representative each from State Government's Departments dealing  with
panchayati Raj and Social Justice and Empowerment;
(i) Chief Wildlife Warden of the State shall be the Member-Secretary, to be
notified by the State Government, in the Official Gazette.
38ZK. ( 1) The State Governmetn shall, on the recommendation of the Rhino
Conservation Authority, notify an area as a rhino reserve.
(2) The provisions of sub-section ( 2) of section 18, sub-sections ( 2), (3) and ( 4) of
section 27, section 30, section 32 and clauses (b) and (c) of section 33 of this Act shall, as far
as may be, apply in relation to a rhino reserve as they apply in relation to a sanctuary.
(3) The State Government shall prepare a Rhino Conservation Plan including staff
development and deployment plan for the proper management of each area referred to in
sub-section (1), so as to ensure—
(a) ecologically compatible land uses in the rhino reserves and areas linking one
protected area or rhino reserve with another for addressing the livelihood concerns of
local people;
(b) the forestry operations of regular forest divisions and those adjoining rhino
reserves are not incompatible with the needs of rhino conservation.
(4) Subject to the provisions contained in this Act, the State Government shall while
preparing a Rhino Conservation Plan, ensure the agricultural, livelihood, developmental and
other interests of the people living in rhino bearing forests or a rhino reserve.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this Section, the expression "rhino reserve"
includes—
(i) core rhino habitat areas of National Parks and Sanctuaries, where it has been
established, on the basis of scientific and objective criteria, that such areas are required
to be kept as inviolate for the purposes of rhino conservation, without affecting the
rights of the Scheduled Tribes or such other forest dwellers, and notified as such by
the State Government in consultation with an Expert Committee constituted for the
purpose;
(ii) buffer or peripheral area consisting of the area peripheral to core area, identified
and established in accordance with the provisions contained in Explanation (i) above,
where a lesser degree of habitat protection is required to ensure the integrity of the
rhino habitat with adequate dispersal for rhino species, and which aim at promoting
co-existence between wildlife and human activity with due recognition of the livelihood,
developmental, social and cultural rights of the local people.
38ZL. (1) No alteration in the boundaries of a rhino reserve shall be made except on a
recommendation of the Rhino Conservation authority and the approval of the National
Board for Wildlife.
(2) No State Government shall de-notify a rhino reserve, except in public interest with
the approval of the Rhino Conservation Authority and the National Board for Wildlife.
38ZM. (I ) The State Government shall establish a Rhino Conservation Foundation for
rhino reserves within the State in order to facilitate and support their management for
conservation of rhino and biodiversity and, to take initiatives in eco-development by
involvement of people in such development process.
(2) The Rhino Conservation Foundation shall, have the following objectives:—
(a) to facilitate ecological, economic, social and cultural development in the
rhino reserves;
Rhino
Conservation
Plan.
Rhino Reserve
Alterantion and
De-notification.
Establishment
of Rhino
Conservation
Foundation.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
(b) to promote eco-tourism with the involvement of local stakeholder communities
and provide support to safeguard the natural environment in the rhino reserves;
(c) to facilitate the creation of, and or maintenance of, such assets as may be
necessary for fulfilling the above said objectives;
(d) to solicit technical, financial, social, legal and other support required for the
activities of the Foundation for achieving the above said objectives;
(e) to augment and mobilise financial resources including recycling of entry and
such other fees received in a rhino reserve, to foster stakeholder develpokent and
eco-tourism;
(f) to support research, environmental education and training in the above related
fields.".
3. In section 51 of the principal Act, after sub-section (1D), the following sub-sections
shall be inserted, namely:—
"(1E) Any person, who commits an offence in relation to the core area of a rhino
reserve or where the offence relate to hunting in the rhino reserve or altering the
boundaries of the rhino reserve, such offence shall be punishable on first conviction
with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than seven years but may extend
to ten years, and also with fine which shall not be less than seventy five thousand
rupees but may extend to five lakh rupees; and in the event of a second or subsequent
conviction with imprisonment for a term of not less than ten years and also with fine
which shall not be less than ten lakh rupees but may extend to fifty lakh rupees.
(1F) Whoever, abets any offence punishable under sub-section (1E) shall, if the act
abetted is committed in consequence of the abetment, be punishable with the
punishment provided for that offence.".
4. In section 55 of the principal Act, after clause (ac), the following clauses shall be
inserted, namely:—
''(ad) Member-Secretary, Rhino Conservation Authority; or
(ae) Director of the concerned rhino reserve; or''.
5. In section 59 of the principal Act, after the word, figures and letter "Chapter IVC",
the word, figures and letter "Chapter IVD" shall be inserted.
6. In section 60 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), after the word, figures and letter
"Chapter IVC", the word, figures and letter "Chapter IVD" shall be inserted;
7. In section 63 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after clause (gvi), the following
clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
"(gvii) qualification and experience of experts or professionals under clause (d)
of sub-section (2) of section 38ZB;
(gviii) the salaries and allowances and other conditions of appointment of the
members under sub-section (4) of section 38ZC;
(gix) the form in which the annual statement of accounts of Rhino Conservation
Authority shall be prepared under sub-section (1) of section 38ZG;
(gx) the form in which and the time at which the annual report of Rhino
Conservation Authority shall be prepared under section 38ZH.".
Amendment of
section 51.
Amendment of
section 55.
Amendment of
section 59.
Amendment of
section 60.
Amendment of
section 63.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Rhinoceros are one among the critically endangered species in the world. At present
there are only five species left in the world, two in Southern and Eastern Africa i.e. the
African White Rhinoceros, the African Black Rhino and the Sumatran Rhino and the Javan
Rhino and the Great Indian one-horned Rhinoceros and three in tropical Asia.
The Greater one-horned Rhinoceros or Indian Rhinos are restricted to the alluvial
plains of the Indus, Ganges, Yamuna and Bramhaputra rivers. So, they remain confined to the
Nothern half of the country and they are also found in plain, marshy, riverine terrains at a
higher elevation such as Chitwan in Nepal. The largest resident population of greater
one-horned rhinos happen to be at Kaziranga National Park, Assam.
The Greater one-horned Rhinoceros were initially found in almost all the South-Asian
countries. But by mid 20th century, not more than two hundred rhinos in total are left in the
world and now they happen to be only in India and Nepal. This was mostly because of
hunting, habitat loss and poaching of rhinos. Greater one horned Rhinoceros features in the
Red List of International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) and also listed in the
Appendix-I of CITES (Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild
Fauna and Flora). This indicates the existing extent of threat for the species.
Poaching is the major reason for the decreasing rhino population in the world. Rhinos
are generally poached for their horns; there is an overarching demand for rhino horns from
some of the Asian countries like Vietnam and China. Vietnamese value it as an ingredient in
traditional medicine to treat a variety of ailments from fever to hallucination and headaches,
as well as, as a status symbol of wealth and power. With highest population of rhinos
residing at Kaziranga, there is an increasing pressure on the National Park for rhino horns. In
2016, 19 rhinos were poached at Kaziranga National Park alone (as of 26.12.2016). Without
proper protection and conservation, greater one-horned rhinos will soon face extinction.
The need is to constitute a conservation authority for rhinos comprising of the Union,
States and other experts, to help to solve the problem of poaching of rhinos in the country
which will result in a better and protected environment for rhinos and other wildlife habitats.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 with a view to
provide for—
(i) constitution of the National Rhino Conservation Authority;
(ii) confer powers and functions of the Rhino Conservation Authority, so as to
include—
(a) approval of Rhino Conservation Plan prepared by State Governments;
(b) lay down normative standards, guidelines for tiger conservation in the
buffer and core areas of Rhino reserve, apart from ensuring their due
compliance;
(c) providing information on protection measures including future
conservation plan, rhino estimation, disease surveillance, mortality survey,
patrolling, reports on untoward happenings and such other management
aspects as it may deem fit, including future plan for conservation;
(d) approve and co-ordinate research on rhino, its habitat and related
ecological and socio-economic parameters;
(e) ensure that identified rhino bearing forests are not diverted for
ecologically unsustainable uses, except in public interest, and with the approval
of the National Board for Wildlife on the advice of the Rhino Conservation
Authority;
8

9
(f) facilitate and support rhino reserve management in the State through
eco-development and people's participation as per approved management plans,
and to support similar initiatives in adjoining areas consistent with the Central
and State laws;
(iii) preparing the Annual Report of the Rhino Conservation Authority and
sub-mission of the audited report to the Central Government for laying before Parliament;
(iv) constitution of Steering Committee by States;
(v) preparation of the Rhino Protection and Conservation Plans by State
Governments including staff development and deployment, protection, habitat inputs,
addressing the livelihood concerns of local people and compatibility of forestry
operations in the adjoining Forest Divisions;
(vi) ensuring the agricultural, livelihood, developmental and other interests of
people living inside forests or in rhino bearing forest areas; and
(vii) establishing a Rhino Conservation Foundation by States for supporting
their development.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; GAURAV GOGOI
January 11, 2017.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to provide for the constitution of the National Rhino
Conservation Authority. It also provides for appointment of the officers and other employees
to the Authority. It also provides that Central Government shall provide grants and loans
to the authority for being utilised for the purposes of the Bill. It further provides for
constitution of the Rhino Conservation Authority Fund in which all grants, loans made by
the Central Government, fees and charges, etc., received by the Authority shall be credited.
It also provides for constitution of Steering Committee in rhino range States under the
Chairmanship of Chief Minister of the State concerned. The expenditure relating to States
shall be borne from the Consolidated Fund of the State concerned. The Bill, therefore, if
enacted, will involve recurring expenditure of rupees sixty crore per annum which shall be
charged from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees twenty crore is also likely to be
involved.
10

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the National Rhino Conservation
Authority to which the Central Government may prescribe by rules—
(i) the salaries, allowances and other conditions of appointment of members of
the Authority;
(ii) the terms and conditions of service of officers and other employees of the
Authority;
(iii) the form in which the annual statement of accounts of the Authority is to be
prepared; and
(iv) the form and time for submitting annual reports of the Authority to the
Central Government.
As the rules will relate to matter of detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of
a normal character.
11

12
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE WILD LIFE (PROTECTION) ACT, 1972.
(53 of 1972)
* * * * * * * *
51.  (1)  Any person who contravenes any provisions of this Act except Chapter V A and
section 38J or any rule or order made thereunder or who commits a breach of any of the
conditions of any licence or permit granted under this Act, shall be guilty of an offence
against this Act, and shall, on conviction, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to three years or with fine which may extend to twenty five thousand rupees or
with both:
Provided that where the offence committed is in relation to any animal specified in
Schedule I or Part 11 of Sch. 11, or meat of any such animal, animal article, trophy, or uncurled
trophy derived from such animal or where offence relates to hunting in, ox, altering the
boundaries of a sanctuary or a National Park, such offence shall be punishable with impris-
onment for a term which shall not be less than one year but may extend to six years and also
with fine which shall not be less than five thousand rupees:
Provided further that in the case of a second or subsequent offence of the nature
mentioned in this sub-section, the term or imprisonment may extend to six years ‘and shall
not be less than two years and the amount of fine shall not be less than ten thousand rupees.
(1A) Any person who contravenes any provisions of Chapter VA, shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less then one year but which may extend to
seven years and also with fine which shall not be less than five thousand rupees.
(1B) Any person who contravenes the provisions of Section 38J shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend
to two thousand rupees, or with both. Provided that in case of second or subsequent offence
the term of imprisonment may extend to one year or the fine may extend to five thousand
rupees.
(1C) Any person, who commits an offence in relation to the core area of a tiger reserve
or where the offence relate to hunting in the tiger reserve or altering the boundaries of the
tiger reserve, such offence shall be punishable on first conviction with imprisonment for a
term which shall not be less than three years but may extend to seven years, and also with
fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but may extend to two lakh rupees;
and in the event of a second or subsequent conviction with imprisonment for a term of not
less than seven years and also with fine which shall not be less than five lakh rupees but may
extend to fifty lakh rupees.
(1D) Whoever, abets any offence punishable under sub-section (IC) shall, if the act
abetted is committed in consequence of the abetment, be punishable with the punishment
provided for that offence.
* * * * * * * *
55. No court shall take cognizance of any offence against this Act on the complaint of
any person other than
(a) the Director of Wildlife Preservation or any other officer authorised in this
behalf by the State Government; or
(ab) Member-Secretary, Tiger Conservation Authority; or
(ac) Director of the concerned tiger reserve; or
* * * * * * * *
Penalties.
Cognizance of
offences.

13
59. Every officer referred to [in Chapter II and the chairperson, members, member-
secretary, officers and other employees referred to in chapter IVA, chapter IVB and foreseen
and every other officer exercising any of the powers conferred by this Act shall be deemed to
be a public servant within the meaning of sec. 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).
60. (1) No suit, prosecution, or other legal proceeding shall lie against any officer or
other employee of the Central Government or the State Government for anything which is in
good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government or the
State Government or any of its officers or other employees, for any damage caused or likely
to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.
(3) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Authority referred to in
Chapter IVA and Chapter IVB and its chaiperson, member, member secretary, officers and
other employees for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this
Act.
63. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for all or any of the
following matters, namely:
* * * * * * * *
(giv) the form in which the annual statement of accounts of Tiger Conservation
Authority shall be prepared under sub-section (1) of section 38R.
* * * * * * * *
Officers to be
public servants.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Power of
Central
Government
to make rules.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972.
————
(Shri Gaurav Gogoi, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4131LS(S3)—20.02.2017.