THE ABOLITION OF CHILD LABOUR BILL, 2010
By
SHRI ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY, M.P.
A
BILL
to abolish child labour in the country and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Abolition of Child Labour Act, 2010.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 31 of 2010
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Definitions.
5

2
(b) "child" means a boy or a girl who has not attained the age of eighteen years;
(c) "establishment" includes a shop, commercial establishment, work-shop, farm,
residential hotel, restaurant, eating-house, theatre or other place of public amusement
or entertainment; and
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. Child labour, in any form, in any establishment in the country, is hereby abolished.
4. Whoever employs a child in any establishment, shall be punished with simple
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and with fine which may extend to
rupees one lakh.
5. Any parent or a lawful guardian of a child, who coerces his child into employment,
shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year and with
fine which may extend to rupees fifty thousand.
6. (1) Any establishment employing children shall remove such children from
employment within a period of six months from the date of coming into force of this Act.
(2) If, after the expiry of the period specified in sub-section (1), any establishment fails
to remove children employed in that establishment, the appropriate government shall order
closure of such establishment.
7. (1) The appropriate Government shall establish at least one children home in every
district for rehabilitation of children found engaged in any establishment or collecting
rags and waste or begging.
(2) The children homes established under sub-section (1) shall provide free boarding
and lodging, education, maintenance and such other facilities to the children, as may be
prescribed, till they attain the age of eighteen years.
(3) Any child who is found engaged in any establishment or collecting rags and waste
or begging shall immediately be taken into custody by the police and sent to the nearest
children home.
8. The provisions of this Act or rules made thereunder shall have effect notwithstanding
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in
any instrument having effect of law by virtue of any law other than this Act.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Abolition of
child labour.
Punishment.
Punishment to
parents for
coercion.
Closure of an
organisation/
establishment
engaging child
labour.
Establishment
of children
homes for
rehabilitation
of children.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
India has the largest number of child labour in the world. The official figure is thirteen
million. But the actual number may be much higher. Indian children are the source of cheap
labour because they can be paid less wages or can be abused without provoking retaliation.
These children work in industries manufacturing crackers, diamond polishing, glass,
brassware, carpet weaving, bangle making, lock making and mica cutting to name just a few.
A large number of children also work as domestic servants.
Poverty is cited as a major cause of child labour, but it is not the only determinant.
Inadequate number of schools or even the expense of providing education leaves some of
the children with practically no option but to work. The attitude of parents also contributes
to child labour. Compulsory elementary education may help ameliorate this attitude. The
problem of child labour cannot be eliminated in one stroke. Many countries have enacted
laws providing for ban on buying products of industries where children are employed.
Only multi-dimensional strategies including compulsory elementary education,
eradication of poverty, eradicating parental illiteracy, making child labour illegal will help in
achieving this objective. Stringent legal provisions, severe punishment for violation of laws,
rehabilitation of children already engaged in work have to go along with abolition of child
labour in the country. Therefore, it is high time that a stringent law for abolition of child
labour is enacted.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI;  ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
February 8, 2010.
3

4
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 7 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall establish at least
one children home in every district for the rehabilitation of children found engaged in any
establishment or collecting rags and waste or begging. The Central Government will have to
incur expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India for establishment of children homes
in respect of Union territories. The State Governments will incur expenditure for establishment
of children homes in the States from their respective Consolidated Funds. The Bill, therefore,
if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve
a recurring expenditure of  about fifty crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one crore is also likely to be involved.

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules  will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative powers is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to abolish child labour in the country and for matters connected therewith.
—————
(Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND— 1001LS(S5)—12-03-2010.