 AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 31 of 2023
THE HUMAN TRAFFICKING (PREVENTION AND
CONTROL) BILL, 2023
By
SHRI B HOLA S INGH, M.P.
A
BILL
 to establish a Central Human Trafficking Prevention and Control
Commission for prevention and control of human trafficking
in the country and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of
India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Human Trafficking (Prevention and Control)
Act, 2023.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5

2
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government
of that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “Commission” means the  Central Human Trafficking  Prevention  and
Control Commission established under section 4;
(c) “human trafficking” means an act of recruiting or transferring any person
for unlawful purpose including sexual exploitations or engaging him as forced
labour within the country or in a foreign country; and
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by the rules made under this Act.
(2) The words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in
the Indian Penal Code, 1860, or the Immoral Traffic (Prevention and Control) Act,
1956 shall have the same meaning, respectively, assigned to them in those Acts.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be after the commencement
of this Act and in consultation with the State Governments by notification in the Official
Gazette, formulate a National Policy aimed at Prevention and Control of growing
incidents of human trafficking and overall welfare, protection and rehabilitation of
victims of human trafficking.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, it shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to implement the national
policy formulated under sub-section (1).
4. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
establish a Central Human Trafficking Prevention and Control Commission for
Prevention and Control of the human trafficking of citizens within the country
or abroad.
(2) The headquarters of the Commission shall be at Bulandshahr, Uttar
Pradesh.
(3) The Commission may establish its branches in the States and Union
Territories in such manner as may be prescribed.
(4) The Commission shall consist of one Chairperson and such other
members having relevant experience in the field to be appointed by the Central
Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(5) The salary and allowances payable to the Chairperson and members of
the Commission shall be such as may be prescribed.
(6) The Commission shall be a body corporate by the name of aforesaid
having perpetual succession and a common seal with power to acquire, hold and
dispose of property, both movable and immovable and to contract and shall by
the said name sue and be sued.
(7) The Commission may appoint such number of officers and employees
as may be necessary for the efficient functioning of the Commission and carrying
out the purposes of this Act.
(8) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of
service of officers and employees of the Commission shall be such as may be prescribed.
5. The Commission shall—
(a) take measures for rehabilitation and welfare of victims of human
trafficking;
(b) provide boarding and lodging facilities for victims of human
trafficking;
5
10
15
20
Definitions.
25
30
35
45
40
Formulation of
National Policy
to prevent and
control Human
Trafficking.
Establishment
of Central
Human
Trafficking
Prevention and
Control
Commission.
Functions of the
Commission.
45 of 1860
104 of 1956

(c) provide emergency medical care and necessary legal assistance to
victims of human trafficking; and
(d) undertake such other measures as may be deemed fit for Prevention
and Control of human trafficking.
6. The appropriate Government shall formulate rehabilitation scheme for
persons rescued from trafficking and take such other welfare measures for
Prevention and Control of human trafficking under this Act in such manner as
may be prescribed.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State
Governments for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
8. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the
time being in force.
9. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other law for the time being applicable to the subject matter of this Act.
10. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
   (2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid,
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in
session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in
two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making
any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.
Power to make
rules.
Act not in
derogation of
other laws.
5
10
15
20
25
3
Appropriate
Government to
formulate
rehabilitation
scheme.
A Central
Government to
provide
adequate funds
to the State
Governments.
Act to have
overriding
effects.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Human Trafficking is the recruitment, transportation, transfer, harbouring or
receipt of people through force, fraud or deception, with the aim of exploiting them
for profit. Men, women and children of all ages and from all backgrounds can become
victims of this crime, which occurs in every region of the world. The traffickers often
use violence or fraudulent employment agencies and fake promises of education and
job opportunities to trick and coerce their victims.
In 2021, over one thousand human trafficking cases were reported with almost
three thousand victims across India. The State of Maharashtra had the highest number
of human trafficking cases in the country with over 260 cases. India is in the league
of such nations where the Governments have proved to be unsuccessful in Prevention
and Control of incidents of human trafficking. India has become the largest base of
human trafficking in the world. In the abominable market of human trafficking, India
is being identified both as a consumer and producer.
Human trafficking has taken deep roots in the society. The network of human
trafficking has been spreading across the country. Lakhs of women are being trafficked
every year within the country, out of which more than forty per cent are minors. Forty
per cent of the kidnapped children are forced into child labour or prostitution.
Human trafficking is a heinous and inhumane crime. The web of human
trafficking is spreading rapidly in the country and it is not only spoiling the image of
India in the world, but also contaminating the society on a large scale. If the growing
number of incidents of human trafficking are not checked in time, the situation would
go out of control.
    NEW DELHI;                         BHOLA SINGH
January 17, 2023.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for establishment of a Central Human Trafficking
Prevention and Control Commission for Prevention and Control of the human
trafficking. Clause 5 provides for rehabilitation and welfare measure of persons victims
of human trafficking. Clause 6 provides for the formulation of rehabilitation scheme
for persons rescued from human trafficking. Clause 7 provides that the Central
Government shall provide adequate funds to the State Governments. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of rupees five hundred crore per annum.
  A non-recurring expenditure of rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of this Bill empowers the Appropriate Government to make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail
only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to establish a Central Human Trafficking Prevention and Control
Commission for prevention and control of human trafficking
in the country and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Bhola Singh, M.P .)