1
Short title
and
commencement.
Bill No. 320 of  2015
THE  CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI DUSHYANT CHAUTALA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment)  Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as Central Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, appoint.
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In section 358 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,—
(i) in sub-section (1) for the words "the Magistrate may award such compensation
not exceeding one thousand rupees", the words " the Magistrate may either sentence
the person so causing arrest or simple imprisonment for a period not exceeding thirty
days or award such compensation, not exceeding ten thousand rupees" shall be
substituted.
(ii) in sub-section ( 2), for the words "one thousand rupees", the words
"ten thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
2 of 1974.Amendment
of section
358.
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Section 358 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. 1973 prescribes compensation to persons,
who are arrested groundlessly. However, various cases pertaining to malicious and vexatious
complaints and investigation with regard to misuse of section 358 has been registered. The
need is to check exploitation of the common man at the ends of the police and help to reduce
harassment of innocent citizens in lieu of false complaints. Further, the accountability of
policemen needed to be increased while investigating a complaint and also making the
complainant accountable in case the complaint is proved to be a false one. The increase of
accountability will keep a check on corruption and strengthen trust of a common man in
police and law.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 with a view to
inflict simple imprisonment to the person causing groundless arrest of another person in
addition to fine in order to check the misuse of the powers and increase the accountability of
police while investigating the complaint.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; DUSHYANT CHAUTALA
November 18, 2015.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973
(ACT NO. 2 OF 1974)
* * * * * *
358. (1) Whenever any person causes a police officer to arrest another person, if it
appears to the Magistrate by whom the case is heard that there was no sufficient ground for
causing such arrest, the Magistrate may award such compensation, not exceeding one
hundred rupees, to be paid by the person so causing the arrest to the person so arrested, for
his loss of time and expenses in the matter, as the Magistrate thinks fit.
(2) In such cases, if more persons than one are arrested, the Magistrate may, in like
manner, award to each of them such compensation, not exceeding one hundred rupees, as
such Magistrate thinks fit.
* * * * * *
Compensation
to persons
groundlessly
arrested.
4

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
————
(Shri Dushyant Chautala,  M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2943LS(S3)—08-12-2015.