1
Short title.
Bill No. 321 of  2016
THE RESERV ATION OF POSTS IN SERVICES AND SEATS IN
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS FOR PERSONS
LIVING IN ECONOMICALLY
BACKWARD AREAS BILL, 2016
By
SHRIMATI RAMA DEVI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the reservation of posts in the services of the Central Government
and Public Sector Undertakings and seats in all classes of educational
institutions for the persons living in economically backward
areas in the country with a view to improving their living
standard and expending them the benefits of progress
made by the country after independence and for
matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Reservation of Posts in Services and Seats in Educational
Institutions for Persons Living in Economically Backward Areas Act, 2016.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "economically backward area" means such areas declared as economically
backward areas by the NITI Aayog;
(b) "family" includes husband, wife, their dependent children and parents;
(c) "person Living in economically backward  areas" means  a  person
living in economically backward area whose annual income does not
exceed rupees thirty thousand per annum; and
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. The Central Government shall reserve thirty per cent. of posts in Central Government
services and public sector undertakings for the persons living in economically backward
areas.
4. (1) There shall be reserved thirty per cent of seats in all classes of educational and
training institutions for the persons living in economically backward areas; and
(2) The expenditure on the education and training of persons admitted in educational
and training institutions under sub-section (1) shall be borne by the Central Government
after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, from time to time.
5. The benefits of reservation in posts and services and admission specified under this
Act shall be provided only once to a family living in economically backward area.
6. If any difficulty arises in giving effort to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficult:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of three
years from the date of commencement of this Act.
7. (1) The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
(2) The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of any other
law, for the time being in force.
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before
each House of the State Legislature while it is in session for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and if, before
the expiry of the session immediately following the session or successive sessions aforesaid
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both  Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Definitions.
Reservation of
posts in
Government
services.
Reservation of
seats in
educational
and training
institutions.
Benefits under
the Act to be
given only
once.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
After Independence, though there has been a lot of industrial, economic and educational
development in the country, some areas like the tribal areas of Madhya Pradesh and drought
prone Chhattisgarh region in the State, Kalahandi in Orissa, deserts of Rajasthan and Gujarat,
the economically backward belt of Bihar and hilly regions of Uttar Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh,
Jammu and Kashmir remain deprived of the benefits of this development. Persons living in
such economically backward areas of the country continue to suffer from abject poverty.
Some of these areas have already been declared as backward areas by the NITI Aayog and
by some State Governments as well.
In such areas there are very few industries and little economic activity. As a result,
persons of these areas find it very difficult to earn their livelihood. Due to their abject
poverty they do not get even two meals a day, leave alone education and other needs of life.
As such they remain illiterate and are greatly exploited throughout their lives. To improve
their lot it is necessary that posts are reserved in the services of the Central Government and
public sector undertakings and in all types of educational institutions for persons living in
economically backward areas of the country. It will not only improve the economic conditions
of persons living in such backward areas but will also help in their educational advancement.
It will be a good beginning for the welfare of persons living in economically backward areas
of the country.
N
EW DELHI; RAMA DEVI
November 4, 2016.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall bear the entire expenditure
on the education and training of persons living in the economically backward areas of the
country. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees
eighty crores per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred crores is also likely to be
involved.
4

5
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central  Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the reservation of posts in the services of the Central Government
and Public Sector Undertakings and seats in all classes of educational
institutions for the persons living in economically backward
areas in the country with a view to improving their living
standard and expending them the benefits of progress
made by the country after independence and for
matters connected therewith.
————
(Shrimati Rama Devi, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3409LS(S3)—05-12-2016.