1
THE PAYMENT OF MINIMUM W AGES (FOR WORKERS AND OTHERS)
BILL, 2015
By
SHRI CHANDRAKANT KHAIRE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for payment of minimum wages to workers and others and for matters
connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Payment of Minimum Wages (for Workers and Others)
Act, 2015.
Short title.
Bill No. 321 of 2015
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force or
any judgement, decree or order of any court to the contrary, the minimum wages shall be
as follows:—
(a) for unskilled workers, rupees five hundred per day;
(b) for semi-skilled workers, rupees one thousand per day;
(c) for skilled workers, rupees seven hundred fifty per day;
(d) for clerical work for those who have completed class twelve, rupees eight
hundred per day;
(e) for supervisors, rupees one thousand per day; and
(f) for managers, rupees one thousand and two hundred per day.
3. The minimum wages referred to in section 3 shall be revised by the Central
Government every three years according to increase in cost of living index in such manner
as may be notified by the Central Government.
4. Where an organisation or establishment makes payment of minimum wages on a
monthly basis, the minimum monthly wages of a skilled worker and manager shall not be
less than rupees fifteen thousand per month and rupees thirty-five thousand per month,
respectively, and minimum wages per month of other persons referred to in section 2 shall
be increased thirty times their daily wages.
 5. (1) The Central Government may make rules for carrying out the purposes of this
Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Revision of
minimum
wages by the
Central
Government.
Fixation of
minimum
wages of a
skilled worker.
Powers to
make rules.
Payment of
minimum
wages to
workers, etc.
5
10
15
20
25

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Payment of Minimum Wages Act, 1948 enacted many years back does not in
practice guarantee of minimum wages to workers and the wages have been left to the State
Governments for their implementation. However, in practice even skilled workers are getting
meagre wages and compelled to work for long duration to earn that meagre wages. There
is no provision of revision of wages from time to time with the increase in cost of living
index. Therefore, it is proposed to fix the minimum wages specifically and also to provide
for revision from time to time.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; CHANDRAKANT KHAIRE
November 18, 2015.
3

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for payment of certain minimum wages to workers and
others engaged in any organisation or establishment, payment of higher minimum wages
to workers engaged in Central Government establishments. The Bill, therefore, if enacted,
would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that recurring
expenditure of about rupees two crore per annum would be involved from the Consolidated
Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to frame rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for payment of minimum wages to workers and others and for matters
connected therewith.
————
(Shri Chandrakant Khaire, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3087LS(S3)—08-12-2015.