1
THE RESERV ATION FOR SCHEDULED CASTES AND SCHEDULED
TRIBES IN PRIVATE SECTOR BILL, 2015
By
SHRI KODIKUNNIL SURESH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for reservation for the person belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes in private sector and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Reservation for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
in Private Sector  Act, 2015.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) ‘private sector’ means any organization or establishment which is owned
purely by private individual or corporation or limited company or in any organization
in which the Government of India or a State has no financial interest and wherein not
less than 50 persons are employed; and
(b) ‘prescribed’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Short title.
Bill No. 322 of  2015
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Definitions.5
10

2
3. (1) The Central Government shall give due encouragement to private sector to make
provisions for reservation for the person belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes in their organization.
(2) The encouragement as provided in sub-section (1) may include:—
(i) special concessions under various existing Central schemes; and
(ii) loans from nationalized banks at reduced rate of interest.
4. The Central Government shall cause to be laid an annual report before both Houses
of Parliament about the action taken under this Act.
5. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Government
to encourage
private sector
to make
provision for
reservation.
Annual
Report.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
At present reservation is available in favour of persons belonging to the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes under the State. The number of posts and appointments in
Government sector has come down considerably, especially after the economic liberalization.
Now, the private sector is more involved in the nation building activities and infrastructure
and economical projects. Also, people belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes find it very difficult to get into Government service due to less number of posts
available.
At present, there is no provision for reservation in favour of persons belonging to the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in services under private sector. But the
Government cannot force private sector to make reservation for them. This can be done only
by providing concessions and special schemes to encourage private sector to provide
reservation.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KODIKUNNIL SURESH
November 18, 2015.
3

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
4

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for reservation for the person belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes in private sector and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Kodikunnil Suresh, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2880LS(S3)—09-12-2015.