1
Short title
and com-
mencement.
THE  REPRESENTATION  OF  THE  PEOPLE  (AMENDMENT)
BILL,  2019
By
SHRI LAVU SRI KRISHNA DEVARAYALU,  M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act,
2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After section 127A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, the  following
section shall be inserted, namely:—
"127B. (1) No person shall print or publish, or cause to be printed or published,
an election manifesto unless the manifesto contains:—
(a) a rationale for the promises made to any section of citizens or residents
of India; and
Insertion of
new section
127B.
Bill  No. 322 of  2019
Duty to
publish
responsible
manifesto.
5
10
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(b) the general means by which the financial requirements for the promises,
schemes and initiatives shall be satisfied.
(2)  An election manifesto shall not contain anything, including illustrations, which is
repugnant to the ideals and principles enshrined in the Constitution or which is in the
nature of a promise seeking to alter the basic structure of the Constitution.
(3) Every political party, candidate or his agent, who seeks to publish an election
manifesto, shall, before three days of its release, submit three copies of the manifesto to the
concerned Chief Electoral Officer along with its English version in case the manifesto is in
a language other than English.
(4)While submitting copies of an election manifesto under sub-section ( 3), every
political party, candidate or his agents shall make—
(a) a declaration stating that the contents to be published in the manifesto are
in consonance with paragraph VIII of the Model Code of Conduct issued by the
Election Commission; and
(b) a satisfactory elucidation of the proposed finances and means to meet the
financial requirements for the promises and schemes.
(5) If in the opinion of the Election Commission the conditions specified in
sub-section (4) have not been adequately satisfied by any political party or a candidate or
an agent, the Election Commission may exercise its powers under section 146 to satisfy
itself of the same.
(6) Any political party, candidate or agent or any other person who contravenes the
provisions of this section shall be punishable with fine which may extend up to five thousand
rupees.’’.
5
10
15
20

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Representation of the People Act, 1951 was enacted to provide for the conduct of
elections of the Houses of Parliament and to the House or Houses of the Legislature of each
State, the qualifications and disqualifications for membership of those Houses, the corrupt
practices and other offences at or in connection with such elections and the decision of
doubts and disputes arising out of or in connection with such elections.
The Supreme Court in its judgment in the matter of S. Subramaniam Balaji and Anr V.
Government of Tamil Nadu and others on July 5th, 2018 noted that there was scope for the
misuse of election manifestos to 'shake the roots of free and fair elections to a large degree'
and that there was no enactment to govern the contents of election manifestos. The supreme
Court, therefore, urged the Election Commission to urgently frame guidelines for the same.
Paragraph VIII of the Model Code of Conduct issued by Election Commission of India
states that in the interest of transparency, a level playing field and credibility of promises, it
is expected that manifesto also reflect the rationale for the promises and broadly indicate
the ways and means to meet the financial requirement for it. It further states that political
parties should avoid making those promises which are likely to vitiate the purity of the
election process or exert undue influence on the voters in exercising their franchise. Therefore
it is essential that promises which are repugnant to the ideals and principles enshrined in
the constitution are not permitted to be published with the aim to mislead the electorate.
To further ensure that manifestos are not used to elude the scrutiny of the Model
Code of Conduct, the Bill seeks to ensure an accounting of finances for all promises,
schemes, and initiatives by the Election Commission. Trust of voters should be sought
only on those promises which are possible to be fulfilled.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW D ELHI; LAVU SRI KRISHNA DEVARAYALU
October  29, 2019.
3

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
————
(Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—3014LS(S3)—18-11-2019.