THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
By
SHRI VISHNU DAYAL RAM, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2019.
2. In the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution,—
(a) in List II-State List, in entry 14, the words "subject to the provisions of entry
48 of List III" shall be inserted at the end; and
(b) in List III-Concurrent List, after entry 47, the following entry shall be inserted,
namely:—
"48. Agricultural marketing, including price determination and inter-state
marketing and supply of agricultural produce.".
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 323 of  2019
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Amendment
to the Seventh
Schedule.5
10

2
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Constitution is regarded as a living document that adapts to the changing times.
The Indian Polity has evolved and matured since the Constitution was first adopted. The
economic and social drivers today demand a relook at the subjects that the Union and State
Governments have been given jurisdiction of under the Seventh Schedule. There are certain
subjects which need to be shifted from the State List to the Concurrent List as they are
pervasive across States and demand a uniform national legislation and direction.
With our varied agro-climatic zones and cropping patterns, agriculture was included
in the State List. However, over the years, agriculture has evolved into a national sector with
agrarian distress intensifying and markets being integrated nationally and internationally.
The Committee on Doubling Farmers' Income in its draft report had called for moving
agricultural marketing to the Concurrent List on the grounds that marketing has no
boundaries; necessitating a pan-India operation to meet the demand across the country.
The NITI Aayog had also suggested that both the Centre and States should have a
shared jurisdiction over agricultural marketing, in order to reform the sector. Since larger
proportions of agricultural produce are moving out of the producer State, it is vital that it be
governed by the Centre to balance our each State's interests.
With a view to achieve the aforesaid objective, it is proposed to amend the Constitution
of India by addition of agricultural marketing to the Concurrent List to enable both the
Centre and State governments to legislate on it.
Hence, this Bill.
N
EW D ELHI; VISHNU DAYAL RAM
November  4,  2019.

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
SEVENTH SCHEDULE
* * * *
LIST II-STA TE LIST
* * * *
14. Agriculture, including agricultural education and research, protection against pests
and prevention of plant diseases.
* * * *
LIST III-CONCURRENT LIST
* * * *
47. Fees in respect of any of the matters in this List, but not including fees taken in any
court.
* * * *

MGIPMRND—3125LS(S3)—18-11-2019.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram, M.P.)