1
Bill No.  323  of  2015
THE PROHIBITION OF SPITTING IN PUBLIC PLACES BILL, 2015
By
SHRI PRALHAD VENKATESH JOSHI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for prohibition of spitting in public places in order to keep
the public places clean.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prohibition of Spitting in Public Places Bill, 2015.
(2) It extends to the Union territories only.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "local authority" includes a municipal committee, corporation, council by
whatever name called, district board, cantonment board or any authority for the time
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
being entrusted by law with the control and administration of any matters within a
specified local area; and
(b) "spitting" includes expectorating.
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the spitting in any manner whatsoever, in any public place is hereby prohibited.
4. (1) Whoever violates the provisions of section 3 shall be liable to pay a fine of not
less than five hundred rupees in the case of spitting of saliva or phlegm and a fine of not
less than one thousand rupees in the case of spitting of betel nut or paan.
(2) A person violating the provisions of section 3 shall also be liable to perform such
community service as may be decided by the local authority for four hours.
5. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament or, as the case may be, each House of the State Legislature,
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session
or two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, Parliament or, as the case may
be, the State Legislature agrees in making any modification in the rule or agrees that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Prohibition of
spitting in
public place.
Punishment.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Spitting or expectorating in India is a major health and cleanliness issue that has
gripped the country since many years. Spitting is a potential cause of airborne diseases such
as tuberculosis, pneumonia and influenza (including swine flu). India has the highest number
of new cases of tuberculosis and of TB-related deaths in the world, with 2.3 million new
cases and an estimated 320,000 deaths annually. Further, in 2015 alone there have been more
than 30,000 reported cases of swine flu. Apart from being a serious public health hazard, this
habit impacts the tourism industry negatively as the red stains of gutka creates an unhygienic
environment for local public and tourists alike.
Keeping in mind, the Swachh Bharat Abhiyan, it is pivotal that we bring change in our
daily lives and manners to make sure that the country could progress in the right direction.
It is, therefore, proposed to prohibit spitting in public places and making its violation an
offence.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; PRALHAD VENKATESH JOSHI
November 18, 2015.
3

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
4

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for prohibition of spitting in public places in order to keep
the public places clean.
————
(Shri Pralhad Venkatesh Joshi, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3183LS(S3)—09-12-2015.