1
THE WILD LIFE (PROTECTION) AMENDMENT BILL, 2019
By
SHRI RAJIV PRATAP RUDY, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) The Act may be called the Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No.  324  of  2019
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In section 2 of the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), clause (12A) and (12B) shall be renumbered as clauses (12B) and (12C) and
before clauses (12B) and (12C) as so renumbered, the following clause be inserted, namely:—
'(12A) "Environmental Impact Assessment" refers to a detailed report evaluating the
likely environmental impacts of a proposed project or development, taking into account
inter-related socio-economic, cultural and human-health impacts, both beneficial and adverse;'.
3. After section 28 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, namely:—
"28A. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Chief Wildlife Warden
shall—
(a) commission an Environmental Impact Assessment Report in each of the
National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries in the region covering specifically the impact
of industrial activity in surrounding areas and impact of tourist activity on each of the
National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries; and
(b) issue permits for setting up of Commercial Establishments in non-core areas
of Wildlife Sanctuary and National Parks solely for the purpose of refreshments and
lodging, subject to Environmental Impact Assessment Reports made under clause (a)
in the impact of the setting up of such establishments:
Provided that no permit shall be issued by the Chief Wildlife Warden beyond the
determined carrying capacity of the protected areas under this Act.
28B. The Central Government in  Consultation with the State Government concerned
shall frame guidelines for setting up of commercial establishments in and around protected
areas under this Act.
28C. The Collector shall publish annual reports on the following issues related to the
National and Wildlife Reserves:—
(a) status of existing infrastructure in the protected areas and cost of upkeep of
such infrastructure facilities;
(b) status of employees working, including but not limited to number of persons
employed, wages earned and working conditions; and
(c) financial benefits to local communities in and around protected areas under
this Act.
28D. (1) No permit shall be granted to individuals travelling to the protected areas
under this Act unless unaccompanied by local guides or tour operators.
(2) No person shall be allowed to do photography in protected areas without obtaining
prior permission in this regard.
(3) No person shall be permitted to have any physical interaction with or disturb the
habitat of any species of fauna in the protected area except for scientific research purpose
subject to the fact that no physical damage is inflicted on the said species.
53 of 1972.
Insertion of
new sections
28A, 28B,
28C, 28D and
28E.
Chief Wildlife
Warden to
commission an
Environmental
Impact
Assessment
Report with
respect to
National
Parks.
Definitions.
The Central
Government
and the State
Government
to frame
guidelines for
setting up of
commercial
establishments
in protected
areas and
sanctuaries.
Collector to
publish Annual
Reports.
Regulation of
tourist
activity,
photography
and research
in protected
areas.
5
10
20
25
30
35
15

3
28E. Whoever,—
(a) found guilty of intentionally defacing or damaging any resource in the
protected areas shall be liable to a fine which shall not be less than rupees five thousand
per person and imprisonment for a term which may extend upto six months or with
both; and
(b) found guilty of littering in the protected areas shall be liable to a fine which
shall not be less than rupees two thousand per person:
Provided that if the person found guilty of any offence punishable under clause (a) or
(b) is a tour operator or a local guide, he shall be liable to a fine which shall not be less than
rupees ten thousand for the first offence:
Provided further that if the tour operator or a local guide is found guilty of any offence
punishable under clause (a) or (b) second or subsequent time, he shall be prohibited to enter
in the protected area and his license shall also be cancelled."
Penalty for
defacing or
damaging any
resource in the
protected
areas, etc.
5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India boasts of a vast diversity of flora and fauna and therefore has a huge potential to
increase ecotourism even further. The tiger, the gangetic dolphin, the flamingo of Chilika, the
mangroves of Sundarbans, the Himalayas and the Western and Eastern Ghats are just some
of the places which boast of a huge trove of ecological treasures of India. Therefore, it is only
natural that ecotourism is a growing field in the country. Researches estimate an average
annual growth rate of 7-8 per cent in ecotourism activity across the country.
The growth and proliferation of ecotourism in India must be celebrated. However, with
it come dangers as well. Exploitation of India's wildlife resources put the natural order at risk.
Poaching and disturbance of habitats are on the rise. The risk of human-wildlife conflicts
increases. There are also increasing instances of vandalism and destruction inside wildlife
reserves.
Therefore, there is a need to address the need of a well thought out ecotourism
framework in the country, especially via legislative action. At the moment, only the Wild Life
(Protection) Act of 1972 talks of ecotourism, with regards to national parks and wildlife
sanctuaries. Thus, a set of guidelines to further strengthen the scope of this Act is being
proposed.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 with a view
to:—
(a) expand the role of the Chief Wildlife Warden with respect to protected areas
under the Act for commissioning an Environmental Impact Assessment Report covering
impact of industrial activity in surrounding areas and impact of tourist activity on each
of the National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries;
(b) empower the Central Government and the State Government to frame
guidelines for setting up of commercial establishments in and around protected areas
under this act;
(c) making an obligation of the Collector to publish annual reports regarding
protected areas in such manner as may be prescribed under this Act containing status
of existing infrastructure in the protected areas and cost of upkeep of such infrastructure
facilities etc.; and
(d) regulate tourist activity, photography and research in protected areas and
punishment thereof.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAJIV PRATAP RUDY
November 6, 2019.
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE WILD LIFE (PROTECTION) ACT, 1972
(53 OF 1972)
* * *
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* * *
(12A) "Forest officer" means the Forest officer appointed under clause (2) of section 2
of the Indian Forest Act, 1927 (16 of 1927) or under any other Act for the time being in force
in a State;
(12B) "forest produce" shall have the same meaning as in sub-clause (b) of clause (4)
of section 2 of the Indian Forest Act, 1927 (16 of 1927);*      *      *
* * *
Definitions.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Wild Life (Protection)  Act, 1972.
————
(Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—3280LS(S3)—19-11-2019.