Bill No. 327 of  2015
THE CONSUMER GOODS (RIGHT TO FREE RETURN) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI NISHIKANT DUBEY, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for consumers the right to free return of consumer goods within a stipulated
time and for all matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Consumer Goods (Right to Free Return) Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall be come into force on such date, as the appropriate Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for coming
into force of different provisions of this Act.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
Definitions.
Receipt to act
as a guarantee
contract.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State, and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "consumer" means any person who buys any goods for a consideration
which has been paid or promised or partly paid and partly promised, or under any
system of deferred payment and includes any user of such goods other than the buyer
of such goods for consideration paid or promised or partly paid or partly promised, or
under any system of deferred payment when such use is made with the approval of
such person, but does not include a person who obtains such goods for resale or for
any commercial purpose;
(c) "consumer goods" mean products which are purchased for consumption by
an average consumer;
(d) "durable goods" mean goods which are consumed and used or disposed
after serving its usefulness for a period of time, which is more than two years, like
refrigerator, laptops, television sets etc.;
(e) "manufacturer" have the same meaning as given in section 2(j) of the Consumer
Protection Act, 1986;
(f) "retailer" or "retail supplier" means any person who does the sale of goods
from individuals or business to the end-user or final consumer and also includes
online retail shops; and
(g) "semi durable goods" mean those products which are neither perishing nor
lasting, like cloths, preserved foods, furniture etc.
CHAPTER II
P
ROCURING  RECEIPT  AND  EXCHANGE  OF  CONTRACT
3. (1) The appropriate Government shall make it mandatory for all retailers to
give a receipt for every durable and semi durable consumer goods purchase by the
consumers and such receipt of purchase shall act as contract between the retail
supplier and the consumer, wherein the production of this receipt shall be a pre-
requisite for every claim made under the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every receipt given to the consumer shall have consumer guarantees
specified on it as under:—
(a) that goods are of acceptable quality;
(b) that goods will be reasonably fit for use;
(c) that the description of goods is accurate and it would match any
sample or demonstration model;
(d) that the goods will satisfy any extra promises made about them; and
(e) that there is a 'right to free return' of the goods within fifteen days of
its purchase.
CHAPTER III
T
HE  RIGHT  TO FREE  RETURN
4. Every consumer shall have the right to return free any semi durable or
durable goods purchased within fifteen days of the purchase in such manner as
may be prescribed:
Provided that every such return of goods shall be done in their original
condition, with no alteration to its size or shape, along with its original packing
and the receipt of the purchase.
Right to free
return valid
till fifteen
days from
purchase.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
5. The appropriate Government shall ensure that all retail shops shall,—
(a) remove all signs that say 'no refund' or 'no replacement' from product
covers and the retail shops; and
(b) display a board mentioning the right of consumers for free return of
goods purchased by them.
6. A receipt of the purchase of goods shall be considered as guarantee itself
and the retail supplier shall not ask for any further payment from the consumer for
receiving any guarantees.
7. If a consumer returns the defective goods to the retailer, the retailer shall
have the right to claim them against the wholesaler or the manufacturer, from whom
he received the goods.
CHAPTER IV
G
RIEV ANCE REDRESSAL  MECHANISM
8. A conumer may in case of redressal of any grievance under this Act move
to the 'Consumer Disputes Redressal Forum' or to the 'State Consumer Protection
Council' or to the 'Central Consumer Protection Council' established under the
Consumer Protection Act, 1986.
9. The Central Consumer Protection Council established under CPA 1986 and
the agencies appointed by it shall be responsible for the enforcement of the
provisions and rules made under this Act.
10. The Central Consumer Protection Council shall publish on its website
this Act and rules made thereunder and also the details of complaints received by
the authorities in District, State and Central level, on different products, under the
purview of this Act, including details of:—
(a) the products returned;
(b) the refund sought;
(c) tracking the progress of each complaint with time line for completion;
and
(d) the complaint resolved.
11. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
appropriate Government may make such order or give such direction, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or
expedient for the removal of any difficulty.
12. (1) The Central Government, may by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification
in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case
may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Removal of
no
replacement
and no refund
signs and
display of
right of
consumers.
No payable
payment for
receiving
guarantee.
Right of
retailer to
make claim
against
defective
goods.
Right of
Consumers to
move to
court.
Law
enforcing
agency.
Details
disclosed
online for
transparency.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Power to
make rules.
68 of 1986.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Consumer Protection Act, 1986 is widely considered to be a benevolent social
legislation that provides for the protection of consumer rights. The fact was amended a
number of times, the last being in 2002. The Principal Act, introduced in 1986 and subsequently
amended, established consumer dispute resolution mechanisms and provides to control the
trade of spurious goods and services through the authorities established. It does not confer
on the consumer a positive right which he can enforce himself. In the context of increasing
influx of imported goods to the country and the new trend of online shopping, it is necessary
that the consumers are empowered to refuse a goods that does not satisfy the needs,
without approaching forums or courts.
This Bill makes it the right of a consumer to return any purchased product within a
stipulated time for genuine reasons. It seeks to provide the consumer a right to return any
purchased durable or semi-durable goods within fifteen days of purchase. It also provides
that there should be a centralized database on complaints received and resolved by consumer
protection councils and forums on goods purchased, so that before buying any product the
consumer can make an informed choice to any terms agreed by both parties, retail supplier
and consumer. The Bill seeks to provide additional statutory provisions for the benefit to the
consumer.
The enforcement of the Act would be the responsibility of the authorities established
under the Consumer Protection Act 1986. This will ensure that there is no burden on the
Central or State Governments for establishing additional authorities for monitoring and
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; NISHIKANT  DUBEY
November 13, 2015.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 12 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make necessary rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for consumers the right to free return of consumer goods within a stipulated
time and for all matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Nishikant Dubey, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2916LS(S3)—08-12-2015.