Short title and
commencement.
Substitution of
section 6 of
Act 4 of
1936.
THE PAYMENT OF WAGES (AMENDMENT)
BILL,  2016
A
BILL
further to amend the Payment of Wages Act, 1936.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Payment of Wages (Amendment) Act, 2016.
 (2)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. For section 6 of the Payment of W ages Act, 1936, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:—
"6. All wages shall be paid in current coin or currency notes or by cheque or by
crediting the wages in the bank account of the employee:
Provided that the appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, specify the industrial or other establishment, the employer of which shall pay
to every person employed in such industrial or other establishment, the wages only by
cheque or by crediting the wages in his bank account.".
Bill  No. 327  of  2016
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Wages to be
paid in
current coin
or currency
notes or by
cheque or
crediting in
bank
account.
5
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Payment of Wages Act, 1936 (the Act) regulates the payment of wages of certain
classes of employed persons. The Act was amended several times and last amended in the
year 2005. Section 6 of the Act provides that all wages shall be paid in current coin or
currency notes or in both. However, proviso to said section enables the employer to pay the
wages to an employee either by cheque or by crediting the wages in his bank account after
obtaining his written authorisation.
2. With the passage of time, technology has been changed and a large section of the
employed persons have their bank accounts. The payment of wages through cheque or
crediting it in the bank account of employed persons will reduce the complaints regarding
non-payment or less payment of minimum wages, besides serving the objectives of digital
and less cash economy. The State Governments of Andhra Pradesh, Uttrakhand, Punjab,
Kerala and Haryana have already made provisions in the said Act for payment of wages to
the employed persons either by cheque or by crediting the wages in their bank account, by
making state amendments to the Act.
3. In view of the above, it has been decided to substitute section 6 of the Act so as to
enable the employer to pay the wages to the employed person also by cheque or crediting it
to their bank account and also to enable the appropriate Government to specify the
industrial or other establishments, by notification in the Official Gazette, which shall pay to
every employed person, the wages only  by cheque or by crediting in his bank account.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI;               BANDARU  DATTATREYA
The 08th  December, 2016.
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936
(4 OF 1936)
*****
6. All wages shall be paid in current coin or currency notes or in both:
Provided that the employer may, after obtaining the written authorisation of the
employed person, pay him the wages either by cheque or by crediting the wages in his
bank account.
*****
Wages to be
paid in
current coin
or currency
notes.
3

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Payment of Wages Act, 1936.
————
(Shri Bandaru Dattatreya, Minister of  State for Labour and Employment )
GMGIPMRND—3843LS(S3)—09-12-2016.