1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 328 of  2019
THE COMPULSORY MILITARY CONSCRIPTION BILL, 2019
By
SHRI JAGDAMBIKA PAL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory military conscription to every Indian in the age group of
seventeen to twenty-three years of age and for matter connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Military Conscription Act, 2019.
(2) It extend to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "military conscription" means six months of training and twelve months of
service in the armed forces of the country; and
Definitions.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(b) "citizen" means every citizen between seventeen to twenty-three years of
age.
3. (1) Every citizen shall undergo military conscription in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(2) Every citizen who undergoes military conscription under sub-section (1) shall,—
(a) not receive any salary, stipend or any other type of remuneration in cash or
kind in any manner whatsoever during the entire period of conscription;
(b) have the option to choose his joining age within the age group of seventeen
to twenty-three years; and
(c) receive physical and cognitive training, as may be deemed necessary by the
Central Government.
(3) The military conscription under sub-section (1) shall be provided free of cost and
entire expenditure shall be borne by the Central Government:
Provided that if the citizen undergoing military conscription is having income above
the Income Tax exemption limit, he may be made liable to pay subscription fees for the
training period, as may specified by the Central Government under this Act.
4. No person shall be compelled to undergo military conscription under sub-section(1)
of section 3, if he is,—
(a) a person with disabilities; or
(b) a person with criminal record(s) or convicted for an offence; or
(c) exempted due to religious considerations; or
(d) he is a Non-Resident Indian (NRI) who has left the country at least sixty
months prior to the eligible age of seventeen years and has not returned to the country
for a period of not more than thirty days at once by the maximum age of twenty-three
years; or
(e) exempted under any Acts of the Parliament.
5. In section 11A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, after sub-section (3),
the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
"(3A) Any person who found guilty of any offence punishable under the
Compulsory Military Conscription Act, 2019, by the order of the President shall be
disqualified for such period, as determined, for voting at any election".
6. Any citizen who denies to undergo military conscription under sub-section (1) of
section 3 shall be declared disqualified to vote under section 11A of the Representation of
the People Act, 1951.
7. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act, as may appear to be necessary or expedient for removing difficulty.
8. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
Compulsory
Military
conscription
for every
citizen.
Exemptions.
Amendment
of the
Representation
of the People
Act, 1951.
43 of 1951.
Penalty.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
43 of 1951.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Gandhi ji stated that rights cannot exist without duties. As articles 19 and 21 of the
Constitution provide right to life and liberty, there emerges a need for every citizen to fulfil
his duty of protecting the country, without which, such rights would have no real significance.
The need is to prioritise the love for our nation among the citizens, train the citizens in
case of a war, instill discipline among youth, train women in the art of self-defence and give
real life experience of a soldiers' life.
The Bill, therefore, attempts to provide for compulsory national military service for all
citizens between the age group of seventeen and twenty-three years to achieve the above
objectives.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; JAGDAMBIKA  PAL
November 5, 2019.
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the compulsory military conscription for every citizen
who is in age group of seventeen to twenty-three years. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, is
likely to involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an
annual recurring expenditure of about rupees five thousand crore would be involved from
the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees hundred crore is also likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory military conscription to every Indian in the age group of
seventeen to twenty-three years of age and for matter connected therewith.
————
(Shri Jagdambika Pal, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—3266LS(NEW)(S3)—19-11-2019.