THE MAJOR PORT AUTHORITIES BILL, 2016
——————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
——————
CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, commencement and application.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
BOARD OF MAJOR PORT AUTHORITY
3. Constitution and composition of Board of Major Port Authority.
4. Qualifications of Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and Members of Board.
5. Removal of Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and Member from office in certain
circumstances.
6. Term of office of Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and Members.
7. Disclosure of interest.
8. Resignation of Members.
9. Removal from office of Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and Members.
10. Fees and honorarium payable to Members.
11. Powers and duties of Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and Members.
12. Meetings of Board.
13. Appointment of committees.
14. Delegation of powers.
15. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Board.
16. Power to make appointments.
CHAPTER III
M
ANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRA TION
A. STAFF OF MAJOR PORT AUTHORITY
17. List of staff of  Board.
B. PROPERTY AND CONTRACTS
18. Board to be deemed as successor of Board of Trustees of Major Port.
19. Usage of property, assets, etc., by Board.
Bill  No.  328 of  2016
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

CLAUSES
20. Procedure when immovable property cannot be acquired by agreement.
21. Contracts by Board.
C.  PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT
22. Powers of Board in respect of planning and development.
D.  IMPOSITION OF RATES
23. Scale of rates for assets and services available at Major Port.
24. Board's lien for rates.
25. Ship-owner's lien for freight and other charges.
26. Sale of goods and application of sale proceeds in certain cases.
27. Master Plan.
28. Recovery of rates and charges by distraint of vessel.
29. Application to Adjudicatory Board.
C
HAPTER IV
POWERS OF  BOARDS OF  MAJOR PORT AUTHORITIES IN RESPECT OF  LOANS AND  SECURITIES
A. FINANCIAL POWERS OF BOARDS OF MAJOR PORT AUTHORITIES
30. Power to raise loans and issue securities.
31. Endorsements to be made on security itself.
32. Indorser of security not liable for amount thereof.
33. Recognition as holder of port securities in certain cases and legal effect thereof.
34. Discharge in certain cases.
35. Security for loans taken out by Boards of Major Port Authorities.
36. Power of Board to repay loans to Government before due date.
37. Establishment and application of sinking fund.
38. Existing loans and securities to continue.
B. G
ENERAL  ACCOUNTS OF MAJOR PORT AUTHORITIES
39. General accounts of Board.
40. Application of money in general accounts.
C. A
CCOUNTS AND AUDIT
41. Accounts and audit.
CHAPTER V
SUPERVISION OF CENTRAL GOVERNMENT
42. Administration report.
43. Power of Central Government to order survey or examination of works of Board.
44. Power of Central Government to restore or complete works at cost of Board.
45. Power of Central Government to take over management of Board.
46. Laying of report.
47. Power of Central Government to exempt from obligation to use port assets.
(ii)

CLAUSES
48. Board not to sell, alienate or divest its assets, properties, rights, powers and
authorisations without sanction of Central Government.
49. Remedies of Government in respect of loans made to Board.
50. Power of Central Government to issue directions.
CHAPTER VI
C
ONSTITUTION OF ADJUDICATORY BOARD
51. Constitution of Adjudicatory Board and its functions.
CHAPTER VII
PENALTIES
52. General provision for punishment of offences.
53. Offences by companies.
CHAPTER VIII
MISCELLANEOUS
54. Cognizance of offences.
55. Protection of acts done in good faith.
56. Persons employed by Board of Authority to be public servants.
57. Power to evict certain persons from premises of  Board.
58. Alternate remedy by suit.
59. Corporate Social Responsibility and development of infrastructure by Board.
60. Power of Central Government to make rules.
61. Power of Boards of Port Authorities to make regulations.
62. Laying of rules and regulations.
63. Repeal and savings.
64. Power to remove difficulties.
65. Transitional provision.
(iii)

THE MAJOR PORT AUTHORITIES BILL, 2016
A
BILL
to provide for regulation, operation and planning of Major Ports in India and to vest the
administration, control and management of such ports upon the Boards of Major
Port Authorities and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Major Port Authorities Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
(3) It shall, in the first instance, apply to the Major Ports of Chennai, Cochin, Jawaharlal
Nehru Port, Kandla, Kolkata, Mumbai, New Mangalore, Mormugao, Paradip, V .O.
Chidambaranar and Visakhapatnam and to such other Major Ports with effect from such
date as the Central Government may notify.
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Adjudicatory Board” means the Board constituted by the Central
Government under section 51;
Short title,
commencement
and application.
Definitions.
Bill  No.  328 of  2016
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(b) “Board” means the Board of Major Port Authority constituted by the
Central Government in accordance with sub-section (1) of section 3 for each Major
Port under this Act;
(c) “capital reserves” for the purpose of this Act, shall mean the total of the
revenue excluding the reserves set forth in sub-section (1) of section 40 and the value
of the current assets of the Board in the preceding financial year;
(d) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Board appointed under
sub-section (1) of section 4;
(e) “dock” includes all basins, locks, cuts, entrances, graving docks, graving
blocks, inclined planes, slipways, gridirons, moorings, transit-sheds, warehouses,
tramways, railways and other works and things appertaining to any dock, and also the
portion of the sea enclosed or protected by the arms or groynes of a harbour;
(f) “foreshore”, in relation to a Major Port, means the area between the high-
water mark and the low-water mark relating to that Major Port;
(g) “goods” includes livestock and every kind of movable property;
(h) “grave emergency” means a condition as determined by the
Central Government wherein the Board is unable to discharge its duties appropriately
and includes acts of sedition, non-performance, unlawful and illegal actions, negligence
and financial misappropriation;
(i) “high-water mark”, in relation to a Major Port, means a line drawn through
the highest points reached by ordinary spring-tides at any season of the year at that
Major Port;
(j) “immovable property” includes wharfage-rights and all other rights exercisable
on, over, or in respect of, any land, wharf, dock or pier;
(k) “Independent Member” means a Member of the Board appointed under
sub-section (3) of section 4;
(l) “Indian Ports Act” means the Indian Ports Act, 1908;
(m) “land” includes the bed of the sea or river below high-water mark, and also
things attached to the earth or permanently fastened to anything attached to the earth;
(n) “low-water mark”, in relation to a Major Port, means a line drawn through
the lowest points reached by ordinary spring-tides at any season of the year at that
Major Port;
(o) “Major Port” or 'Major Port Authority' means the Major Port as defined in
clause (8) of section 3 of the Indian Ports Act;
(p) “Major Port approaches”, in relation to a Major Port, means those parts of
the navigable rivers and channels leading to the Major Port, where the Indian Ports
Act is in force;
(q) “master”, in relation to any vessel or any aircraft making use of any
Major Port, means any person having for the time being the charge or control of such
vessel or such aircraft, as the case may be, except a pilot, harbour master, assistant
harbour master, dock master or berthing master of the Major Port;
(r) “Member” means the Member of the Board appointed under section 4;
(s) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the
expression “notify” shall be construed accordingly;
15 of 1908.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(t) “owner”,—
(i) in relation to goods, includes any consignor, consignee, shipper or
agent for the sale, custody, loading or unloading of such goods; and
(ii) in relation to any vessel or any aircraft making use of any Major Port,
includes any part-owner, charterer, consignee, or mortgagee in possession thereof;
(u) “pier” includes any stage, stairs, landing place, hard, jetty, floating barge,
transhipper or pontoon, and any bridges or other works connected therewith.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, the term “transhipper” means a floating
craft or vessel, whether dumb or self-propelled, on which gears are provided for discharging
cargo from a barge or wharf and loading it into a ship;
(v) “port assets” means any asset within the port limits including land, movable
or immovable property or any other property, whether tangible or intangible, owned
by or vested with the Board through the Central Government or the State Government,
as the case may be;
(w) “port limits” in relation to a Major Port, means the limits including any
piers, jetties, landing-places, wharves, quays, docks and other works made on behalf
of the public for convenience of traffic, for safety of vessels or for the improvement,
maintenance or good governance of the Major Port and its approaches whether within
or without high-water-mark, and, subject to any rights of private property therein, any
portion of the shore or bank within fifty yards of high-water mark and the area of such
Major Port as may be determined by the Central Government by way of notification
from time to time;
(x) “port security” means the debentures, bonds or stock certificates issued by
the Board in respect of any loan contracted by it under the provisions of this Act or
issued by any other Authority for the payment of which the Board is liable under this
Act;
(y) “prescribed” means prescribed by the rules made under this Act;
(z) “Public Private Partnership project” means the projects taken up through a
concession contract entered into by the Board of Major Port Authority under sub-
section (1) of section 21 based on a revenue or royalty sharing basis;
(za) “rate” includes any toll, due, rent, rate, fee, or charge leviable under this
Act;
(zb) “regulations” means the regulations made by the Board under this Act;
(zc) “vessel” includes anything made for the conveyance, by water, of human
beings or of goods and a caisson;
(zd) “wharf” includes any wall or stage and any part of the land or foreshore that
may be used for loading or unloading goods, or for the embarkation or disembarkation
of passengers and any wall enclosing or adjoining the same.
(2) Words and expression used but not defined in this Act and defined in the Indian
Ports Act shall have the same meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act.
CHAPTER II
B
OARD OF MAJOR PORT AUTHORITY
3. (1) The Central Government shall, within a period of ninety days from the date of
commencement of this Act, by notification, in respect of each Major Port, constitute a Board
called the Board of Major Port Authority for that Port which shall consist of the following
Members, namely:—
Constitution
and
composition of
Board of Major
Port Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
Qualifications
of Chairperson,
Deputy
Chairperson
and Members
of Board.
38 of 1963.
(a) a Chairperson;
(b) a Deputy Chairperson;
(c) one Member each from the—
(i) Concerned State Government in which the Major Port is situated;
(ii) Ministry of Railways;
(iii) Ministry of Defence; and
(iv) Customs, Department of Revenue;
(d) not less than three and not exceeding four Independent Members;
(e) one Member not below the rank of Director nominated by the Central
Government, ex officio; and
(f) one Member representing the interest of the employees of the Major Port
Authority:
Provided that until the constitution of the Board of Major Port Authority, the Board of
Trustees constituted under section 3 of the Major Port Trust Act, 1963 shall continue to
function and shall cease to exist immediately after the constitution of the Board under this
Act.
(2) The Board of each Major Port Authority constituted under this Act shall be a
permanent body having perpetual succession and a common seal with power, subject to the
provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold or dispose of property, both movable and immovable,
and to contract, and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.
4. (1) The Chairperson and Deputy Chairperson of the Board shall be appointed by
the Central Government on the recommendation of a Select Committee consisting of such
persons and in such manner, as may be prescribed.
(2) The Members of the Board as mentioned in clause ( c) of sub-section ( 3) of
section 3 shall be appointed by the Board in such manner as may be prescribed from amongst
persons having adequate knowledge and professional experience of not less than fifteen
years in shipping, marine, management or administration.
(3) The qualifications, experience and manner of appointment of Independent Members
shall be such as may be prescribed.
(4) The appointment of the Member referred to in clause ( f) of sub-section ( 3) of
section 3 shall be made by the Central Government, by notification, from amongst the persons
who in the opinion of the Central Government are capable of representing the interest of the
employees in the Major Port Authority.
(5) Every person nominated or appointed to the office of the Chairperson or the Member
of the Board, shall, within thirty days of his nomination or appointment, furnish to the said
Board his consent and a declaration that he is not disqualified or ineligible to hold such
office.
5. (1) A person shall not be eligible for appointment or to continue as a Member of the
Board, if —
(a) he has been adjudged as an insolvent; or
(b) he has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a Member; or
(c) he has been convicted of an offence, involving moral turpitude; or
(d) he holds an office of profit or the office of the Functional Head in the
Major Port Authority or the Board of that Authority; or
Removal of
Chairperson,
Deputy
Chairperson
and Member
from office in
certain
circumstances.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

5
(e) he has made a false declaration under sub-section (5) of section 4; or
(f) he has been removed or dismissed from the service of a Major Port Authority,
Government or a body corporate owned or controlled by the Central Government or
the State Government; or
(g) an order disqualifying him for appointment as a Member has been passed by
a court or tribunal and such order is in force.
(2) The Chairperson or Deputy Chairperson or any other Member shall not be removed
from his office except by an order of the Central Government on the ground of his proved
misbehaviour or incapacity or in contravention of the provisions of section 7 after the Central
Government, has, on an inquiry, held in accordance with the procedure prescribed in this
behalf by the Central Government, come to the conclusion that the Member ought on any
such ground to be removed.
(3) The Central Government may suspend the Chairperson or Deputy Chairperson or
any other Member in respect of whom an inquiry under sub-section (2) is being initiated or
pending till the Central Government has passed an order on receipt of the report of the
inquiry.
6. (1) The Chairperson and the Deputy Chairperson shall hold office for a term not
exceeding five years from the date on which they enter upon their office or until they attain
the age of superannuation, whichever is earlier.
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, a person appointed as a Member of the Board
by virtue of an office under clause (c) of sub-section (3) of section 3 shall continue to be a
Member of the Board so long as he continues to hold that office.
(3) An Independent Member shall hold office for a term of three years from the date of
his appointment or up to the age of seventy years, whichever is earlier and shall be eligible
for re-appointment:
Provided that no Independent Member shall hold office for more than two consecutive
terms:
Provided further that an Independent Member shall not, during the said period of
three years, be appointed to or be associated with any Major Port Authority in any other
capacity, either directly or indirectly.
(4) The Member appointed under clause (f) of sub-section (3) of section 3 shall hold
office for a term of three years.
7. Before appointing any person as a Chairperson or Deputy Chairperson or Member,
the Central Government shall satisfy itself that the person does not have any such financial
or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as such Chairperson,
Deputy Chairperson or Member:
Provided that where any Member who is not so concerned or interested at the time
of occupying such office, he shall, if he becomes concerned or interested afterwards,
disclose his concern or interest forthwith when he becomes concerned or interested or at
the first meeting of the Board held after he becomes so concerned or interested and resign
forthwith.
8. The Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and Members may, by notice in writing under
their hand addressed to the Central Government, resign their office and on such resignation
being accepted by that Government, shall be deemed to have vacated their office.
Term of office
of Chairperson,
Deputy
Chairperson
and Members.
Disclosure of
interest.
Resignation of
Members.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

6
Removal from
office of
Chairperson,
Deputy
Chairperson
and Members.
Meetings of
Board.
9. The Central Government shall remove the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson or any
Member, if he-—
(a) becomes subject to any of the disqualification mentioned in section 5; or
(b) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, ceased to represent the interest
by virtue of which he was appointed or elected; or
(c) refuses to act or becomes incapable or acting; or
(d) is, without the permission of the Board previously obtained, absent from six
consecutive ordinary meetings of the Board; or
(e) is absent from the meetings of the Board for a period exceeding six consecutive
months; or
(f) acts in contravention of the provisions of this Act.
10. The Members appointed under clauses ( c), ( d) and ( f) of sub-section ( 3) of
section 3, shall be paid such honorarium as may be prescribed.
11.  The Chairperson and in his absence, the Deputy Chairperson shall have powers of
general superintendence and directions in the conduct of affairs of the Major Port Authority
and he shall, in addition to presiding over the meetings of the Board, exercise supervision
and control over the acts of all employees of the Major Port Authority in matters of executive
administration and in matters concerning the accounts and records of such Board.
12. (1) The Board shall meet at such places and times, and shall follow such rules of
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including quorum at such
meetings), as may be specified by the regulations.
(2) If the Chairperson for any reason, is unable to attend a meeting of the Board, the
Deputy Chairperson and in the absence of such Deputy Chairperson, any other Member
chosen by the Members present amongst themselves at the meeting, shall preside at the
meeting.
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Board shall be—
(a) decided by a majority of votes by the Members present and voting, and in
the event of an equality of votes, the Chairperson or in his absence, the person presiding
shall have a second or casting vote;
(b) dealt with as expeditiously as possible and the Board shall dispose of the
same within a period of sixty days from the date of receipt of the application:
Provided that where any such application could not be disposed of within the said
period of sixty days, the Board shall record its reasons in writing for not disposing of the
application within that period.
13. (1) A Board may, from time to time, from amongst its Members and any other
person, constitute committees for the purpose of discharging such of its functions as may be
delegated to such committee or committees by the Board.
(2) The committee or committees constituted under this section shall meet at such time and
at such places and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of  business
at its meetings (including the quorum) as may be provided by regulations made under this Act.
14. The Board may, for the purpose of discharging of its powers, functions and duties,
by general or special order in writing, specify—
(a) the powers and duties conferred or imposed upon the Board by or under this
Act which may also be exercised or performed by the Chairperson; and
Fees and
honorarium
payable to
Members.
Powers and
duties of
Chairperson,
Deputy
Chairperson
and Members.
Appointment
of  committees.
Delegation of
powers.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

7
V acancies, etc.,
not to
invalidate
proceedings of
Board.
Power to make
appointments.
(b) the powers and duties conferred or imposed on the Chairperson by or under
this Act, which may also be exercised or performed by the Deputy Chairperson or any
officer or officers of the Board and the conditions and restrictions, if any, subject to
which the powers and duties may be exercised and performed:
Provided that any powers and duties conferred or imposed upon the Deputy Chairperson
or any officer of the Board under this clause ( b) shall be exercised and performed by him
subject to the supervision and control of the Chairperson.
15. No act or proceedings of the Board shall be invalid merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in, the constitution of the Board; or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a Member of such Board;
or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Board not affecting the merits of the
case.
16. (1) The power of appointing any person to any Post, whether temporary or permanent
shall—
(a) in the case of a post—
(i) the incumbent of which is to be regarded as the Head of a department; or
(ii) to which such incumbent is to be appointed; or
(iii) the maximum of the pay scale of which (exclusive or allowances)
exceeds such amount as the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, fix,
be exercisable by the Central Government after consultation with the Chairperson;
(b) in the case of any other post, be exercisable by the Chairperson or by such
authority as may be specified by regulations:
Provided that no person shall be appointed as a pilot at any port, who is not for the
time being authorised by the Central Government under the provisions of the Indian Ports
Act to pilot vessels at that or any other port.
(2) The Central Government may, by order, specify any post the incumbent of which
shall, for the purposes of this Act, be regarded as the Head of a department.
CHAPTER III
M
ANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRA TION
A. STAFF OF MAJOR PORT AUTHORITY
17. The Board shall after every five years prepare and submit to the Central Government
a list of the employees of the Board of Major Port Authority indicating therein the designations
and grades of employees and the salaries, fees and allowances which are proposed to be paid
to them.
B. P
ROPERTY AND CONTRACTS
18. On and from the date of constitution of the Board—
(a) the Board of the Major Port Authority shall be the successor of the Board of
Trustees constituted under the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963;
(b) all the assets and liabilities of the Board of Trustees shall stand transferred
to, and vested in, the Board.
List of staff of
Board.
Board to be
deemed as
successor of
Board of
Trustees of
Major Port.
38 of 1963.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

8
Usage of
property,
assets, etc., by
Board.
Explanation.—The assets of the Board of Trustees shall be deemed to include
all rights and powers, all properties, whether movable or immovable, including, in
particular, cash balances, deposits and all other interests and rights in, or arising out
of, such properties as may be in the possession of the Board of Trustees and all books
of account and other documents relating to the same; and liabilities shall be deemed to
include all debts, liabilities and obligations of whatever kind;
(c) without prejudice to the provisions of clause (a), all debts, obligations and
liabilities incurred, all contracts entered into and all matters and things engaged to be
done by, with or for the Board of Trustees immediately before that date, for or in
connection with the purpose of the said Board of Trustees, shall be deemed to have
been incurred, entered into or engaged to be done by, with or for, the Board;
(d) all sums of money due to the Board of Trustees immediately before that date
shall be deemed to be due to the Board;
(e) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or which could have been
instituted by or against the Board of Trustees immediately before that date may be
continued or may be instituted by or against the Board;
(f) every employee serving under the Board of Trustees of the Major Port
immediately before such date shall become an employee of the Board, shall hold his
office or service therein by the same tenure and upon the same terms and conditions of
service as he would have held the same if the Board had not been established and shall
continue to do so unless and until his employment in the Board is terminated or until
his tenure, remuneration or terms and conditions of service are duly altered by the
Board:
Provided that the tenure, remuneration and terms and conditions of service of
any such employee shall not be altered to his disadvantage without the previous sanction
of the Central Government.
19. (1) The Board of each Major Port shall be entitled to use its property, assets and
funds in such manner and for such purposes as it may deem fit for the benefit of that Major
Port.
(2) All Port assets under the ownership of the Board or vested with the Board through
the Central Government shall be used and developed as per the regulations made by the
Board in that behalf and to the exclusion of any municipal, local or Government regulation:
Provided that any contract or arrangement by the Board for sale of land or immovable
property or for lease of land or immovable property for port related use for a term exceeding
forty years and for any purpose other than the purposes specified in section 22 for a term
exceeding twenty years shall be subject to the prior approval of the Central Government:
Provided further that the tenure for lease of land or immovable property for
Public Private Partnership projects by the Board shall be subject to the policy notified by the
Central Government in respect of such Public Private Partnership projects.
(3) The Board of each Major Port may erect, construct or build such civil structures
within the port limits for port development or improving commerce and trade in national
interest for which no regulatory license or approval from the State authorities shall be required,
unless so mandated by the Central Government.
20. Where any immovable property is required for the purposes of the Board, the
Central Government or, as the case may be, the State Government may, at the request of the
Board, procure the acquisition thereof under the provisions of the Right to Fair Compensation
and Transparency in Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 or any other law for the time
being in force, and on payment by the Board of the compensation awarded under that Act
and of the charges incurred by the Government in connection with the proceedings, the land
shall vest in the Board.
30 of 2013.
Procedure
when
immovable
property
cannot be
acquired by
agreement.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

9
Powers of Board
in respect of
planning and
development.52 of 1962.
21. (1) The Board of each Major Port shall be competent to enter into and perform any
contract necessary for the performance of its functions under this Act.
(2) Every contract shall, on behalf of the Board of each Major Port, be made by the
Chairperson or by any such officer of the Board as the Chairperson may by general or
special order, authorise in this behalf and shall be sealed with the common seal of the Board.
(3) The form and manner in which any contract shall be made under this Act shall be
such as may be prescribed.
C. P
LANNING AND DEVELOPMENT
22. For the purposes of planning and development of the Major Port, the Board in
relation to that Major Port shall have the power to make regulations, not inconsistent with
the Customs Act, 1962 or any rules made thereunder, to—
(a) undertake, execute and perform such works and provide such services at or
within the port limits and Major Port approaches on such terms and conditions as it
may deem necessary or expedient;
(b) declare availability of the port assets at the Major Port or Major Port
approaches for port related activities and services subject to such limits, conditions
and restrictions as it may deem necessary or expedient;
(c) develop and provide infrastructure facilities including setting up new ports,
jetties, navigational channels, dry ports and such other infrastructure in furtherance of
the interest of the Major Port;
(d) take charge of the goods from the concerned owner for the purpose of
performing any port related services;
(e) order, in cases of emergency or for any other reason, the master or owner or
agent of any sea-going vessel, not to bring any vessel alongside of, or to remove such
vessel from, any dock, berth, wharf, quay, stage, jetty or pier belonging to or under the
control of the Board;
(f) permit construction and development by itself or through any person, to make,
erect, fix or remove within the port limits or Major Port approaches any wharf, dock,
quay, stage, jetty, pier, building or structure, erection or mooring or undertake any
reclamation of foreshore within the said limits and buildings and amenities required
for the residence and welfare of the employees of the Board, subject to such limits,
conditions and restrictions as it may deem necessary or expedient;
(g) provide exemption or remission from payment of any rate or charge leviable
on any goods or vessels or class of goods or vessels under this Act;
(h) provide any other services or amenities in respect of vessels, passengers,
goods or employees;
(i) undertake, execute and perform such works, activities and studies to promote
maritime education, training skill development of coastal communities, seafarers
welfare and Major Port related development; and
(j) make or construct or erect within the port limits such structures, buildings,
drains, roads, fences, tube-wells, in-take wells, storage facilities, warehouses, pipelines,
telephone lines, communication towers, electricity supply or transmission equipment,
and such other works and conveniences as the Board of each Major Port thinks proper.
Contracts by
Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

10
Scale of rates
for assets and
services
available at
Major Port.
D. IMPOSITION OF RATES
23. ( 1) The Board of each Major Port Authority or the committee or committees
appointed in this behalf by the Board in accordance with section 13, may,—
(a) frame scale of rates at which, and a statement of conditions under which any
services shall be performed or made available;
(b) frame scale of rates at which, and a statement of conditions under which, the
access to and usage of the port assets may be allowed by the Board;
(c) frame consolidated scale of rates for any combination of services specified in
clause (a) or for any combination of such service or services with any user or permission
to use or access to any port assets as specified in clause ( b);
(d) pass an order for refund of any amount overcharged by the Board in relation
to the services provided to any person;
(e) pass an order for recovery of any rate or charge which is short-levied or
erroneously refunded by the Board to any person under this Act;
(f) frame different scales, fees, rates and conditions for different classes of goods
and vessels under this section:
Provided that the fixation and implementation of such scales, fees, rates and
conditions shall—
(a) not be with retrospective effect;
(b) not be applicable for Public Private Partnership projects already awarded
by the Board or the Central Government;
(c) not be in derogation with the rules made by or the directives of the
Central Government in this behalf;
(d) not be inconsistent with the provisions of the Competition Act, 2002;
and
(e) not be inconsistent with the provisions of any other law for the time
being in force:
Provided further that in case of such Public Private Partnership projects, the
Board may fix the reference tariff for purposes of bidding only and the concessionaire
appointed under any such Public Private Partnership projects shall be free to fix the
tariff based on market conditions and such other conditions as may be notified:
Provided also that the revenue share and other conditions would be as per the
provisions of the specific concession agreement between the Board and the
Public Private Partnership concessionaire appointed under the Public Private
Partnership project.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1), the Board
may, by auction or by inviting tenders, lease any land or shed belonging to or in its possession
or occupation at a rate higher than that provided under clause (b) of sub-section (1).
24. (1) The Board for the amount of all rates leviable under this Act in respect of any
goods and for the rent due to such Board for any buildings, plinths stacking areas, or other
premises on or in which any goods may have been placed, it shall have a lien on such goods,
and may seize and detain the same until such rates and rents are fully paid.
(2) The right of lien referred to in sub-section (1) shall have priority over all other liens
and claims, except for general average and for ship owner's lien upon the said goods for
freight and other charges where such lien exists and has been preserved in the manner
12 of 2003.
Board's lien for
rates.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

11
Ship-owner’s
lien for freight
and other
charges.
Sale of goods
and application
of sale
proceeds in
certain cases.
52 of 1962.
52 of 1962.
provided in sub-section (1) of section 25, and for money payable to the Central Government
under any law for the time being in force relating to customs, other than by way of penalty or
fine.
(3) The right of lien shall also vest with any concessionaire appointed by the Board
with whom a concession contract under a Public Private Partnership project for operating
any berth or terminal within the port limits has been executed by the said Board.
25. (1) If the master or owner of any vessel or his agent, at or before the time of
landing from such vessel or any goods at any port asset belonging to or in the occupation of
the Board of the Major Port, gives to such Board a notice in writing that such goods are to
remain subject to a lien for freight or other charges payable to the ship owner, to an amount
to be mentioned in such notice, such goods shall continue to be liable to such lien to such
amount.
(2) The goods shall be retained in the custody of the Board at the risk and expense of
the owners of the goods until such lien is discharged and godown or storage rent shall be
payable by the party entitled to such goods for the time during which they may be so retained.
(3) Upon the production, before any officer appointed by the Board in that behalf, of
a document purporting to be a receipt for, or release from, the amount of such lien, executed
by the person by whom or on whose behalf such notice has been given, the Board may
permit such goods to be removed without regard to such lien, provided that the Board shall
have used reasonable care in respect to the authenticity of such document.
26. (1) The Board may, after expiry of such time and in such manner as stipulated in
section 48 of the Customs Act, 1962, sell any goods that have passed or placed into the
custody of the Board upon landing thereof—
(a) if any rates payable to the Board in respect of such goods have not been
paid; or
(b) if any rent payable to the Board in respect of any place on or in which such
goods have been stored has not been paid; or
(c) if any lien of any ship-owner for freight or other charges of which notice has
been given has not been discharged and if the person claiming such lien for freight or
other charge has made to the Board an application for such sale; or
(d) if such goods are not removed by the owner or the person entitled thereto
from the premises of the Board.
(2) The procedure for sale of goods under sub-section ( 1) and the proceeds of any
such sale shall be applied in the manner as provided in section 150 of the Customs
Act, 1962.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, controlled goods may be sold
at such time and in such manner as the Central Government may direct.
Explanation.—In this section, “controlled goods” means the goods, the price or disposal
of which is regulated under any law for the time being in force.
27. Subject to the rules made under this Act, the Board of each Major Port shall be
entitled to create specific master plan in respect of any development or infrastructure
established or proposed to be established within the port limits and such master plan shall be
independent of any local or State Government regulations of any authority whatsoever.
28. (1) If the master of any vessel in respect of which any rates or penalties are payable
under this Act, or under any regulations or orders made in pursuance thereof, refuses or
neglects to pay the same or any part thereof on demand, the Board may distrain or arrest
such vessel and the tackle, apparel and furniture belonging thereto, or any part thereof, and
detain the same until the amount so due to the Board, together with such further amount as
may accrue for any period during which the vessel is under distraint or arrest, is paid.
Master Plan.
Recovery of
rates and
charges by
distraint of
vessel.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

12
Application to
Adjudicatory
Board.
Power to raise
loans and issue
securities.
42 of 1999.
36 of 1963.
(2) In case any part of the said rates or penalties, or of the cost of the distress or arrest,
or of the keeping of the same, remains unpaid for the space of fifteen days next after any such
distress or arrest has been so made, the Board may cause the vessel or other thing so
distrained or arrested to be sold, and, with the proceeds of such sale, shall satisfy such rates
or penalties and costs, including the costs of sale remaining unpaid, rendering the surplus
(if any) to the master of such vessel on demand.
29. Any person aggrieved by any action of the Board while exercising its powers
under sections 19 to 28 (except section 25), may approach the Adjudicatory Board constituted
under section 51 by filing an application before it in such form, manner and on payment of
such fee, as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER IV
P
OWERS OF BOARDS OF MAJOR PORT AUTHORITIES IN RESPECT OF LOANS AND SECURITIES
A. FINANCIAL POWERS OF BOARDS OF MAJOR PORT AUTHORITIES
30. (1) The Board may for the purposes of its capital expenditure and working capital
requirements raise loans in any currency or currencies from any—
(a) scheduled bank or financial institution located within India; or
(b) financial institution in any country outside India in compliance with the laws
for the time being in force:
Provided that no loan or loans exceeding a sum equivalent to fifty per cent. of
the capital reserves of the Board shall be raised by the Board without the previous
sanction of the Central Government.
(2) The loans may be raised by the Board in open market within India and in any
country outside India on port securities including but not limited to debentures, bonds and
stock certificates issued by the Board or may be obtained from the Central Government or a
State Government:
Provided that no loan shall be raised from and no securities shall be issued to any
person resident outside India without complying with the Foreign Exchange Management
Act, 1999, the circulars and guidelines issued by the Reserve Bank of India, the Foreign
Direct Investment Policy issued by the Central Government and any other law for the time
being in force.
(3) The holder of any port security in any form may obtain in exchange thereof, upon
such terms as the Board may from time to time determine, a port security in such form as
may be specified by the regulations made by the Board.
(4) The right to sue in respect of moneys secured by port securities shall be exercisable
by the holders thereof subject to the provisions of the Limitation Act, 1963.
(5) Nothing contained in this Act shall be deemed to affect the power of the Boards of
Major Port Authorities to raise loans under the Local Authorities Loans Act, 1914.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Board may borrow moneys by
means of temporary overdraft or otherwise by pledging the securities held by the Board in
its reserve funds or on the security of the fixed deposits of the Board in its banks:
Provided that such temporary overdrafts or other loans shall not be taken, without
previous sanction of the Central Government, if at any time in any year the amount of such
overdrafts or other loans exceeds a sum equivalent to fifty per cent. of the capital reserves of
the Board:
Provided further that all moneys so borrowed by temporary overdrafts or otherwise
shall be expended for the purposes of this Act.
9 of 1914.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

13
31. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 15 of the Negotiable Instruments
Act, 1881, no indorsement of a port security, which is transferable by indorsement, shall be
valid unless made by the signature of the holder inscribed on the back of the security itself.
32. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, a
person shall not by reason only of his having indorsed any port security be liable to pay any
money due, either as principal or as interest, thereunder.
33. (1) The person to whom a duplicate or new security has been issued under the regulations
made by the Board under section 22 shall be deemed for the purposes of sub-section (2) to
have been recognised by the Board as the holder of the security; and a duplicate security or
a new security so issued to any person shall be deemed to constitute a new contract between
the Board and such person and all persons deriving title thereafter through him.
(2) No recognition by the Board of a person as the holder of a port security shall be
called in question by any court so far as such recognition affects the relations of the Board
with the person recognised by it as the holder of a port security or with any person claiming
an interest in such security; and any such recognition by the Board of any person shall
operate to confer on that person a title to the security or securities subject only to a personal
liability to the rightful owner of the security for money had and received on his account.
34. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Limitation Act, 1963—
(a) on payment of the amount due on a port security on or after the date on
which payment becomes due; or
(b) when a duplicate security has been issued under the regulations made by the
Board under section 22; or
(c) when a new security has issued upon conversion, consolidation or sub-division
under the regulations made by the Board,
the Board shall be discharged from all its liability in respect of the security so paid or in
place of which a duplicate or new security has been issued—
(i) in the case of payment after the lapse of six years from the date on
which payment was due;
(ii) in the case of a duplicate security after the lapse of six years from the
date of the issue thereof or from the date of the last payment of interest on the
original security, whichever date is later;
(iii) in case of a new security issued upon conversion, consolidation or
sub-division after the lapse of six years from the date of the issue thereof.
35. If a loan is raised by the Board of any Major Port and a security other than the port
security is required to be furnished to secure such loan, the Board of that Major Port may
secure such loan against—
(a) the port assets other than—
(i) any sum set apart by the Board—
(A) as the sinking fund for the purpose of paying off any loan; or
(B) for the payment of pension to its employees; or
(ii) the provident or pension fund established by the Board; and
(b) income of the Board from the port assets and services.
36. The Board may apply any sums, out of moneys which may come into its hands
under the provisions of this Act and which can be so applied without prejudicing the security
of the other holders of port securities, in repaying to the Government any sum which may
remain due to it in respect of the principal account of any loan although the time fixed for the
repayment of the same may not have arrived.
Endorsements
to be made on
security itself.
Indorser of
security not
liable for
amount thereof.
Recognition as
holder of port
securities in
certain cases
and legal effect
thereof.
Discharge in
certain cases.
26 of 1881.
26 of 1881.
Security for
loans taken out
by Boards of
Major Port
Authorities.
Power of Board
to repay loans
to Government
before due
date.
36 of 1963.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

14
38 of 1963.
37. (1) In respect of loans raised by the respective Board of the Major Port Authorities
under this Act, which are not repayable before the expiration of one year from the date of
such loans, such Boards shall set apart out of their income enough sinking fund or funds to
service or liquidate such loans for a period of at least one year.
(2) Before the commencement of this Act, if any sinking fund had been established by
the Board of Trusts constituted under the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 in respect of a loan
raised by it for which loan, the Board is liable under this Act and the sinking fund so established
by that Board of Trusts shall be deemed to have been established by the Board under this Act.
(3) The sums so set apart by the Board under sub-section ( 1) and the sums forming
part of any sinking fund referred to in sub-section (2) shall be applied in such manner as may
be prescribed.
(4) The Board may apply the whole or any part of the sums accumulated in any sinking
fund in or towards the discharge of the moneys borrowed for the repayment of which the
fund has been established:
Provided that  The Board pays into the fund in each year, and accumulates until the
whole of the moneys borrowed are discharged a sum equivalent to the interest which would
have been produced by the sinking fund, or the part of the sinking fund so applied.
38. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, all loans raised or borrowed and
all securities issued or pledged in relation to a Major Port prior to the commencement of this
Act shall continue to be governed in accordance with the provisions of the Major Port Trusts
Act, 1963.
B. G
ENERAL ACCOUNTS OF MAJOR PORT AUTHORITIES
39. All moneys received by or on behalf of the Board under the provisions of this Act
shall be credited to such general account or accounts of the Board which the Board may
from time to time generally open with the scheduled banks as per the guidelines of the
Ministry of Finance, Government of India.
40. (1) The moneys credited to the general account or accounts under section 39, shall
be applied by the Board in payment of the following charges, namely:-—
(a) the salaries, fees, allowances, pensions, gratuities, compassionate allowances
or other moneys due to—
(i) the Members of the Board except Members appointed under
clauses (d), (e) and (f) of sub-section (3) of section 3;
(ii) the employees of the Board; and
(iii) the surviving relatives, if any, of such employees;
(b) the cost and expenses, if any, incurred by the Board in the conduct and
administration of any provident or welfare fund or loan or special fund established by
the Board;
(c) the maintenance, development, security and protection of the Board and the
docks, warehouses and other properties of the Board;
(d) the cost of repairs and maintenance of the property belonging to or vested in
the Board and all charges upon the same and all working expenses;
(e) the costs, expenses, sums, payments and contributions to be made or incurred
by the Board for the purposes provided under section 23; and
(f) any other charge or expenditure for which the Board may be legally liable.
(2) All moneys standing to the credit of the Board which cannot immediately be applied
in the manner or for the purposes specified in sub-section (1) may be used for such lawful
purposes as the Board may from time to time decide.
Establishment
and application
of sinking fund.
38 of 1963.
Existing loans
and securities to
continue.
General
accounts of
Board.
Application of
money in
general
accounts.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

15
Accounts and
audit.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 38 and sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2),
moneys received by or on behalf of the Board from non-port related use except those falling
under section 59 shall be credited to a designated account and shall be applied by the Board
for capital investment or for such purposes as may be prescribed.
C. A
CCOUNTS AND AUDIT
41. (1) The Board shall prepare a budget, maintain proper accounts and other relevant
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts including the balance sheet in such
form as may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller
and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The accounts of the Board shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General
of India or such other person as may be appointed by him in this behalf and any amount
payable to him by the Board in respect of such audit shall be debitable to the general account
of the Board.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General and any person appointed by him in
connection with the audit of the accounts of the Board under this Act shall have the same
rights and privileges and authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and
Auditor-General generally has in connection with the audit of Government accounts and, in
particular shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected
vouchers and other documents and papers, and to inspect any of the offices of the Authority.
(4) The accounts of the Board, as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of
India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report
thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government by the Board and the Central
Government shall cause the same to be laid, as soon as may be after it is received, before
each House of Parliament.
CHAPTER V
S
UPERVISION OF CENTRAL GOVERNMENT
42. As soon as may be after the first day of April in every year and not later than such
date as may be fixed by the Central Government, the Board shall submit to the Central
Government a detailed report of the administration of the Board during the preceding year
ending on the thirty-first day of March, in such form as the Central Government may direct.
43. The Central Government may, at any time, order a local survey or examination of
any works of the Board, or the intended site thereof and the cost of such survey and
examination shall be borne and paid by the Board from and out of the moneys credited to its
general account.
44. (1) If, at any time, the Central Government is of the opinion that the inaction by
any Board in repairing, completing, restoring, carrying out or providing any work or appliance
mentioned in sub-section (2) has led to a grave emergency, the Central Government may
cause such work to be restored or completed or carried out, or such repairs to be carried out
or such appliance to be provided and the cost of any such restoration, completion, construction,
repair or provision shall be paid by the concerned Board from and out of the moneys credited
to its general account.
(2) The following actions or omissions may be considered to have led to grave
emergency under sub-section (1), if any Board-—
(a) allows any work or appliance constructed or provided by, or vested in, the
Board to fall into disrepair; or
(b) does not, within a reasonable time, complete any work commenced by the
Board or included in any estimate sanctioned by the Central Government; or
Administration
report.
Power of Central
Government to
order survey or
examination of
works of Board.
Power of
Central
Government to
restore or
complete works
at cost of
Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

16
(c) does not, after due notice in writing, proceed to carry out effectually any
work or repair or provide any appliance which is necessary in the opinion of the
Central Government for the purposes of this Act.
45. (1) If, at any time, the Central Government is of the opinion—
(a) any Board is unable to perform the duties imposed on it by or under the
provisions of this Act or of any other law for the time being in force; or
(b) that any Board has persistently made defaults in  performance of the duties
imposed upon it by or under the provisions of this Act or of any other law for the time
being in force and as a result of such default, the financial position or the administration
of that Board has greatly deteriorated,
the Central Government may, by notification, take over the management of that Board for
such period, not exceeding twelve months at a time, as may be specified in the notification:
Provided that before issuing a notification under this sub-section for the reasons
mentioned in clause ( b), the Central Government shall give a reasonable time of not less
than three months to the Board to show-cause why its management should not be taken over
and shall consider the explanations and objections, if any, of that Board.
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-section ( 1) for taking over the
management of the Board,—
(a) all the Members of the Board shall, as from the date of taking over, stand
removed from their respective office or position in the Board;
(b) all the powers and duties which may, by or under the provisions of this Act
or of any other law for the time being in force, to be exercised or performed by or on
behalf of the Board, shall be exercised and performed by such person or persons as the
Central Government may direct in this behalf until the Board is reconstituted under
clause (b) of sub-section (3);
(c) all property vested in the Board shall, until the Board is reconstituted under
clause (b) of sub-section (3), vest in the Central Government.
(3) On the expiration of the period of taking over specified in the notification issued
under sub-section (1) or at any time prior to such expiration, the Central Government may
by notification —
(a) extend the period of taking over the management of the Board for such
further term, not exceeding twelve months, as it may consider necessary; or
(b) reconstitute the Board by making fresh appointment to all posts of the Board
on such terms and conditions as the Central Government may consider necessary, and
in such case, any persons who stand removed from their offices under clause ( a) of
sub-section (2) shall be deemed disqualified for appointment.
46. For any action or actions taken under sections 42 and 44 and any notification
issued under section 45, the Central Government shall prepare and cause a full report of any
such action or actions and notification and the circumstances leading to such action to be
laid before each House of Parliament.
47. Notwithstanding anything contrary in this Act, the Central Government may, in the
interest of security of the nation or on account of a grave emergency, by general or special
order, from time to time, permit certain specified vessels or classes of vessels to discharge or
ship goods or certain specified goods or classes of goods, at such place in a Major Port or
within the Major Port approaches, in such manner, during such period and subject to such
payments to the concerned Board in relation to such Major Port or such Major Port approaches
and on such conditions as the Central Government may think fit.
Power of
Central
Government to
take over
management of
Board.
Laying of
report.
Power of
Central
Government to
exempt from
obligation to
use port assets.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

17
38 of 1963.
48. The Board shall not sell, alienate or divest its assets, properties, rights, powers
and authorisation vested in it under this Act without the prior sanction of the Central
Government.
49. (1) The Central Government or a State Government, from the date of commencement
of this Act, shall have, in respect of loans made by it to the Board or  to any other authority
for the repayment of which the Board is legally liable on such commencement, the same
remedies and priority as applicable under the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 as if this Act had
not been passed.
(2) For prospective loans by the Central or State Governments or of loans made by any
other authority, the remedies would be the same as available to holders of port securities
issued by the Board unless priority or greater rights are granted by the Board in respect of
such loans within the respective loan agreements.
50. (1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, the Board shall
in discharge of its functions under this Act, be bound by such directions on question of
policy as the Central Government may give in writing from time to time:
Provided that the Board shall be given an opportunity to express its views before any
direction is given under this sub-section.
(2) The decision of the Central Government on whether a question is one of policy or
not shall be final and binding on the Board.
CHAPTER VI
C
ONSTITUTION OF ADJUDICATORY BOARD
51. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, constitute an Adjudicatory Board
for adjudicating disputes relating to Major Ports and such Board shall consist of a
Presiding Officer and such other members not exceeding two, as may be appointed by the
Central Government.
(2) The head office of the Adjudicatory Board shall be in Mumbai:
Provided that the Adjudicatory Board may hold its sittings at such other places as the
Presiding Officer may decide from time to time having taken into consideration the
convenience to decide the disputes referred to it.
(3) The Adjudicatory Board referred to in sub-section (1) shall perform the following
functions, namely:—
(a) the functions envisaged to be carried out by the erstwhile Tariff Authority
for Major Ports arising from the Tariff Guidelines of 2005, 2008 and 2013 and tariffs
orders issued by the said Authority;
(b) to receive and adjudicate reference on any dispute or differences or claims
related to rights and obligations of Major Ports and Public Private Partnership
concessionaires or captive users for dedicated berth within the framework of their
concession agreements and to pass orders after considering and hearing all the parties
involved in the dispute:
Provided that any party not agreeable with order of the Adjudicatory Board may
resort to arbitration as provided under the provisions of their respective concession
agreements;
Board not to
sell, alienate or
divest its assets,
properties,
rights, powers
and
authorisations
without sanction
of Central
Government.
Remedies of
Government in
respect of loans
made to Board.
Power of
Central
Government to
issue
directions.
Constitution of
Adjudicatory
Board and its
functions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

18
(c) to appraise, review the stressed Public Private Partnership projects as
referred by the Central Government or the Board of the Major Ports and to suggest
measures to revive such projects; and
(d) to look into the complaints received from port users against the services and
terms of service rendered by the Major Ports or the private operators operating in the
Major Ports and to pass necessary orders after hearing the parties concerned:
Provided that any party not satisfied with the order of the Adjudicatory Board
shall be free to resort to arbitration or any other available legal remedy.
(4) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Presiding Officer of the
Adjudicatory Board unless he is, or has been, or is qualified to be, a judge of a High Court.
(5) The Presiding Officer and members of the Adjudicatory Board shall be appointed
by the Central Government on the recommendation of a Select Committee consisting of
such persons and in such manner as may be prescribed.
(6) The Presiding Officer and members of the Adjudicatory Board shall hold office
for a term not exceeding five years from the date on which they enters upon their office or
until they attain the age of seventy years, whichever is earlier.
(7)  A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a member of the Adjudicatory
Board unless he is an expert in the field of finance, commerce, marine, shipping and port related
matters, etc., having worked in the respective field for not less than twenty years.
(8) The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service
of the Presiding Officer and members of the Adjudicatory Board shall be such as may be
prescribed:
Provided that neither the salary and allowance nor other terms and conditions of service
of the Presiding Officer or members of the Adjudicatory Board shall be varied to their
disadvantage after their appointment.
(9) The procedure to be adopted by the Adjudicatory Board, while discharging its
functions referred to in sub-section(1) shall be such as may be prescribed.
(10) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
while exercising the powers under sub-section ( 1), the Adjudicatory Board shall have the
same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 while
trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the discovery and production of books of account and other documents, at
such place and at such time as may be specified by the Adjudicatory Board;
(b) summoning and enforcing the attendance of persons and examining them on
oath;
(c) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents; and
(d) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(11) Any proceeding before the Adjudicatory Board shall be deemed to be a judicial
proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 and for the purposes of section 196
of the Indian Penal Code and the Adjudicatory Board shall be deemed to a civil court for all
the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
(12) Subject to the provisions of this Act, every order made by the Adjudicatory Board
under this Act shall be final and shall not be called in question in any suit, application,
execution or other proceeding and no injunction shall be granted by any court or other
authority in respect of any action taken or intended to be taken in pursuance of any power
conferred by or under this Act.
5 of 1908.
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

19
Offences by
companies.
Persons
employed by
Board of
Authority to be
public servants.
45 of 1860.
CHAPTER VII
PENALTIES
52. Any person who contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or any rule, regulation
or order made thereunder, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to rupees one
lakh.
53. (1) If the person committing an offence under this Act is a company, every person
who, at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, the
company for the conduct of business of the company, as well as the company, shall be
deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person liable
to such punishment provided in this Act if he proves that the offence was committed without
his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such
offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), where an offence under
this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed
with the consent or connivance of, or that the commission of the offence is attributable to
any negligence on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company,
such director, manager, secretary, or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
(a) “company” means a body corporate and includes a firm or other
association of individuals; and
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
CHAPTER VIII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
54. No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate of the
First Class shall try any offence punishable under this Act or any rule or regulation made
thereunder.
55. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Board or any Member or
employee thereof in respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done
under this Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder, or for any deficiency of service or
any consequential losses on account of deficiency in services.
56. Every person employed by the Board under this Act, shall be deemed to be a
public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
57. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, the Board in exercise of the powers conferred on it by regulations made under this Act
or by invoking the contractual remedies available to the Board may cancel the allotment of
any premises made to any employee of the Board or any other person or evict an employee
of the Board or any person in occupation of any port asset or premises or area in the port
limits, by notice in writing, addressed to such allottee or employee or other person who may
be in occupation or possession thereof in violation of the regulations specified or formulated
by the Board:
Provided that such notice shall indicate the reasons for cancellation of allotment or
eviction or removal along with the period within which the removal or eviction is sought and
General
provision for
punishment of
offences.
Cognizance of
offences.
Protection of
acts done in
good faith.
Power to evict
certain persons
from premises
of the Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

20
Corporate
Social
Responsibility
and
development of
infrastructure
by Board.
recovery of the sums of dues in arrears and also for the extended unauthorised use of such
premises.
(2) If any allottee or employee or other person is aggrieved by the order made under
sub-section (1), then the said allottee or employee or other person may appeal against the
order with the compensation officer so appointed by the Board within thirty days from the
receipt of the order under sub-section (1).
(3) If any allottee or employee or other person refuses or fails to comply with an order
made under sub-section (1), then any Magistrate of the First Class may, on application made
by or on behalf of the Board, order any police officer, with proper assistance, to enter into
the premises and evict any person from, and take possession of, the premises and to deliver
the same to the Board or a person appointed by the Board in that behalf and the police
officer may, for the purpose, use such force as may be necessary.
(4) Any such notice as is referred to in sub-section (1) may be served—
(a) by delivering or tendering it to the allottee or employee or any other person
who may be in occupation or possession of the whole or any part of the premises; or
(b) if it cannot be so delivered or tendered, by affixing it on the outer door or
some other conspicuous part of the premises; or
(c) by registered post; or
(d) by publishing in the local newspaper having circulation in the area.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the expression “premises” means any
land, building or part of a building which is part of port assets and includes—
(i) areas such as canteens, gardens, grounds and out-houses, if any, appertaining
to such building or part of a building;
(ii) any fittings affixed to such building or part of a building for the more beneficial
enjoyment thereof; and
(iii) any furniture, books or other things belonging to the Board and found in
such building or part of a building.
58. Without prejudice to any other action that may be taken under this Act, the Board
may recover by suit any rates, damages, expenses, costs, or in case of sale the balance
thereof, when the proceeds of sale are insufficient, or any penalties payable to, or recoverable
by, the Board under this Act or under any regulations made in pursuance thereof.
59. (1) Subject to the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013, the Board may use its
funds for providing social benefits including development of infrastructure in areas of
education, health, housing, accommodation, skill development, training and recreational
activities within the port limits for its own employees, customers, business partners,
Government and Non-Government Organisation, local communities, environment and society
at large.
(2) The manner of utilisation of funds for the Corporate Social Responsibility shall be
such, as may be prescribed.
60. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the
provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the composition of the Select Committee and the manner of appointment of the
Chairperson and Deputy Chairperson of the Board under sub-section (1) of section 4;
(b) the manner of appointment of Members of Board under sub-section ( 3) of
section 4;
Alternate
remedy by suit.
18 of 2013.
Power of
Central
Government to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

21
(c) the procedure for conducting of any inquiry made under sub-section (3) of
section 5;
(d) the honorarium payable to the Members of the Board under section 10;
(e) the form and manner in which contracts shall be made by the Board under
sub-section (3) of section 21;
(f) the form, manner and fees for filing application before the Adjudicatory Board
under section 29;
(g) the manner of applying the sums under sub-section (3) of section 37;
(h) the purposes for which the moneys received by the Board shall be applied
under sub-section (3) of section 40;
(i) the form in which and the time at which the Board shall prepare an annual
report under sub-section (1) of section 41;
(j) the salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of
services of the Presiding Officer and members of the Adjudicatory Board under
sub-section (8) of section 51;
(k) the procedure to be adopted by the Adjudicatory Board, under
sub-section (9) of section 51;
(l) other functions of  the Adjudicatory Board under sub-section (10) of section 51;
(m) the manner of utilisation of funds for Corporate Social Responsibility under
sub-section (2) of section 59; and
(n) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect
of which provision is to be made, by rules.
61. (1) The Board may, with the previous approval of the Central Government and
after previous publication, by notification, shall make regulations consistent with this Act
and the rules made thereunder to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) rules of procedure for transaction of business under sub-section ( 1) of
section 12;
(b) rules of procedure for transaction of business under sub-section ( 2) of
section 13;
(c) the appointment of employees under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of
section 16;
(d) the use and development of the port assets under sub-section ( 2) of
section 19;
(e) the purposes of planning and development of Major Port under section 22;
(f) the form of port security under sub-section (3) of section 30; and
(g) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified by regulations
or in respect of which provision is to be made by regulations.
62. Every rule made by the Central Government, every regulation made by the Board
and every notification issued by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session, immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule,
regulation or notification or both Houses agree that the rule, regulation or notification should
not be made, the rule, regulation or notification shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
that rule, regulation or notification.
Power of
Boards of Port
Authorities to
make
regulations.
Laying of rules
and regulations.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

22
38 of 1963.
38 of 1963.
38 of 1963.
38 of 1963.
38 of 1963.
38 of 1963.
38 of 1963.
38 of 1963.
38 of 1963.
10 of 1897.
Repeal and
savings.
63. (1) The Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 is here by repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 under
sub-section (1),—
(a) anything done primarily by the Board of Trustees under the Major Port Trusts
Act, 1963 in respect of any rule, notification, inspection, order or notice made or
issued or any appointment or declaration made or any operation undertaken or any
direction given or any proceeding taken or any penalty, punishment, forfeiture or fine
imposed under the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963, shall, insofar as it is not inconsistent
with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been done or taken under the
corresponding provisions of this Act;
(b) any order, rule, notification, regulation, appointment, conveyance, mortgage,
deed, trust, special purpose vehicle, joint venture, document or agreement made, fee
directed, resolution passed, direction given, proceeding taken, instrument executed or
issued, or thing done under or in pursuance of the repealed Major Port Trusts Act,
1963 shall, if in force at the commencement of this Act and not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act, continue to be in force, and shall have effect as if made, directed,
passed, given, taken, executed, issued or done under or in pursuance of this Act;
(c) any principle or rule of law, or established jurisdiction, form or course of
pleading, practice or procedure or existing usage, custom, privilege, restriction or
exemption shall not be affected, notwithstanding that the same respectively may have
been in any manner affirmed or recognised or derived by, in, or from, the repealed
Major Port Trusts Act, 1963;
(d) any person appointed to any office under or by virtue of the repealed Major
Port Trusts Act, 1963 shall be deemed to have been appointed to that office under or
by virtue of this Act;
(e) any jurisdiction, custom, liability, right, title, privilege, restriction, exemption,
usage, practice, procedure or other matter or thing not in existence or in force shall not
be revised or restored;
(f) any documents and any funds constituted and established under the repealed
enactments shall be deemed to be documents and funds constituted or established
under the corresponding provisions of this Act;
(g) any prosecution instituted under the repealed enactments and pending
immediately before the commencement of this Act before any Court shall, subject
to the provisions of this Act, continue to be heard and disposed of by the said
Court; and
(h) any inspection, investigation or inquiry ordered to be done under the repealed
Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 shall continue to be proceeded with as if such inspection,
investigation or inquiry has been ordered under the corresponding provisions of this
Act.
(3) The mention of particular matters in sub-section (2) shall not be held to prejudice
the general application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 with regard to the
effect of repeal of the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963.
64. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made in respect of a Major Port after the expiry of
a period of three years from the date on which this Act is made applicable to that Major Port.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

23
Transitional
provision.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament.
65. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Board of Trustees functioning
as such immediately before the commencement of this Act shall continue to so function until
the Board for each Major Port is constituted under this Act, but on the constitution of such
Board, under this Act, the Members of the Board of Trustees holding office before such
constitution shall cease to hold office.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Major Ports Trust Act was enacted in the year 1963 for constitution of Port
Authorities for certain Major Ports in India and to vest the administration, control and
management of such ports in such authorities and for matters connected therewith.
2. In India, the Major Port Trusts were created by the Central Government in the 1960's
following the Service Port Model. Each of the Major Port Trust so constituted is being
governed by a Board of Trustees. The powers of these Trustees are limited as they are
bound by the directions on policy matters and orders of the Central Government. The current
model of the Board of Trustees has operational restrictions due to diverse representation of
the Trustees. With the growth and development of private ports, the Major Ports are facing
severe competition and difficulties in implementing the changes which may help the Major
Ports compete in the evolving market conditions.  The regulation of tariff in the Major Ports
by the Tariff Authority under the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 and their administrative control
by the Central Government are some of the critical factors hindering their growth and
development.
3. In view of the above, and to provide greater autonomy, flexibility to the Major Ports
and to professionalise their governance, it is proposed to repeal the Major Port Trusts Act,
1963 and to replace it with a new legislation, namely the Major Ports Authorities Bill, 2016.
 4. The proposed Major Port Authorities Bill, 2016, inter alia, provides for the following,
namely:—
(i) to constitute the Board of Port Authority for each Major Port in the place of
the Board of Trustees;
(ii) the Board for each Major Port Authority shall consist of—a Chairperson, a
Deputy Chairperson, one Member each from the (a) concerned State Government in
which the Major Port is situated; (b) Ministry of Railways; (c) Ministry of Defence;
and (d) Customs, Department of Revenue, minimum three and not exceeding four
Independent Members, one Member representing the interest of the employees and
one Member nominated by the Central Government;
(iii) to enable the Board of Port Authority—
(a) to use its property, assets and funds in such manner and for such
purposes as it may deem fit for the benefit of that Major Port;
(b) to enter into and perform any contract necessary for the performance
of its functions under the proposed legislation;
(c) to make regulations for the purposes of operations, development and
planning of the Major Port;
(d) to frame the scales of rates for assets and services available at Major
Port;
(e) to claim lien on such goods and to seize and detain the same until such
rates and rents are fully paid;
(iv) to empower the Board of Port Authority to raise the loans and issue securities
for the purposes of the capital expenditure and working capital requirements of such
Port  Authority;
(v) empowering the Central Government—
(a) to order survey or examination of the works of the Port Authority;
(b) to restore and complete the works at the cost of the Port Authority;
24

25
(c) to take over the management of the Port Authority in certain
circumstances;
(d) to exempt certain specified vessels from obligation to use port assets in
the interest or security of the nation or on account of a grave emergency; and
(e) to issue directions to every Port Authority;
(vi) to constitute an Adjudicatory Board for adjudication of disputes among
Major Ports, Public Private Partnership concessionaries and captive users. This
Adjudicatory Board shall consist of a Presiding Officer and such other Members not
exceeding two, as may be appointed by the Central Government; and
(vii) to make a provision for Corporate Social Responsibility measures within the
port limits.
5. The Notes on Clauses explain in detail the various provisions contained in the Bill.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; NITIN GADKARI
The  15th   December, 2016.

Notes on Clauses
Clause 1.—This clause relates to the short title and commencement of the proposed
legislation and enables the Central Government to appoint a date with respect to the
commencement of the proposed legislation.
Clause 2.—This clause contains the definitions of various expressions used in the
proposed legislation.
Clause 3.—This clause lays down the provisions for the constitution and composition
of the Board of Major Port Authority. The Board shall consists of a Chairperson, a Deputy
Chairperson, one Member each from the (a) concerned State Government in which the Major
Port is situated; (b) Ministry of Railways; (c) Ministry of Defence; and (d) Customs,
Department of Revenue, minimum three and not exceeding four Independent Members, one
Member representing the interest of the employees and one Member nominated by the
Central Government.
Clause 4.—This clause lays down the provisions relating to the qualification, experience
and the manner of appointment of the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and Members of the
Board.
Clause 5.—This clause lays down the circumstances in which the Chairperson,
Deputy Chairperson and other Members of the Board shall be  ineligible for appointment.
Clause 6.—This clause lays down the term of office of the Chairperson,
Deputy Chairperson and Members.
Clause 7.—This clause provides that the Members of the Board shall disclose their
interests which are  likely to affect their official functions within the Board.
Clause 8.—This clause lays down the procedure and manner in which the Chairperson,
Deputy Chairperson and Members of the Board may resign from their office.
Clause 9.—This clause lays down the circumstances under which the Chairperson,
Deputy Chairperson or any Member of the Board shall be removed from his office.
Clause 10.—This clause relates to fees and honorarium payable to Members appointed
from amongst the Members referred to in clauses (c), (d) and (f) of sub-section (1) of section 3.
Clause 11.—This clause provides that the Chairperson and in his absence, the
Deputy Chairperson shall have powers of general superintendence and directions in the
conduct of the affairs of the Major Port Authority and he shall, in addition to presiding over
the meetings of the Board, exercise supervision and control over the acts of all the employees
of the Major Port Authority, in matters of executive administration and in matters concerning
the accounts and records of such Board.
Clause 12.—This clause lays down the procedure and manner in which the meetings
of the Board shall be conducted.
Clause 13.—This clause lays down the power of the Board to appoint Committees and
delegation of powers to such Committees.
Clause 14.—This clause provides that Board may, for the purpose of discharging its
powers, functions and duties, by general or special order in writing, specify (a) the powers
and duties conferred or imposed upon the Board by or under this Act which may also be
exercised or performed by the Chairperson; and (b) the powers and duties conferred or
imposed on the Chairperson by or under this Act, which may also be exercised or performed
26

27
by the Deputy Chairperson or any officer or officers of the Board and the conditions and
restrictions, if any, subject to which the powers and duties may be exercised and performed.
Clause 15.—This clause provides that any vacancy, defect or irregularity in the
constitution of the Board or appointment of the Members shall not invalidate the proceedings
of the Board.
Clause 16.—This clause, inter alia, specifies the relevant authorities empowered to
make appointments on different posts in the Major Port.
Clause 17.—This clause provides that the Board shall prepare and submit to the
Central Government, after every five years, a list of the employees of the Board of the
Major Port Authority indicating therein the designations and grades of employees and the
salaries, fees and allowances which are proposed to be paid to them.
Clause 18.—This clause provides that the Board of the Port Authority shall be deemed
to be the successor of the Board of Trustees of Major Port and all assets, contracts, obligations,
liabilities and employees serving under the Board of Trustees under the Major Port Trusts
Act, 1963 shall transferred to the Board of the Port Authority constituted under the proposed
legislation.
Clause 19.—This clause lays down the provisions relating to usage of property, assets,
etc, by the Board. This clause further lays down that any contract or arrangement to be
entered by the Board for sale of land or immovable property or for lease of land or immovable
property for port related use for a term exceeding forty years and for any purpose other than
the purposes specified in clause 22 for a term exceeding twenty years shall be subject to the
prior approval of the Central Government. This clause also provides that the tenure for lease
of land or immovable property by the Board for Public Private Partnership projects shall be
subject to the policy notified by the Central Government in respect of such Public Private
Partnership projects.
Clause 20.—This clause lays down the procedure for the Board to acquire immovable
property through the Central Government or State Government by payment of compensation
under the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Rehabilitation and Resettlement
Act, 2013.
Clause 21.—This clause empowers the Board to enter into contracts for performance
of its functions under the proposed legislation. This clause further provides that the contracts
shall be entered into by the Chairperson or any authorised officer on behalf of the Board.
Clause 22.—This clause empowers the Board to make different regulations for the
planning and development of the Major Port and such regulations shall not be inconsistent
with the Customs Act, 1962 and the rules made thereunder.
Clause 23.—This clause empowers the Board to frame and fix the scale of rates for
assets and services available at Major Ports. This clause further provides that the fixation
and implementation of such rates, etc. shall not be (a) with retrospective effect; (b) applicable
for Public Private Partnership projects already awarded by the Board or the
Central Government; (c) in derogation of the rules made by or directives of the
Central Government in this behalf; (d) inconsistent with the provisions of the Competition
Act, 2002; and (e) inconsistent with the provisions of any other law for the time being in
force.
Clause 24.—This clause empowers the Board to have lien over the goods in respect of
which any fee or rent is leviable and due to the Board under the proposed legislation. This
clause further provided that the Board also has powers to detain such goods until the
outstanding fee or rate is fully paid to the Board.
Clause 25.—This clause relates to ship-owner's lien for freight and other charges and
provides that if the master or owner of any vessel or his agent, at or before the time of landing
from such vessel or any goods at any port asset belonging to or in occupation of the Board,
gives to such Board a notice in writing that such goods are to remain subject to a lien for

28
freight or other charges payable to the ship owner, to an amount to be mentioned in such
notice, such goods shall continue to be liable to such lien to such amount.
Clause 26.—This clause lays down the circumstances under which the Board may sell
the goods that have been passed or placed into its custody upon landing at the Major Port
and also empowers the Board to apply the sale proceeds of such goods in the manner
stipulated under section 150 of the Customs Act, 1962.
Clause 27.—This clause empowers the Board to create specific master plan in respect
of development of infrastructure within the port limits. The said master plan shall be
independent of any local or State Government regulations.
Clause 28.—This clause relates to recovery of rates and charges by distraint of vessel
and empowers the Board to detain or arrest any vessel in respect of which the rates or
penalties are not paid as per the provisions of the proposed legislation.
Clause 29.—This clause provides that any person aggrieved by the action or decision
of the Board under clauses 19 to 28 (except clause 25) of the Act to file an application against
such action or decision before the Adjudicatory Board.
Clause 30.—This clause empowers the Board to raise loans and issue port securities
for capital expenditure and working capital requirements of the Port Authority from any
Scheduled Bank or financial institution located in India or from any financial institutions in
any country outside India without prior approval of the Central Government up to fifty-one
per cent. of the capital reserves of the Board.
Clause 31.—This clause relates to indorsements to be made on port security such as
debentures, bonds and stock certificates issued by the Board and states that notwithstanding
anything contained in section 15 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, no endorsement
of a port security, which is transferable by indorsement, shall be valid unless made by the
signature of the holder inscribed on the back of the security itself.
Clause 32.—This clause provides that the indorser of security not liable for amount
thereof and states that notwithstanding anything contained in the Negotiable Instruments
Act, 1881, a person shall not by reason only of his having indorsed any port security be
liable to pay any money due, either as principal or as interest, thereunder.
Clause 33.—This clause provides for recognition of the person to whom a duplicate or
new port security has been issued under the regulations made by the Board under clause 22
as the holder of the security. This clause further provides that such recognition by the Board
of a person as the holder of a port security shall not be called in question by any court so far
as such recognition affects the relations of the Board with the person recognised by it as the
holder of a port security or with any person claiming an interest in such security. This clause
also provides that such recognition by the Board of any person shall operate to confer on
that person a title to the security or securities subject only to a personal liability to the
rightful owner of the security for money had and received on his account.
Clause 34.—This clause lists out the events and circumstances in which the Board of
Major Port Authority shall be discharged from its liability to make payments on amount due
on port securities.
Clause 35.—This clause lists out different securities (other than the port security) that
the Board of  Major Port Authority may secure for raising loans.
Clause 36.—This clause relates to the power of the Board to repay loans to the
Government before due date.
Clause 37.—This clause requires the Board to establish sinking fund in respect of
loans raised by the Board which are not repayable before the expiry of one year from the date
of such loan. This clause further provides that the Board is also required to set apart enough
funds from its income as sinking fund and apply those funds to service or liquidate its loans.

29
Clause 38.—This clause clarifies that the loans raised and securities issued or pledged
by the Major Ports before the commencement of the proposed legislation shall continue to
be governed by the provisions of the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963.
Clause 39.—This clause provides that all moneys received by the Board shall be
credited to the general accounts of the Board which  it may open with the Scheduled Banks
as per the guidelines of the Ministry of Finance, Government of India.
Clause 40.—This clause lays down the purposes for which the Board shall apply the
moneys credited into the general accounts of the Board. This clause further provides that
the provision includes payment of salaries, fees, allowances, pension, etc., of the Members
and employees of the Board, cost and expenses incurred by the Board in the conduct and
administration of any provident or welfare fund established by the Board, maintenance,
development, security and protection of the Board, docks, warehouses and other properties
of the Board, and the like.
Clause 41.—This clause relates to the accounts and audit of the Board and requires
the Board to prepare a budget and an annual statement of its accounts. This clause further
provides that the accounts of the Board shall be audited by the office of the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India and the audited report as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General shall be forwarded to the Central Government for presentation before both the
Houses of Parliament.
Clause 42.—This clause requires the Board to submit to the Central Government, an
annual report in relation to the administration of the Major Port.
Clause 43.—This clause empowers the Central Government to order a survey or
examination of the works of the Board and the cost of such survey and examination by the
Central Government shall be borne and paid by the Board from and out of the moneys
credited to its general account.
Clause 44.—This clause relates to the power of the Central Government to restore or
complete works at the cost of the Board in case of non-completion or inaction of the Board
to complete such works has led to grave emergency. This clause further provides the
circumstances under which the actions or omissions of the Board may be considered to have
led to grave emergency.
Clause 45.—This clause provides the circumstances under which the Central
Government may take over the management of the Board.
Clause 46.—This clause requires the Central Government to prepare and lay report of
actions taken under clauses 42, 44 and 45 before each House of the Parliament.
Clause 47.—This clause relates to the power of the Central Government to exempt
from obligation to use port assets and states that the Central Government may, in the interest
of security of nation or on account of grave emergency, by general or special order, from time
to time, permit certain specified vessels or classes of vessels to discharge or ship goods or
certain specified goods or classes of goods, at such place in a Major Port or within the Major
Port approaches, in such manner, during such period and subject to such payments to the
concerned Board in relation to such Major Port or such Major Port approaches and on such
conditions as the Central Government may think fit.
Clause 48.—This clause restricts the Board not to sell, alienate or divest its assets,
properties, rights, powers and authorisation vested in it under the Act without the prior
sanction of the Central Government.
Clause 49.—This clause, inter alia, provides that the Central and State Governments
in respect of loans given by it to the Board or of loans given to any other authority for the
repayment of which the Board is legally liable on the commencement of the Act, the same
remedies and priority as applicable under the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963, as if the new Act
had not been passed.

30
Clause 50.—This clause states that the Board shall in discharge of its functions under
the Act, be bound by the directions on questions of policy as the Central Government may
give in writing from time to time. This clause further states that the Board shall be given an
opportunity to express its views before any direction is given by the Central Government;
but the decision of the Central Government on whether a question is one of policy or not
shall be final and binding on the Board.
Clause 51.—This clause provides for the constitution of the Adjudicatory Board for
hearing the application against any person aggrieved by any action of the Board while
exercising its powers under sections 19 to 28 (except section 25).
Clause 52.—This clause relates to general provision for punishment of offences and
states that any person who contravenes any of the provisions of the Act or any rule,
regulation or order made thereunder, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to
rupees one lakh.
Clause 53.—This clause relates to the offences by companies and inter alia, states
that if the person committing an offence under the proposed legislation is a company, then,
every person who, at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible
to, the company for the conduct of business of the company, as well as the company, shall be
deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly. This clause further provides that no such person shall be liable to punishment
if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all
due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.
Clause 54.—This clause relates to cognizance of offences and states that no court
inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate of the First Class shall try
any offence punishable under the proposed legislation or any rule or regulation made
thereunder.
Clause 55.—This clause relates to protection of acts done in good faith and states that
no suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Board or any Member or employee
thereof in respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under the
Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder, or for any deficiency of service or any
consequential losses on account of deficiency in services.
Clause 56.—This clause stipulates that every person employed by the Board under
the Act, shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian
Penal Code.
Clause 57.—This clause relates to power of the Board to evict certain persons from
premises of the Board and stipulates that the Board in exercise of the powers conferred on it
by regulations made under the Act or by invoking the contractual remedies available to the
Board may cancel the allotment of any premises made to any employee of the Board or any
other person or evict an employee of the Board or any person in occupation of any port asset
or premises or area in the port limits, by notice in writing, addressed to such allottee or
employee or other person who may be in occupation or possession thereof in violation of the
regulations specified or formulated by the Board.
Clause 58.—This clause entitles the Board with an alternate remedy to recover by suit
any rates, damages, expenses, costs, or in case of sale the balance thereof, when the proceeds
of the sale are insufficient, or any penalties payable to, or recoverable by, the Board under
the Act or under any regulations made in pursuance thereof.
Clause 59.—This clause relates to Corporate Social Responsibility of the Major Ports
and requires the Board of Port Authorities to utilise funds for providing social benefits
including development of infrastructure in areas of education, environment, health, housing,
skill development, training, etc., within the port limits for its employees, customers, business
partners, Non-Government Organisations and society at large.

31
Clause 60.—This clause provides that the Central Government may, by notification
make rules for carrying out the provisions of the Act.
Clause 61.—This clause provides that the Board may, with the prior approval of the
Central Government, by notification, make regulations consistent with the provisions of the
Act and the rules made thereunder.
Clause 62.—This clause provides that every rule, regulation and notification made
under the Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
Clause 63.—This clause relates to repeal of the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 and
saving of certain actions taken under the said Act.
Clause 64.—This clause relates to power to remove difficulties and provides that if
any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of the proposed legislation, the Central
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of the Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty.
Clause 65.—This clause relates to the transitional provision and provides that the
Board of Trustees functioning as such immediately before the commencement of the Act
shall continue to so function until the Board for each Major Port is constituted under the
proposed legislation, but on the constitution of such Board under the proposed legislation,
the Members of the Board of Trustees holding office before such constitution shall cease to
hold office.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 23 of the Major Port Authorities Bill, 2016  Bill empowers the Board of each
Major Port authority to frame scale of rates for services to be performed or made available,
and for access to and usage of the port assets.
2. Clause 30 of the Bill empowers the Board to raise loans for capital expenditure and
working capital requirements of the Port Authority from any Scheduled Bank or financial
institution located in India or from financial institutions in any country outside India without
prior approval of the Central Government upto fifty per cent. of the capital reserves of the
Board.
3. Clause 37 of the Bill, inter alia, requires the Board to establish sinking fund in
respect of loans raised by the Board which are not repayable before the expiry of one year
from the date of such loan.
4. Clause 39 of the Bill provides that all moneys received by or on behalf of the Port
Authority under the provisions of this Act shall be credited to such general account or
accounts of the Port Authority which the Board may from time to time generally open with
the Scheduled  Banks as per the guidelines of the Ministry of Finance, Government of India.
5. Clause 40 of the Bill requires that the moneys credited in the general account shall
be applied by the Port Authority for payment of such charges and for such purposes as
mentioned in the said clause.
6. The Bill does not involve any other expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India,  either  recurring or  non-recurring.
32

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 60 of the Major Port Authorities Bill, 2016 seeks to empower the
Central Government to make rules for—(a)  the composition the Select Committee and the
manner of appointment of the Chairperson and Deputy Chairperson of the Board under
sub-section (1) of section 4; (b) the manner of appointment of members of  the Board  under
sub-section (3) of section 4; (c) the procedure for conducting any inquiry made under
sub-section (3) of section 5; (d) the honorarium payable to the Members of the Board under
section 10; (e) the form and manner in which contracts shall be made by the Board under
sub-section (3) of section 21; (f) the form, manner and fees for filing application before the
Adjudicatory Board under section 29; (g) the manner of applying the sums under
sub-section (3) of section 37; (h) the purposes for which the moneys received by the Board
shall be applied  under sub-section (3) of section 40; (i) the form in which and the time at
which the Board shall prepare an annual report under sub-section (1) of section 41; (j) the
salaries and allowances payable to and other  terms and conditions of services of the Presiding
Officer and members of the Adjudicatory Board under sub-section (8) of section 51; (k) the
procedure to be adopted by the Adjudicatory Board, under sub-section (9) of section 51; (l)
other functions of the Adjudicatory Board under sub-section (10) of section 51; (m) the
manner of utilisation of funds for Corporate Social Responsibility under sub-section (2) of
section 59; and (n) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed, or in
respect of which provision is to be made, by rules.
2. Clause 61 of the Bill empowers the Board, with the previous approval of the
Central Government, by notification, to make regulations consistent with the provisions of
the Act and the rules made thereunder to provide for — (a) rules of procedure for transaction
of business under sub-section (1) of section 12; (b) rules of procedure for transaction of
business under sub-section (2) of section 13; (c) the appointment of employees under clause
(b) of sub-section (1) of  section 16; (d) the use and development of the port assets under
sub-section (2) of section 19; (e)  the purposes of planning and development of Major Port
under section 22; (f)  the form of port security under sub-section (3) of section 30; and
(g)  any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified by regulations or in respect
of which provision is to be made by regulations.
3. The matters in respect of which the aforementioned rules and regulations may be
made are matters of procedure and administrative detail, and as such, it is not practicable to
provide for them in the proposed Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore,
of a normal character.
33

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for regulation, operation and planning of Major Ports in India and to vest the
administration, control and management of such ports upon the Boards of Major
Port Authorities and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Nitin Gadkari, Minister of Road Transport, Highways and Shipping)
GMGIPMRND—3933LS(S3)—15-12-2016.