1
THE TRANSGENDER PERSONS (WELFARE) BILL, 2015
By
DR. KAKOLI GHOSH DASTIDAR, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for welfare of transgender persons and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth year of Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Transgender Persons (Welfare) Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette appoint.
Bill No. 328 of 2015
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of that
State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "Special Court"means a court established under section 6;
(c) "Fund"means Transgender Persons Welfare Fund constituted under section 3;
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(e) "transgender person"means a person, whose gender does not match with the
gender assigned to that person at birth notwithstanding his or her genotypical or phenotypical
sex.
3. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Fund to be known as the Transgender
Persons Welfare Fund for providing social security to transgender persons.
(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute to the Fund
in such ratio as may be prescribed.
(3) The Fund shall be administered by a Board consisting of—
(a) one eminent person having special knowledge — Chairperson;
or practical experience in the field of transgender
rights and rehabilitation
(b) one representative of each of the State Government — Member; and
(c) two transgender persons — Members,
to be appointed by the Central Government in
such manner as may be  prescribed.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
the Chairperson and members of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
(5) The Central Government shall provide such number of officers and staff to the
Board as may be required for its efficient functioning.
(6) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
the officers and staff of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. The Board shall—
(a)  study the problems being faced by the transgender persons and suggest
remedial measures to the appropriate Government; and
(b)  promote awareness about the rights of the transgender persons and
safeguards available for their protection.
5. Every transgender person shall be entitled to—
(a)  freely express his gender identity and be considered as a third gender;
(b)  access to education and vocational training;
(c
)  basic rights like right to personal liberty, dignity, freedom of expression, right
against violence and right to employment and livelihood opportunities;
(d)  medical facilities including health services and health insurance; and
(e)  right to marry and live in home with his immediate family members.
6. (1)  For the purpose of providing speedy trial of cases arising out of infringement
of basic rights of transgender persons, every State Government shall, with the concurrence
of the Chief Justice of the High Court concerned, by notification in the Official Gazette,
establish an exclusive special court for one or more districts within the State:
Definitions.
Constitution
of the
Transgender
Persons
Welfare Fund.
Functions of
the Board.
Rights of
transgender
persons.
Special Courts.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
Provided that in districts where the number of cases tried by a special court falls
below such number as may be prescribed, the State Government may, with the concurrence
of the Chief Justice of the High Court concerned, by notification in the Official Gazette,
designate the Court of session to be a special court to try the offences under this Act for
such districts:
Provided further that the Court so established or designated, as the case may be, may,
suo moto take cognizance of offences under this Act.
(2)  It shall be the duty of the State Government to establish adequate number of
Special Courts to ensure that the cases under this Act, as far as possible, are disposed of
within a period of two months from the date of their filing in that Court.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purpose
of this Act.
8.  (1)  The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purpose of this Act.
(2)  Every rule under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made before
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two more successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the
session immediately following the sessions or the successive sessions aforesaid, both
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rules
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be, so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Central
Government
to provident
funds.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND REASONS
All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and ought to be entitled to
enjoyment of human rights without discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and
gender identity. However, such is not the case with the transgender persons. The
discrimination based on their class and gender makes the transgender community one of
the most disempowered and deprived section of society. Transgender people face variety
of problems. They do not command same respect, dignity and equality as is being enjoyed
by other persons in society. The society treats them differently.
It is, therefore, necessary to recognize the deprivation being suffered by transgender
persons and initiate suitable legislative measures for their overall development.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI;
July 21, 2015. KAKOLI GHOSH DASTIDAR
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of a Transgender Persons Welfare Fund.
It further provide for constitution of a Board to administer the welfare fund. Clause 4
provides that the Board shall promote awareness about the rights of the trangender persons
and safeguards available for their protection. Clause 5 provides for vocational training and
access to medical facilities including health insurance to the transgender persons. Clause 6
provides for establishment of special Courts to deal with the cases arising out of infringement
of basic rights of transgender persons. Clause 7 provides that the Central Government shall
provide adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes of the Bill.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty crore is also likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for welfare of transgender persons and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2329LS(S3)—09.12.2015.