1
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI RAHUL SHEWALE, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, 1951.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, 2015.
2. In section 30 of Representation of the People Act, 1951,—
(i) in clause (d), for the words "fourteenth day", the words "seventh day" shall
be substituted; and
Bill No. 329 of  2015
Short title.
Amendment of
Section 30.
43 of 1951.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(ii) after clause (e), the following proviso shall be added at the end, namely:—
"Provided that where a general election is to be held for the purpose of
constituting a new Legislative Assembly of only one State, the poll shall be held
on a single day.".

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
At present, election to fill up a seat in Legislative Assembly or Parliament can be held
only after fourteenth day from the date of withdrawal of nominations. This period appears to
be a  long gap and money power and muscle power could play its dirty role in the elections.
Moreover, it has been seen that many a times non-serious candidates are also in the fray due
to reasons best known to them. It is felt that elections should be held immediately after the
last date for the withdrawal is over in order to ensure free and fair polls. Therefore, it is
proposed to curtail the waiting period of fourteen days for elections to seven days.
It has been observed that elections to Parliament or Assemblies of States are held in
different phases i.e. scattered and not held on a single date. This results in channelization of
energy of bureaucrats and others in election process leading to complete stoppage of even
routine work in the State. Moreover, if enough time is given, it leads to unnecessary
expenditure, irregularities, hatred and tension. If the poll is held on a single date, all these
things could be avoided. Intention behind holding of polls in different phases may be
deployment of security forces in order to ensure peaceful election. However, to start with, if
general election is held to fill up seats in the Legislative Assembly of only one State, poll
must be held on a single day by deploying adequate security forces.
This Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.
N
EW DELHI; RAHUL SHEWALE
November 13, 2015.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE ACT, 1951.
(ACT NO. 43 OF 1951)
* * * * * * *
30. (d) The date or dates on which a poll shall, if necessary, be taken, which or the first
of which shall be a date not earlier than the fourteenth day after the last date for the withdrawal
of candidatures.
* * * * * * *
4
Appointment
of dates for
nominations,
etc.

GMGIPMRND—2826LS(S-3)—09.12.2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, 1951.
————
(Shri Rahul Shewale, M.P.)