8m No. 3z of 19S4-
THE GOVERNMENT PREMISES (EVICTION) AMEND-
MENT BILL, 1954 
(As INTRODUCED IN THE LOK SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Government Premises (Eviction) Act, 1950 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:-
1. Short tltle.-This Act may be called the Government Premises 
(Ev~ction) Amendment Act, 1954. 
2. Amendment of long title, Act xxvn of 1950.-...:1n the long title 5 
of the GovernIl)ent Premises (Eviction) Act, 1950 (hereinafter refer-
red to as the principal Act), for the words "certain persons from 
Government premises", the words "persons from public premises in 
certain cases" shall be substituted. 
3. Amendment of section 1, Act XXVU of 1950.-1n sub-section 10 
(1) of section 1 of the principal Act, for the words "Government 
Premises", the words "Public Premises" shall be substituted. 
rI. Amendment of section 2, Act XXVD of 1950.-ln section 2 of 
the principal Act,-
(a) for clause (b), the following clause shall be substituted, IS 
namely:-
" (b) 'public premises' means any premises belonging to, 
or taken on lease or requisitioned by, the Central Govern-
ment, or requisitioned by the competent authority under the 
Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immovable Property Act, 20 
1952 (XXX of 1952), and, in relation to the State of Delhi, 
includes any premises vested in the Delhi Improvement 
Trust or a local authority in that State, whether such pre-
mises are in.. the possession of, or have been leased out by, 
the Trust or local authority, as the case may be;"; 2S 
-

2 
(b) in clause (c), for the words "means any building", the 
words "means any land or any building" shall be substituted; 
(c) after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted. 
namely:-
S "(e) 'unauthorised occupation', in relation to any person 
authctrised to occupy any public premises, includes the con-
tinuance in occupation by him of the premises after the 
authority under which he was allowed to occupy the pre-
mises has been duly determined." 
10 5. Amendment of section 3, Act xxvn of 195O.-1n section 3 of 
the principle Act,- -
(a) in sub-clause (a) (i) of sub-s~ction (1), for the words 
"or of the competent authority", the words "or of any other 
authority competent to permit such sub-letting" shall be substi-
IS tuted; and 
(b) for the words "Government premises" wherever they 
occur, the words "public premises" shall be substituted. 
6. Amendment of sectioDs f and 10, Act XXVD of 1950.-ln sec-
tions 4 and 10 of the principal Act, for the words "Government 
20 premiie$", wherever they occur, the words '''public premises" shall 
be substituted. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In the Government Premises (Eviction) Act, 1950 the expression 
"'Government premises" has been so defined that while, in relation 
to the Government and municipalities, it covers both buildings and 
land, in relation to the Delhi Improvement Trust, it covers land 
only and not buildings belonging to that body. The Delhi Improve-
ment Trust owns a number of buildings andl it is experiencing 
considerable difficulty in evicting unauthorised occupants and in 
recovering arrears of rents and damages in respect of such buildings. 
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the definition of "wemises" to 
cover land also. At the same time, the expression 'Government 
premises" is being changed to "public premises", as the former is 
not appropriate in the context of premises belonging to the Delhi 
Improvement Trust or any other local authorities. 
2. In a recent decision of the Bombay High Court, it was held 
that sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Act aoes not authorise the 
eviction of a person who continued to be in occupation of the pre-
mises allotted to him even after the d~ determination thereof, 
because he was not a person in unauthorised ot:cupation of the 
premises within the meaning of clause (b) of the said sub-section. 
The intention of the section had always been that such persons 
should be deemed to be persons in unauthorised occupation of the 
premises, and the amendments in clauses 2 and 4(c) of the Bill are 
designed to make this intention clear. 
3. The amendment in clause 5(a) is clarificatory. 
SWARAN SINGH. 
NEW DELltJ: 
The 26th JulU. 1954. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE GOVERNMENT PREMISES (EVICTION) ACT, 1950 
(No. XXVII or 1950) 
An Act to provide for the evicfion of certain persons from Gov'ern-
ment Premises and for certain matters connectted therewith . 
... ... ... • ... ... 
1. Short title and extent.-(1) This Act may be called the 
Government Premises (Eviction) Act, 1950. 
... ... • • • ... 
2. Deftnltlons.-In this Act unless the context otherwise requires,--
... ... • ... • • 
(b) 'Government premises' means any premises or land 
belonging to, or ~aken on lease or requisitioned by, the Central 
Government or requisitioned by the co!ppetent authority under 
the Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immovable Property Act, 
1952, and, in relation to the State of Delhi, includes any premises 
or land belonging to any municipalfty in Delhi or any land 
belonging to the Improvement Trust Delhi, whether such land 
is in the possession of, or leased out by, the Improvement Trust. 
(e) "premises" means any building or part of a building 
and includes-
(i) the garden, grounds and outhouses, if any, apper-
taining to such building or part of a building, and 
(ii) any fittings affixed to such ,building or part of a 
building for the more beneficial enjoyment thereof; 
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act. 
3. Power to evlct certain persons from Government premlses.-
(1) If the competent authority is satisfied-
(a) that the person authorised to occupy any Government 
premises has, whether before or after the commencement of this 
Act,-
(i) sub-let, without the permIssIon of t.he Central 
Government or of the competent authority, the whole or 
any part of such premises, or 
(ii) otherwise acted in contravention of &.ny of the 
terms, express or implied, under which he is authorised 
to occupy such premises, or 
(b) that any person is in unauthorised 'occupation of any 
Government premises, 
the competent authority may, by notice served by post or otherwise, 
order that that person as well as any other person who may be in 
occupation of the whole or any part of the Government premises, 
shall vacate them within fifteen days of the date of the service of 
the notice. 
4 

5 
(2) If any person refuses or fails to comply with an order made 
under sub-section (1), the competent authority may evict that person 
from, and take possession of, the Government premises and may for 
that purpose use sucil force as may be necessary. 
4. Power to recover rent or da.ma&'es In respect of Government 
premises as arrears of land revenue.-(l) Subject to any rules that 
may be made in this behalf by the Central Government, by notifica-
. tion in the Official Gazette, any sum due by way of rent in respect 
of any Government premises which is in arrear may be recovered 
by the competent authority from the person liable to pay the same 
in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue. 
(2) Where any person is in unauthorised occupation of any Gov-
ernment premises, the competent authority may, ~n the prfscribed 
manner, assess such damages on account of the use and occupation 
of the Government premises as it thinks fit and may, by notice serv-
ed by post or in such other manner, as may be prescribed by rules 
made in this behalf, order that person to pay the damages within 
such time as may be specified in the notice. 
(3) If any person refuses or fails to pay the damage within the 
time specified in the notice under sub-section (2), the damages may 
be recovered in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue . 
• • • • 
10. Power to make rules.-(l) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette. make rulea for carrying out the 
purposes of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the ,;enerality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the 
following mat.ters, namely:-
(a) the form of notice and the manner in which it may be 
served; 
(b) the procedure to be followed in taking posse.ssion of 
Government premises; 
(bb) the circumstances under which rent in respect of 
Government premises may be recovered as an arrear of land 
revenue; 
(c) the manner in which damages for unauthorised occupa-
tion may be assessed and the matters which mav be taken into 
account in assessing such damages; 
(cc) the manner of service of any netice under this Act; 
(d) the manner in which appeals May ,be preferred and the 
procedure to be followed in appeals; 
(e) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed. 

LOK SABHA 
I 
.A. 
BILL 
further to amend the Government Premises (Eviction) 
Act, 1950. 
(Sartiar SflXlran Singh, 
Minister fur Works, Housi"ng and SUPP~Y.) 
Gll'D-LAn- ·S79 LS. - :2'-8-S4-17S0 