e· 
~, As INTRODUCED IN LoE SAJIHA OK 
A 
BILL 
2 2 APR 196~ 
further to amend the Wakf Act, 19M. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifteenth Year of the Republic 
of lndia as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Wakf (Amendment) Act, 1964. Short title. 
29 of 1954. Z. In section 3 of the Wakf Act, 1954 (hereinafter referred to as the Amend-
S principal Act) ,- ment ot 
(i) in clause (a), for the words "established for the benefit of sections. 
the Muslim community", the words "sanctioned by the Muslim 
10 
20 
law" ahall be substituted; 
(ii) in clause (c), for the word and figure "section 9", the 
words, brackets, figures and letter "sub-section (1), or 88 the case 
may be, under sub-section (1 A) of section 9" shall ,be sulbstituted; 
(iii) after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
'(dd) "Council" means the Central Wakf Council estab-
lished under section 8A;'; 
(iv) in clause (i), aftea:- the word "prescribed" where that 
word occurs for the first time, the words, figures and letter' 
", except in Chapter lIA, " shall be inserted; 
(v) in clause (l), for· sub-<lause (ii), the following sub-
clause shall be substituted, namely:-
"(ii) grants (including mashrut-ul-khidmat) for any 
purpose recognised Iby the Muslim law as pious, religious or 
charitable; and". 
214 (B) ts-l. 

Amend-
mentot 
8eCtion'l. 
Insertion 
otnew 
Chapter. 
Iil.A. 
~blijb­
mentaD4 
constitu-
tionottbe 
Central 
Wakf 
Councll. 
~ 
otthe 
C~uDcil. 
I 
3. In sub-section (1) of section 7 of the principal Act, after the 
words "cost of making a survey", the words "including the coat of pub-
lication of the list of wakfs" shall be inserted. 
4. In the principal Act, after Chapter II, the following Chapter 
shall be inserted, namely:- 5 
"CHAPTER IIA 
CENTRAL WAD' COUNCIL 
"SA. (1) For the purpose of advismgit, on matten con-
cerning the working of Boards and the due administration of 
wakfs, the Central Government may, by notification in the om- 10 
oia!· Goette, establish a Council to be called the Central Wald 
Council. 
(2) The Council shall consist of a Chairman, who shan be 
the Union Minister in charge of wakfs, and such other memben 
not exceeding twenty in number, as may be appoiAted by the I' 
Central Government. 
(8) The term of office of, the procedure to be followed in 
the discharge of their functions by, and the mana8l.' of ftJ:li.ag 
casual vacancies among, members of the Council shall be such 
as may be prescribed by rules made by the Central Government. 20 
8B. (1) Every Board shall pay from its Wakf Fund annual-
ly to the Council such contribution as is equivalent to one per 
cent. of the aggregate of the net annual incom.e of the proper-
ties of the walds in respect of which contribution is payable 
under sub-section (1) of section 46: 25 
Provided. that where the Board in the case of any particu-
lar wakf has remitted. under sub-section (2) of section 46 the 
whole of the contribution payable to it under sub-osectlon (1) of 
that section, then for calculating the contribution payable to the 
Council under this section, the net annual income of the pro- 30 
perty of the wakf in respect of which such remission has been 
granted shall not be taken into account. 
(2) All monies received by the Council under sub-section 
(1) and all other monies received. by it as donations, benefac-
tions and grants shall form a fund to be called the Central 35 
Wakf Fund. .• 
(3) Subject to any rules that may be made by the Central 
Government in this behalf, the Central Wald Fund shall be. 
under the control' of the· Council and may be applied for such 
purposes as the Council· may deem flt. 40 

LOK SABRA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE WAKF (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1964 
(To betAs introduced in Lok Sabha) 
1. Page 1, line 16,-
. atter III prescri bed'" insert ',' 
2. Page 3, in the marginal heading to clause 5,-
tor "Ament-ment" ~ nAmend-menttt 
3. Page 4, lines 28 and 29,-
after "similar" insert 
4. Page 6, line 1,-
" n·· , 
for "persons" ~ "person" 
5. Page 7, line 15,-
atter "sub-section (2)"'~ " " , 
6. Page 7, in the marginal heading to new section 43A,-
.!:2!: "wakf" read "certain wakfs" 
P.T.O. 

- 2 -
7. Page 9,-
(i) in line"l?, after "musaf-arkhana" insert If," 
(ii) in lines I? and 18, omit "for the sole benefit of 
peFSOns professing Islam," 
8. Page 14, line 18,-
for tfwa'kfs" read "wakf\' - -
9. Page 15, line 2 from bo.ttom,-
for "clause 5" read "clause 4" 
-
10. Page 16, line 1,-
for "45" read "46" - -
11. Page 22, line 4 from bottom,-
foI' "Endoments" read ''Endowments'' - ' -.' 12. Correct:l4.ne numbers on pages 3, 4, 5, 7 and 9. 
{Sakal 

3 
8C. tJ.> The Council shall cause to be maintaiDed such Aceounta 
·hDoks fJf aecount -and other books in relation to its accounts in and Audit. 
.fteh form and in such manner as may be prescribed by rule. 
S made by the Central Government. 
10 
IS 
(I) The accounts of the Council shall be audited and exa-
minee! -annually by such auditor as may b, appointed. by the 
C8!lIt'ra1 Government. 
(3) The costs of the audit shall be paid from the Central 
Wakf Fund. ~ 
SD. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in Powerof 
the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of g:tral 
tb1s 'Chapter. I - mwU;:-
make (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality rules. 
of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for aH or any 
of the following matters, namely:-
(a) the term of office of, the procedure to be followed 
in the discharge of their functions by, and the manner of 
ftlling casual vacancies among, the members of the Council; 
(b) control over and application of the Central Wald 
Fund; 
(c) the fonn and manner in which accounts of the 
Council may be maintained. 
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under 
this Chapter shall be laid, as soon las may be after it is made, 
before each House of P8Il"l:iamen.t while it is in session for a total 
period of tbJrty days, which may be comprised in one session or 
in two successive sessions, and If, before the expiry of the session 
in 'Which it is so laid or the seesion immediately following both 
Houses agree in making any modiftcation in. the rule or botih 
HMmes agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
~ -have effeet only in iRlch modified form or be of no 
effect, as the case may be; so however that any such modiftca-
... or .nnl1lment mall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule!'. 
5. In sed:itm 9 of the principal Aet,- ~:!f 
(4) atter sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be HCtiOD'. 
inserted, namely:-
.. (1A.) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-
aection (1), If the Shia wakfs in any State constitute in 
number more than fifteen per cent. of all the waJcfs in the 
State or if the income of the properties .f)fthe Shia walds 

Amend-
mental 
IeCtionll. 
Amend-
menta! 
Metion 15. 
'. in the State constitutes more than fifteen per cent. of the 
total income of the properties of all the walds in 
the State, the State Government may, iby notification in 
the Official Gazette, establish a Board of Wakfs each for. S 
Sunni Walds and for Shia Wakfs under such names as may 
be specified in the notification and in such a case, the pro-
visions of this Act shall, in their application to the State, 
have effect as if the amendments specified in the Schedule 
had- been made."; 
(b) in sub-section. (2), for the words "The said Board", 10 
the words "The Board" shall be substituted. 
6. In section 11 of the principal Act, in clauses (b) and (c), the 
word "special" shall be omitted. 
'I. In section 15 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2) ,-
(a) in clause (e), for the portion beginning with the words 9S 
"in any case" and ending with the words "of being heard", 
the following shall be substituted., namely:-
"to direct-
(i) the utilization of the surplus income of a wakf 
consistently with the objects of the wakf; 20 
(ii) in what manner the income of a wakf, the 
objects of which are not evident from any written ins-
trument, shall be utilized; 
(iii) in any case where any object of a wakf has 
eeased to exist or has become incapable of achievement, 2S 
that so much of the income of the wakf as was pre-
viously applied to that object shall be applied to any 
other object which shall be similar or as .nearly as 
practicable similar to the original object: 
Provided that no direction shall be given under this 30 
clause without iiving the parties affected an opportunity 01. 
being heard."; : 
(b) for clause (n, the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"(;) to sanction in accordance with the Muslim law, any 3S 
transfer of immovable property of a wakf by way of eaIe, , 
gift, mortgage, exchange or lease, as required by section 
3M: 
Provided that no such sanction shall be given. unless It 
least two-thirds of the,members of the BOM:d vote in favour 40 
, of such trl.DS8Ction.". " 

'6 
. 8. In section 22 of the principal Act, after the words"servant or Amend-
the Bo8rd", the words "Ql' any committee thereof' shall be inserted. me~t of sechon22. 
8. In. section 23 of the principal Act, after sub-sectian. (2), the Amend-
following sub-section shall lbe inserted, namely: - ment of 
section 23. 
5 "(3) The powers conferred on the Secretary by sub-section 
(2) may also be exercised by such other officer OIl' officers of the 
Board as may either generally OIl' specially be authorised in this 
behalf ,by the Board." . 
. 10. Section 32 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered as rub- Amend-
10 section (2) of that section, and before the! su~section as so Il'e-num- ment of 
bered, "the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely: _ section 32. 
2.0 
30 
35 
"(1) Every mutawalli shall keep regular accounts.". 
11. After section 36 01. the principal Act, the following sections Insertion 
shall be inserted, namely: _ of new 
sections 
36Aand 
36B. 
"3BA. Notwithstanding anything contained in the wakf deed, Transferof 
no transfer of any immovable property of a wakf by way of- immovable . property 
(i) sale, gift, mortgage or exchange; or of wakfs. 
(ii) lease for a period exceeding three years in the case 
of agricultural land, OIl" for a period exceeding one year in 
the case of non-agricu1tural land or building, 
shall Ibe valid without the previous sanction of the Board. 
36B. (1) If the Board is satisfied, after making an Inquiry Recovery 
in such manner as may be prescribed, that any immovable pro- of wakf 
perty of a wakf entered as such in the register of walds main- Ptropefrtyed • rans err 
tamed under section 26, has been transferred without the preVl- in contra"! 
ous sanclion of the Board in contravention of the provisions of vention ot 
section 36A, it may send a requisition to· the Collector within section 
whose jurisdiction the property is situate to obtain and deliver 36A. 
possession of the property to it. 
(2) On :receipt of a requisition under sub-section (1), the 
Collector shall pass an order directing the person in possession 
of the property to deliver the property to the Board within a 
period of thirty days ftro,m the date of the service of the order. 
(3) Every order passed under sulb-seCt1em (2) shall be 
served-
(d) by glvtng' or tendering the order or by sending It by 
post to the person fo.r whom it 18 intended; at 

Amestd-
mental 
MCtlon41. 
Amend-
mentof 
aectionU. 
.. 
~ ·tf 8UCh peISODa eaamot be f~d, by aextngtlle Older 
OIl 8DIDe compicuouspu1 ·of his lut-kDown place -at abode 
or business, or by giving or tendering the order to some 
aduilt male memOer or 8l!II:Vantofhis family or by causing 
it to be aftlxed -OIl some conspicuous part of *he propertf te S 
which it relates: 
Provided 'that WIbere the.penon on whom the order is to be 
I8r¥edts '. mmor, IIII'Vice U1pt7A his pardian or vpcm «ny adult 
male member or servant of his family shall be deemed. to be 
service upon the minor. 10 
(4) Any person aggrieved oy the order of the Collector 
under salb-eecti'oo (2) may, with1u a period of thirty days from 
the ,date of the service of the order, prefer an appeal to the dis-
trict court within whose jurisdiction the property is situate and 
the decision of the district court. on such appeal shall! be final. IS 
Explanation.-In this sub-section, "d:lstriet court" 1D8IDS,1I1 
any area for which there is a city civil court, that court, and, in 
any other area, the principal civil court of original jurisdiction. 
(5) Where an order passed under sub-section (2) has not 
been complied with and the time for appealing against such 20 
order has expired without an appeal havilng been preferred or 
the a:ppea1, if any, preferred within that time has been dismissed, 
the -conectQr shall Dbtain posseasion of ate property in respect 
of which tlbe order has been: made, using such force, if any, as 
ma.y he necesary fJOr the puzpoae and deliver it to the Board. 25 
(6) In exercising hi. functions under this -sect101'1~ the Collee-
tor shall be gutded by SIlch rules as maybe made 1n "tkU behalf 
by the State GoYetnment.". 
u. Clause (g) of s~()n (I) of eeetiCm 41 Of the prtnetpal 
Act shall be omitted. 30 
13. In section 43 of the principal Aet,- " 
(a) in sub-seetion (1), for c1a1Ule (b), the foDowmg clauses 
shall be substituted, namely:-
A'(b) has ~ ~ .ef en offence of __ Ina! 
~reech of trust or any- other oi!slce mvolviq JDlX'al turpi- 3' 
tude; 0Jr' ' 
'(e) lIdWI4'l.opdIttae ..... 1Inp0i*lY with the pro-
perties -.lu. ''''';01' ~ , 

20 
35 
, 
(4-)' _ of llD!!9IJDcllIIliD4 Qris, IMfIerme m. other men-
tal or phy.aictU, ~ or 1n&mity: w.bich would; nod. hiaa 
uDAt to perfOJl'Dl. the func.tJ.oDl an4. discbarge the, duties of • 
mutawalli; 
i')< ha& ltaOad to pay, Without 1"e8IIIJDable· excuse, for 
two consecutive years, the contribution payDlt! by him 
uadetl seoijQQ' 46."; 
(b) in sub-eection (2), after the wards "appointed' by the 
:ao.d", tha.; wOldl· uQII any' pel"8Dn; o~' autboriVy DOt 1belDI'.' court 
of law," ahall be inserted; 
(t), after sub-sect1on (4), the fbllaw1nr SUft>.saettcm shall be 
inserted, namely:-
If (4A) A mutawalli who is aggrieved by lUI. ordeu: paIIoo 
ed under any 04 ,the clauses (c) to (e) of sub--section (1) or 
under sub-secti<>n-(2)', may, within one month from the date 
otthereceipt by him otthe order, appeal against the order to 
the State Govern.ment and the di!e1siOll of the State GOftI1l-
ment on such appeal shall be final and shall not De ques-
tiOfted m any court of law;"; 
(d) after sub-section (5), the followinlsub laotiou" ahall be 
inserted, name1y:-
"(6) A mutawalli of a wald removed from his oftlce 
under this section shall not be eligible for appointment u 
a mutawalli of that wakf for a period of' five years trom. the 
date of such removal.". 
1'- Mter section 43 of the principal Act, the following section ~ 
shall be' inserted, namely: - of new 
sectiQn. 
43A. 
"43A. (II.) Where no suitableperaon ia avallabl.fOll appoint- Assump. 
ment as a mutawalli of a wakf under sectioo 42 or uDder sub- tion of 
IeCtion (I) of sectioo. 43, the BOfIII'd may, by nottilcatien in the direet 
Ofticial. Gazette, asaume d1reot management of the· wakf' far :::=-
SIIOhr period; or perioda, not exceeding in the aggregate five years, wakt b7 
M,ma.y be.specifted in the'ftOtiftcation. the Board. 
(2) NotwfIthstandtng anything contained in section 33, the 
aoeounts qt. f!!'fery wakf' under the cltreet manag'!!ttent of· the 
Board shall Ibe audited annually ,by an auditor to be' appointed 
1)y. the Board, from among chartered accountants in practice 
withm the meaning of the Chartered Accountant., ~ 1941.". 

Amend-
mentof 
lection46. 
Amend-
mentof 
section 46. 
. '!S. In section 45 of the principal Act, fClr sub-eect1on (1), the toi-
lowing wb-eection shall be substituted, namely:-
,. (1) The Board may, either' on an application received under 
section 44 or on its own motion, 
(a) h~d an inquiry in such manner as ~y be pres-,S 
cribedjor 
(b) authorise any person in this behalf to hold aD m-
.. .quiry, 
' .. iJl~ any :Qlatter relatipg tQ. awakf and take such .actian u it 
thinks fit.". 
, IG, In sect.ion 46 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the 
word llfive", the word Usix" shallibe substituted. 
10 
Amend- 17. ~ section 48 qr the principal. Act, fen- sub-section (1), the 
mentof following sub-sections shall ,be substituted, namely:-
&ection.8 ... 
Omission 
of section 
5t. 
II (1) All monies received or realised by the Board under this IS 
Act and all other monies received as donations, benefactions or 
grants by the Board shall form a fund to be called the Wakf 
fund. 
(1A) All monies received by the Board as donations, bene-
factions and grants shall be deposited and accounted for under a 20 
separate sub-head.". 
18. Section 54 of the principal Act shall ·be omitted. 
SUbstitu- 19. For section 55 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
tion of be substituted, namely:-
new sec-
tion for 
section 55. 
Institution 
of suits 
under 
section 92 
of the Code 
of Civil 
Procedure, 
1908. 
1155. (1) A suit to obtain any of the reliefs mentioned. in 2S 
section 92 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, relating to 8ID.y 
wakf may, notWithstanding anything to the contrary contained 
in that section, be instituted by the Board without obtaining the 
consent referred to therein. 
(2) No suit to obtain any of the !reliefs referred to in section 30 
92 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, relating to any wakf 
shallibe instituted by any person or authority other than the 
Board without the consent in writing of the Board and for the 
institution of any such suit, it shall not be lIlecessary to obtain 
the c.onsent referred to in that section, notwithstanding anything 35 
contained therein: n 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply in 
relation to any such suit against the Board.". 

s 
10 
IS 
20 
9 
20. In section 62 of the principal Act, for sub.-section (1), the fo1- Amend-
lowing sub-section shall be substituted, namely: _ me!lt of 
section 62. 
"(1) The Central Government may issue such directions, as 
it may think fit, on questions of poHcy to be followed by a Board 
Wld for issuing such directions it may call for any periodic or 
other report or inforl'Illltion from any Board through the Gov-
ernment of the State concerned.". 
21. After section 66B of the principal Act, the following section Insertion 
o;hall be inserted, namely: - of new 
section 
66C. 
u66C. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act where A I' . pp lca-any movable or immovable property has been gIven or dOnAted tion of 
,by any person not professing Islam for the support of a wRkf Act to 
being- properties 
given or 
(a) a mosque, idgah, imambara, dargah, khangah or a donated 
maqbara; by persons 
not profes-
(b) a Muslim graveyard; sing Islam 
f for support (c) a choul~ry or a musafarkhana for the sole bE'nefit 0 of certain 
persons professmg Islam, wakfs. 
then such property shall be deemed to be compris~ in that waId 
and be dealt with in the same manner as the wakf in which it is 
so comprised.". 
22. In section 67 of the principal Act,- Amend-
. . () f h d" f thO A tIt ment 01 (a) In sub.-sectIon 1 , or t e wor s purposes 0 IS C 'section 67. 
the words, figures and letter /'purposes of this Act other than 
2S those of Chrapter IIA" shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (2), in clause (h), the words /land approv-
ed by the State Government" shan be omitted. 
23. In section 69 of the principal Act, in clause (2) of sub-section Amend-
(1), the words and figure "section 5 of" shall be omitted. ment of 
section 69. 
30 24. Mter section 69 of the principal Act, the following section and Insertion 
Schedule shall he inserted, namely:- Ofnt~W 70 sec Ion 
and Sche-
"70. If any difficulty arises in ~ving eff~ to the provilllfons dule. 
of this Act. the Central Government may. by order published in R,emov~1 of 
the Official Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with difficultIes, 
214 (B) LS-2. 

Decision if 
a property 
is wakf 
property. 
10 
l~e purposes of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expe-
dlent for removing the ditliculty. 
THE SCHEDULE 
[See section 9 (lA)] 
LIST OF AMENDMENTS 
1. In suh-section (2) of section 5, for the WOII'ds "a list of 
wakfs", the words "a list of Sunm walds or, as the c&<;e may be, 
Shia wakfs" shall be substituted. 
2. In section 11,-
s 
(a) for clause (b), the following clause shall be substi- 10 
tuted, namely:-
.. (b) ,persons having knowledge of Muslim law and 
representing, in the case of a Sunni Board of Wakfs, 
associations such as State J'amiat-u1-Ulama-i-Hind 
(whether such persons are Hanafi, Ahle-Hadis or Shefai) 15 
and in the case of a Shia Board of Wakfs, associations 
such as State Shia Conference;"; 
(b) the second proviso shall be omitted. 
3. In clause (e) of sub-section (2) of section 15, the Exp'£ana-
tion shall be omitted. 20 
4. For section 27, the following section shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"27. (1) The Board may itself collect information regard-
ing any property which it has reason to believe to be wakf 
property and if any question arises whether a particular 25 
property is wakf property or not or whether a wald is a 
Sunni wakf or a Shia wakf, it shall refer the question to a 
civil court of competent jurisdiction. 
(2) The decision of the civil court on any question re-
ferred to it under sub-section (1) shall be fina!.". 30 

STATEMtNT OF OBJleTS AND kEASON'S 
The Wakf Act, 1954 was enacted to provide for the better ad. 
ministJ: ation and supervision of wakfs. The Act was amended in 
1959 for the limited purpose of removing certain difficulties arising 
out of re-organisation of States. Experience of the working of the 
Act over the last ten years has revealed certain difficulties. It is, 
therefore, proposed to amend the Act to remove these difficulties and 
to ensure better administration of wakfs by mutawallis. 
2. The main features of the Bill are: 
(i) The definition of benefiCiary in regard to objects of 
public utility is being broadened to cover all objects sanctioned 
by Muslim law. Endowments made by non-Muslims for sup-
port of certain Muslim religious and pious institutions will also 
come under the purview of the Act. 
(ii) A Central Wakf Council is proposed to be established. 
(iii) A provision is being made to enable the establishment 
of separatQ Sunni and Shia Boards in any State in which the 
Shia wakfs constitute in number more than fifteen per cent. of 
the total number of wakfs in that State or the income of the 
property of Shia wakfs constitutes more than fifteen per cent. 
of the income of all the wakfs in the State. 
(iv) To check mutawallis from alienating wakf properties, 
a specific provision is being made to clarify that alienations 
without the sanction" of the Board will be invalid. As a further 
step in this directiOn, it is also being prOVided that where 
mutawallis illegally alienate properties already determined as 
wakf properties, the Board can recover possession by issuing 
certificates to Collector. A right of appeal to the district court 
Mainst the order of the Collector is also being provided for. 
(v) Authority is being conferred on the Bo~rd to. rem~ve 
mutawallis on some additional grounds not mentIoned 10 sectIon 
43 and to assume direct management of wakfs for a period not 
11 

12 
exceeding five years in cases where no suitable mutawallis are 
available. 
3. The notes on clauses explain in detail the various changes pro-
posed to be made. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 9th April, 1964. 
HUMAYUN KABIR. 

Notes on Clauges 
C!ause 2.-The definition of 'beneficiary' in section 3 (a) of the 
Act 1Ovol:es a devia.tion from the real concept of beneficiary under 
the Musl~m l~w WhICh makes no distinction between Muslims and 
non-Mushms 10 the matter of beneficiaries or disbursement of 
charity. It is. to that extent inconsistent with the definition of 
'wakf' contained in the Act. Sub-clause (i) seeks to amend the de-
finition of 'beneficiary' to remove this inconsistency. 
. The amendments sought to be made by sub-clauses (ii), (iii) and 
(IV) are of a consequential and drafting nature. 
The definition of wakf in section 3 includes inter alia mashrut-ul-
khidmat (service grants). The definition is being widened to in-
clude all grants. 
Clause 3.-At present, the cost of publication of the list of walds 
in the Official Gazette is met by the Board. As the cost is fairly 
heavy and the publication of the list, besides being really a con-
cluding part of the survey, is meant essentially for the benefit of 
wakfs, it is only proper that the expenditure incurred on such pub-
lication should come from the wakfs themselves. This clause there-
fore seeks to amend sub-section (1) of section 7 SUitably for the 
purpose. 
Clause 4.-Section 62 of the Act confers on the Cenfl'al Govern-
ment power to give directions, on questions of policy to be followed 
by the Boards set up under the Act in various States. Experience 
has revealed that for the efficient discharge of this power, the 
Central Government should have proper advice. For this purpose, 
the establishment of a Central Wakf Council is being provided for 
in clause 4 (vide new section SA). 
As regards the finances of the Council, the clause provides for the 
formation of a Fund to be called the Central Wald Fund, consisting 
of contributions from the Boards of Wakfs in various States and all 
other monies received by the Council as donations, benefactions or 
grants (vide new section 8S). 
Suitable provisions are also incorporated for the audit of the 
accounts of the CouncU(vide new section .8C).. . 
Cia" •• 5.-The Act does not previde for the, estab~ent of se-
parate Boardt for Sunm wPfl and Sb1a wald. in any State. It 1& 
I, 

i4 
felt that in any State in which the number of Shia walds is fairly 
large to justify the establishment of a separate Board for Shia wakfs 
this should be allowed. Accordingly, clause 5 seeks to amend sec~ 
tion 9 of the Act for providing that a State Goveruunent may estab-
li!h separate Boards for Sunni walds and Shia wakfs if the Shia , 
walds in the State constitute in number more than 15 per cent. of 
the total number of wakfs in the State or if the income of the Shia 
wakfsr in the State constitutes more than 15 per cent. of the total 
income of all the wakfs in the State. All the consequential amend-
ments have been relegated to the Schedule for the sake of con-
venience. 
Ctause 6.-The word "sp~cial' used in clauses (b) and (c) of sec-
tion 11 is being omitted as unnecessary. 
Clause 7.-Under clause (e) of sub-section (2) of section 15, the 
Board h~s power to direct in what manner the income or surplus 
income of a wakf whose objects have ceased to exist should be utilis-
ed. This provision is being amplified. to cover cases where though 
the ubjects of a walds have not ceased to exist, they have become 
incapable of achievement. 
Under section 15 (2) (j), sanction of at least three-fourths of the 
members of the Board is necessary for any lease of property for 
more than three years or for any mortgage or exchange of property. 
The I!lauge is being amended to reduce the proportion of num·her of 
members whose concurrence is necessary from three-fourths to two-
thirds. The other changes made in the clause are consequential 
to the insertion of proposed section 36A (Bee notes on clause 11). 
Clause 8.-Section 22 has been interpreted to mean that the 
Board can delegate its powers to individual members but not to a 
committee of members. The section is being amended to enable 
delegation being made to such committees as well. 
Ci:ause 9.-A new SUlb-section is being added to section 23 to pro-
vide that in addition to ~he secretary any other officer or servant 
of the Board authorised for the purpose by the Board would be com-
petent to issue certified copies of the records of the Board. 
Clause lO.-Section 32 of the Act is being amended to make it 
cle8l' that mutawallis should maintain regular accounts. 
Cta1L8e B.-Under proposed section 36A which is modelled on 
similar provisions in certain enactments. relating to public' tnHts, 
transfers of wakf property by way of eale,gift, exchange or mortg. 

I~ 
86 a~ transfers of such property by way of lease for a period ex-
ceedmg three years in the case of agricultural land and one year in 
the case of non-agricultural land or building will be invalid. if such 
transfers have been effected without the previous sanction of the 
Board. 
In order to effectively check unscrupulous mutawallis from alie-
nating wakf properties hi contravention of the law and to protect 
the interests of walds. a special provision is made in new section 
36B to the effect that where a mutawalli alienates wakf property 
entered as such in the register of wakfs without the previous sanc-
tion of the Board as required by section 36A, the Board can recover 
possession of such property by sending a requisition to the Collector. 
A provision has also been made for appeal to the district court by 
any person aggrieved by the order of the Collector. 
Clame 12.-The deletion of clause (g) of sub-section (1) of 
section 41 is consequential to the amendment proposed to section 43 
so as to provide for removal of a mutawalli who fails. without re-
asonable excuse, for two consecutive years to pay the contribution 
under section 46. 
Clause 13.-The scope of sub-section (1) of section 43 is being 
enlarged to specify certain additional grounds for removal of muta-
wallis. 
Sub-section (2) of section 43 is being amended to provide that 
the Board can supersede any committee appointed by any person 
or authority other than a court of law, if the committee fails to dis-
charge its functions properly. 
To avoid injustice, a new sub-section is being added to section 43 
giving a right of appeal to any mutawalli aggrieved by an order o~ 
removal under sub-section (2) of that section or under the new 
grounds proposed to be incorporated in sub-section (1). 
Clause 14.-Proposed section 43A is intended to enable the Board 
to assume direct management of a wakf for a period or periods not 
exceeding five years in the aggregate where no suitable person is 
available for appointment as mutawalli thereof. 
Cla1Ue 15.~ub-section (1) of section 45 is being recast, so as to 
make the intention clear. 
ClaU8e 16.- To cover the contribution payable b" Boards to the 
Central Wakf Council under proposed section 8B (vide clause 5), ~he 
maximum limit of contribution payable by a mutawalli under sectIon 

16 
45 is being raised from 5 to 6% of the net annual income of the pro-
perty of the wakf situate in the State. 
Clause 17.-The amendment by this clause is self-explanatory. 
Clause 18.-Section 54 is being omitted as unnecessary. 
Clause 19.-Seclion 5~ has been interpreted by the 'Kerala High 
Court to mean that a person desiring to institute a suit under the 
provisions of any of the Acts mentioned in the section has to obtain 
in addition to the consent of the Board the consent of the authorities 
specified under the provisions of those Acts. This was not the ori-
ginal intention. Accordingly, the section has been recast to bring 
out the real intention. 
Clause 20.-Sub-section (1) of section 62 is being recast to make 
the intention clear. 
Clause 21.-The definition of wakf under section 3 (1) requires that 
the dedication must be made by a person professing Islam. It does 
not cover endowment!; made by non-Muslims for the support of 
Muslim institutions like Dargahs, etc. In Madras, this difficulty has 
been got over by a local amendment to the Act. As !;imilar endow-
ments exist in other States also. new section 66C is being inserted 
to bring such endowments .within the purview of the Act. 
Clause 22.-Clause (h) of section 67 (2) provides that the State 
Government can frame rules prescribing the form and time of sub-
mission of budget of the Board and its approval' :by the State Gov-
ernment. The approval of the budget by the State Government is 
not consistent with the scheme of the Act and creates difficulty in 
actual practice. It is not even necessary as no Government money 
is involved. The words "and approved by the State Government" 
are, therefore, being omitted. 
Clause 23.-Under clause (2) of section 69 (1) of the Act, only 
section 5 of the Religious Endowments Act, 1863 has been made 
inapplicable to walds. The section is being amended to make the 
Religious Endowments Act, 1863 in its entirety inapplicable to wakfs. 
This is necessary as a Committee set up under the 1863 Act exercises 
almost the same functions as a Board does under the Wakf Act. 
Further"lacking the finances and resources of the Board, such Com-
mittees ·cannot be as effective as the Boards. 
Clause 24.-A new section 70 has been inserted to provide for re-
moval of difficulties in the imrlementation of the provisions of the 
Act. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 4 of the Bill which inserts a new Chapter IIA provides 
for the establishment of a Central Wakf Counci1. New section 8D 
forming part of this Chapter empowers the Central Government to 
make rules fOr carrying out tbe purposes of this Chapter. The 
matters in respect of which such rules may be made relate inter alia 
to the term of office of, the procedure to be followed in the discharge 
of their functions by, and thentanher of filling casual vacancies 
among, the members of the Central Wakf Council. 
Sub-seetion (6) of new section 36B (vide clause 11) em:powers 
the State Government to make rules fo1' the guidance of Collectors 
required under that section to obtain possession Of -eertaitl wakf 
properties. 
The matters in respect of which delegation of legislative power 
has been provided for are thus matters of procedure, fann or detail 
,nd as such the delegation is of a normal character. 
• d" 17 
214 (B) LS-3. 

• 
• 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE WAKP ACT, 1954 
(29 OF 1954) 
• 
• 
• • 
CHAPTER I 
PRl:LIMIN'ARY 
• • 
• 
• 
I. In thill Act, unless the conltext otherwise requires,-
• 
• 
(a) "beneficiary" means a person or object for whose bene-
ftt a wald is created and includes religious, pious and charitable 
objects and any other objects of public utility established for 
the beneftt of the Muslim community; 
• • • • • 
(e) uBoard" means a Board of Wakfs established under 
seetion 9; 
• • • • • • 
(i) ''prescribed'' means prescribed by rules made by the 
State Government under this Act and includes the regulations 
made by the Board under this Act; 
• • • • • • 
(1) "wald" means the permanent dedication by a person 
·professing Islam of any movable or immovable property for any 
purpose recognised by the Muslim law as pious, religious or 
cl1arltabl~d includes-
• 
• 
(i) a wakf by user; 
(ii) mashrut-ul-khidmat; and 
• 
• 
• • 
CHAPTER n 
Suavn OF W AIm! 
• • 
• • 
• • 
De1initioNl. 
T. (1) The total cost of making a survey under this Chapter shall Keeovery 
be borne by all the mutawallis in proportion to the income of the of costa 
property of the walds situated in the State, such proportion being of surve)'. 
assessed by the Commis.ioner. 
• • • • • • 
18 

Incorpora-
tion. 
Appoint-
mentof 
members. 
Functions of 
the Board. 
19 
CHAPTER Dr 
EsTA1Il.ISHMENT OF BoARDS AND THEIR FUNCTIONS 
9. (1) With effect from such date a8 the State Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there 
shall be established a Board of Wakfs under such name as may be 
specified in the notification. 
(2) The said Board shall be a body corporate having perpetual 
succession and a common seal with power to acquire and hold 
property and to transfer any such property subject to luch conditions 
and restrictions as may be prescribed and shall by the said name sue 
and be sued. 
• • • • • • 
11. The members of the Board shall be appointed by the State 
Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, from anyone or 
more of the following categories of persons, namely:-
• 
15. 
• • • • • • • • • • 
(b) persons having special knowledge of Muslim law and 
representing associations such as Stat,e Jamiat-ul-Ulama-i-Hind 
(whether such per.;ons are Hanafi, .Ahle-Hadis or Shefai) or 
State Shia Conference; 
(c) persons having speciel knowledge of administration, 
finance or law; 
• • • • • • 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, 
the functions of the Board shall be-
• • • • • • 
(e) in any case where the objects of the wakf are not evi-
dent from any written instrument or the objects for which they 
were created have ceased to exist, to direct in what manner the 
income of the wakf or the surplus income thereof shall be uti-
lised; but nu such direction shall be given without giving the 
parties affected an oppo:rtunity of being heard. 
• • • • • 
(j) to sanction leases of property for more than three years 
or mortgage or exchange properties according to the provisions 
of Muslim law: 
Provided that no such sanction shall be given unlees at 
least three-fourths of the members of the Board vote in favour 
of such a transaction; 
• • • • • • 

iO. 
22. The Board may, by a geQ.eE~ or special order in writing, Delegll-
delegate to the Chairman or any other member or to the Secretary tion. 
or any other oftlcer or servant of the Board, subject to such conditions 
and.1imiiations (if any) as may be specitied in the order, sucb. Qf 
its pow.e:no. and duties under thi~ Aot as it may deem necessary· 
• • • • • • 
4.1. (1) 1f a mutawalli fails-
• • • • • • 
(g) to pay the contributions payable under section 46; 
• • • • • • 
PenalU ... 
43.· (1) Notwithstal:\dingapythiIl.g ~ontained in any other law or Removalof 
the deed of wakf, the 130ard may remove a mutawalli from his office muta. 
if such mutawalli- wallis. 
• • • • • 
(b) has been convicted of an offence of criminal breach of 
trust or any other offenqe. involving mo~ turpitude. . 
(2) Where a committee is appointed by the Board to act as a 
mutawalli for managing or administering any waldproperty and the 
committee, in the opinion of the Board, is unable to perform, or has 
persistently made default in the perfprmance of, the duty imposed on 
it by or under this Act or has exceeded or abused its powers, the 
Board may supersede the committee and appoint any other person or 
committee to act as the mutawalli of the wald property. 
• • • • • -U. (1) The Boord may, either on an application received under Inquiry by 
section 44 or on its own motion, institute an inquiry into any matter the Board. 
relating to a wakf and shall hold the inquiry in such manner as may 
be prescribed or authorise any person in this behaU to hold the 
inquiry. 
• • • • 
CHAPTER VI 
FINANCE OF THE BOARD 
46. (1) The mutawalli of every \Wkf shall pay annually to the Annual 
Board slJch contribution not exc~ding five per cent. of the net annual contribu-

tions 
payable 
to the 
Board. 
~t 
income of such of its property as is situate in the State as the Board. 
may, subject to the sanction of the State Government, from ti~ to 
time, determine: 
Provided that no such contribution shall be paJ9ble by the muta~ 
walli of a wakf of which the net annual income does not exceed o~e 
hundred rupees. . 
• • • • • 
Wakt 48. (1) All moneys received by the Board under section 46 and-all 
Fund. other moneys realised ,by the Board utlder this Act shall form a fund 
to be called the Weld Fund . 
• • • • • • 
Noftnan- 54. The State Government shall not be liable for any expNlditure cial " incurred in connection with the administration of this Act. liability 
of Govern-
men\. 
Institution 
of suits 
under sec-
tion 14 of 
the Religi-
ous 
Endow-
CHAPTER VII 
JUDICIAL PROCEEPINGS 
55. (1) A suit to obtain any of the reliefs mentioned in section 14 
of the Religious Endowments Act, 1863 and in section 92 of the Code 20 of 1.883. 
of Civil Procedure, 1908, relating to any wakf may, notwithstanding 5 of 1908. 
anything to the contrary contained in those Acts, be i.Elstituted' by 
the Board without obtaining the leave or consent referred to in 
those Acts. 
mentsAct, 
1863 and (2) No suit to obtain any of the reliefs referred to in sub-section 
section 92 (1) relating to a wakf shan be instituted by any person or authority 
• of the Code other than the Board without the consent in writing of the Board: 
of Civil 
Procedure, 
1908. 
Directions 
by the 
Central 
Govern-
ment. 
Provided that no such consent shall be required for the institution 
of a suit against the Board in respect of any act purporting to be 
done by it in pursuance of this Act or of any rules or orders made 
thereunder. 
• • • • 
CHAPTER VnI 
MlscELLA.NEous 
• • 
6.2. (1) The Central Government may call for any report or in-
formation from the Government of any State with respect to the 
functioning of the Board in that State and after considering such 
report or information, the Central Government may 188ue IUch direc-

~alRe­
gulation 
XIX of 
1810. 
10 of 1883. 
lions oh questions of polley to be followed by the Board as it may 
think fit. 
• • • • • • 
67. (1) The State Government may, by notification in the om- Powerto 
cial Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. mlake 
(Z) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the . 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the follow-
ing matters, namely:-
• • • • • 
(h) the form in which, and the time within which, the bud-
get of the BoUd may be prepared and submitted by the Board 
and approved by the State Government; 
• • • • • • 
ru ea. 
69. (1) The following enactments, namely:-
(1) The Bengal Charitable Endowments, 
Repeal and 
Public Buildings laving •. 
and Escheats Regulation, 1810; 
(Z) Section 5 of the ReligioUG Endoments Act, 1863; 
• • • • • • 
shall not apply to any wakf to which this Act applies. 
• • • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Wakf Act, 1954. 
(Shri Humayun Kabir, 
Minister of Petroleum and Ch£micals.) 