Bill .0. 81 0118&8 
THE SEA CUSTOMS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1953 
(A.s INTRODUOBD IN TIlB HOUSB 011' THB PBOPLB) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Sea Customs Aot, 1878. 
BE it enacted by Parliament I1S follows:--
1. Sbort tme.-This Act ml\y be caJled the Bea Oustoms (Amendm3nt) 
Act, 1958. 
2. lDeertlon of new section '8B in Act vm of 18'18.-After section 
.1 
. . 
43A of the Sea Customs Act. 1878 (hereinafter referred to as the princi- 0 
pal Act), tlJl~ following sectioll shall be inserted, na.mely:-
.. 431>. Drawbacl,; on imported matericUs used in the manu/aotwe 
0/ goods whioh aT' B:eported. -(1) Where it appears to the Central 
Government that, in the case of goods of any olass or description 
ma.nufactured in, and exported from, India or shipped as provi- 10 
sions or stor.es for lise Oll board a ship proceeding to a foreign port, 
8 drawbaok should be allowed of duties of customs ohargeabll( under 
this Act in respect of any material of a cl68s or description used in 
the manufacture of such goods, the Central Government may, by 
notifioation in the Offioial Gazette, direot that a drawback shall be 15 
allowed in respeot of suoh goods in acoordance with, and aubjeo' to, 
the provisions of this seetion and any rules made thereunder., 
(2) A drawback under this seotion shall be allowed only in 
respeot of suoh quantity and materia} 811 is shown to the satisfaotiolJ 
of the Customs-collector to be duty-paid. 20 
(3) The Central Government may make rules for the purpose of 
oarrying out the provisions of this section and, in partioular, suoh 
rules may-
(a) specify the oluss or desoription of manufactured goods 
in the case of which, aud the c18ss or description of material in 26 
respect of whioh, drawback is to be paid; 
(b) provide for drawback to be paid in respect of such quantity 
of material of that class or description as iR actually contained 
in the goods or is specified in thA rules 8S being the average 

10 
16 
20 
30 
2 
quantity of suoh material used in the manufe.oture of goods of 
that class or description either by manufacturers generally or by 
any purticular manufacturer; 
(0) specify the rate of drll-wback to be payable with refer-
fPloe to the weight, quantity or any other basis as the Central 
Government may deem fit; 
(d) provide for the admissibility of drawback for any specific 
period or without any limit of period; . 
(II) provide for requiring the manufaoturer of goods in the case 
of which drawback is to be paid to produce, to the Customs-
collector, evidence relating to the proportion in which the 
material in respeot of which drawback is claimed is contained 
in..uch goods and the payment of duty on such material; 
(.I.). PllOvide for. requiring per80DS who have been coucl:lrued 
at any stage with ~oods in th~ case of V(qi~p:. drawback is olaimed 
under ·this seotionto furnish sueh information as may, in the 
opinion of the Customs·col~otor, be neoessary to enable him to 
determine whether duty 4~lI' be,en paid on the material 000-
tained in the goods in respeot of whioh a claim is made and 
for r~ing sUQb., D~r80Qa to produoe any books of aooount or 
other documents of wh8~ever nature rel~ing to t4",t material; 
(g) provi~e £01' ~e pr~uotipD of liuoh oertifioates, 4Pcumeuts 
-and. oflh*ellidencein flupport of each ohum of drawb~k lUI 
may be neoessary; 
(h) provide for requiring the manufacturl:lr to give aooess to 
e77ery part of his manufactory to any offioer of the Central 
Government specially authorised in this behalf by the Chief 
(~URtOI{JS Ofliq~r. 0Ii thJl.Qhi~ C~ms AuthQr.ity to enable such 
8uthotls,ed Om-oer to wspeot the processes of manufaoture and 
tp veri~yb'y apt~l chJlck or otherwise tbe s,t,aiements made in 
supp'ort. of t.lJ!' clain~ .for drawback. 
E:lfplanation.-In ~is section the expressipn 'mauufaQture' 
• (with its grammatiQal va,iations and oognate expressipus) in-
cludes the prooeslles of blending any goods or making ot other 
alteratioqa thel'tlbl .... 
• , I , __ , ." 
Ilt. ___ Qf,.e".ctkIIl lOOA ID Act VDl. of IIT8.-A~r ~tion 
100 of the !pr.Wcipal. A.ct, ihe following seotion shall be insert«l, namely:-
"100 ... MtJII,lljactUT8 oj good8 in bonded waT6ho1l81l8.-(1) With 
~,8I¥lotion of th~ Oustoms-collector, and· after sucb noti~ given 
aod under such rules as the Chief Customs Authority from time to 
tilne pre~ribes, any owner of goods. majy, aUer wa~ousing the 
aame-
(a) carry OD any manufaoturing process in the warehouse in 
relatipn to suoh goods; 
(b) blend, the goods or make an, other alt.eratioD,thereiu 
for nny purpos,e whatsoever. 
(2) Without prej\ldu~e to the general~ty of the power oonferred 
'by lub-seotion (1), the rules which tqe Chief. CustQms Authority may 

3 
prescribe under that sub-section may provide for aU or any of the 
following matters, namely:-
(a) the conditionE! rela'ting to 'the storage of. ~utY-Daid ~I~~ 
other goods in the wurehouse for the, purpose of carryltlg on ttierem 
any operations pel'missiHie u'llder sub-sec'tioll '(1); . 6 
(b~ the sup~vifrion by officers of flU1Jtornll o\\>r 1Ilicti ~. 
tiolls und the pa~'nHllJt of fees for Sltcli sll~elr\ildon: 
(c) the seourity to be furnished for the due Obl:ierVllllCe o( 
ally rules Ilhd conditions prescl'ibed under this sect,ion. 
(.1) After any operutiolls permissible uuder this se<Mdrt ba'Vie \;etln ." 
carried out in the warehouse and the wurehouaad' goode, l'llJ*Ok!ed. III 
proper or approved packages, the Customs-colleotor may, at th~ re-
quest of the ownor of such goods, oause or permit any refuse, damag-
ed or surplus goods remaining after the oompletion of such operl\-
tions or repacking (or, fit the like request, any goods which may not 16 
be wOJ·th tho duty) to be d~stroyed, and may remit the duty pay~ble 
thereon. 
(4) The Central Government may, by notification in the Offioial 
Gazette, exempt any goods manufactured, blended or otherwise al-
tpreci in a warehouso, when cleared for horne consumption from tbe 20 
whole or any part of the duties leviRble thereon.". 
4. Amendment 01 Schedule to section 187. Aot vm 0Il878.-1:"I. t.be 
Schedule to section 167 of the principal A('t,-
(a) in item 1. in the entry in the first column, the words 'for the 
oontravention of whioh no speoifio penalty is prescribed' shall be in- 26 
serted at the end: 
(b) after item 10, the following item shall be inserted, namely:-
.. lOA. If 1& claim for drl&wback 
in relpeOt of any goodl il mnde in 
contravention of section '3B or any 
ruleR made thel'f'lunder. 
Such good- -hall be Ii able to oonfl8ca-
t.ion; 
so 
'3 B, any person oonoorned ia any luch 
offence Bhan be liable to a peDalty 
not exceeding twit>e the amount of 
drawback: claimed or not eSOMdiog 36 
one tholUaDd rupees.". 
(c) in item 47-
(i) in the entry in the first column, for the words and fi~ureR 
'in section 100' the words. figures and letters 'in section 100 or 
section l00A or in any rules made under section IOOA' shaU 
be substituted; , 
(;1) in the entry in the second oolumn, for the figurel '98 
& 100' the figures, word and letter '98, 100 and lOOA' shall be 
8ubstituted . • 

4 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Government oonsider that for the development of India's export 
trad.?', it iR necessary to provide ill the Sea. Customs Act, 1878, for pay-
'ment .. of drawback of import duty paid on the r~w IlIuteriuil:l contained 
in ~be manufactured goods exported abroad. Government also consider 
it neCftBsary to make a provision in that Act for allowing manufacture of 
goods in bond in order to faoilitute industrial enterprise. 'fhe object of this 
Bill is to giveeffeot to these proposals. 
C. D. DESHMUKH . 
. NxwDBLID; 
Thi lath March, 1958. 

lS 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 2· of the Bill seek!; to empower thi~ Central Government to 
gTQllt a. dra.wback of duty 011 materials on export of goods IrlliDUfQctl1re<i 
therefrom. It is not· possible at this stage to indicate what expenditure 
will be inourred 8S a result oftbe BiU passing into law. No ~xpenditure 
on acoount of any additional staff is at present contemplf!oted. The mn 
seeks to empower Government to grant a drawback. It is only 011 appli. 
cl4tions from the trade being received to 8vail of the facility and on accept. 
ance by the applioant .. of the condition. to be, laid down by Government,. 
that the amount of revenue involved by granting suoh conoeasions can be 
estimated. 

6 
ANNEXlURE 
EXTRAC!'B F80)I THE SEA CUSTOMS ACT, 1878 (VIII OF 1878) 
• • '. , • • 
.0.117 
1ft .-PnDlibmenb for, otl~G"''-:The offences mentioped in the first 
cOlUmn of the following Sohedul~ shall be punisbable to tal' extent men· 
tioned ill the third column of the saUle with refel'enoe to 8uob offellces 
i'espectNely : - ' 
Section of thil 
Aot to wbleb 
oft'enoe ball 
referenoe 
1.-OODtrav8llUag any role made UDder General 
thil Act. 
• • • • 
47.-lf any wareboUled aooda are opened 98 4: 100 
in oontravention of the proviliollll of 
I8Otion 88 ; or 
if anT alteration be made in IUAlb 
goode or in the packing thereof. 
exoept 811 provj~ in aeation 100 • 
• • • • 
Peualt,. not aoeed1na 
tlve hundred rapeea . 
• • 
auoh roodl Ib.n be 
liable to oonfiJaation. 
• • 

HOUS~ OF TH~ P~OPt~ 
.A 
BILL 
.. 
further to amend the Sea Customs Aot, 1878. 
The President has, in pursuance of clauses (1) a.nd (3) of 
article 117 of the Constitution of India, recommended to the 
-House of the People the introduotion and oonsideration of 
the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Sfl«'eUJ'lI. 
-,. <--~ 
(SAri O. D. DesAmu1eh, 
Miniater for Finance) 