32 of 19,8. 
• 
16 AUG 1iOl 
BiD No. 32: of 1"3 
TIm PUBLIC PREMISES (EVICTION OF ,uNAUTHO-
RISED OCCUPANTS) AMENDMENT BllL, 1963 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised 
Occupants) Act, 1958. 
'BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fourteenth. Year of the 
. Republic of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Public Premises (Eviction of Un- Short titll. 
8utharised Occupants) Amendment Act, 1963. 
S 2. In section 2 of the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Amc~meDt 
Occupants) Act, 1958 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), of lectJon 2. 
after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted and shall be 
10 
IS 
deemed always to have been inserted, namely:-
C (dd) "rent", in relation to any public premises, means the 
consideration payable periodically for the authorised occupation 
of the premises, and includes--
(i) any charge for electricity, water or any other ser-
vices in connection with the occupation of the premises, 
(ii) any tax (by whatever name called) payable in res-
pect of the premises, 
where such charge or tax is payable by·the Central Government;'. 
3. In section 3 of the principal Act,- Amendment 
j. (a) in clause (a), after the words "gazetted officers of Gov- of leCtion 3. 
ernment", the words, brackets, letter and figure "or officers of 

Amendment 
ot Icction S. 
a 
equivalent rank of the Corporation or any committee or the 
Authority referred to in clause (b) of section 2" shall be inserted; 
(b) iD elause (b), for the words "eacb estate oftleer", tbe 
words "tbe estate oftleen" shall be substituted. 
4. In sub-section (2) of section 5 of the principal Act,-
(a) for the words "forty-five days", the words "thirty days" 
shall be substituted; 
(b) the proviso shall be omitted. 
Amenclmt:nc 5. In sub-section (2) of section 6 of the principal Act, after the 
of lecdon 6. 11 d 
Amendment 
of lection 7. 
Amendment 
of Icc:tion 9. 
AnteDdmeat 
oC aectioa 
10. 
words "rent or damages,", the words "or costs," aha be inserte. 10 
6. In section 7 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (2), the proviso shall be omitted; 
(b) for sub-section (3), the following .sub-section shall be 
Bubstituted, namely:-
"(3) No order under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) IS 
shall· be made against any person until after the issue of a 
notice in writing to the person calling upon him to show 
cause within such time as may be specified in the notice why 
such order should not be made, and until his objections, if 
any, and any evidence he may produce in support of the 20 
same, have been considered by the estate officer.". 
7. In section 9 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (2), for the words "thirty days" wherever 
they occur, the wards "fifteen days" shall be subst~tuted; 
(b) after sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be 25 
inserted, nl1mely:-
.. (4A) The costs of any appeal under this section shall 
be in the discretion of the appellate officer.". 
8. To section 10 of the principal Act, the following words shall be 
added at the end, namely:- 30 
"and no injunction shall be granted by any court or other' 
authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in 
pursuance of any power conferred by or under this Act". 

3 
9. After section 10 of the principal Act, the following sections llUertioD of 
shall be inserted, namely:- newaectiona loA, loB, 
IoC and 
100 . 
.. "lOA. (1) If any ·person who has been evicted from any Ofl'enus and 
public premises under this Act again occupies the premises penalty. 
without authority for such occupation, he shall be punishable 
with imprisonment which may extend to one year, or with fine 
which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
(2) Any magistrate convicting a person under sub-section 
(1) may make an order for evicting that person summarily and 
10 he shall be liable to such eviction wit1!out prejudice to any 
action that may be taken against him under this Act. 
lOB. If the estate officer has reasons to believe that any Power to 
persons are in unauthorised occupation of any public premises, :a~~D~afOI'­
the estate officer or any other officer authari~d by him in this 
IS behalf may require those persons or any other person to furnish 
information relating to the names and other particulars of the 
persons in occupation of the public premises and every person 
so required shall be bound to furnish the information in his 
possession . 
20 
2S 
3S 
• 
lOCo (1) Where any person against whom any proceeding Liability of 
for the determination of arrears of rent or for the assessment of Iheirl' and . . ega repre-
damages IS t(1 be or has been taken dles before the proceeding lentatives. 
is taken or during the pendency thereof, the proceeding may be 
taken or, as the case may be, continued against the heirs or legal 
representatives of that person. 
(2) Any amount due to the Central Government from any 
person whether by way of arrears of rent or damages or costs 
shall, after the death of the person, be payable by his heirs or 
legal representatives, but their liability shall be limited t. the 
extent of the assets of the deceased in their hands. 
100. If any person refuses or fails to pay the arrears of rent Recovery of 
payable under sub-section (1) of section 7 or the damaees pay- rent, etc., •• 
able under sub-section (2) of that section or costs awarded to the ~~ ~~rr 
Central Government under sub-section (4A) of section 9 or any revenQe. 
portion of such rent, damages or costs, within the time, if any, 
specified therefor in the order relating thereto, the estate officer 
may issue a certificate for the amount due to the Collector who 
shall proceed to recover the spme a, an alTear of land revenue.". 

Amendment 
of .ccdOD 
13· 
Special pro-
vi8ion for 
Umitation. 
4 
10. In section 13 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (2), after clause (b), the following clause 
shall ,be inserted, namely:-
" (bb) the distribution and allocation of work to estate 
officers and the transfer of any proceeding pending before 5 
an estate officer to another estate officer;"; 
(b) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(3) Every rule made unde.r this section shall be laid 
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of 10 
Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or 
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session in which it is so laid or the successive sessions afore-
said, both Houses agree in making any modification in the IS 
rule or both Houses agree that the :rule should not be made, 
the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified 
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without pre-
judice to the validity of anything previously done under that 20 
rule .... 
11. For the removal of dou,bts, it is hereby declarld that the 
amendments made by clause (a) of section 7 of this Act shall not 
apply to any order made under section 5 or section 7 of the principal 
Act before the commencement of this Act.' 2S 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS ' 
The Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 
1958, was enacted to provide for speedy eviction of unauthorised 
occupants. from public premises and for other connected matters. 
Experience of the working of the Act has however revealed certain 
difficulties in relation to procedural matters. It is, therefore, pro-
posed to amend the Act so as to remove those difficulties and to in-
corporate certain provisions which would help effectively to imple-
ment the Act. 
The main features of the Bill are-
(a) a person who, having been evicted from a public pre-
mises, reoccupies it without authority will be committing an 
offence; 
(b) no court or other authority shall have power to grant 
any injunction in respect of any action taken or proposed to be 
taken by or under the Act; 
(c) the heirs and legal representatives of a person will be 
liable for arrears of rent or damages or costs due from that 
person; 
-(d) the reduction of the time for preferring appeals and for 
compliance with the orders of eviction. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 8th July. 1963. 
MEHR CHAND KHANNA. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill contemplates appointment of more estate 
officers, who would be empowered to evict persons in unauthorised 
occupation of public premises. It is intended that this work would 
be entrusted to existing officers and it may not, therefore, be neces-
sary to incur any additional expenditure. 
It is, however, difficult to anticipate whether it would be necessary 
to create in future any additional posts for expediting the disposal of 
the work. It is not, therefcxre, possible to give any estimate of the 
additional expenditure, if additional posts are created.. Even if any 
additiopal expenditure is involved, it is not lilrely to be appreciable 
and may be about fifty thousand rupees per annum. 
6 

mMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 10 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (2) of section 13 
of the Act in order to empower the Central Government to make 
rules for the distribution and allocation of work to estate officers and 
the transfer of any proceeding pending before an estate officer to 
another estate officer. These are matters of procedural and adminis· 
trative nature. 
2. The delegation of legislative power is thus of a normal charae· 
ter. 
., 

Appoint-
ment of 
CIt ate 
officers. 
Eviction of 
uDauthor sed 
occupants. 
Diapoaalof 
~TRACTS FROM THE PuBLIC PREMlSJfS' (EvtCTION OF 
UNAUTHORISED OCCUPANTS) ACT, 1958 (32 OF 1958) 
• • • • • 
3. The Central Government may, by notification in the Oftlci~l 
Gazette,-
(a) appoint such persons, being gazetted officers of Govern-
ment, as it thinks fit to be estate officers for the purposes of this 
Act; and 
(b) define the local limits within which, or the categories 
of public premises in respect of which, each estate officer shall 
exercise the powers conferred, and perform the duties imposed, 
on estate officers by or under this Act. 
• • • • • 
5. (1) • • • • 
(2) If any person refuses or fails to comply with the order of 
eviction within forty-five days of the date of its publication under 
sub-section (1), the estate officer or any other officer duly authorized 
by the estate officer in this behalf may evict that person from, and 
take possession of, the public premises and may, for that purpose, 
use such force as may be necessary: 
Provided that in the case of any such person who is not a Gov-
ernment employee and who has been in continuous occupation of the 
public premises for a period exceeding three years immediately 
preceding the date of the publication of the order of eviction, the 
estate officer shall not, if an application is made to him in this behalf, 
evict such person from the public premises within ninety days of 
such publication. 
G. (1) • • • • 
propa:ty .. 
.left ~n (2) Where any property IS sold under sub-Becbon (1), the sale 
;~~e. by proceeds shall, after deducting the expenses of the sale and 'the 
unauthor:sed amount, if any, due to the Central Government on account of 
occupaots. 
8 

9 
arrears of rent or damages, be paid to such person or persons as may 
appear to the estate officer to be entitled to the same: , 
Provided that where the estate officer is unable to decide as to the 
person or persons to whom the balance of the amount is payable or 
as to the apportionment of the same, he may refer such dispute to 
the civil court of competent jurisdiction and the decision of the 
court thereon shall be final. 
7. (1) • .. • • Power to 
recover rent 
(2) Where any person is, or has at any time been, in unauthoris- ?r damages 
cd occupation of any public premises, the estate officer may, having ~~ ~~Cli~t 
regard to such principles of assessment of damages as may be pres- premises as 
cribed, assess the damages on accouht of the use and occupation of ia~da~.~!_ 
such premises and may, by order, require that person to pay the nue. 
damages within such time and in such instalments as may be speci-
fied in the order: 
Provided that no such order shall be made until after the issue 
of a notice in writing to the person calling upon him to show cause 
within such time as may be specified in the notice why such order 
should not be made, and until his objections, if any, and any evi-
dence he may produce in support of the same, have been considered 
by the estate officer. 
(3) If any person refuses or fails to pay the arrears of rent or 
any instalment thereof payable under sub-section (1) or the damages 
or any instalment thereof payable under sub-section (2) within the 
time specified in the order relating thereto, the estate officer may 
issue a certificate for the amount due tQ the Collector who shall pro-
ceed to recover the same as an arrear of land revenue . 
• • • • • 
9. (1) • • • * 
(2) An appeal under sub-section (1) shall be preferred-
(a) in the case of an appeal from an order under section 5, 
within thirty days from the date of publication of the order 
under sub-section (1) of that section; and 
(b) in the case of an appeal from an order under section 7, 
within thirty days from the date on which the order is communi-
·cated to the appellant: 
Provided that the appellate officer may entertain the appeal after 
the expiry of the said period of thirty days, if he is satisfied that the 
Appeala. 

Finality d" 
orders. 
10 
appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal 
in time. 
'" '" • 
10. Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, every order 
made by an estate officer or appellate officer under this Act shall be 
final and shall not be called in question in any original suit, applica-
tion or execution proceeding. 
'" '" '" • 
Power tc! 13. (1) The Central Government may, by notification make rules. in the 
of this Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes 
Act. 
'" • • '" • 
(3) All rules made under this section shall, as soon as may be 
after they are made, be laid for not less than thirty days before each 
House of Parliament and shall be subject to such modifications as 
Parliament may make during the session in which they are so laid 
or the session immediately following. 
, 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the.. Public Premises (Ev iction of Unautho-
rised Occupants) Act, 1958. 
(Shri Mehr Chand Khanna, 
Minister of Works, 
Housing and 
Rehabilitat ion.) 