Bill No. 32 of 1960 
THE RUBBER (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1960 
(As INTRODUCED IN Lolt SABRA 
ON 1ST AUGUST, 1960) 

s 
34 of 1947· 
10 
IS 
30 
Bill No. 3~ of 1960 
THE RUBBER (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1960 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
fu.rther to amend the Ru.bber Act, 1947. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eleventh Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Rubber (Amendment) Act, ~~~o~~e 
1960. mencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notifioation in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Z. For section 12 of the Rubber Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred Substitution 
to as the principal Act), the following section shall be substituted, 0tif netiw lec-on or 1eC-
namely:- tion 12. 
"12. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Govern- Impolition 
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, there b~n:;tlb­
shall be levied as a cess for the purposes of this Act, III duty of 
excise on all rubber produced in India at such rate, not exceed-
ing fifty naye paise per kilogram of rubber so produced, as the 
Central Government may fix. 
(2) The duty of excise levied under sub-section (1) shall 
be collected by the Board in accordl8.nce with rules made in this 
behalf either from the owner of the estate on which the rubber 
is produced or from the manufacturer by whom such rubber is 
used. 
(3) The owner or, as the oase may be, the manufacturer shall 
pay to the Board the amount of the duty within one month from 
the date on which he receives III notice of demand therefor from 
, 

, ' 
, ~ 
:1\ 
.r 
, I 
2 
the Board and, if he fails to do so, the duty may be recovered 
from the owner or the manufacturer, as the case may be, as an 
arrear of land revenue. 
(4) For the purpose of enabling the Board to assess the 
amount of the duty of excise levied under this section- S 
(a) the Board shall, by notification in the Officlal 
Gazett~, fix a period in respect of which assessments shall 
be made; and 
(b) without prejudice to the provisions of section 20, 
every owner and every manufacturer shall furnish to the 10 
Board a return not later than fifteen days after .the expiry 
of the period to which the return relates, stating,-
(i) in the case of en owner, the total quantity of 
rubber produced on the estate in each such period: 
Provided that in respect of an estate situated. only IS 
partly in India, the owner shall in the said return show 
separately the quantity of rubber produced within and 
outside India; 
(ii) in the case of a manufacturer, the total qUlBn-
tity of rubber used by him in such period out of the 2.0 
rubber produced in India. 
(5) If any owner or manufacturer fails to furnish, within 
the time prescribed, the return referred to in sub-section (4) 
or furnishes a return which the Board has reason to belinIe 11 
incorrect or defective, the Board may assess the amount of the ~s 
duty of excise in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(6) Any person aggrieved by an assessment made under this 
section may, within three months of the service of the notice un-
der sub-section (3), apply to the District Judge for the cancella-
tion or modification of the assessment, and the District Judge)O 
shall, after giving the Board an opportunity of being heard, pass 
such order (which shall be final) as he thinks proper. 
(7) The proceeds of the duty of excise collected under this 
section reduced by the cost of collection as detennined by the 
Central Government shall first be ctedited to the Consolidated 35 
,Fund of India, and then be paid by the Central Government to 
the Board for being utilised for the purposes of this Act, if Parlia-
ment by appropriation made by law in this behalf so providea.". 

3 
3. In section 25 of the principal Act,- AmeadJDl'D[ 
(i) in sub-section (2), after clause (xx), the following clause 
shall be inserted, namely:-
"(xxa) the cases and circumstances in which the duty 
S of excise under section 12 shall be payable by the owner and 
the manufacturers respectively, the manner in' which the 
duty may be assessed, paid or collected, the regulation of 
the production, manufacture, transport or sale of rubber in 
so far as such regulation is necessary for the proper levy, 
10 payment or collection of the duty;" ; 
(ii) for sub-section (3). the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid 
as soon as may be after it is made before each House of Par-
IS Iiament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two successive 
sessions, and if before the expiry of the session in which it 
is so laid or the session immediately following, both Houses 
agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses 
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall there-
after have effect only in such modified form or be of no 
effect, as the case may be, so however toot any such modifi-
cation or annulment shall be without prejudice to the vali-
dity of anything previously done under that rule.". 
of lectiOll .),5. 

_ I' ", ':~:~' • .""' ···.:~..::2L, .. '.~·5'~.:::': ,r >"':. ::",,"-:~' ~~'-. '-';',;, ~"'" ... ~.~:~;;:,":-~,'1'.;~"">'.':Ll:,.~~:,.':'-'.'.' c.., .. <:.,·,\:.::.·~.~(J):'2Ioi~-cn.~"'"\~~·I"""',:v.· ... o..;<~tl'<"·~f".'\'·.,).,;!.; ... .....:iK ... ,.~""IiiI"..~~I~·r:~'.,T"~ 
(, ~1~ 
aWL:, 
; , 
j " 
, \' 
11 
d I 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Section 12 of the Rubber Act, 1947, provides for the levy anti 
collection of cess on all rubber produced in India at Q rate not exceed-
ing one anna per pound of rubb:?r. This cess is payable by the owner 
of the estate on which rubber is produced and is assessed on the 
total amount of rubber produced as stated in the return which every 
owner of an estate has to furnish to the Rubber Board not later than 
15 days after the expiry of the period in respect of which the assess-
ment is made. 
Section 10 of the Act makes it obligatory on the part of e"lery 
owner of the estate to register himself with the Rubber Board. 
This method of collection of the cess provided under the Act has 
led to considerable evasion of cess by the owners of the estates, 
either by evasion of registration or by failure to submit correct 
returns or any returns at all. There are about 26,000 estates under 
production in the country and most of .them are small holdings. 
Many of them do not render returns of production to the Rubber 
~rd and thus evade payment of duty. :From October, 1947 to 
December 1954, it was found that 20,608 tons of rubber escaped 
assessment and the Board suffered during the period a loss of 
Rs. 2,30,805. The Rubber Board estimates that under the present 
system there is no likelihood of more than 65% of the potential 
revenue being realised each year. 
With a view to improving the efficiency of collection, it is pro-
posed to amend section 12 of the Act so as to enable the cess to be 
collected either from the owner or the manufacturer who ultimately 
consumes the rubber produced in the estates. 
There are at present 347 registered rubber manufacturers in the 
country. It is felt that it would be far more easy to collect the cess 
from a small number of manufacturers than from about 26,000 pro-
ducers whose number will increase year by year. The proposed 
amendment of section 12 in the amending Bill is an enabUng measure 
for the administrative change in the method of collection being con-
templated. 
4 
.' .. . 

The opportunity for the amendment of section 12 is also being 
utilised to increase the permissible maximum rate for the levy of 
cess from one anna per pound to 50 Naye paise per kilogram. 
This is necessary for the implE:mentntion of certain plans for speed-
ing up the production of natural rubber in the c01,1l1try which are 
now under consideration. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 14th May. 1960. 
N. KANUNGO. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to amend section 25 of the Act in order 
to vest power in the Central Government to make rules for the 
regulation, manufacture, production, transport or sale of rubber in 
so far as such regulation is essential for the proper levy and collec-
tion of the duty of excise and also for prescribing the circumstances 
in which the duty shall be payable by the purchaser and the manu-
facturer respectively. The delegation of legislative power is of a 
normal character. 

ANNEXURE 
ExTRACTS FROM THE RUBBER Ac.T, 1947 (XXIV OF 1947) 
• • • • • 
12. ().) With effect from such date as may be notified by the ~=:t~~~f 
Central Government in this behalf, there shall be levied and collect-
ed! as a cess for the purposes of this Act a duty of excise on all 
rubber produced in India at such rate not exceeding one anna per 
pound of rubber so produced, as the Central Government may, by the 
same or a like notification, from time to time fix. 
(2) The said duty of excise shall be payable by the owner of the 
estate on which the rubber is produced, and shall be paid by him 
to the Board within one month from the date on which he 
receives a notice of demand therefor from the Board. 
(3) The said duty of excise may be recovered as if it were an 
arrear of land-revenue. 
(4) For the purpose of enabling the Board to assess the amount 
of the duty of excise payable by the owner of an estate under this 
section-
(a) the Board shall, by notification in the Gazette of India, fix 
the period in respect of which assessments shall be 
made, and 
(b) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 20, every 
owner of an estate shall furnish to the Board a return 
stating the total amount of rubber produced on the 
estate in each such period, not later than fifteen days 
after the expiry of the period to which the return 
relates: 
Provided that in respect of an estate situated only partly in 
India, the owner shall in the said return show sepa-
rately the amounts of rubber produced within and 
outside India. 
(5) If any owner of an esmte fails to furnish in due time the 
return referred to in sub-section (4) or furnishes a return which the 
Board has reason to believe is incorrect or defective, the Board may 
assess the amount payable by that owner in such manner as may 
be prescribed. 
7 

Power of 
Ceuteral 
Govermneat 
make rule •• 
8 
(6) Any owner of an estate aggrieved by an assessment made 
under this section may within three months of the service of the 
notice under sub-lSection (2) apply to the District Judge for the 
cancellation or modification of the assessment, and the District Judgt.o 
shall, after giving the Board an opportunity of being heard, pass 
such order (which shall be final) as he thinks proper. 
(7) The proceeds of the duty of excise collected by the Board 
and any of the fees levied under this Act (all of which shall form 
part of the Consolidated Fund of India) reduced by' the cost 
of collection as determined by the Central Government, shall, if 
Parliament by appropriation made by law in this behalf so provides, 
be paid to the Board for being utilised for the purposeli of this Act. 
... ... ... ... ... ... 
(25) (1). ... • ... ... ... 
(3) All rules made under his Act shall, as soon as may be after 
they are made, be laid before both Houses of Parliament. 
• .. ... • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Rubber Act, 1947. 
The president has, in pursuance of clause (1) of article 117 of 
the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha 
the introduction of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri Nityanand Kanu",o, Minister of Commerce.) 