am Mo. p ollHt 
THE EMPLOYMENT EXCHANGES 
(COMPULSORY NOTIFICATION OF 
VACANCIES) BILL, 1959 
(As INTRODUCB!> IN Lo~ SABHA 
ON 24TH APRIL, 1959) 

s 
Bill No. 33 of 19S9 
THE EMPLOYMENT EXCHANGES (COMPULSORY 
NOTIFICATION OF VACANCIES) BILL, 1959 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the compulsory notification of vacancies to employ-
ment exchanges. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Tenth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Employment Exchanges Short title, 
(Compulsory Notification of Vacancies) Act, 1959. ~=e~~~-
ment. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu 
and Kashmir. 
(3) It shall come into force in a State on such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in 
this behalf for such State and different dates may be appointed for 
10 different States or for different areas of a State. 
IS 
2. In this Act, unless the cuntext otherwise requires,-
(a) "appropriate Government" means-
(1) in relation to-
(a) any establishment of any railway, major port, 
']line or oil-field, or 
(b) any establishment owned, controlled or manag-
ed by-
(i) the Central Government or a department of 
the Central Government, 
Definitions. 

'~ 
(ii) a company In' which' not less than fifty-one 
per cent. of the share capital is held by the Central 
Government or partly by the Central Government 
and partly by one or more State Governments. 
(iii) a corporation (including a co-operative 5 
society) established by or under a Central Act which 
is owned, controlled or managed by the Central 
Government, 
the Central Government; 
(2) in relation to any other establishment, the Govern- 10 
ment of the State in which that other establishment is 
situate; 
(b) "employee" means any person who is employed in an 
establishment to do any work for remuneration; 
(c) "employer" means any person who employs one or more IS 
other persons to do any work in an establishment for remunel'9-
tion and includes any person entrusted with the supervision 
and control of employees in such establishment; 
(d) "employment exchange" means any office or place 20 
established and maintained by the Government for the collection 
and furnishing of information, either by the keeping of regist~rs 
or ~therwise, respecting-
(i) persons who seek to engage employees, 
(ii) persons who seek employment, and 
(iii) vacancies to which persons seeking employment 
may be appointed; 
(e) "establishment" means-
(a) any office, or 
(b) any place where any industry, trade, business or 30 
occupation is carried on; 
<f) "establishment in public sector" means an establishment 
owned, controlled or managed by-
(1) the Government. or a department of the G~vern­
ment; 
(2) a Government company as defined in section 617 of 35 I of 19)6. 
the Companies Act, 1956; 

3 
(3) a corporation (including a co-operative society) 
established by or under a Central, Provincial or State Act, 
which is owned, controlled or managed by the Government; 
(4) a local authority; 
S (g) "establishment in private sector" means an establish-
ment which is not an establishment in public sector and where 
ordinarily twenty-five or more persons are employed to work for 
remuneration; 
10 (h) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under 
this Act; 
(i) "unskilled office work" means work done in an estab-
lishment by any of the following categories of employees, 
namely:-
(1) daJtri; 
IS (2) jemadar, orderly and peon; 
20 
(3) dusting man or fara8h; 
(4) bundle or record lifter; 
(5) process server; 
(6) watchman; 
(7) sweeper; 
(8) any other employee doing any routine or unskilled 
work which the Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, declare to be unskilled office work. 
3. (1) This Act shall not apply in relation to vacancies,- Actln~t to 
ePfa ¥ In 
(a) in any employment in agriculture (including horti- ~~~o: to 
culture) in any establishment in private sector other than YBe8ncies. 
employment as agriculturRlor farm machinery operatives; 
(b) in any employment in domestic service; 
(c) in any employment the total duration of which is less 
than three months; 
(d) in any employment to do unskilled office work. 
(2) Unless the Central Government otherwise directs by notifica-
tion in the Official Gazette in this behalf, this Act shall not also 
apply in relation to-
3S (a) vacancies which are proposed to be filled through pro-
motion or by absorption of surplus staff of any branch or 
department of the same establishment or on the result of any 

Jotification 
f vacancies 
) employ-
lent ex-
harges. 
!mpioyers 
o fUrnish 
nformation 
nd returns 
n prescri-
:ed form. 
4 
examination conducted or interview held by, or on the recom-
mendation of, any independent agency, such as the Union or a 
State Public Service Commission and the like; 
(b) vacancies in an employment which carries a remunera-
tion of less than sixty rupees in a month; 5 
4. (1) After the commencement of this Act in any State or 
area thereof, the employer in every establishment in public sector 
in that State or area shall, before filling up any vacancy in any 
employment in that establishment, notify that vacancy to such 
employment exchanges as may be prescribed. 10 
(2) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, require that from such date as may be specified 
in the notification, the employer in every establishment in private 
sector or every establishment pertaining to any class or category of 
establishments in private sector shall, before filling up any vacancy 15 
in any employment in that establishment, notify that vacancy to such 
employment exchanges as may be prescribed, and the employer shall 
thereupon comply with such requisition. 
(3) The manner in which the vacancies referred to in sub-section 
(1) or sub-section (2) shall be notified to the employment exchanges 20 
and the particulars of employments in which such vacancies have 
occurred or are about to occur shall be such as may be prescribed. 
(4) Nothing in sub-sections (1) and (2) shall be deemed to 
impose any obligation upon any employer to recruit any person 
through the employment exchange to fill any vacancy merely 15 
because that vacancy has been notified under any of those sub-
sections. 
5. (1) After the commencement of this Act in any State or 
area thereof, the employer in every establishment in public seetor 
in that State or area shall furnish such information or return as may 30 
be prescribed in relation to vacancies that have occurred or are about 
to occur in that establishment, to such employment exchanges as 
may be prescribed. 
(2) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, require that from such date as may be specified 35 
in the notification, the employer in every establishment in privatE" 
sector or every establishment pertaining to any class or category 
of establishments in private sector shall furnish such information or 
return as may be prescribed in relation to vacancies that have 
occurred or are about to occur in that establishment to such employ- 40 
ment exchanges as may be prescribed, and tbe· employer shall 

5 
S 
thereupon comply with such requisition. 
(3) The form in which, and the intervals of time at which, such 
information or return shall be furnished and the particulars which 
they shall contain shall be such as may be prescribed. 
6. Such officer of Government as may be prescribed in this behalf, Right of 
th . d b h' . 't' h II access to or any person au orise y 1m m wn mg, s a records Or 
have access to any relevant record or document in the possession of document •• 
any employer required to furnish any information or returns under ' 
section 5 and may enter at any reasonable time any premises where 
10 he believes such record or document to be and inspect or take copies 
of relevant records or documents or ask any question necessary for 
obtaining any information required under that section. 
7. (1) If any employer fails to notify to the employment ex- PenaltieL 
changes prescribed for the purpose any vacancy in contraven-
IS tion of sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 4, he shall be 
punishable for the first offence with fine which may extend to five 
hundred rupees and for every subsequent offence with fine which 
may extend to one thousand rupees. 
20 
(2) If any person-
(a) required to furnish any information or return-
(i) refuses or neglects to furnish such information or 
return, or 
(ii) furnishes or causes to be furnished any informa-
tion or return which he knows to be false, or 
2S (iii) refuses to answer, or gives a false answer to, any 
question necessary for obtaining any information required 
to be furnished under section 5; or 
(b) impedes the right of access to relevant records or 
documents or the right of entry conferred by section 6, 
30 he shall be punishable for the first offence with fine which may 
extend to two hundred and fifty rupees and for every subsequent 
offence with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees. 
8. No prosecution for an offence under this Act shall be instituted Cognizance 
except by, or with the sanction of, such officer of Government as of offences. 
35 may be prescribed in this behalf or any person authorised by that 
officer in writing. 

Protection 
of action 
taken in 
,000 faith. 
6 
9. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against 
any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to 
be done under this Act. 
Power to 10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
make rules. Official Gazette and subject to the condition of previous publication, 5 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the 
following matters, namely:-
(a) the employment exchange or exchanges to which, the 10 
form and manner in which, and the time within which, vacancies 
shall be notified, and the particulars of employments in which 
such vacancies have occurred or are about to occur; 
('b) the form and manner in which, and the intervals 
at which, information and returns required under section 5 15 
shall be furnished, and the particulars which they shall contain; 
(c) the officers by whom and the manner in which the right 
of access to documents and the right of entry conferred by section 
6 may be exercised; 
(d) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed 20 
under this Act. 
(3) All rules made under this Act shall be laid for not less than 
thirty days before each House of Parliament as soon a8 may be 
after they are made, and shall be subject to such modifications as 
Parliament may make during the session in which they are so laid 3~ 
or the session immediately following. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Training and Employment Services Organization Committee 
set up by the Government of India in 1952 had recommended, inter 
alia,-
(a) that employers should be required on a compulsory 
basis to notify to the employment exchanges all vacancies other 
than vacancies in unskilled categories, vacancies of temporary 
duration and vacancies proposed to be filled through promotion, 
(b) that employers should also be required on a compulsory 
basis to render to the employment exchanges staff strengtb 
returns at regular intervals. 
The Committee had further recommended that the measure of 
compulsion so suggested may be embodied in suitable legislation. 
The present Bill seeks to implement those recommendations. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 7th April, 1959. 
GULZARI LAL NANDA. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The measures contemplated in the Bill form part of the normal 
expansion of the Employment Service and will accelerate the 
process of the utilisation of the Service. Consequently, the addi-
tional expenditure involved will not exceed the amount which will 
be normally required as the Service develops. The Bill when 
enacted into law will result in more vacancies being reported to the 
Employment Exchanges. It is difficult at this stage to make an 
exact estimate of the extra work-load or expenditure, but, the 
additional expenditure is not likely, in any case, to exceed 2 to 3 
per cent. of the expenditure on Employment Exchanges or Rs. 2 to 3 
lakhs per year. This additional expenditure will be shared between 
the Central and the State Governments in the ratio of 60: 40. The 
Central share of expenditure will be met from out of the provisiOlJ 
alr€.'.ldy made in the Plan for the development of the Service. 
B 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Sub-clause (1) of clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central 
Government to make rules to carry out the purposes of the Bill. 
Particular matters in respect of which rules may be made are 
specified in sub-clause (2) of that clause. Provisions made in the 
proposed clause would enable the Central Government to make rules 
relating mainly to matters of procedure, e.g., the form and manner 
in which and the time within which vacancies including particulars 
of employment in which such vacancies "have occurred or are about 
to occur should be notified to the employment exchanges, the form 
and manner in which and the intervals of time at which information 
and returns required under clause 5 shall be furnished. and the parti-
culars which they shall contain. The delegation of powers is of 8 
normal character. 
.. 
9 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the compulsory notification of vacancies to 
employment excbanges. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (3) of article I I 7 of 
the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha 
the consideration of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri Gulzarilal Nanda, 
Minister of Labour and Employment.) 