8ft1 No. 3Z of ."1 
THE INDIAN RAILWAYS (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, I¢>I 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
ON 2ND MAy 1961) 
,. .. ~ 

LOKSABHA 
COlUUGENDA 
to 
THE INDIAN RAILWAYS (AMENDMIN'l') BlLI... 1881 
(To be I As ifltf'oduced in Lot SlIbha) 
1. Page 1, in the marginal heading to clause 1,-
for "Shert It1e" read "Short tiSe". 
2. Page 4, line 6.-
for "xecute" read "execute". 
3. Page 4, line 3~.­
far "," read ":". 
4. Page 5, line 5,-
far "speical" read "speclal~'. 
5. Paee 5, in the marginal heading to section 74(1),-
(i) for <t f" read "0£"; 
(li) for "f r" read "far'. 
6. Page 5, in the marginal heading to aecttcm 'l&r-
(i) for "RespoDSib lity" read "Responslbll1ty"; 
(li) for "administrati "read "administration". 
7. Page 5, in the marginal beading to section 75A,-
(i) for "f" read "of"; 
(li) for "f r" read "for"; 
(ill) for 109 da" read "goods". 
8. Page 5, in the marginal. beading to section 78,-
(i) for "d y" read "delay"; 
(if) for "detenti n" read "deteDtion". 
9. Page 8, in the marginal heading to section 7'1,-
for "dministrati n" read "ac:tinin1atration". 
10. Page 8, line 13,-
for "expir " read "expiry". 
11. Page 8, in the marginal beading to section 7A,-
for "provisi n" read "provision". 
12. Page 9, line 39.-
for "declard." read "declared". 

13. Page 9, line 40,-
fOT "be" read "by". 
1'- Page 12, llne8 1 and 2,-
few IlcompensatOtn'~ ,",ead "oompeDl&tion". 
15. Page 13, in the marglli8I heeding to c1auae 15,-
,:.\ . 10' "~ If ·Had "A.meDdmant"~;' ....' . ~'... -~.' . 
16. Page 13. in the margiDal heading to clauae 16,-
for "Amendmen "read "Amendment". 
17. Page 14. line 18,-
for "pa!a" read "paid". 
18. Page 14, line 14,-
add at the end-
"" 
19. Page 30, line 3 from bottom,-
for "Indian" read "India" .. 
20. C~ ~e numbers on pages 4, 7, 8 and 14. 
NEW DBLHI; 
May 2, 1961. 
Vaisakha 12,1883 (8iili) . 
,. 

9 of 1890. 
BJlI No. 32 of 1"1 
THE INDIAN RAILWAYS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1961 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Indian Railways Act, 1890. 
B!: it enacted by Parliament in the Twelfth Year of the Republic 
at India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Railways (Amendment) Shm tIt1e 
Act, 1961. and 0"Gl-
IDCDClllDCDt. 
S (2) It aball come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
10 
!S 
ment may, by notiftcation in the OfBcial Gazette, appoint. 
2. In section 3 of the Indian Railways Act, 1890 (hereinafter AmeDdmaat 
refel'Md to as the principal Act), clauses (14) and (17) shall be ohectioa ,. 
omitted. 
3. In section 27 of the principal Act,- AmeadDJall 
oflectiaa 
(a) in lIU~tion (3), for the words "one mile", the words a1. 
"one kilometre" shall be substituted; 
(b) in the proviso to sub-section (4) ,-
(i) in clause (0), for the words ''per maund", the 
words, brackets and figures ''per quintal (100 kilograms)" 
Ihall be substituted; 
(ii) in clause (h), the word ''mileap'' occurring in two 
places shall be omitted . 
• 

Amendment 
of section 
47· 
4. In section 47 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub~ection (1), for the words "Every railway com-
pany and in the case of a railway administered by the Govern-
ment, an officer to be appointed by the Central Government in 
this behalf", the following shall be substituted, namely: - 5 
"The Central Government or in the case of a railway 
administered by a railway company, the railway company"; 
(b) in clause (1) of the same sub-section, for the words 
"warehouse or retain goods", the words "warehouse goods or 
retain goods or animals" shall be substituted; 10 
(c) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
" (3) A rule made under this section, whether by the 
Central Government or a railway company, shall not take 
effect until it is published in the Official Gazette, and in 15 
the case of a rule made by a railway company, unless 
before such publication it has also received the sanction of 
the Central Government.". 
AmeDdmeDt 5. In section 55 of the principal Act, the word "terminal". 
of 1CCti0D 55 wherever it occurs, shall be omitted. 20 
InsertiOD of 
DCWaection 
S6A. 
Disposal of 
poriabable 
aoods in 
certain dr-
CQIDItaD<:CI. 
6. After section 56 of the principal Act, the following section 
shall be inserted, namely:-
"56A. (1) Where by reason of any 1Iood, land-slip, breach 
of any line of rails, collision between trains, derailment of or 
other accident to a train or any other cause, traffic on any route 25 
is interrupted and there is no likelihood of early resumption of 
. such traffic, nor is there any other reasonable route whereby 
traffic of perishable goods may be diverted to prevent loss or 
deterioration of, or damage to, such goods, the railway adminis-
tration may, after obtaining wherever practicable instructions 30 
from the person appearing to the railway administration to be 
entitled to the goods, sell them by public auction. 
(2) Out of the proceeds of the sale, the railway administra-
tion may retain a sum equal to the charge due in respect of the 
goods and the expenses of and incidental to the sale rendering 35 
the surplus, if any, of the proceeds to the person entitled thereto. 
(3) The provisions of this section shall be without pre-
judice to the claim or right which the person entitled to the 
Joods may have against the railway administration under any 
other enactment for the time being in force.". 
• 

:J." 
3 
7. In section 61 of the principal Act, in sulHlection (1), item (b) Amca~t 
shall be omitted. ~~.sectiOD~ 
8. In section 63 of the principal Act, for the words "in English or ~t 
in one or more of the vernacular languages in common use in the ~~OD 
5 territory traversed by the railway, or both in English and in one 
or more of such vernacular languages, as the Central Government, 
after consultation with the railway administration, may detennine", 
the words "in Hindi and in English and also, if considered necessary 
by the railway administration, in one or more of the regional 
[0 languages in common use in the temtory traversed by the railway" 
shall be substituted. 
9. In section 64 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the AmendmeDt 
words "fifty miles", the words "eighty kilometres" shan be substi- of section 
ted. 4 tu 
15 10. In section 65 of the principal Act, for the words "in English Amendmeat 
and in a vernacular language in common Use in the temitory where ~fsection 
the station is situate", the words "in Hindi and in English and also s. 
in a regional language in common use in the territory where the 
station is situate, if Hindi is not in common use therein" shall be 
20 substituted. 
11. In section 66 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2) ,- Amendment 
(a) in clause (a), for the words "in a vernacular language ~~.scc:tion 
in common use in the territory traversed by the railway", 
the words "in Hindi and in a regional language in common use 
.15 in the territory traversed by the railway, if Hindi is not in 
common use therein" shall be substituted; and 
(b) in clause (b), for'the words "in English", the words "in 
Hindi and in English" shall be substituted. 
12. In section 71B of the principal Act, the words and figures AmendmeDt 
30 "the Indian Merchant Shipping Act, 1923, or" shall be omitted and ~~OD 
after the words and figures "the Mines Act, 1952", the words and 
figures "or the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958" shall be inserted. 
13. For sections 72, 72A, 73, 74, 74A, 74B, 74C, 740, 74E, 75, 76, Subaritution 
77 and 78 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be sub9ti- of n~w Ii 
scctlODI or ~5 tuted, namely:- section. 72 
"72. Any person delivering to a railway administration ~tion Of 
any animals or goods to be car.ried by railway shall,- fo~ 
. ~~m 
(a) if the anunals or goods are to be carried by a train respect of 
intended solely for the carriage of goods, or =:ie.t 
.40 (b) if the goods are to be carried by any other train on. railwa,. 
and consist of articles of any of the following categories, 
namely:-
(i) articles carried. at owner's risk rates, 
• 

General 
l'OIpOmibility 
of. railway 
administra-
tion u. 
carrier of 
anlmale and • 
sooda· 
4 
(ii) articles of a perishable nature, 
(iii) articles mentioned in the Second Schedule, 
(iv) articles in a defective condition or defectively 
packed, 
(v) explosives and other dangerous goods, 5 
uecute a note (in this Act referred to as the forwarding note) 
in sucr. form as may be prescribed by the railway administra-
tion and approved by the Central Government, in which the 
sender or his agent shall give such particulars in respect of the 
animals or goods so delivered as may be required. 10 
73. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, a railway 
administration shall be responsible for the loss, destruction, 
damage, deterioration or non-delivery, in transit, of animals or 
goods delivered to the adnUnistration to be carried by railway, 
arising from any cause except the following, namely:- 15 
(a) act of God; 
(b) act of war; 
(c) act of public enemies; 
(d) arrest, restraint or seizure under legal process; 
(e) orders or restrictions imposed by the Central Gov- 20 
eroment or a State Government or any officer or authority 
subordinate to the Central Government or a State Govern-
ment; 
(f) act or omission or negligence of the consignor or 
the consignee or the agent or servant of the consignor or 25 
the consignee; : \ 
(g) natural deterioration or wastage in bulk or 
due to inherent defect, quality or vice of the goods; 
(h) latent defects; 
(i) fire, explosion or any unforeseen risk; 
weight 
30 
Provided that even where such loss, destruction, damage, 
deterioration or non-delivery is proved to have arisen from any 
one or more of the aforesaid causes, the railway administration 
shall not be relieved of its responsibility for the loss, destruc- • 
tion, damage, deterioration or non-delivery unless the adminis-
tration further proves that it has used reasonable foresight and 3S 
care in the carriage of the BIlimals or gCMNb. 

5 
10 
15 
20 
35 
.40 
s 
, . . 
74. (1) When any animals or goods are tendered to • ran. ~bi­
way administration for carriage by railway and the railway :fi;.y. ad-
adminjstration provides for the carriage of such animals or goods ~nilt.ratmaliOD 
., ~('r &Ill • 
either at the ordinary tariff rate (m this Act referred to as the or lu.:d. 
railway risk rate) or in the alternative at a speical reduced rate carri~ ~ 
(in this Act referred to as the owner's risk rate). the animals ::.er. 
or goods shall be deemed to have been tendered to be carried a~ 
owner's risk rate, unless the sender or his agent elects in writing 
to pay the railway risk rate. 
(2) Where the sender or his agent elects in writing to pay 
the railway risk rate under sub~ection (1), the railway 
administration shall issue a certificate to the consignor to that 
effect. 
(3) When any animals or goods are deemed to have been 
tendered to be carried, or are carried, at the owner's risk rate, 
then, notwithstanding anything contained in section 73, the 
railway administration shall not be responsible for any loss, 
destruction, damage, deterioration or non-delivery, in transit, of 
such animals or goods, from whatever cause arising, except 
upon proof that such loss, destruction, damage, deterioration or 
non-delivery was due to negligence or misconduct on the part 
of the railway administration O!r of any of its servants. 
75. A railway administration shall not be responsible for Relponeibi-
the loss, destruction, damage, deterioration or non-delivery of ~ of. d 
any luggage belonging to a passenger unless a railway servant miniW:~~i';D 
has booked the luggage and given a receipt therefor and in the f carrier of 
case of luggage which is carried by the passenger in his charge,. UJPIO· 
unless it is also proved that the loss, destruction, damage or 
deterioration was due to the negligence or misconduct on the 
part of the railway administration Ql' of any of its servants. 
75A. When any goods which, under ordinary circumstances, Reeponlibi-
would be carried in covered vehicles or vessels and would be litl ' f • 
liable to damage if carried otherwise, are, at the requ·est of the :::lra~~ 
. sender or his agent recorded in the forwarding note, tendered f. r If " t!' 
for carriage by railway in open vehicles or vessels, the railway ::ed lD 
administration shall not be responsible for any destruction, dete- Yehic1el. 
;ioration or damage which may arise only by reason of the goods 
being so carried. 
76. A railway administration shall be responsible for loss, RnpoaeihJ-
destruction, damage Ql' de'erioration of animals or goods proved :~d~c;r~d'7 
by the owner to have been caused by delay or detention in in traDlit. 
their carriage unless the railway administration proves that the 
• 

Responsibi-
lity for 
deviation of 
route. 
Responsibi-
lity for 
wrong 
dolivery. 
RCIPODaibi-
Iity for 
aoods to be 
CieliVORd at 
aidinl. 
Responsibi-
lity of tWo 
or more . 
raUwayad-
miniltratioDs 
for thr011lh 
trdic. 
6 
delay or detention arose without negligence or misconduct on 
the part of the railway administration or of any of its servants. 
76A. Where, due to a cause beyond the control of a railway 
administration or due to congestion in the yard or other opera-
tional reasons, animals or goods delivered to the railway admi- 5 
nistration to be carried by railway are carried over a route other 
than the route by which they are booked or the usual or custo-
mary route, the rai1~y administration shall not be deemed to 
have committed a breach of the contract of carriage by reason 
only of the deviation of route. 10 
76B. Where a railway administration to which animals or 
goods are delivered to be carried by railway delivers them in 
good faith to a person who produces the original railway receipt, 
the railway administration shaUnot be responsible on the 
ground that such person is not legally entitled thereto or that 15 
the endorsement on the railway receipt is forged or otherwise 
defective. 
76C. In the case of goods to be delivered by a railway 
administration at a siding not belonging to the administration, 
the railway administration shall not be responsible for loss, des- 20 
truction, damage, deterioration or non-delivery of such goods, 
from whatever cause arising, after the wagon containing the 
goods has been placed at the point of interchange of wagons 
between the railway administration and the owner of the siding 
and the owner of the siding has been informed in writing that 25 
the wagon has been so placed. 
76D. Where any animals or goods delivered to a railway 
administration to be carried by railway have been booked 
through over the railways of two or more railway administra-
tions or over one or more railway administrations and one or more 30 
transport systems not belonging to any railway administration, 
the person tendering the animals or goods to the railway admi-
nistration shall be deemed to have contracted with each one of the 
railway administrations or the owners of the transport systems 
concerned, as the case may be, that the provisions of this Chapter 3S 
shall apply, so far as may be, in relation to the carriage of such 
animals or goods in the same manner and to the same extent 
as they would have applied if the animals or goods had been 
carried by the railway of only one railway administration: 
Provided that- 40 
(a) where there is a deviation in the route by which 
the animals or goods are to be carried, such deviation WIUI 
• 

fO 
25 
30 
3S 
40 
7 
due to a cause beyond the control of the railway adminis-
tration, or the OWDer of the transport system concerned, as 
the case may be, or to congestion in the yard or other ope-
rational reasons; 
(b) for the purpose of making the provisions of this 
Chapter relating to the carriage of animals or goods at the 
owner's risk rate applicable, the benefit of the railway risk 
rate and the owner's risk rate was available in the alterna-
tive to the sender on each of the railway administrations or 
transport systems concerned at the time of the delivery of 
the animals or goods to the railway administration for the 
purpose of carriage. 
76E. Where in the course of carriage of animals or goods ~sponaib; 
from a place in India to a place outside India or from a place r!fiway~­
outside India to a place in India or from one place outside India !IJini,!,!'ltionf • 1nca .... 0 to another place outside India or from one place in 1nd18 to ano- traflic 
ther place in India over any territory outside India, the animals :U~sov~~ 
or goods are carried over the railway of a railway administration, IDdia IDd 
the railway administration shall not be responsible under any of =r in 
the provisions of this Chapter for loss, destruction, damage or couDtries. 
deterioration of the animals or goods, from whatever cause aris-
ing, unless it is proved by the owner of the animals o.r goods that 
such loss, destruction, damage or deterioration arose on the rail-
way of the railway administration. 
76F .. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 74,- ::= of 
(a) where the whole of a consignment of goods, or the :m=~fct 
whole of any package forming part of a consignment, carried DOn-delivory 
at owner's risk rate is not delivered to the consignee and :- r~~~ 
such non-delivery is not proved. by the railway administra- goode curie::' 
tion to have been due to fire or to any accident to the train, :1u raa:::er s 
or 
(b) where, in respect of any consignment of goods or 
of any package which had been S0 covered or protected that 
the covering or protection was not readily removable by 
hand, it is pointed out to the railway administration on or 
before delivery that any part of such consignment or 
package had been pilfered in transit, 
the railway administration shall be bound to disclose to the 
consignor how the consignment or the package was dealt with 
throughout the time it was in its possession or control, but if 
negligence or misconduct on the part of the railway adminis-
tration or of any of its servants cannot be fairly inferred from 
such disclosure, the burden of proving such negligence or mis-
conduct shaD lie on the consignor . 
• 

Responsibi-
lity of a 
railway ad-
miDiatratbo 
after termi-
nation of 
thO" 
Funhc:r 
provision 
With respect 
to the rel-
ponaibility of 
a railwayad-
ministration 
.. a camer 
of animab. 
8 
77. (1) A railway administration shall be responsible as a 
bailee under sections 151, 152 and 161 of the Indian Contract Act, 
1872, for the loss, destruction, damage, deterioration or non-
delivery of goods carried by railway within a period of thirty 
days after the termination of transit: 
Provided that where the goods are carried at owner's risk 
rate, the railway administration shall not be responsible for such 
loss, destruction, damage, deterioration or non-delivery except 
on proof of negligence or misconduct on the part of the railway 
administration or of any of its servants. 
(2) The railway administration shall not be responsible in 
any case for the loss, destruction. damage, deterioration or non-
delivery of goods carried by railway, arising after the expir~ 
of the period of thirty ds'Ys after the termination of transit. 
5 
10 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing 15 
provisions of this section, a railway administration shall not be 
responsible for the loss, destruction, damage, deterioration or non-
delivery of the goods mentioned in the Second Schedule, animals 
and explosives and other dangerous goods carried by railway, 
after the termination of transit. 
(4) Nothing in the foregoing provisions of this section shall 
relieve the owner of animals or goods from liability to any 
demurrage or wharfage for so long as the animals or goods are 
not unloaded from the railway wagons or removed from the 
railway premises. 25 
(5) For the pur.poses of this Chapter,-
(4) unless otherwise previously determined, transit 
terminates on the expiry of the free time allowed (after the 
arrival of animals or goods at destination) for their unload-
ing from railway wagons without payment of demu1'll'age, 30 
and where such unloading haa been completed within the 
free time so allowed, transit terminates on the expiry of the 
free time allowed for the removal of the animals or goods 
from railway premises without payment of wharfage; 
(b) 'demurrage' and 'wharfage' have the meanings 35 
respectively assigned to them in clause (d) and clause (h) 
of section 46C. 
77A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the fore-
going provisions of this Chapter, the responsibility of a railway 
administration for the loss, destruction, damage, deterioration or 40 • 
non-<ielivery of any animal delivered to the administration to be 
carried by railway shall not exceed the amount respectively 
specified in column two against the item relating to the animal 

5 
Iv 
IS 
.20 
25 
35 
". , 
9 
in column one of the Firs~ Schedule, unless the person delivering 
the animal to the railway admini!JI:ration declares in writing a 
higher value in the forwarding note and has paid or elliaged to 
pay to the railway administration a percentage specified by it 
upon the excess of the value so declared over the respective 
sums mentioned in column two of the said Schedule. 
(2) Where such higher value has been declared, the, railway 
administration may charge, in respect of the increased risk, a 
percentage upon the excess of the value so declared over the 
respective sums aforesaid. 
(3) Nothing contained in this section shall render the railway 
administration liable for any loss. destruction or damage arising 
from fright or restiveness of the animal or from overloading 
of wagon by the consignor or his agent. 
770. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the prov!. p~~ 
sions of this Chapter, when any articles mentioned in the Second =~ec:t 
Schedule are contained in any parcel or package delivered to a to ~;I- f 
railway administration to be carried by railWaY and tl1e value ~waytJ.d. 
of such articles in the parcel or package exceeds five 11iD.dred min;= 
rupees, the railway administration shall not be responsibie' ·for ~ :mcln of 
the loss, destruction, damage or deterioration of the parcel ' or IIjcial 
package unless the person sending or' del.vering the va ue, 
parcel or package to the administration caused its value and 
cont.ts to be declared in writing or declared them' bi writing 
at the time of the delivery of the parcel or the p8~ge for,. 
carriage by railway, and if so required by the administration, 
paid or engaged to pay in writing a percentage' oil the value so 
declared by way of compensation for the increased risk. 
(2) When any parcel or package of which the value has 
been decl,ared und~ sub-section (1) has been lost, d.troyed, 
or damaged or has deteriorated, the compensation reeoverable 
in· respect of such loss, destruction, damage or deterioration 
shan not exceed the value so declared. 
(3) A railway administration may make it a condition of 
carrying a parcel or package declared to contain any article 
mentioned in the Second Schedule that a railway servant 
authoriSed in this behalf has been satisfied by eX8lDiDation or 
otherwn.e that the parcel or package actually cOBtaiDs the 
artkle 'declard to be therein. 
(4) The Central Government may, be notification in the 
O.lal Gazette, direct that any article mentiobed in· the Second 
Schedule may, without beiDg coatained in any pare ... ' lJ8ckage, 

t6 
he delivered to a railway administration to be carried by railway 
and upon the issue of such notification, the provisions of this 
section shall apply in relation to such article as they apply in 
relation to any article mentioned in the Second Schedule and 
contained in any parcel or package. 5 
77C. (1) When any goods tendered to a railway administra-
tion to be carried by railway-
(a) are in a defective condition as a consequence of 
which they are liable to damage, deterioration, leakage or 
wastage, or 10 
(b) are either defectively packed or packed in a manner 
not in accordance with the general or special order, if any, 
issued under sub-sectien (4), and as a result of such defective 
or improper packing are liable to damage, deterioration, 
leakage or wastage, J 5 
and the fact of such condition or defective or improper packing 
has been recorded by the sender or his agent in the forwarding 
note, then, notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing 
provisions of tois Chapter, the railway administration shall not 
be responsible for any damage, deterioration, leakage or 20 
wastage, or for the condition in which such goods are available 
for delivery at destination, except upon proof of negligence or 
misconduct on the part of the railway administration or of any 
of its servants. " •. ", :;,~,": ':' , 
(2) When any goods delivered to a railway administration 25 
to be carried by railway are found on arrival at destination to 
have been damaged or to have suffered deterioration leak-
age or wastage, then, notwithstanding anything contained in the 
foregoing provisions of this Chapter, the :railway administration 
shall not be responsible for the damage, deterioration, leakag.e 30 
or wastage .of the goods on proof by the railway administration--
(a) that the goods were, at the time of delivery to the 
railway administration, in a defective condition or were at 
that time either defectively packed or packed in a manner 
not in accordance with the general or special order, if any, 35 
issued under sub-section (4) and as a consequence of such 
defective condition or defective or improper packing were 
liable to damage, deterioration, leakage or wastage, and 
(b) that such defective condition or defective or improper 
packing was not brought to the notice of the railway 40 
administration or of any of its servants at the time of 

II 
delivery of the goods to the railway administration for 
carriage by railway: 
Provided that the railway administration shall be responsible 
for any such damage, deterioration, leakage or wastage if negli-
S gence or misconduct on the part of the railway administration 
or of any of its servants is proved. 
(3) A railway administration shal~ not be responsible under 
sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) for any damage, deterioration, 
leakage or wastage occurring after the expiry of the period of 
10 thirty days after the termination of transit as defined in sub-
section (5) of section 77. 
(4) The Central Government may, by general or special 
order, prescribe the manner in which goods delivered to a rail-
way administration to be carried by railway shall be packed. 
15 78. Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing ~zoneradoa 
provisions of this Chapter, a railway administration shall not be ~~ in 
responsible- ccrbIiD c:uea. 
(a) for the loss, destruction, damage, deterioration or 
non-delivery of any goods with respect to the description of 
20 which an account materially false has been delivered under 
sub-seciion (1) of section 58 if the loss, destruction, damage, 
. deterioration or non-delivery is, in any way, brought about 
by the false account. nor in any case for an amount exceed-
Ing the value of the goods if such value were calculated in 
2S accordance with the description contained in the false 
account; or 
(b) for the loss, destruction, damage, deterioration or 
non-delivery of animals or goods in cases where there has 
been fraud practised by the consignor or the consignee or an 
30 agent of the consignor or the consignee; or 
35 
.40 
(e) for the loss, destruction, damage, deterioration or 
non-delivery of animals or goods proved by the railway 
administration to have been caused -by or to have arisen 
from-
(i) improper loading or unloading by the consignor 
or the consignee or by an agent of the consignor or the 
consignee, or 
(ii) riot. civil commotion. strike, lock-out, stoppage 
or restraint of labour from what~ver cause, whether 
partial or general; or 
(d) for any indirect or consequential damages or for 
loss of particular market . 
• 

Burdell of 
proof in 
auita for 
compensa-
tion. 
Notification 
of claims to 
Nfunda of 
O"Vercbarpa 
ADd to com-
J)eDlation for 
JoIIeI. 
Substitution 
of new IOC-
tiOD for 
eectiou 80. 
Suits for 
compeau-
doD. 
12 
78A. In any suit against a railway administration for com-
pensatoin for any delay, loss, destruction, damage, deterioration, 
or Don-delivery, the burden of proving-
(a.) in the case of animals, the value thereof, or the 
higher value declared under section 77A, and where the S 
animal has been injured, the extent of the injury, or 
(b) in the case of any parcel or package, the value of 
which has been declared under section 77B or any article 
mentioned in the Second Schedule not contained in any 
parcel or package, the value of which has been declared 10 
under that section, that the value so declared is its true 
value, . 
shall lie on the person claiming the compensation, but, subject 
to the other provisions contained. in this Act, it shall not be 
neceseary for him to prove how the delay, loss, destruction, IS 
damage, deterioration or non-delivery was caused. 
78B. A person shall not be entitled to a refund of an over-
charge in respect of animals or goods carried· by railway or to 
compensation for the loss, destruction, damage, deterioration 
or non-delivery of animals or goods delivered to be so carried. 20 
unless his claim to the refund or compensation has been prefer-
red in writing by him or on his behalf-
(a) to the railway administration to which the animals 
Or goods were delivered. to be carried by railw~y, or 
(b) to the railway administration on whose railway the 25 
destination station lies, or the loss, destruction, damage or 
deterioration occurreci, . 
within six months from the date of the delivery of the animals 
01' goods for carriage by railway,". 
1'. FOI' section 80 of the principal Act, the following section 30 
shall be substituted,namely:-
"SO. A suit for compensation for loss of the life of, or per-
sonal injury to, a passenger or for loss, destruction, damage, 
deterioration or non-delivery of animals or gOods may be insti-
tuted,- 35 
(a) if the passenger was, or the animals. or goods were. 
booked from. one station to another on the railway of the 
same railway administration,. against • that railway adminis-tration; . . .. . 

171111d 18 
Viet., C. J 04. 
2S and 26 
5 
10 
15 
13 
(b) if the passenger was, or the animals or goods were, 
booked thrOugh over the railway of two or more railway 
administrations, against the railway administration from 
which the paisenger obtained his pass or pui"Chased· his ticket 
or to which the animals or goods were delivered for carriage, 
as the case may be, 'or against the railway adtnililstTation 
on whose railWiaY the destination station lies, or the loss, 
injury, destruction, damage or deterioration occurred; 
and, in either ,case, the suit may be instituted in a court having 
jurisdiction over the place at which the passenger obtained his 
pees' or purchased his ticket or the animals or goods were 
delivered for carriage, as the case may be, or over the place in 
which the destination station lies, or the loss, injury, destructiolJ, 
damage or deterioration occUIlTed.". 
15. In section 82, of, the principal Act, in sub-section (I) ,-
(i) for the words "enemies of Government", 
"pubUc enemies" shall be substit11lted; 
the words 
Amendment 
of ICCtioD 
82. 
viet., c. 63. 20 
(ii) for the words and figures "the Merchant Shipping Act. 
185ol, 8ftd the Merchant Shipping Act Amendment Ad, 18M, if 
the ship were registered under the former of thOse Aets". the 
words and figures "the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958, jf the ship 
were registered under that Act" shan be substituted. 
16. In section 82J of the principal Act, for sub--section (3), the AfDlClll~':"1 , " 0 actU&D'· 
following sub-section shall be substituted, namely: - 8:.J, 
25 "(3) Every rule made under this spctlon shall be laid as 
soon as may be after it is made before each HOuse of Parliainent 
while jt is in session for a total period of thirty days wh1ch may 
be comprised' in one session or in two successive se.ss'ions, and 
if before the expiry of'the session in which it is so laid 'or the 
30 session immediately following, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Hous'?s agree that the rule 
should nl)t be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in 
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case m1'lv be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be with-
3S out prejudice to· the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule.". 
n. In section 106 of the principal Act, for the words "fifty rupees Amof cn~ent • ,1Cct1on 
for every maund or part of a maund", the words Clone hundred and 106. 
fifty rupees for eve'ry qUintal or part of a qUintal" shall be substi-
40 tuted. 

Amendment 
of section 
113· 
Substitution 
or new 
section fi.lr 
section lIS. 
Bzceu 
charge and 
single fare 
collected to 
be pajd to 
raifwayad-
ministration. 
Amendment 
of section 
130. 
14 
18. In section 113 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), for the 
words "eight annas", the words "fifty naye paise", and for the words 
"nearest anna, or two annas", the words "ne3rest multiple of five 
naye paise, or fifteen naye paise" shall be substituted. 
19. For section 115 of the principal Act, the following section S 
shall be substituted, namely:-
"115. Out of any amount recovered under section 112, the 
excess charge and single fare referred to in that section shall be 
paid to the railway administration before any portion of that 
amount is credited as fine to the Government; and that portion 10 
of any fine imposed under section 114 which represents the 
single fare therein mentioned shall, as the fine is recovered, be 
paici to the railway administrartion before any portion of the 
fine is credited to the Government." 
20. In sub-section (1) of section 130 of the principal Act, for the IS 
words and figures "he shall be deemed, notwithstanding anything in 
section 82 or section 83 of the Indian Penal Code, to have committed 
an offence, and the Court convicting him may, if it thinks fit, direct 
that the minor, if a mal~, shall be punished with whipping, or may 
require", the words "the Court convicting him may require" shall 20 
be substituted. 
~~:r:e~~f 21. After section 138 of the principal Act, the following section 
139. shall be inserted, namely:-
Proof of 
entries in 
record. and 
documents. 
.Amendment 
of aection 
14°· 
"139. "Entries in the records or other documents of a railway 
administration shall be admitted in evidence in all proceedings 2S 
by or against the railway administration, and all such entries 
may be proved either by the production of the records or other 
documents of the railway administration containing such entries 
or by the producti9n of a copy of the entries certified by the 
oftlcer· having custody of the records or other documents under 30 
his signature and stating that it is a true copy of the original 
entries and that such original entries are contained in the records 
or other documents of the railway administration in his posses-
sion.". 
22. In section 140 of the principal Aot,- 3S 
(a) for· the words "the Manager" wherever they occur, the 
words "the Manager or the Chief Commercial Superintendent" 
shall be substituted; 
(b) for the words and figures "under Part III of the Indian . 
Post Oftlce Act, 1866", the words and figures "under the Indian 40 
Post Office Act, 1898" shall be substituted. 

.. 
. . . 
II. In section 141 of the principal Act, for the words and figures Amendment 
"under Part In of the Indian Post Office Act, 1866", the words and of section 
figures "under the Indian Post Office Act, 1898" shall be substituted. 141. 
M. After section 147 of the principal Act, the following section Insertion. of newaectlOli S shall be inserted, namely: - I 47A. 
"147A. The Central Government may, by notification in the powe~tu 
Official Gazette, add any articl: to, or omit any article from, the S::C!d 
Second Schedule, and on the publication of such notification, Scbedule. 
such article shall be deemed to be included in or, as the case 
10 may be, omitted from the said Second .SChedule.". 
IS 
25. In the First Schedule to the principal Act, for the brackets, Amendme.nt 
words and figures "[See section 73]", the brackets, words, figures and S~~UI:'ll'It 
letter "[See section 77A]" shall be substituted. 
28. In the Second Schedule to th~ principal Act,- Amendmcnt 
of the 
(a) for the brackets, words and figures "[See section 75]", Second 
the brackets, words, figures and letter ',[See section 77B]" shall Schedule. 
be substituted; 
(b) item (8) shall be omitted. 

STATEMENT OF Oa.JECTS AND REASONS 
The Railway Freight Strl.lcture Et:lqwry Cpmmit~ (1956-57) had 
recommended that the responSibility of th:e railway~ in lndia as 
carriers of animals and goods, which is at present that of a bailee, 
should be ~hanged to that of a common carrier. Tper~ is also a 
public demand for such a change. After a careful and d~tailed 
examination of the question, the Government have decided to accept 
the Committee's recommendation. The Government have also 
decided: 
(a) that in resPect of articlr.s which are not removed from 
railway premises at destination within the free time allowed 
therefor, the railways should assume responsibility of a bailee 
for a period of 30 days thereafter; and 
(b) that parcels or packages cont~ing artiQl~ of special 
value be carried at r~ilway risk without payment o~ any addi-
ti(l~l ch~rge wpetl the v~lue of such articles in a p.arcel or a 
package does not exceed Rs. 500/- instead of Rs. 300/- as at 
present. 
Opportunity has been taken to amend the Indian Railways Act 
in certain other respects also, viz:-
(a) The Bill seeks to make it clear that in the case of 
through booking of consignments over an Indian Railway and 
a Foreign Railway, the responsibility of the Indian Railway as 
a common carrier would extend only over that portion of the 
carriage which is over the Indian Railway; 
(b) Amendments have been proposed in the Bill in connec-
tion with the adoption of the metric system of weights and 
measures by the railways; and 
(c) Other amendments included in the Bill are intended to 
rectify certain defects or ambiguities in the existing provisions 
of the Act which were revealed by experience in its working. 
NEW DELHI; 3AGJIVAN RAM. 
The 27th April, 1961. 
16 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Under new section 73 proposed to be inserted by clause 13 of the 
~ill, the basic responsibility of railways, which is at present that of 
'a bailee, is proposed to be changed to that of a common carrier, i.e. 
the railways will be undertaking greater responsibilities and will be 
liable for loss of or injury to consignments in all cases arising when 
they are in the course of transit unless such loss or injury is caused 
by an act of God or other excepted perils specified in that section. 
It is also proposed:-
(a) Under new section 77 (1), proposed to be inserted by 
clause 13 of the Bill, that a railway administration shall be 
responsible as a bailee in respect of loss or injury to goods 
which are not removed from railway premises at destination 
within the free time allowed therefor, for a period of thirty 
days thereafter. 
(b) Under new section 77B, proposed to be inserted by 
clause 13 of the Bill, that parcels or packages containing articles 
of special value be carried at railway risk without payment of 
any additional charge when the value of such article in a parcel 
or package does not exceed Rs. 500/- instead of Rs. 3001- as at 
present. 
The provisions referred to above would involve expenditure from 
the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that the additional 
expenditure which the railways may have to incur may amount 
approximately to rupees two crores per annum. 
J7 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE INDIAN RAILWAYS ACT, 1890 
(No.9 OF 1890) 
• • • 
3. DeJlDitions.-In this Act, unless there is something repugnant in 
the subject or context,-
• • • • • 
(14) "tenninals" includes charges in respect of stations, 
atdlngl, wharves, depots, WM'ehouses, cranes and other atmUar 
matters, and of any services rendered thereat; 
• • • • • 
(17) "maund" means a weight of three thousand two hundred 
tolas, each tola being a weight of one hundred and eighty grains 
Troy; and I 
• • • • • 
Z7. Duty of raHway administrations to arrange fOl' reeeivm. and 
forwardln, traMe without unreasonable delay and without par-
tiallty.-
• • • • • 
(3) A railway administration having or working railways w,hich 
fonn part of a continuous line of railway communication, or having 
ita terminus or station within one mile of the terminus or station of 
another railway administration, shall afford all due and reasonable 
facilities for receiving and forwarding by one of such railways all 
thetriftlc arriving by the other at such terminus or station, without 
any unreasonable delay, and without any such preference or ad-
vantage or prejudice or disadvantage as is referred to in section 28, 
and so that no obstruction may be offered to the public desirous of 
using such railways as a cODltinuous line of communication, and so 
that all reasonable accommodation may by means of such railways 
be at all times afforded to the public in that behalf. 
(4) 'nle facilfties to be afforded ~~der this section shall include 
the due and reasonable receiving, forwarding and delivering by 
every railway administration at the request of any other railway 
administration, of through traffic to and from the railway of any 
other railway administration at through rates: 
Provided as follows:-
(a) the railway administration requiring the trafftc to be 
forwarded shall give written notice of the proposed through rate 
18 

• 
19 
to each forwarding railway administration, statin. both ita 
amount and its apportionment and the route by which the·traftle 
is proposed to be forwarded. The proposed through rate for 
animals or goods may be per truck or per maund; 
• • • • • 
(h) the Central Government shall not in any case compel 
any railway administration to accept lower mileaae rates than 
the mileage rates which the administration may for the time 
being legally be charging for like traftlc carried by a like mode 
of transit on any other line of communication between the same 
points, being the points of departure and arrival of the through 
nN~j , I 
• • • • 
CHAPTER VI 
WORKING OF RAILWAYS 
General 
• 
47. General Rules.-(1) Every railway company and in the case of 
a l'ailway administered by the Government, an officer to be appointed 
by the Central Government in this behalf shall make general rules 
consistent with this Act for the following purposes, namely:-
• • • • • • 
(f) for regulating the terms and conditions on which the rail-
way administration will warehouse or retain goods at 
any station on behalf of the consignee or owner; and, 
• • • 
(3) A rule made under this section shall not take effeat until it 
baa received the sanction of the Central Government and been pub-
lished in the Oftlcial Gazette: 
• • • • • • 
55. Lien for rates, terminals ud other da~I ... -(l) If a peraoa 
fails to pay on demand made by or on behalf of a railway admini&-
tration any rate, tenninal or other charge due from him in respect 
of any animals or goods, the railway administration may detain the 
whole or any of the animals or goods, or, if they have been removed 
from the railway. any other animals or goods of such person thea 
being in or thereafter coming into its possession. 
(2) When any animals or goods have been detained under sub-
seetion (1), the railway administration may sell by public auction, 
in the case of perishable goods at once, and in the cRle of other goods 
• 

or of animals en the expiration of at least fifteen days' notice of the 
intended auction, published in one or more of the local newspapers 
or, where there are no such newspapers, in such manner as the 
Central Government may prescribe, sufficient of such animals or 
goods to produce a sum equal to the charge, and all expenses of such 
detention, notice and sale, including, in the case of animals, the 
~es of the feeding, watering and tending thereof. 
(3) Out of the proceeds of the sale the railway administration 
may retain a sum equal to the charge and the expenses aforesaid, 
rendering the surplus, if any, of the proceeds, and such of the animals 
or goods (if any) as remain unsold, to the person entitled thereto. 
(4) If a person on whom a demand for any rate, terminal or other 
charge due from him has been made fails to remove from the railway 
within a reasonable time any animals or goods which have been 
detained under sub-section (1), or any animals or goods which have 
remained unsold after a sale under sub-section (2). the railway 
administration may sell the whole of them and dispose of the 
. proceeds of the sale as nearly as may be under the provisions of 
sub-section (3). 
(5) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing sub-sections, the 
railway administration may recover by suit any such rate, termiRal 
or other charge 88 aforesaid or balance thereof: 
• • • • 
61. Requisitions on railway administrations for details of gross 
Charps.-(l) Where any charge is made by and paid to a railway 
administration in respect of the carriage of goods over its railway, 
the administration shall, on the application of the person by whom 
or on whose behalf the charge has been paid, render to the applicant 
an account showing how much of the charge comes under each of 
the following heads, namely:-
(a) the carriage of the goods on the railway; 
(b) terminals; 
(e) demurrage; and 
(d) collection, delivery and other expenses; 
but without particularising the several items of which tlae charSf! 
under each head consists. 
• • • • • 
63. Maximum number of palS8Dlers for each compartment.-
Every railway administration shall fix, subject to the approval of the 
Central Government, the maximum number of passengers which 

2i 
&:nay be carried in each compartment of every description of carriaae, 
and shall exhibit the number so fixed in a conspicuous manner inside 
or outside each compartment, in English or in one or more of the 
vernacular languages in common use in the territory traversed by 
the railway, or both in English and in one or more of such 
vernacular languages, as the Central Government, after consultation 
with the railway administration, may determine. 
64. Reservation of compartments for females.-(I) 
• • • • • 
(2) One such compartment so reserved shall, if the train is to 
run for a distance exceeding fifty miles, be provided with a closet. 
65. Exhibition of time-tables and tables of fares at stations.-
Every railway administraUon shall cause to be posted in a 
conspicuous and accessible place at every station on its railway, in 
English and in a vemacular language in common use in the territory 
where the station is situate, a copy of the time-tables for the time 
being in force on the railway, an. lists of the fares chargeable for 
travelling from the station where the lists are posted to every place 
for which card-tickets are ordinarily issued to passengers at that 
station. 
66. Supply of tickets on payment of fares.-(I) 
• • • • • 
(2) The matters required by sub-section (1) tEl be specified on 
a ticket shall be set forth-
(a.) if the class of carriage to be specified thereon is the 
lowest class, then in a vernacular language in common use in 
the territory traversed by the railway; and 
(b) it the class of carriage to be so specified is any other 
than the lowest class, then in English . 
• • • • • 
71B. Chapter VIA not to apply to certain railway servants.-
This Chapter shall not apply to any railway servant to whom the 
Indian Merchant Shipping Act, 1923 (21 of 1923) or the Factorietl 
Act, 1948 (63 of 1948) or the Mines Act, 1952 (35 of 1952) applies. 
• • • • • 
CHAPTER VII 
RESPONSIBILITY O}l' KAILWAY ADMINISTRATIONS AS CARRIERS 
72. Measure of the general responsibility of a railway admlnls. 
tration as a carrier of animals and goods.-(I) The responsibility of 
• a. railway administration for the loss, destruction or deterioration 
of animals or goods delivered to the administration to be carried 
by railway shall, subject to the other provisions of this Act, be that 
• 

22 
bf a bailee under sections 151, 152 and 161 of the Indian Contl:act 
Act, 1872 (9 of 1872). 
(3) Nothing in t.he conunon law of England or in the Carriers 
Act, 1865 (3 of 1865), regarding the responsibility of common carriers 
with respect to the carriage of animals or goods, shall affect the 
responsibility as in this section defined of a railway administration. 
72A. Execution of forwarding notes in respect of animals or 
goods carried on a railway.-Any person delivering to the railway 
administration any animals or goods lobe carried on a railway 
.shall,-
(a) if the animals or goods are to .be carried by a train 
intended. solely for the carriage of goods, or 
(b) if the goods are to be carried. by any other train and COD-
sists of articles of any of the following categories, namely:-
(i) articles carried at owner's risk rates; 
(ii) articles of a perishable nature; 
(ill) erticles mentioned in the Second Schedule; 
(iv) articles defectively packed or in a defective condi. 
tion; . 
(v) explosives and other dangerous goods, 
execute a note (in this Act referred to as the forwarding note) in 
such form as may be prescribed by the railway administration and 
. approved by the Central Government, in which the sender or his 
agent shall give such. particulars in respect of the animals or goods 
so delivered as may be required. 
13. Further provision with respect to tbe HabiUty of a railway ad. 
ministration a. a carrier of animals.-(1) The responsibility of a rail· 
way administmtion under section 72 for the loss, destruction or 
deterioration of any animal delivered to the administration for 
earriage by railway shall not exceed the amount rnpectively speci-
fied ill column two against the item relating to the animal in column 
one of the First Schedule, unless the person de1iyering the animal 
to the railway administration declares in writing a higher value 
in the forwarding note and has paid or engaged to pay to the railway 
administration a percentage specified by it upon the excess of the 
wlue 80 declared over the respective sums mentioned in the second 
column of the said Schedule. 
(2) Where such higher value has been declared, the rallway 
administration may charge, in respect of the incraued risk, a per-
centage upon the excess of the value 80 declared over the r",peetlve' 
IUmI aforesaid. 

• 
:&5 
(3) Nothin. contained in this section shall render the nillwq 
administration liable for any damage or loss arising from frigJU 
or Nativeness of the animal. 
74. Fur1her provi.ioa. with respect to the liability of a nil.ay 
administration as a carrier of lu,p,e.-A railway administration 
.hall not be responsible for the loss, destruction or deterioration of 
any luggage belonging to or in charge of a passenger unless a rail-
way servant has booked and given a receipt therefor. 
7U. Liability of a railway administration for roods in delactlve 
euiadltiob or defeeti'Vely packed.-(l) When any goods tendered to 
a railway administration for carriage by raoi1way-
(a) are in a defective condition as a consequence of which 
they are lia},le to deterioration, leakage, wastage or damage in 
transit, or 
(b) are either defectively packed or packed in a manner not 
iii ac~rdance with the general or special order, if any, issued 
under sub-section (2), and, as a result of such defective or impro-
per packing:, are liable to leakage, wastage or damage in transit, 
and the fact of such condition or defective or improper packing has 
been recorded by the sender or his agent in the forwarding note, the 
railway administration shall not be responsible for any deteriora-
tion, leakage, wastage or damage. or for the condition in which 
.uch goods are available for ddivery at destination, except upon 
proof of negligence or misconduct on the pari; of the railway admi-
nistration or of any of its servants. 
(2) The Central Government may, by general or spec1el order, 
prescribe the manner in which goods tendf'red to a railway admi-
nistration for carriage by railway shall be packed. 
74B. Liability of a railway administration for goods earried iD 
OPeD velaicles'.-When any goods which, under ordill1ry circumstances 
would be carried in covered vehicles or vl'ssels and would be liable 
to damage if carried otherwise, are, at the request of the sender or 
his agent recorded in the forwarding note, tendered for carriage 
by Milway in open vehicles or vessels, the railway administration 
shan not be responsible for any destruction, deterioration or damage 
which may arise only by reason of the goods being so carried. 
14C. Liability of a raHway administration for animals or gCNNIs 
earried at owner's risk rate.-(1) When any animals or goods are 
tendered to a railway administration for carriage by railway and 
the railway administration provides for the carriage !)f such animals 
• 

24 
or 'goodJ either at the ordinary tariff rate (in this Act referred to 
as the railway risk rate) or in the altern,tive at a special redueed 
rate (in this Act referred to as the owner's risk rate), the anlrttals 
or goods shall be deemed to have been tendered to be carried at 
owner's risk rate, unless the sender or his agent elects in writing 
to pay the railway risk rate. . . 
(2) Where the sender or his agent elects in writing to pay the 
railway risk rate under sub-section (1), the railway administration 
shall issue a certificate to the consignor to that effect. 
(3) When any animals or goods are carried or are deemed to 
be oarrieci at owner's risk rate, a railway administration shall not 
be responsible for any loss, destruction or deterioration of or damage 
to such goods from any cause whatsoever except upon proof that 
Nch loss, destruction, deterioration or damage was due to negli-
gence or misconduct on the part of the railway administration or 
of any of its servants. 
740. Burden of proving misconduct where goods earned at 
owaer's risk rate are not delivered to the eondgnee or are pUfered in 
transit.-Notwithstanding anything contained in section 74C,-
(a) where the whole of a consignment of goods or the whole 
of any package fonning part of a consignment carried at owner's 
risk rate is not delivered to the consignee and such non-delivery 
is not proved by the railway administration to have been due to 
any accident to the train or to fire, or 
(b) where, in respect of any consignment of goods or of any 
package which had been so covered or protected that the covering 
or protection was not readily removable by hand, it is pointed out 
to the railway administrntion on or before delivery t11at any part 
of such consignment or package had been pilfered in transit, 
the railway administration shall be bound to disclose to the consig-
nor how the consignment or packag~ was dealt with throughout the 
time it was in its possession or control, but if negligence or mis-
conduct on the part of the railway administration or of any of its 
servants cannot l)e fairly inferred from such disclosure, the burden 
of proving such negligence or misconduct shan lie on the consignor. 
74E. Liability of two or more ra.way administrations for throua'h 
tramc.- When any animals or goods tendered to a railway administra-
tion for carriage by railway have heen booked through over the rail-
ways of two or more railway administrations or over one cr 
mdPe Milway administrations and one or more transport systems. 
not belonging to any railway administration, the person tendering 
the animals or goods to the railway administration shall be deemed 
to have contrac~ed with each one of the railway administratio~ or 

!~ 
the owners of the tnlDsport systems concerned, as the case may be. 
that the provisions of sections 73, 74A, 74C, 74D and 75 shall apply, 
so far as may be, in relation to the carriage of such animals or goods 
in the same manner and to the same extent as they would have 
applied if the animals or goods had been carried over only one rail .. 
way administration: 
Provided that-
(i) where there is a deviation in the route by which the 
animals or goods are to be carried, such deviation was due to a 
cause over which the railway administration, or the owner of 
the transport system concerned, as the case may be, had no 
control; 
(ii) for the purpose of making the provisions of section 74C 
or section 74D applicable, the benefit of the railway risk rate and 
the owner's risk rate was available in the alternative to the 
sender on each of the raihWlY administrations or transport sys-
tems concerned at the time of the tender. 
75. Further provision with respect to the liability of a raHway 
administration as a carrier of articles of special value.-(l) When 
any articles mentioned in the Second Schedule are contained in any 
parcel or package delivered to a railway administration for carriage 
by railway, and the value of such articles in the parcel or package 
exceeds three hundred rupees, the railway administration shall 
not be responsible for the loss, destructi·on or deterioration of the 
parcel or package unless the' person sending or delivering the parcel 
or package to the administration ceused its value and contents to 
be declared in writing or declared them in writing at the time of 
the delivery of the parcel or package for carriage by railway, and, 
if so required by the administration, paid or engaged to pay in 
writing a percentage on the'value so declared by way of compensa-
tion for increased risk. 
(2) When any parcel or package of which the vqiue has been 
declared under sub-section (1) has been lost or destroyed or bas 
deteriorated, the compensation recoverable in respect of such loss, 
destruction or deterioration shall not exceed the value so declar-
ed. 
(3) A railway administration may make it a condition of carry-
ing a parcel declared to contain any article mentioned in the Second 
Schedule that a railway servant authorized in this behalf has been 
satisfied by examination or otherwise that the parcel actually con-
tains the article declered to be therein . 
• 

' .. 
"'0. ,Bartl. of proof in s~ts for compeDSation.-In any suit 
;against a railway administration for compensation for any delay, 
"loss, destruction, deterioration or damage, the burden of proving-
(q) in ihe case of animals, the value thereof, or the higher 
value declared under section 73, and, where the animal has been 
injured, the extent of the injury; or 
(b) in the case of any parcel or package the value of which 
,luls ,~een declared under section 75, that the value so declared 
·is its true .vallle, 
shall' lie on the person claiming the compensation, but, subject to 
the other proviSiOns contained in this Act, it shall not be necessary 
for him to prove how the delay, loss, destruction, deterioration or 
daIPllge was ca\l8t!d. 
''17. )JodficatiOD'of ·elaims to refunds of overcharges and to COlD-
-pe .... tionfor·Ioues.-A pei'son shall not be entitled to a refund of 
1Ul0vercharge in respect of animals or goods carried by railway or 
to compensation for the lu.;s, destruction or deterioration of animals 
or goods delivered to be so carried, unless his claim to the refund 
.or compensation ·has been preferred in writing by him or on his 
.behalf to the railway administration within six months from the 
·date of the delivery of -the animals or goods for carriage by railway, 
18. ExoQUation from responsibility in case of goods falsely 
.d~d.-Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of 
.this Cbapter,. railway administration shall not be responsible for 
.the 1088, destruction or deterioration .of any goods with respect to 
the desc;ription of which an ,account materially false has been deli-
vered under su~section (1) of section 58 if the loss, destruction 
or deterioration is in any way brought about by the false account, 
nor in any case for an amount exceeding the wlue of the goods 
if such value were calculated in accordance with the description 
contained in the false account. 
• • • • • 
so. Suit#for compensation for injury to through-booked trame.-
Notwithstanding anything in any agreement purporting to limit the 
liability of a railway administration with respect to traffic while on 
the railway of another administration, a suit for compensation for 
Was of the life of, or personal injury to, a passenger, or for loss, 
.destruction or deterioration of animals or goods where the passenger 
was orothe animals or goods were booked through over the railways 
of two or more railway administrations, may be brought either 
against ~ raUway administration from which the passenger obtain- • 
ed his pass or purchased his ticket, or to which the animals or goods 
were delivered. by the consignor thereof, as the case 'may be, or 

27 
against the railway administration on whose railway the loss,-
injury, destruction or deterioration occurred. 
• • • • • 
82. Limitation of liability of railway administration in-·respec:t of 
accidents at sea.-(1) When a railway administration contracts to 
ca.rry passengers, animals or goods partly by railway and partly 
by sea, a condition exempting the railway administration from res-
ponsibility for any loss of life, personal injury or loss of or damage 
to animals or goods which may happen during the carriage by sea 
from the act of God, enemies of Government, fire, accidents from-
machinery, boilers and steam and all and every other dangers and 
accidents of the seas, rivers and navigation of whatever nature and 
kind soever shall, without being expressed, be deemed' to be part 
of the contract, and, subject to that condition, the railway administra-
tion shall, irrespective of the nationality or ownership of the ship 
us~ for the carriage by sea, be responsible for any loss of life, 
personal injury or loss of or damage to animals or goods which may 
happen during the carriage by sea, to the extent to which it woa.ld 
be responsible under the Merchant Shipping Act, 1854 (17-- and 18-
Vict., c. 104) and the Merchant Shipping Act Amendment Act, 1882 
(25 and 26 Viet., c. 63), if the ship were registered under the -fanner 
of those Acts and the railway administration were owner of the 
ship, and not to any greater extent. 
(2) The burden of proving that any such lossj Injury or damage 
as is mentioned in sub-section (1) happened during the' cama,e:b!, 
sea shall lie on the railway administration. 
82A. Liability of railway administration in respect of aed_a 
to- trains carrying- passengers.-(I) When- in the course of- worldng 
a railway an accident occurs, being either a collision between·tra!M 
of which one is a train carrying passengers or the derailment ~ 
or other accident to a train or any part of a train carrying passengers, 
then, whether or not there has been any wrongful act, negleet 
ilr default· on the part of th«:> railway administration such as would 
entitle a person who has been injured or has suffered loss- to main .. 
tain an action and recover damages in respect thereof, the' rallwa,' 
administration shall, notwithstanding any other provisiot1 of laW' 
to the contrary, be liable to pay compensation to the extent set-
out in sub-section (2) and to that extent only for loss occasioned 
• by the -death of a- passenger dying as a result of such, accident, and 
for personal injury and-loss, destruction or deterioration of animals 
or goods owned by the -passenger and -accompanying the passenger 
• 

28 
in his compartment or on the train, sustained as a result of such 
accident. 
• • • • • 
8U. Power to make rules.-(1) 
• • • • 
(3) All rules made under this section shall be laid before 
Par1iament as soon as may be after they are made . 
• • • • • 
106. Giving false account of goods.-If a person requested under 
section 58 to give an account with respect to any goods gives an 
account which is materially false, he" and, if he is not the owner of 
the goods, the owner also shall be punished with fine which may 
extend to fifty rupees for every maund or part of a maund of the 
goods, and the fine shall be in addition to any rate or other charge 
to which the gooda may be liable . 
• • • • • . ... , 
113. Travelling without pass or ticket or with insufficient pass or 
ticket or beyond authorized distance.-(1) 
• • • • 
(3) The excess charge referred to in sub-section (1) and sub-
section (2) shall be a sum equivalent to the amount otherwise pay-
able under those sub-sections, or eight annas, whichever is greater: 
Provided that where the passenger has immediately after incur-
ring the charge and before being detected by a railway servant 
notified to the railway servant on duty with the train the fact of 
the charge having been incurred, the excess charge shall be one-sixth 
of the excess charge otherwise payable calculated to the nearest anna, 
or two annas, whichever is greater: 
Provided further that if the passenger has with him a certificate 
granted under sub-section (2) of section 68, no excess charge shall 
be payable. 
• • • • • 
115. Disposal of fines under the two last foregoing sections.-That 
portion of any fine imposed under section 112 or the last foregoing 
section which represents the single fare therein mentioned shall, as 
the fine is recovered, be paid to the railway administration before 
any portion of the fine is credited to the Government . 
• • • • • 
130. Special provision with respect to the commisaloo by children 
of acts endangering safety of persons travelling by railway.-(1) If 
Ii minor under the age of twelve years is with respect to any railway 

29 
guilty of any of the acts or omissions mentioned or referred to in 
any of the four last foregoing sections, he shall be deemed, notwith-
standing anything in section 82 or section 83 of the Indian Penal 
Code (45 of 1860), to have committed an offence, and the Court 
convicting him may, if it thinks fit, direct that the minor, if a male, 
shall be punished with whipping, or may require the father or 
guardian of the minor to execute, within such time as the Court 
may fix, a bond binding himself, in such penalty as the Court directs, 
to prevent the minor from being again guilty of any of those acts 
or omissions. 
• • • • • 
1.0. Service of notices on raHway administrations.-Any notice 
or other document required or authorized by this Act to be served 
on a railway IIIdministration may be served, in the case of a railway 
administered' by the Government, on the Manager and, in the case 
of a railway administered by a railway company, on the Agent in 
India of the railway company-
(a) by delivering the notice or other document to the Manager 
or Agent; or 
(Ib) by leaving it at his office; or 
(c) by forwarding it by post in a prepaid letter addressed to 
the Manager or Agent at his office and registered under 
Part III of the Indian Post Office Act, 1866 (14 of 1866). 
Ul. Service of notices by railway administrations.-Any notice 
or other document required or authorized by this Act to be served 
on any person by a railway administration may be served-
(a) by delivering it to the person; or 
(b) by leaving it at .the usual or last lmown place of abode 
of the person; or 
(e) by forwarding it by post in a prepaid letter addressed 
to the person at his usual or last lmown place of abode 
and registered under Part III of the Indian Post Oftlee 
Act, 1866 (14 of 1866) . 
• • • • • 

THE FIRST SCIttDut'E 
(See section 73) 
(s) any article of special value which the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, add to this 
Schedule. 
• • • • 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(See section 75) 
ARTICLES TO BE DECLARED AND INSURED 
• • 
(i) Television apparatus; 
(ii) Heavy water; 
• 
(iii) Thorium and uranium; 
(iv) Bank cheques; 
• 
• 
• • 
(v) All printed material' produced by the Indian Security 
Press, Nuik; 
(Vi);'Examination answer papers. 

t6i< SAB1tA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Indian Railways Act, 1890. 
The President has, in pursuance of clauses (I) and (3) of artick 
117 of the Constitution of India, reconunended to Lok 
Sabha the introduction and consideration of the Bill. 
(Shri Jagjivan Ram, 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
Minister of Rai/way!;.) 