As INrRopucED iv Lox Sastia

Bill No. 32 of 1992
—— अजयिःि।ण--+

THE NATIONAL HIGHWAYS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1992

A
BILL

further to amend the National Highways Act, 1956.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-third Year of the Republic
of India as follows:—
480f 1956 5

1. This Act may be called the National Highways (Amendment) Act,
1992. |

2. In section 7 of the National Highways Act, 1956 (hereinafter re-

ferred to as the principal Act), in sub-section (1), after the words “on

10 national highways”, the words “and the use of sections of national high-
ways” shall be inserted.

3. In section 9 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), in clause (b),
after the words “national highway”, the words “and the use of sections
of any national highway” shall be inserted.

Short
title.

Amend-
ment of
section

Mi

Amend-
ment of
section
9.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Section 7 of the National Highways Act, 1956 provides for the levy
of fees by the Central Government for services or benefits rendered in
relation to the use of ferries, bridges and tunnels on national highways.
‘The need to augment resources for the development of national high-
ways has been felt since long. Certain sections of the national highways
are, therefore, intended to be selected for the purpose of levying fees
tor the use of such sections.

2. It is, therefore, proposed to empower the Centra] Government to
levy fees for services or benefits rendered in relation to the use of any
section of a national highway. Consequently, the aforesaid Act is
sought to be amended.

3. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objects.

New DEH; JAGDISH TYTLER.
The 17th February, 1992.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to amend section 7 of the National High-
ways Act, 1956 in order to enable the Central Government to levy fees
on the use of any notified section of any national highway also. The
collection of fees would necessitate the construction of fee plaza complex
consisting of lay-byes and one or more collection booths. The non-
recurring expenditure on the construction of each unit of fee plaza com-
plex would be about Rs. 40 lakhs. In addition, the annua] recurring ex-
penditure on the staff at one unit is estimated to be of the order of about
Rs. 6.to 8 lakhs. The expenditure, recurring or non-recurring, cannot be
precisely estimated at this stage as the number of sections of national
highways to be covered for the levy of fees would be identified as and
when required. + i


MEMURANDUM SEGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to amend section 9 of the National High-
ways Act, 1956 in order to empower the Central Government to make
tules to provide for the rates at which fees for services rendered in re-
Jation to the use of any section of any national highway may be levied
and the manner in which such fees shall be collected.

2. The matters in relation to which the power to make rules is
Proposed to be conferred on the Central Government are matters of
procedure and detail. ‘The delegation of power is, therefore, of a normal
character.


| ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM ‘Hx Natronar, Higuways Acr, 1956

i | (48 of 1956)

* + + 2 *

Provided that if the Central Government is of opinion that it is
necessary in the public interest so to do, it may, by like notification,
Specify any bridge im relation ६0 the use of which fees shal? not be levi.
ह under this sub-section,

* * . = के

%. 0) 1] * * Pa *

(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the
Zoregoing Power, such rules may provide for all or any af the following
matters, namely: - |

* * 2 + =

(b) the rates at which fees for services rendered in relation to
the use of ferries, permanent bridges, temporary bridges and tun-
nels on any national highway may be levied, and the manner in
which such fees shal] be collected, under section 7;

* * * = *

Fees for
services
or bene.
fits ren-
dared on
national
high.

ways.

Power to
make
rules,


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the National Highways Act, 1956

(Shri Jagdish Tytler, Minister of State of
the Ministry of Surface Transport)