, \ 
. q / ~
-." 
Bm 50. U 01 j<l' 
" THE lIAINTENABCE ORDERS ERJ'OBCEMEKT (AMEND-
MENT) BILL, 1952 
I As INTltODUCED IN THE HOT:SF. OF THE PEOPLE] 
A 
. BILL 
luniter tu tl7W;n,[ lllc JfuintcllulH:e Orders Enlorcoment Act, 1921. 
J:h: it enacted by Parliumeut u.s follows:-
1. Short tltJe.-'1'his Act may be called the Maintena.nce Orders Enforce-
! ment (Amendment) Act, H~52, 
. 
2. Amendment of long' title and preamble, Act XVIn 01 1921.-ln thl:l 
,.oug titl,· oi, und the preamble t.o, the 'Maintel1fillCe Orders Enforcement 5 
Act, ]!)~1 (hereinaftpr l"l~f(~rrl)(1 to flS the lirincipul Act) for the words "Hili 
, Majt:sty 's Dowiniow; awl Pl'Otecturntt'8," the words • 'reciprocating terri-
toriN:," ehall be substituted, 
3. Amendment of section 2, Act xvm of 1921.-I11 section 2 of t.he 
"principal Act,- 10 
(II) ill the (ll:ltitlition of 'dependanttl' for the words 'the part of His 
.l\lU,jl·st,Y'S D,Hlliniolls' the words 'the reciprocating territory' shaU be 
SUb8titllt('d; 
(b) for thH rlefinition of 'reciprocating territory' the 
definit.ion shall be substituted, ll[,mely:-
following 
'" 'reciprocating territor'y' means any country or territory 
outside India in, J'el'pect of which this Ad for the time being applies 
by virtue of R' declaratiolJ IInder section 3, ... 
'18 
i. Substitution of new section for section 8, Act XVIU of lell.-For 
,section 3 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, ao 
;namely:~ 
.\ 
• 'S, Declaration of reciprocal arrarlgementB.--lf the Centl'sl GQv-
enlment is satisfied thfit legal provision' exists in any country or terri· 
tory outside India for the enforcernent within that country or territory 
of mainteuancf:' orders made by COurtR in India, the Central Govern- 25 
'ment may, by notifica.tion in tire Official Gazette, declare that this Act 
aPlllies in rf:'Rpect of that country or territory and thereupon it shall 
upply (accordingly." 

2 
STATEMENT OF OBJECT!:) AND REASONS-
The Ma.intenance Orders Enforcement Ac't, 1921, faoilitates the enforce;-
ment in Indill. of maintenance orders made in "His l\lajest,y'lj Dominions-
and Proteetorate~" and vice verBa, but it has no application to maintenance-
orders made in countries outside the Commonwealth. It is desirable that 
where a foreign country is prepared to make arrangf'ments for the enforc'e-
ment within its territory of maintenllnce order~ paRsed by courts in India, 
there !:ihould be legal provision enabling toe GO'Vernment of India ·to ex-
tend the facility to that country on a reciprocal basis. The objeet of the-
present Bill is to make necessary amendmt'!nts in the Maintenauc'e Orders 
Enforcement Act, 1921, so as to facilitate the enforcement in India on ~ 
reciprocal basis of maintenance decrees or orders passed by ('ourts in foreign .. 
countries., 
C, C. BISWAS. ' 
NEW DE~I; 
Tla. 14th May, 1952 

3 
ANNEXUHE 
EXTRACT FROM THE MAINTENANCE ORDERS ENFORCBMENT ACT, 1921 (XVIII 
OF 1921). 
Long title ana preamble . 
• An Act to facilitate the enforcement in India ·of Maintenance-
Orders made in His Maje~t'y"B DOminions and Protectorates.. 
and vice versa. 
WHEREAS it is expedient to facilitate the enforcement in ludia I.'f 
1laintenanee Orders made in His Majest.y's Dominions and Protectorates, 
and vice VCTlla .. It is hereby enacted as follows:-
* * * * * 
s.otioft S 
2. Dejinitionfl.-In this Act, unless there is 4nything repugnant in the-
subject or context,-
* * * * * 
ff dependants" means auch persona as a person against whom a mainten-
ance order is made is lia.ble to maintain according to the law in force in th& 
pel·t of HiH :\lajesty's Dominions in which the maintenance order is made . 
* * * • * • 
"reciprocating tenitory" means any part of His Majesty's Dominions· 
in respect of which this Act for the time being applies. 
Bection S 
8. Reciprocal aTTun.genumt8.-(1) If the Central Government is satisfied 
that provisions have hf!Eln made by .t1I.e .. L.~gisla.ture of any part of His 
!Majesty's Dominions for the enforcement within that part of maintenaDc& 
order'~ mr.·de by Courts in India the Central Government may, by notifica-
tion in the Official Gazette, declare that this Act applies in respect of thafl 
part of His Majesty's Dominions and thereupon it shall apply accordingly. 
(2) The Central Government ma.y, by like notification, declare that this 
Act applieR in respect of any British protector&:te, and where such 8 deola-
ratio!} has been made, ihis Act shall apply as if such protectorat-e were a. 
reciprooating terrirory. 
• * •• • • 

HOUSEIOF THE PEOPLE 
A 
BILL 
further t:> amond:the .)Iaintenance Orders Enforcement Act, 
1921 
•. s 
(Skri O. O. BiBwa8, 
Minister Jor Law) 
GIPD-LAD-I-173. PB -111-5-12-1,40\) 