As INTRODUCED IN tOK SABat 
ON 1ST APRIL, 1966~ 
BUI No. 32 of 1966. 
THE PRODUCE CESS BILL, 1966 
A 
BILL 
fo proride for the imposition of cess on certain produce JOT the im-
provement and development of the methods of cultivation and 
rrr,Q.rketing of such prod'uce and fOT matters connected theTewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventeenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Produce Cess Act, 1966. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
S 2. In this Act, un1ess the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "Collector" means the officer appointed by the Centra] 
Government to perform in any specified area the duties of a 
Collector under the provisions of this Act and the rules made 
thereunder, and includes any officer subordinate to that officer 
10 whom he may, by order in writing, authorise to perform his 
de1ties under those provisions; 
(b) "cotton" means raw cotton, whether baled or loose, 
which has been ginned; 
(e) "custom:; port" has the meaning assigned to it in the 
r: 15 Custums Act, 1962; 
• 
I 25 
(d) "Indian Council of Agricultural Research" means the 
body registered in that name under the Societies Registration 
Act, 1860; 
(e) "lac" includes any form of manufactured or unmanu-
facturl'd lac othec than refuse lac; 
(f) "managir.l.g agent" has the meaning assigned to it in the 
Companies Act, 1956; 
(g) "mill" means,-
(i) in relation to cotton, any place which is a factory 
as defined in section 2 of the Factories Act, 1948, and in 
which, or in any part of which, cotton is converted into 
yarn or thread either for sale as such or for conversion .into 
cotton goods, 
Short 
Utle and 
extent. 
De1lnJUons. 

Imposition 
of cess. 
2 
(ii) in relation to copra or oil-seed and oil, any premi~ 
in which or in any part of which, copra or oil-seed, as th. 
case may be, is crushed, or is ordinarily crushed, with l~ 
aid of power for the extraction of oil. . 
Explanation.-"Power" means electrical energy or ar" 
other form of energy, which is mechanically transmi,:~ 
and is not generated by human or animal agency, 
(iii) in relation to any other produce, such place as t~ 
Central Government may, by notification In the Offici 
Gazette, specify; 
(h) "occupier", in relation to any mill, means the perSCll. 
who has the ultimate control over the affairs of the mill alX 
where the said affairs are entrusted to a managing agC'nt, suet 
agent shall be deC'med to be the occupier of the mill; 
(i) "oil-sC'cd" docs not include copra: 
(j) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made undr 
this Act; 
(k) "produce" means any goods specified in the FiIf 
Schc·dule or the Second Schedule. 
3. (1) There shall be levied and collectC'd as a cess, fo!" the 
poses of this Act, on CVCTv produce specified in column :2 of 
First Schedule, which is exported from any customs port to any 
beyond the limits of India, a duty of customs at such J"c!t(', 
exceeding the rate specified in the corresponding cntn' in column 
thereof, as the Central Government may, by notific3tion in 
Ofllcial Gazette, specify: 
Provided that until such rate is specified by the Central G 
ment, the duty of customs shall be levied and collected at the 
specified In the corresponding entry 
Schedule. 
(2) There shall be levied and collected as a cess, for the pLi 
of this Act, on every produce specified in column 2 of the 
Schedule, a duty of excise at such rate, not exceedir.g the 
specified in the corresponding entry in column 3 thereof. as 
Central Government may, by notification in the Ollicial G 
specify: 
Provided that until such rate is specified by the Central 
ment, the duty of excise shall be levied and collected at the 
specified in the corresporlding entry in column 4 of the said S 

" Every duty of customs leviable under this Act on any produce Persons 
. bi b th b h . who shall "'all be paya eye person y w om such produce IS exported be liable S:I 
f ""~!11 India and every duty of excise leviable under this Act on any to pay ...... . duty. 
produce shall be payable by the occupIer of the mill in which such 
S produce is consumed or extracted. 
5. (1) An amount equivalent to the proceeds of the duty AppU-
It"icd and collected under this Act, reduced by the cost of coHee- ~~~~e~d~f 
lion as determined by the Central Government, together with any of cess. 
lIloncys received by the Central Government for the purposes of 
10 this Act. shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law, 
~ utilized by the Central Government to meet the expenditure 
incurred in connection with measures which, in the opinion of that 
(Jo"crnment, are necessary or expedient to promote the improve-
ment. development and marketing of produce. 
15 
I~ 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
provisions of sub-section (1), the proceeds of the duty levied and 
collected under this Act may be utilized by the Central Government 
for all or any of the follOwing purposes, namely:-
(a) undertaking, assisting or encouraging, agricultural, 
industrial, technological and economic research, including research 
on the utilization of the products obtained from any produce; 
(b) supplying technical advice to cultivators, growers and 
millers; 
(c) encouraging the adoption of improved methods of culti-
vation and storage of crops; 
( c1) producing, testing and distributing improved varieties of 
crops or assisting such work; 
(e) assisting in the control of insects and other pests and 
diseases of the crops, both in the field and in storage; 
(f) promoting the improvement of the marketing of produce 
and the products obtained therefropt in India and abroad inclu-
ding the setting up and adoption of grade standards for the pro-
duce and the products obtained therefrom; . 
( g) collecting statistics from cultivators, growers, dealers 
~d occupiers of mills on all relevant matters and promoting 
Unprovement in the forecasting of crops and the preparation 
of all relevant statistics relating to the crops and the products 
obtained therefrom; 

Retund 
of ees. 
on oUt 
exportea 
from 
India. 
Occupier 
to sup-
ply cer. 
tain parti· 
culars to 
Collector. 
4 
(h) maiaWalD&', aad assisting In the maintenance of, sucb 
.iastitutes, farms aDtl stations as the Central Government JIll)' 
COD.SIder necessary ; 
(i) advising and providing assistance on all matters connected 
with the improvement of the cultivation of crops (includbt, S 
advising on the best and most suitable varieties of the croPs 
to be cultivated) and the improvement of the indus1ries using the 
crops and the products obtained therefrom; 
(j) promoting and encouraging the co-operative movement 
in any connected industry; )0 I 
(k) adopting such measures as may be practicable for ea-
suring remunerative returns to the growers; 
(l) organising the establishment of cultivators', growers', 
millers' and consumers' organisations; 
(m) aiding and encouraging the establishment of exhibitions 
for demonstrating the uses of the produce and the products ob-
tained therefrom; 
(n) adopting any other measures which the Central GoveN· 
ment may deem to be necessary or advisable to carry out the 
purposes of this Act. 
(3) In this section, "crops" means crops or plants from \vhich 
any produce is obtained. 
6. There shall be refunded from out of the proceeds of cess levied 
and collected under this Act, on such conditions as may be prescribed, 
all sums col1ected as cess on the quantity of oils exported from India. 
if such oils have been extracted from oil-seed or copra crushed iD • 
mill in India, irrespective of whether the oil-seed or copra is produed 
in, or imported into, India. 
7. The occupier of every mill shall,-
(a) if the mill was established before the commencement 
this Act, within fourteen days from such commencement, and 
(b) if the mill is established after the commencement 
this Act, within fourteen days from such establishment, 
furnish to the Collector a statement containing the following 
culars, namely:-
(i) the name and situation of the mill; 
(ii) the name and address of the occupier; 
(iii) the address to which the communications relating to 
mill may be sent; and 
(iv) the total capacity of the mill. 

&) 
8 (1) Every occupier of a mill shall furnish to the Collector every DeUverYh . of mont -
nth a return stating the total amount of produce, specified in the ly re-mo . d turns. Second Schedule, consumed or brought under processmg or extracte 
in the mill during the preceding month. 
S (2) The return referred to in sub-section (1) shall be furnished 
before the seventh day of each month together with such other in-
formation as may be prescribed. 
(3) Every such return shall be made in such form and shall be 
\'crifled in such manner as may be prescribed. 
10 9. (1) On receiving any return made under section 8, the Collec- Collection 
tor shall assess the duty of excise payable on every produce specified f:vi:bfe 
I n the Second Schedule, in respect of the period to which the return 0dn pro-uce 
relates, and if the amount has not already been paid, shall cause a specified 
notice to be served upon the occupier of the mill requiring him to A~nd 
15 make payment of the amount assessed within ten days of the service Schedule. 
of the notice. 
(2) If the occupier of any mill fails to furnish in due time the 
return referred to in section 8 or furnishes a return which the 
Collector has reason to believe is incorrect or defective, the Collector 
20 shall assess the amount payable by him in such manner, if any} as 
may be prescribed, and the provisions of sub-section (1) shall there-
upon apply as if such assessment had been made on the basis of a 
return furnished by the occupier: 
Provided that, in the case of a return which he has reason to 
2S believe is incorrect or defective, the Collector shall not assess the 
duty of excise at an amount higher than that at which it is assessable 
on the basis of the return without giving to the occupier a reasonable 
opportunity of proving the correctness and completeness of the 
return. 
lO (3) A notice under sub-section (1) may be served on the occupier 
of a mill either by registered post or by delivering or tendering it 
to the occupier or his agent at the mill. 
10. (1) Any occupier of a mill who is· aggrieved by an assessment Finality 
I 3S lIlade under section 9 may, within three months of service of the of n t' asseS5-
o ICe referred to in sub-section (1) of that section, appeal to such ment. 
authority as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Oftlcial Gazette, appoint in this behalf, for the cancellation or modifi-
tation of the assessment and, on such appeal, the said authority 
40 may cancel or modify the assessment and order the refund to such 
ocCupier of the whole or part, as the case may be, of the amount 
Paid thereunder : 

Collection 
of cess 
QIl any 
preduce 
specified 
in First 
Schedule. 
Provided that the authority so appointed shall not be inferior in 
rank to the Collector by whom the assessment was made. 
(2) The appellate authority may, if it is satisfied that the appellant 
was prevented by suffici«nt cause from presenting the appeal within 
the aforesaid period of three months, allow it to be presented within 5 
a further period of one;> month. 
(3) Where the appellatE' authority 1s of opinion that any duty of 
excise has be-en short-lC'vied,no order enhancing the duty of excise 
shall be made unless the appellant hus been given notice to show 
cause, within one month from the date d sen'ice thereof, against the :0 
proposed order. 
(4) The Central Government may, on the application of any 
person aggrieved by any order made under sub-section (1) or sub-
section (3), cancel ur modify such order. if such appI:cation is made 
within six months from lhe date of the order made under sub-section 15 
(1) or sub-section (3), as the case may be. 
(5) The Central Governm:2nt may, if it is 5[ltisfied that the appli-
cant was prevented by sufficient cause fror~l pl'L~cnting the application 
within the aforesaid penod of six months, aIlo",; it to be presented 
within a further period of OLe month. J 
(6) The decision of the Central Government, and subject to the 
decision of the Central Government, the decision of the appellate 
authority, shall be final. 
11. (1) The Collector shall in respect of any produce specified 
in the First Schedule which is exported by sea aSSe5S and collect the 
duty of customs at the customs port of export. 
(2) \Vhere any produce specified in the First Schedule is exported 
by land, the duty of cu~toms !eviab1e und~'r this Act on such product 
shall be assessed and collected by such authority and in such manner 
as may be prescribed, and, until so prescribed, such duty of cus 
shall be . levied and collected in accordance with the law in 
immediately before the commencement of this Act. 
(3) The Central Board of Excise and Customs constituted 
the Central Boards of Re\'enue Act, 1963, may, by rules, specify 
conditions and restrictions subject to which--
(a) refund may be made of the duty of customs levied on 
produce specified in the First Schedule which is exported 
land, where such producE is subsequently imported into I 
(b) export may be made by land, without payment of 
duty of customs, of any produce specified in the First 
which is int-ended to be iroueht back to India. 

5 
10 
7 
12. Where any duty of customs or excise demanded trom any 
person or any penalty payable by any person under this Act is not 
paid,-
(a) the Cdlector may deduct the amount so payable from 
any money owing to such PQ!".!on which may be under the control 
of the Collector or any other officer; or 
(b) the Collector may recover the amount so payable by 
detaining and selling any good~ belonging to such person which 
are under the control of the Collector or any other officer; or 
(c) if the amount cannot be recovered from such person 
in the manner provided in clause (a) or clause (b), the Collector 
may prepare a certificate sir,ned h:v him specifying the amount 
clue from such person and se'1d it to th~ Collector of the district 
in which such I='ers()n OW:"lS a:iy p!'operty or resides or carries on 
15 hi:'; b'-lsiness and the said Collector shall, on receipt of such 
certificate, prcc(:'cd to recover from t~e said person the amount 
specified therein as if it were an arrear of land revenue. 
Recovery 
of sums 
due to 
Govern-
ment. 
n (1) The Collector or an:' officer empowered by gcnera~ or Power to 
~pc'cial order of the Centr2.1 GO\'crnmont in this behalf shall have free ~fl?:ct 
~ accl'S.~ 2l.t all r('o.';C:1ab~(:, :i!:"e~ durin',: "\'urking hours to any mill or and take 
copies of d.'':, part of a mill. account. 
(2) The Collector or any such officer may, at any time during 
." ,1rking ho'.ll's. wit:-. or without lJoticc LD the occupier, eX1mine the 
pt.:rch~se. sale Rnd stock records and accounts of any mill and take 
!5 CfI?!f'S ')f or extracts from all or an:' of the said records or accounts 
!rJr the purpose of tos! ing the Jccur.}cy of any return or of informing 
~.::~:.~c·' f a~ to the P2r~ !c.lhr:.; rC'.g:udin'r \\'hich information is required 
!'.r the purpos€s of this Act or any rules made thereunder: 
P!'()i'idcd th3! n(\~h:'1g in this sC'ctinn shall be del'mcd to authorize 
)) '.:'~ examination of any description or formulae of any trade process. 
1 t (1) All such copies and extracts and all information acquired Infor-
:.:; d Collector or an".v other offiC'er from any inspection of any mill mation ac-Quired to 
'!' ~r')m any retun: submitted under this Act shall be treated as be con-
~ !'.~ j~." t i :.11. fldential. 
(?, If th.: Collector or any ~;uch off!cer discloses to any person, 
r· \... 
.... (:!' than a ~uperior officer, any such information as aforesaid, with· 
~'.I~ the previous sanction of the Central Government, he shall be 
r''::")ishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend lo six 
t),:,nths and shall also be liable to fine: 
., PrOVided that nothing in this section shall apply to the disclo:mre 
Of any such information for the purpOi,e of a pr08ecution in respect 
the making of a fal:;e return under this Act. 

Provisions 
of cer-
tain Acts 
to apply. 
8 
15. (1) The provlslOns of the Customs Act, 1962, and the rules 52.., 
and regulations made thereunder, including those relating to refunds 
and exemptions from duty, shall, so far as may be, apply in relation 
to the levy and collection of duties of customs on any prodUce 
specified in the First Schedule as they apply in relation to the levy S 
and collection of duty payable to the Central Government under that 
Act. 
(2) The provisions of the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944, and loJ 
the rules made thereunder, including those relating to refunds and 
exemptions from duty, shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to J~I 
the levy and collection of duties of excise on any produce specified 
in the Seco!1d Schedule as they apply in relation to the levy and 
collection of duty payable to the Central Government under that Act. 
Offences. 16. (1) Whoever-
Limitation 
of pro-
secution. 
Composi-
tion of 
offences. 
(a) evades the payment of any duty of customs or excise I! 
payable under this Act, or 
(b) fails to furnish any return or information which it is 
his duty to furnish under this Act or furnishes a return or infor-
mation which is false in material particulars or which he does 
not believe to be true, or 
(c) obstructs the Collector or any other officer in th(' per-
formance of his duties under this Act or any rules made there-
under, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to six mont..il~, or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees. 
or wi th both. 
(2) Any court trying an offence under this Act may direct thl't 
any produce in respect of which it is satisfied that an offence punish-
able under this Act has been committed shall be forfeited to Gove~ 
ment and may also direct that all packages, coverings or receptacles 
in which such produce is contained and every animal. vehicle, "esse 
or other conveyance used in carrying such produce shall be forfeited 
10 Government. 
17. No prosecution for any offence punishable under this Act 
be instituted against any person except by, or with the conSPJ1t 
the Collector. 
18. Any offence punishable under this Act may, either before 
after the institution of the prosecution, be. compounded by 
Collector or any other officer authorised by him in this behalf 
payment to the Central Government, for the purposes of this 
of such sum as the Collector or such officer, as the case may 
thinks fit. 

9 
19. (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie 
against the Central Government or any person authorized by the 
Central Government for anything which is in good faith done or 
intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rule or order 
5 made thereunder. 
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central 
Government or any person authorized by the Central Government 
for any damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is 
in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of any of the 
10 provisions of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder. 
Protection 
ot action 
taken in 
good faith. 
20. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the ~oa~:r to 
Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. rules. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the !ollow-
15 ing matters, namely:-
(a) conditions subject to which refund may be made of any 
sums collected as duties of excise on any quantity of oil exported 
from India; 
(b) the form of the monthly return which every occupier 
20 of a mill should submit to the Collector and the manner in which 
such return shall be verified; 
(c) information which every occupier may be required to 
furnish in the monthly returns; 
(d) manner in which assessment of duties of excise shall be 
25 made where no return has been furnished or the return which 
has been furnished is believed by the Collector to be incorrect or 
defective; 
(e) the authority by which and the manner in which the 
duties of customs leviable under this Act shall be collected on 
30 any produce specified in the First Schedule which is exported 
by land; and 
(f) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, 
prescribed. 
21. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of Power tc. 
j) this Act, the Central Government may, by order, make such directions drei'2!°v1et . , 1I1CU les. 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to 
be necessary or expedient for the removal of the difficulty: 
Provided that no such directions shall be made after the expiry 
of a period of three years from the date of commencement of this 
40 Act. 

Extension 
of appli-
cation of 
the Act. 
• 
Rules and 
notifica-
tions to 
be laid 
before 
Parlia-
ment. 
10 
22. The Central Government may, after consultation with the 
Indian Council of Agricultural Research, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, declare that the provisions of this Act shall apply to a 
produce not included in the First Schedule or the Second Schedule 
and specify respectively in columns 3 and 4 thereof the maximum 5 
rate of such cess and the actual rate at which such cess shall be 
levied and collected on such produce until a different rate is specified 
by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette, 
and on the publication of such notification, such produce and such 
rate shall be deemed to be included in the First Schedule or the 10 
Second Schedule, as the case may be. 
23. Every rule made under this Act and every notification made 
under section 22 shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one ses£ion or in two 15 
successive ses-sions, and if, before the expiry of the session in which 
it is so laid or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree 
in making any modification in the rule or in the notification or 
both Houses agree that the rule or the notification should not be 
made, the rule or the notification shall thereafter have effect only 20 
in such modified form or be of no effect. as the case may be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under the rule 
or the notification. 

5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
3S 
-s. i 
I 
No. 
I 
-
I 
I 
I 
I 
I I 
I I 
I 
I 
2 
I 
I 
S. I 
N°'i 
I 
2 
3 
11 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
[See section 3 (1)] 
Name of the The maximum 
produce. rate at which 
duty of customs 
may be collected. 
2 3 
Lac produced in Rupees two and 
India. thirty paise per 
quintal. 
Refuse lac produced Rupee one and 
in India. seventy paise 
per quintal. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
[See section 3 (2)] 
Name of the 
produce. 
2 
Cotton consumed in 
any mill in India I 
with a view to 
producing or 
manufacturing any 
goods therefrom. 
Copra consumed in 
any mill in Indiq 
with a view to 
producing or ma-
nufacturing any 
goods therefrom. 
Oil~ extracted from 
oil-seed crushed in 
any mill in India. 
The maXImum 
rate at which 
duty of eXCIse 
may be collected. 
3 
One rupee per bale 
of 181' 4 kilo-
grams, or in the 
case of unbaled 
cotton, twenty-
eight paise per 
50 kilograms. 
Sevemy-fi ve paise 
per quintal of 
copra. 
One rupee per 
quintal of oil. 
, 
Actual rate at 
which duty of 
customs is to 
be collected un-
til a different 
rate is specified 
by the Central 
Government. 
4 
Rupees two and 
thirty paise per 
quintal. 
Rupee one and 
seventy paise per 
quintal. 
Actual rate at which 
duty of excise is to 
be collected 
until a different 
rate IS specified 
by the Central 
Government. 
4 
Seventy-five paise 
per bale of lSI: 4 
kilograms, or 10 
the case of unbaled 
cotton, twenty-one 
paise per 50 kilo-
grams. 
Sixty paise per 
quintal of copra. 
Sixty paise per 
quintal, of oil. 

12 
Declaration under the Provisional Collection of Taxes Act, 1931 
It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the public interest 
that the provisions of clause 3 of this Bill and the First Schedule 
and the Second Schedule thereto shall have immediate effect under 
the Provisional Collection of Taxes Act. 1931. 16 of IS]! 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Indian Cotton Cess Act, 1923, the Indian Lac Cess Act, 1930, 
the Indian Coconut Committee Act, 1944, and the Indian Oilseeds 
Committee Act, 1946, will cease to have effect from 1st April, 1966 
on which date the Indian Central Cotton Committee, the Indian Lac 
Cess Committee J the Indian Central Coconut Committee, and the 
Indian Central Oilseeds Committee, constituted under those Acts will 
stand dissolved, and there will be no legislative sanction for the 
continuance of the levy of cess on these produce after 31st March, 
1966. 
2. Although the Committees have been abolished, the work done 
by the Committees will continue to be carried out even after 31st 
March,1966. The Research Institutes and Stations and other research 
projects of these Committees will come under the administrative 
control of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research and the work 
relating to development, marketing and other functions will be 
directly looked after by the Ministry of Food and Agriculture, Depart-
ment of Agriculture, assisted by Development Councils formed for 
this purpose by the Government. Suitable grants will be given to 
the Indian Council of Agricultural Research for the maintenance of 
the Research Institutes and for carrying on the research activities. 
Under the revised set-up, larger investments will be necessary on 
these produce in order to have an effective programme of research 
and development. It is therefore very necessary that the cesses on 
these produce are continued to be levied even after the Commodity 
Committees have been abolished. 
3. The Bill accordingly seeks to continue the levy of cess on these 
produce. 
4. Opportunity has also been taken to simplify the nature of cess 
levied on the produce and to re-assess the rate of cess to be levied, 
in conformity with the present prices of the produce. 
NEW DELHI; 
The.24th March, 1966. 
IS 
C. SUBRAMANIAM. 

PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA , 
[Copy of Letter No. 2-2/65-Reorgan(CC) dated the 25th March, 1966, 
from Shri C. Subramaniam, Minister of Food, Agriculture, Com-
munity Development and Co-operation to the Secretary, Lok 
Sabha.] 
The President having been informed of the subject matter of the 
Produce Cess Bill, 1966, recommends the introduction and consider-
ation of the Bill in the Lok Sabha under article 117(1) and 117(3) 
of the Constitution of India. 
14 

',', 
)~. 
\; . 
• 
FtNANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Bill provides for the levy and collection of cess in the nature 
of a duty of customs in respect of items in the First Schedule, and 
a duty of excise in respect of items in the Second Schedule. The 
collections made through the existing revenue collection organisation 
are to be credited to the Consolidated Fund of India. Grants-in-aid 
will be given to the Indian Council of Agricultural Research for 
conduct of research and the Department of Agriculture will finance 
specific development projects relating to these produce. The or-
ganisation to execute the development schemes in the Department 
of Agriculture would be the Regional Development Offices which 
are in the process of formation and for which an ad hoc provision 
of Rs. 10 lakhs has been made in the budget for 1966-67. 
The revenue from the proposed cesses, on the basis of the present 
level of production and export of the commodities concerned, is 
estimated to be of the order of about Rs. 134·50 lakhs per annum. 
The expenditure on the various measures enumerated in clause 5 
is estimated to be about Rs. 297 lakhs in 1966-67. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 20 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to 
make rules providing for the authority and the manner in which 
the cess should be collected, the form and information to be furnished 
in the returns to be submitted to the Collectors, assessment of cess I 
where no return has been furnished, and the conditions subject to 
which refunds may be made ip. respect of oil exported from India. 
The matters in respect of which rules may be made relate to pro-
cedure and details. Therefore, the delegation of legislative power 
is of a normal character. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the imposition of cess on certain produce for the 
improvement and development of the methods of 
cultivation and marketing of such produce and for matters 
connected therewith. 
(Shri C. Subramam·am, 
Minister of Food, Agriculture, 
Community Development and 
Co-operation.) 