Short title and
commencement.
THE ANTI-HIJACKING (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010
By
SHRIMA TI  SUPRIYA SULE, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Anti-Hijacking Act, 1982.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Y ear of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Anti-Hijacking (Amendment) Act, 2010.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central  Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  After section 4 of the Anti-Hijacking Act, 1982, the following section shall be
inserted, namely:—
"4A. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for the
time being in force, whoever, being a person committing  the offence of  hijacking of
an aircraft, commits, in connection with such offence, any act of violence resulting in
death of any passenger or member of  the crew of such aircraft, shall be punished with
death.".
Punishment for
acts of violence
resulting in
death.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 32 of  2010
Insertion of new
section 4A.65 of 1982.
5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
There has been a number of cases of hijacking and attempts to hijack aircrafts in the
country. In addition to it, everyday, some outlawed groups or organisations threaten to
commit offence of hijacking. The present law is insufficient and not proving  any deterrent to
the offenders. It is necessary to make the provisions of  the existing statute more stringent
and to award death penalty to the persons who cause death of a passenger or member of
crew of an aircraft while committing the  act of hijacking of aircraft. Such a measure will act as
a deterrent to those who plan or attempt to hijack aircrafts.
In view of increasing cases of hijacking, an amendment is proposed in the Anti-Hijacking
Act, 1982 to award death sentence to persons who during the course of hijacking cause
death to passengers or members of the crew.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI;
February 8,  2010. SUPRIYA SULE
2

LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Anti-Hijacking Act, 1982
—————
(Shrimati Supriya Sule,  M.P.)
GMGIPMRND— 1000LS(S5)—12-03-2010.