Bill No. 32 of  2007.
THE TRUST CORPORATIONS BILL, 2007
BY
SHRI MOHAN SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the creation of Trust Corporations for further development of enterprises
with social obligation and for matters connected therewith.
 BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Trust Corporations Act, 2007.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a)  "business" means and includes industries, plantations, banks, trade, transport
or any other activity carried on for profit;
(b) "Company" means any public or private limited company registered under
the Companies Act, 1956, and having a subscribed capital of more than rupees one
crore;
T
O BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Definitions.
1 of 1956.
5
10

2
(c) "Company Panchayat" means the organ of management of a Trust Corporation
constituted in the manner provided in this Act; and
(d) "Trust Corporation" means any public or private limited company which has
declared itself a Trust Corporation under this Act.
3. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything to the contrary
contained in any law for the time being in force.
4. A company may, by a resolution passed by a majority of shareholders present and
voting at its general meeting, declare itself to be a Trust Corporation.
5. Immediately after the passing of the resolution referred to in section 4, the manager
or the secretary of the company shall notify the same to the Registrar of Joint Stock Companies
in whose jurisdiction the head office of the Company is situated.
6. The Registrar, on receiving such notice, shall direct the manager or the secretary, as
the case may be, to carry on the day to day business of the Company as an interim managing
trustee.
7. The Registrar shall, as soon as possible, arrange to take stock of the assests and
liabilities of the Company and shall constitute a Company Panchayat of Trustees consisting
of not more than sixteen members, in  the following manner, to supervise, control and direct
the managing trustee:
(a) not more than five trustees to be nominated by the shareholders of the
company in its general meeting;
(b) not more than five trustees to be elected by the trade union of the employees
of the company of whom at least one shall be from the managerial staff, one from the
workers and the rest from any section of the employees;
(c) five trustees, to be nominated by the Registrar of Joint Stock Companies, as
experts, representing the Ministries/Departments of the Central Government dealing
with Planning, Industry, Commerce, Company Law, and the Department of Labour of
the State Government concerned and a nominee of Municipality or Panchayat of the
locality in which the Head Office of the Company is situated;
(d) the interim managing trustee shall be an ex-officio member of the Company
Panchayat.
8. Every worker who has been in the employment of the company for not less than six
months shall have the right to vote in the election of the trustees.
9. No representative of workers shall be included in the Company Panchayat unless he
belongs to a united trade union which makes an active demand for responsible participation
in the management of the Trust Corporation.
10. The Company Panchayat shall decide all major questions relating to the management
of the business of the Trust Corporation and, in particular, frame rules for the efficient
management of the Trust Corporation, approve its annual production, trade or business
plans and annual accounts, construction and development programme, purchases, sales,
loans, credits, wages, salaries, bonus to employees and interest, if any, to shareholders.
11. The profits of the Trust Corporation after due provision being made for depreciations
and provident funds, shall be credited to the income tax folio of the Ministry of Finance,
Government of India for being allocated to the different States according to the
recommendations of the Finance Commission.
Provisions to
have effect
nothwith-
standing
any law in
force.
Formation of
Trust
Corporation.
Interim
Management.
Company
Panchayat of
Trustees.
Right of
workers to
vote.
Qualification
for election as
Trustees.
Functions of
Company
Panchayat.
Profits to be
credited  to
Government
of India.
Information
to Register.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
12. The employees of the Trust Corporation shall not demand any rise in wages, which
is not commensurate with the earnings of an average villager or the uniform scales of wages
determined by the Ministry of Labour of the Government of India.
13. The  Company Panchayat  may sanction payment of general bonus or individual
merit bonus for surpassing the annual production targets fixed for the Trust Corporation.
14. Works Committees of employees shall be formed in every department of the Trust
Corporation and they shall be entrusted with  the job of explaining the decisions of the Trust
Panchayat  to the employees, maintenance of the discipline and execution of welfare schemes
of the Trust Corporation.
15. The manager  and the secretary of the company, which has declared itself to be
Trust Corporation, shall become the ex-officio managing trustees of the Corporation.
16. The first managing trustee shall continue  to hold  office, unless removed earlier,
for five years or till he attains the age of sixty years, whichever  is later.
17.  The managing trustee shall be liable to be removed from office by the Company
Panchayat on the ground of breach of trust or mismanagement.
18. (1) The remuneration of the first managing trustee shall be fixed by a contract
between him and the Company Panchayat.
(2) In case  of a dispute regarding the remuneration of the first managing trustee, the
Registrar of Joint Stock Companies shall fix the same after taking into consideration the
standard of life to which the first managing trustee is accustomed and the financial health of
the Corporation.
19. The first managing trustee may recommend a successor to his office but the final
appointment shall be made by the Company Panchayat.
20. The salaries of subsequent managing trustees and other supervisory or technical
staff  shall  be fixed by the Company Panchayat.
21. The Company Panchayat shall elect a Chairman from among its members, who
shall summon its  meetings from time  to time and shall preside over the same.
22. The Company Panchayat shall supervise the work of the managing trustee, examine
his reports and give him instructions in regard to the day to day administration  as also the
policies and programme of the Trust Corporation.
23. All employees of the Trust Corporation shall be subject to the authority of the
managing  trustee in performing their duties.
24. The managing trustee shall be empowered to impose disciplinary penalties  on
defaulting employees.
25. The accounts of the Trust Corporation shall be  audited by the Comptroller and
Auditor General of India and/or his nominee.
26. Statements of income and expenditure, balance-sheets and statement of assets
and liabilities  shall be placed before a joint annual general meeting of  all employees of the
Trust Corporation and the  share holders of the company.
27. The Registrar of Joint Stock Companies, on being satisfied on the basis of the
audit report that the affairs of the Trust Corporation are being conducted in a manner harmful
to the interests of the society, may, after consulting the Company Panchayat, recommend to
the Central Government to take over the assets of the Corporation and dispose them of in
any manner it deems fit.
Wages of
employees.
Payment of
Bonus.
Works
Committees.
Managing
Trustees.
Term of
Office
of Managing
Trustee.
Removal of
Managing
Trustee.
Remuneration
of Managing
Trustee.
Successor of
Managing
Trustees.
Salaries.
Chairman of
Company
Panchayat.
Company
Panchayat to
act through
Managing
Trustee.
Control over
employees.
Power of
Managing
Trustee.
Audit.
Scrutiny of
accounts.
Government
to acquire
Trust
Corporation
in certain
cases.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
28. The coordination of the industrial or commercial activities of the Trust Corporation
with the national plans for economic developments shall be the responsibility of the
representative of the Planning Commission on the Company Panchayat, whose decisions in
this regard shall be final.
29. Any industry or undertaking whose management has been taken over by the
Government  under the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, may be treated
as a Trust Corporation for the purposes of this Act.
30. New Trust Corporations may be floated by an individual entrepreneur investing
fifty percent of the subscribed capital, provided that the Central or the State Government
concerned agreed to contribute the other half of the subscribed capital; so, however, that the
total equity capital does not exceed rupees one crore.
31.  A Trust Corporation formed under section 30 shall be subject to the same rules as
are applicable to any other Trust Corporation formed under this Act.
32. The terms agreed to between the managing trustee of a corporation formed under
section 30 and the Government in respect of remuneration shall be valid during the active
service of the original managing trustee.
33. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions, and if before the expiry of
the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following, both Houses agree in
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made,
the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case
may be; so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to
the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Coordination
with national
plans.
Acquired
undertakings.
New Trust
Corporations.
Application of
rules.
Managing
Trustee of
new Trust
Corporation.
Power to
make rules.
65 of 1951.
5
10
15
20
25

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 Production of 'wealth' or 'capital' is possible only in 'Society' and not in isolation.
Hence an obligation not only to sustain that society but also to promote its welfare and to
improve quantitatively the quality of life of all individuals constituting the whole society is
cast on those who happen to own or possess the wealth created therein. This social obligation
is referred to as the principle of 'trusteeship'.
It has been the experience of humanity through the ages that ownership of 'capital'
whether in private or public, if bereft of social obligation, has always tended to concentrate
power in few hands and reserved the privileges of creativity and production for those
already rich and powerful -multinationals, tycoons, bureaucrats, commissars and the likes
and leaves behind the major segment of the society undeveloped or underdeveloped leading
to class, caste or group conflicts and disarray in social order.
Ours is a Socialist Republic. In the context of the present day controversy about
liberalisation, privatisation and globalisation it is appropriate that State regulated trustee-
ship system  is introduced in the Country for rapid development of economic and social life
of its people.
The present Bill seeks to provide an opportunity to the owners of large companies to
convert them into Trust Corporations and proposes necessary provisions for the democratic
management of such trust corporations. The provisions of the Bill are intended to usher
peacefully an era of a socialist society, which will be built not solely on monetary incentives
but on ideas of service to society.
The provisions of the Bill are expected to promote increased productivity by giving
the workers a sense of full and intelligent participation in the process of production, purchases,
sales and investment of the trust corporations.
The Bill is not a compulsory measure but a premissive one enabling the present owners
of large companies to transform their existing titles based on absolute rights into trust
ownership.
N
EW DELHI; MOHAN SINGH
December 13, 2006
PRESIDENT'S  RECOMMENDATION  UNDER  ARTICLES  117(1), 274 (1)
 AND  117(3)  OF  THE  CONSTITUTION
————
[Copy of D.O. No. 4/44/2006/CL.V, dated 2 March, 2007 from Shri Prem Chand Gupta,
Minister of Company Affairs to the Secretary-General, Lok Sabha].
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Trust Corporations
Bill, 2007 by Shri Mohan Singh,  Member of Parliament, recommends its introduction under
articles 117(1) and 274(1) and consideration under article 117(3) of the Constitution in
Lok Sabha.
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 30 of the Bill provides that the Central Government may invest fifty per cent of
the authorized capital of a new Trust Corporation that may be set up by any entrepreneurs.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty
lakh from the Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
6

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 33 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government to make rules for
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The delegation of legislation power is of a normal
character.
7

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the creation of Trust Corporations for further development of enterprises
with social obligation and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Mohan Singh, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—25LS(S-5)—07-03-2007.

TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
BILL NO. 32 OF 2007
THE TRUST CORPORATIONS BILL, 2007
By
SHRI MOHAN SINGH, M.P .
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
3. Provisions to have effect notwithstanding any law in force.
4. Formation of a Trust Corporation.
5. Information to Registrar.
6. Interim management.
7. Company Panchayat of Trustees.
8. Right of workers to vote.
9. Qualification for election as Trustees.
10. Functions of Company Panchayat.
11. Profits to be credited to Government of India.
12. Wages of employees.
13. Payment of Bonus.
14. Works Committees.
15. Managing Trustees.
16. Term of Office of Managing Trustee.
17. Removal of Managing Trustee.
18. Remuneration of Managing Trustee.
19. Successor of Managing Trustees.
20. Salaries.
21. Chairman of Company Panchayat.
22. Company Panchayat to act through the Managing Trustee.
23. Control over employees.
24. Power of Managing Trustee.
25. Audit.
26. Scrutiny of accounts.
27. Government to acquire Trust Corporation in certain cases.
28. Coordination with national plans.
29. Acquired undertakings.
30. New Trust Corporations.
31. Application of rules.
32. Managing Trustee of a new Trust Corporation.
33. Power to make rules.
9