1
THE OCEAN THERMAL ENERGY UTILIZATION BILL, 2022
By
SHRI SHRIRANG 
APPA BARNE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for promotion of use of ocean thermal energy to produce clean environment
friendly renewable energy at all times and substitute traditional electricity
generation methods of fossil fuel burning and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India
as follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the  Ocean Thermal Ener gy Utilization
Act, 2022.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once .
Bill No.  32  of  2022
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5

2
2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
 (a) “appropriate Government” means in case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “Authority” means the National Ocean Thermal Energy Utilization Authority
of India constituted under section 3;
(c) “Ocean Thermal Energy Utilisation (OTEU)” is a process used for
production of electricity by using the temperature difference between deep ocean
water and warm tropical surface water and utilization thereof of such electricity;
and
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under  this Act.
3. ( 1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by
notification in the Of ficial Gazette, establish an Authority to be called the
National Ocean Thermal Energy Utilisation Authority of India for  carrying
out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The head of fice of the Authority shall be at New Delhi and the
Authority may establish offices at other places in the country as it may
deem necessar y for  carr ying out the purposes of this Act.
(3) The Authority shall consist of the following members who shall be
appointed by the Central Government, namely:—
(a) a Chairperson, who shall be an expert scientist having adequate
knowledge and professional experience in the field of OTEU
technology;
(b) one Deputy Chairperson with such qualifications as may be
prescribed;
(c) five members of Parliament of whom three shall be from the House
of the People and two from the Council of the States to be nominated
by the respective Presiding Officers of the House concerned;
(d) five members to represent the Union Ministries of Environment,
Forests and Climate Change, Science and Technology, New and
Renewable Energy, Planning and Financial, respectively;
(e) four members to represent the non-Governmental
Organisations working for the protection of environment and
promotion of ocean thermal energy in the country; and
(f) four members to be nominated by the Governments of the
States to be r otated amongst the S tates in alphabetical order .
(4) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and
conditions of service of office of the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and
members of the Authority and the pr ocedur e to be followed in the
discharge of the functions of the Authority shall be such, as may be
prescribed.
Establishment
of National
Ocean Thermal
Energy
Authority of
India.
5
10
1 5
20
25
30
35
Definitions.
40

(5) The Authority shall have a secr etariat with such of ficers and
members of staff and with such terms and conditions of services as may be
prescribed, from time to time.
4. (1) Subject to any guidelines issued by the Central Government under the
provisions of this Act, the Authority shall perform and undertake such special steps
in close coordination with concerned Ministries, Departments and Public Sector
Enterprise of the Central and State Governments for the rapid and accelerated
promotion and development of ocean thermal energy throughout the country as it
may deem necessary and expedient to do so for the promotion of ocean thermal
energy conversion.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the
Authority shall,—
(a) formulate ocean thermal energy conversion  and utilisation policy,
its goals and execution plan;
(b) develop indicative standards of ocean thermal energy conversion
and utilization;
(c) support and encourage research and development through
Government and private sector participation involving all major
Research laboratories;
(d) facilitate infrastructure development of ocean thermal energy
conversion in coastal areas;
(e) suggest educational and other policy initiatives for ocean thermal
energy conversion and utilization;
(f) facilitate quick technology transfer and adoption of ocean thermal
energy conversion and utilization; and
(g) such other steps as the appropriate Government may deem
necessary.
5. ( 1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the
time being in force, the appropriate Government shall in consultation with
the Authority make it compulsor y for  ever y coastal city or  villages
including Government establishments to,—
(a) use the OTEU technology to electrify in all coastal
buildings, homes and villages;
(b) make it mandatory for electricity utilities purchase
electricity from ocean thermal energy sources;
(c) reserve adequate resources for setting up of ocean thermal
energy conversion projects; and
(d) such other steps as the appropriate Government may deem
necessar y.
(2) The appropriate Government shall, as soon as may be, identify
the exploitable sources of ocean thermal energy in their respective
5
10
1 5
20
25
30
35
40
Functions
of the
Authority .
Miscellaneous
Provisions.
3

territorial jurisdictions and send pr oject r eport, ther eon to the Authority
which shall depute a team of experts to verify and assess the possibility of
exploiting ocean thermal energy sources.
(3) The Authority shall on the basis of the r eport submitted by the
team of experts work out the estimated expenditure on the project and
recommend the Central Government for implementation of the projects.
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Authority in each financial year
such sums as may be considered necessary and adequate for the
performance of the functions of the Authority under this Act.
7. The Authority shall prepare once in every calendar year in such form and
at such time as may be prescribed in an Annual Report giving a true and full
account of its activities during the previous year and copies thereof shall be
forwarded to the President of India who shall cause the same to be laid before both
the Houses of Parliament.
8. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order published in the Of ficial Gazette, make such
provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be
necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made the expiry of the period of two
years from the date of the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall as soon as may be after it is
made, be laid before both the Houses of Parliament.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions and if, before the expiry of the sessions immediately following the session
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any
modification in the rule of both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the
rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as
the case may be so, however , that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5
10
15
20
25
30
Central
Government to
provide funds .
Annual
Report.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power to
make rules.
4

5
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Our fossil fuel reserves are depleting with every passing day. Our country
and government institutions are striving to find and use sustainable sources of renewal
energy. Our country has promoted use of solar ener gy and wind energy. But both
these sources have their own limitation. Solar energy cannot be converted into
lights and electricity from wind energy can only be created in windy season. In
other seasons, its creation is expensive.
In India’s perspective, there is tremendous scope for harnessing the energy
from the ocean as India has a long coastline of about 7500 km and have 9 coastal
States Gujarat, Maharashtra, Kerala, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Goa,
Odisha and West Bengal, two Union Territories Daman and Diu and Puducherry
and two island territories i.e. Andaman and Nicobar Islands and Lakshadweep
islands. Many of these States are facing clean drinking water and electricity crisis.
Ocean Thermal Energy Utilization (OTEU) is more than just a technology
use that produces clean energy but also produce clean drinking water as by product.
With OTEU, the goal is to create a sustainable future using the world’s most abundant
resource – our oceans.
Our oceans are abundant source of salty water and ener gy. By utilising
ocean’s thermal resource, this technology aims to produce clean energy 24 hours a
day, 7 days a week. This provides a great advantage over intermittent (albeit
important) renewable technologies such as solar and wind.
OTEU also can shrug off the storage problems that are often associated
with clean energy. Due to its ability to produce a range of secondary services, the
surplus energy generated by an OTEU plant can be diverted to power desalination
plants (removing salt and other minerals to produce drinking water). This flexibility
ensures that OTEU-produced ener gy never goes to waste. Another major
competitive benefit of OTEU is its range of secondary services. Besides producing
electricity and fresh drinking water, OTEU can support agriculture and aquaculture
industries, reducing local demand on water supplies. It can also slash costs of air
conditioning in tropical regions. By using the temperature differential between warm
ocean surface water and cold deep water as a renewable energy source, OTEU
can generate two of humanity’ s most fundamental needs—clean drinking water
and renewable base load (24/7) energy. Each OTEU plant is capable of producing
voluminous amounts of drinkable water (a 10-MW OTEU plant can produce as
much as 75 million litres of fresh drinking water a day). Thus, the technology holds
great potential for meeting global domestic and agricultural fresh water demands
both now and in the future. More than 70% of the earth’ s surface is covered by
water, and over 80% of the sun’ s ener gy is stored within surface waters— the
equivalent of 4,000 times the energy used in the world per day. In just one 24-hour
period, tropical ocean water absorb solar radiation equal to the energy produced by
250 billion barrels of oil.

OTEU’s ability to help reduce our dependence on fossil fuels –one of the
largest human induced contributors to climate change – is enormous. Just one
10-MW OTEU plant has been estimated to provide reliable clean energy for
approximately 10,000 people and to replace the burning of 50,000 barrels of oil
and release of 80,000 tonnes of carbon dioxide (CO2) per year into the atmosphere.
OTEU plants therefore may play a huge role in helping global communities fight
pollution-related climate change.
OTEU can also use deep water as a cooling agent for environmentally
friendly air conditioning, a system known as Seawater Air Conditioning (SWAC).
To replace traditional electric chillers and chemicals for cooling buildings, OTEU
plants use cold water from deep oceans and lakes. Their installation into airports,
medical centres and holiday resorts can reduce electricity usage by up to 90%
compared to conventional systems, offering enormous reductions in carbon emissions.
The combination addresses existing global factors that could precipitate
a humanitarian crisis: the growing global need for potable water, the lack of available
freshwater sources, the increased concentration of populations in coastal regions,
and rising energy prices. Keeping all the benefits in view, China has recently installed
world’s largest floating OTEU plant in its southern Chinese high seas. Many countries
are already in ways to install OTEU plants.
Hence this Bill.
NEW DELHI; SHRIRANG  APPA  BARNE
 January  17, 2022.
6

7
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the National Ocean
Thermal Energy Utilisation Authority of India. Clause 5 makes it compulsory for
every Central Government establishment to take measures for using ocean thermal
energy by carrying out appropriate changes. Clause 6 of the Bill makes it obligatory
for the Central Government to provide necessary funds for the purpose of the Act.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted and brought into operation will involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees One
thousand crore  may be involved as recurring expenditure per annum.
Non recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees three hundred crore may
also involve from the Consolidated Fund of India.

8
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail
only, the delegation of legislative power is of normal character.

LOK  SABHA
A
BILL
to provide for promotion of use of ocean thermal energy to produce clean environment
friendly renewable energy at all times and substitute traditional electricity
generation methods of fossil fuel burning and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
(Shri Shrirang A ppa Barne, M.P .)