1
THE PROMOTION OF TWO CHILD NORM BILL, 2015
By
DR. RAMESH POKHRIYAL ‘NISHANK’, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for promotion of two child norm to control population in the country and
for matters connected therewith.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Promotion of  Two Child Norm Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of  India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,  by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 32  of  2015
Short title,
extent,
commencement,
duration and
savings.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(4) It shall remain in force for a period of fifteen years from the date of its commencement,
but its expiry under the operation of this sub-section shall not affect,—
(a) the previous operation of, or anything duly done including any incentive
given under this Act, or
(b) any penalty or punishment incurred under this Act,
and any investigation, proceeding or remedy in respect of any offence committed under this
Act before its expiry may be instituted, continued or enforced after expiry of this Act and
penalty or punishment may be imposed as if the Act had not expired.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, “appropriate Government” means
in the case of a State, the Government of that State and in other cases, the Central Government.
3. (1) It shall be the duty of the Central Government to promote, encourage and
motivate married couples to opt for small family norm with a view to control the rising
population in the country.
(2) For the purpose of sub-section (1), the appropriate Government shall launch such
schemes, as it may deem appropriate, to encourage, sensitise and motivate persons,—
(a) who have two or more than two living children, not to procreate any more
living child; and
(b) who have less than two living children not to procreate more than two living
children.
4. A married couple who has only one living child, and if either of them voluntarily
undergoes sterilisation, shall be given the following incentives by the appropriate
Government,—
(a) free education including higher education to such child;
(b) suitable employment to such child after he completes his education; and
(c) such other benefits as may be prescribed by rules made under this Act.
5. (1) Any person who is appointed to serve or is serving in connection with the affairs
of the Union or in any undertaking or organization under the control of the Government
and,—
(a) who has two or more than two living children shall give an undertaking that
he shall not procreate any more living child after a period of one year from the
commencement of this Act; and
(b) who has only one child or who has not procreated any child or who is
unmarried on the date of commencement of this Act, shall give an undertaking that he
shall not procreate more than two living children.
(2) Any person violating the provisions of sub-section ( 1) shall be subject to such
disciplinary action, including termination of service, as may be determined by the appropriate
Government.
6. After section 8A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, the following section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“8B. (1) A person, having two or more than two living children, shall be disqualified
if he procreates any more living child after a period of one year from the commencement
of this Act.
Definition.
Central
Government
to encourage
small family
norm.
Incentives.
Undertaking
by
Government
employees.
Insertion of
new section
8B in Act
No. 43 of
1951.
43 of 1951.
Disqualification
on ground of
not following
small family
norm.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
3
(2) A person having only one child or who has not procreated any child or who
is unmarried shall be disqualified if he procreates more than two living children:
Provided that the person shall not be disqualified if he, within a period of one
year from the date of commencement of this Act, procreates living child or children and
thereby the number of living children of that person increases to more than two.’’
7. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything to the contrary
contained in any other law for the time being in force.
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Rapid increase in population has given rise to a number of socio-economic problems
like poverty, shortage of food, inadequate housing, unemployment and environmental
degradation, etc. India is the second most populous country after China. China has been
able to control the rapid growth in its population. But we have not been successful in it. Our
population has crossed the figure of one hundred and twenty-one crore. If the present trend
continues, it will not be possible for us to address our socio-economic problems which have
arisen due to increase in population.
It is, therefore, imperative that certain effective steps are taken to check this menace
because our resources are limited. Despite the existence of various birth control measures
and various family planning programmes in force for many years to motivate the people to
accept these birth control methods, the problem of population explosion still remains.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide for two child norm in a family and promote small
family norms in future generation. There is also a provision that this Act shall remain in force
for a period of fifteen years from the date of its commencement. The Bill also makes an
amendment in the Representation of the People Act, 1951 with a view to provide that a
person shall be disqualified for being chosen as or being a member of either House of
Parliament or of the Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council of a State if such person,
after one year from the commencement of this Act, procreates more than two living children.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAMESH POKHRIYAL ‘NISHANK’
December 23, 2014.
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for certain incentives like free education, employment, etc.
to the children of such couples who adopt small family norm. The Bill, therefore, if enacted,
would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of
rupees one hundred crore will be involved as a recurring expenditure per annum from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Bill. As the rules to be made relate to matters of detail only, the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for promotion of two child norm to control population in the country and for
matters connected therewith.
————
(Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal ‘Nishank’, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4366LS(S3)—23-02-2015.