1
THE  CITIZENSHIP (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020
By
SHRI N. K. PREMACHANDRAN, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Citizenship Act, 1955.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-first Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2020.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Citizenship Act, 1955, (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in
section 2, in sub-section ( 1), in clause ( b), for the existing proviso, the following proviso
shall be substituted, namely:—
"Provided that persons, who have faced persecution on various grounds in
their countries and entered into India on or before the 31st day of December, 2014,
shall not be treated as illegal migrant for the purposes of this Act.".
Bill No.  32  of  2020
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of section 2.
57 of 1955.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
3. In the Third Schedule to principal Act, in clause ( d), for the existing proviso, the
following proviso shall be substituted, namely:—
"Provided that for the person, who has faced persecution on various grounds in
his Country and entered into India, the aggregate period of residence or service of
Government in India as required under this clause shall be read as "not less than five
years" in place of "not less than eleven years".".
Amendment
of the Third
Schedule.
5

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Citizenship Act, 1955 (57 of 1955) was enacted to provide for the acquisition and
determination of Indian Citizenship. The trans-border migration of population has been
happening continuously to the territories of India. Such population faced persecution on
various grounds in their countries and entered into India. However, there are certain categories
of population who are yet not included in the purview of Act.
Even though the population is likely to stay in India permanently, the time period
prescribed in the Third Schedule to the Act denies them opportunities. Therefore the
amendment in third schedule is required.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; N. K. PREMACHANDRAN
January  16, 2020.

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CITIZENSHIP ACT, 1955
(57 OF 1955)
* * * *
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a)*  *  *
(b) "illegal migrant" means a foreigner who has entered into India—
(i) without a valid passport or other travel documents and such other
document or authority as may be prescribed by or under any law in that behalf;
or
(ii) with a valid passport or other travel documents and such other
document or authority as may be prescribed by or under any law in that behalf
but remains therein beyond the permitted period of time;
"Provided that any person belonging to Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain, Parsi or Christian
community from Afghanistan, Bangladesh or Pakistan, who entered into India on or before
the 31st Day of December, 2014 and who has been exempted by the Central Government by
or under clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 3 of the Passport (Entry into India)  Act, 1920
or from the application of the provisions of the Foreigners Act, 1946 or any rule or order made
thereunder, shall not be treated as illegal migrant for the purposes of this Act.".
* * * *
THE THIRD SCHEDULE
[See section 6(1)]
Q
UALIFICATIONS FOR NA TURALISATION
The qualifications for naturalisation of a person .......are—
(a)*  *  *
(b)*  *  *
(c)*  *  *
(d) that during the fourteen years immediately preceding the said period of
twelve months, he has either resided in India or been in the service of a Government in
India, or partly the one and partly the other, for periods amounting in the aggregate to
not less than eleven years;
"Provided that for the person belonging to Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain, Parsi or
Christian Community in Afghanistan, Bangladesh or Pakistan, the aggregate period or
residence or service of Government in India as required under this clause shall be read
as "not less than five years" in place of "not less than eleven years.".
* * * *
Interpretation.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Citizenship Act, 1955.
————
(Shri N.K. Premachandran, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—4890LS—03.02.2020.