1
Bill No.  32  of  2011
THE NATIONALISATION OF INTER-STATE RIVERS BILL, 2011
By
SHRI ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for nationalisation of inter-State rivers for the purpose of equitable
distribution of river waters among the States and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Nationalisation of Inter-State Rivers Act, 2011.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means the State Government in case of a State
and the Central Government in all other cases;
(b) “inter-State river” means any river which has its source in one State and
passes through two or more States including the States in which the river has its origin
before it submerges into the sea and also includes, a lake, tank, rivulet, which has its
source from a river which is an inter-State river; and
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Definitions.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
no State shall have exclusive right over an inter-State river or to its use.
4. On and from the date of commencement of this Act, the Central Government shall
have exclusive right and control over all inter-State rivers.
5. (1) Every State Government/Union territory Administration  shall forward its
requirements of water for all purposes, including irrigation and drinking water to the
Central Government and also its requirements for electricity.
(2) While forwarding its requirements, every  State Government/Union territory
Administration  shall indicate the rivers, which are not inter-State rivers, and their status
and any dam constructed within the State on any river, including an inter-State river, and
its capacity for storage of water and electricity generated from those rivers.
 (3) Every appropriate Government shall also indicate the average rainfall in the
State during the last three years in different seasons and the amount of rainfall during the
current year.
6. (1) It shall be the duty of the Central Government to distribute river water of every
inter-State river to the States within which such rivers pass through.
 (2) While distributing river waters, the Central Government shall take into consideration
the following factors:—
 (a) the population and area of each interested State;
 (b) the land available for farming in each State;
 (c) the requirements for drinking water and for agricultural and other purposes
in each State;
 (d) the length of inter-State river passing through each State; and
 (e) the requirements and availability of electricity in each State.
7. (1) On and from the date of commencement of this Act, no appropriate Government shall
construct any hydro-electrical plant or project on any inter-State river or based on it.
 (2) The Central Government shall have exclusive right and control to construct
any power plant meant for power generation on any inter-State river and shall distribute
electricity in such ratio, among the States through which the inter-State rivers pass,
as may be prescribed.
 (3) Every  State  Government shall pay to the Central Government in such ratio as
may be prescribed for the electricity it receives from any hydro-electrical plant or project
constructed on an inter-State river.
 8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
No State to
have exclusive
right over an
inter-State
river.
Only Central
Government
to have right
and control
over inter-
State rivers.
State
Governments
to forward
requirements
for water/
electricity.
Central
Government
to distribute
inter-State
river water.
Central
Government to
construct
hydro-
electrical
plants on inter-
State rivers.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is a union of States. There are many rivers, big or small flowing through many
States before they submerge into the nearest sea. Today half of our population do not have
access to potable water. Water is also not available for irrigation and other purposes. As a
result, production of agricultural products has been considerably reduced.
It has been observed that many States through which a river flows, fight for considerable
share of river water  and try to deprive the just and due demand of other States. Consequently,
many cases are pending in tribunals for settlement. It is a common knowledge that tribunals
take a long time before delivering judgement. In the meantime the affected States fight each
other for their share of water from the inter-State rivers and as a result, there is always
strained relation among the States.
Therefore, it is proposed that only the Central Government shall have exclusive right
and control over all inter-State rivers and it shall distribute river water according to
pre-determined formula for allocation of water. It is proposed that the Central Government
shall also have exclusive right over electricity projects constructed on inter-State rivers. This
measure will not only enable distribution of river water among the different States without
affecting the interests of the concerned States but also  enable proper utilisation of available
resources.
N
EW DELHI; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
July 18, 2011.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 7 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall construct hydro electrical
plants or projects on inter-State rivers. Though there is a provision that every State
Government shall pay to the Central Government in such ratio as may be prescribed for the
electricity it receives, yet some expenditure will be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is likely that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore will
be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
 Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. Since the matters will relate to detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for nationalisation of inter-State rivers for the purpose of equitable distribution
of river water among the States and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
—————
(Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury, M.P. )
GMGIPMRND—587LS(S3)—28-07-2011.