As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

9 0५

ill No. 32 of 2004

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2004
By
‘Suri Basupes Acuaria, M.P.
A
BILL
Further to amend the Constitution of India
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (J) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2004,

(2) After article 16 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,
namely:—

"(16A.) Nothing in this Constitution shall Prevent the State from making any provision
the matter of employment in favour of persons belonging to Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes in private enterprises.

Explanation:— In this article,- (i) "private enterprise” means any private enterprise or
organization whose annual turnover is not less than Tupees ten crore per annum.

(ii) “provision” includes any incentive which may be given to a private enterprise by

‘the Government to encourage them to employ persons belonging to Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes.”,

Short title,

Insertion of new
article 16A.
Employment
opportunities

10 persons
belonging to
Scheduled
Castes and
Scheduled
‘Tribes in
Private sector,


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Over a period of time, private enterprises have not actively been pursuing their social
responsibilities. These private enterprises owe some responsi ity towards society and are
supposed to carry out the same actively in the interest of general public and specially
towards weaker sections of our Society. The job opportunities in the Private sector have
increased manifold in the wake of liberalization of economy. In order to fulfil its social
responsibility, the private sector should come forward to extend job Opportunities to the
Persons belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes,

{tis necessary to make an amendment inthe Constitution to enable the State to encourage
Private enterprises for providing employment to the persons belonging to Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes in their establishments,

The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.

New Dent; BASUDEB ACHARIA
June 10, 2004.


LOK SABHA

A
* BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Basudeb Acharia, M.P.)

MGIPMRND—860LS—05.07 2004.