THE DESTITUTE WOMEN AND WIDOWS WELFARE  BILL, 2009
BY
SHRI J.P. AGARWAL, M.P.
A
BILL
 to provide for the welfare of the destitute women and widows and for matters connected
therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Y ear of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Destitute Women and Widows Welfare Act, 2009.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “authority” means the Destitute Women and Widows Welfare Authority
established under section 3;
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 32 of  2009
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
5

2
(b) “destitute woman and widow” means any female citizen of India who is a
widow or divorcee and has no independent source of income or livelihood to support
herself, or is not being looked after by any family member; and
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall establish an authority, to be known as the
Destitute Women and Widows Welfare Authority in every district of the country.
(2) The composition of the authority and conditions of service of the members of
the Authority shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. The Authority shall perform the following functions:—
(i) maintaining a register of destitute women and widows residing in that district;
and
(ii) formulating plans and schemes for the welfare of the destitute women and
widows.
5. The Central Government shall provide to the destitute women or widows
registered under section 4, the following facilities, namely:—
(a) subsistence allowance of rupees two thousand per month and such other
financial assistance as may be prescribed;
(b) free health care facilities;
(c) free housing facility, wherever necessary;
(d) free education including technical education to the dependent children
of the destitute women and widows;
(e) gainful employment;
(f) vocational training;
(g) free travelling facilities by public transport and also concessions in
private owned transport;
(h) interest-free loans for the purpose of housing and self-employment;
and
(i) such other facilities as may be necessary for the all-round development
and welfare of destitute women and widows.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
that rule.
Power to make
rules.
Establishment
of the Destitute
Women and
Widows
Welfare
Authority.
Functions of
the Authority.
Facilities to be
provided to
destitute
women and
widows.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
A large number of destitute women and widows in our country are leading a very
miserable life. They do not have any means for their own subsistence and for their dependent
children. They work as maids and perform various domestic chores such as cleaning utensils,
washing clothes, dusting, etc. for very small wages. They can do such works only when they
are physically fit. But most widows are not so fortunate. Being old, physically weak or
suffering from serious and chronic diseases, they are incapable of doing physical labour. In
many cases, they are also mentally challenged. Such helpless widows have no other option
but to resort to begging in streets for their livelihood. And many young widows are even
forced into prostitution and they are compelled to choose it as a profession to avoid starvation.
A large number of widows are forced to leave their families after the death of their husbands
and generally they move to other places leaving their family, in search of mental peace. In
many cases, such widows become victims of sexual exploitation at the hands of unscrupulous
persons. They are deprived of their rights by their in-laws and parents, and they have to
manage their affairs themselves. Their condition gets worse when they are driven out of
their home alongwith their children. They have to take care of their children alongwith
themselves. The condition of the widows in rural areas is far worse. They are not only
ill-treated but are also considered ill-ominous. They are forbidden from taking part in family
functions. Being illiterate they are the worst victims of physical, mental and social exploitation.
Our country is a welfare state and, therefore, it becomes the duty of the State to
rehabilitate such hapless widows and to implement welfare schemes for this purpose. But
even after more than sixty years of our independence, a large number of destitute women
and widows still remain deprived of Government assistance. Most of them are without
employment; suffer from malnutrition and various other ailments. It should be the primary
responsibility of the Government to ensure that these widows live and grow in a healthy
environment and are protected from all kinds of exploitation. It is, therefore, necessary to
enact a legislation for the welfare and protection of the destitute women and widows.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; J. P.  AGARW AL
June 17, 2009.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of Destitute Women and Widows
Welfare Authority by the Central Government in every district of the country. Clause 4
provides that the Destitute Women and Widows Welfare Authority shall formulate plans and
prepare schemes for the welfare of the Destitute Women and Widows and that they will also
register the names of all Destitute Women and Widows in their respective jurisdiction. Clause
5 provides that the Central Government shall provide to all the Destitute Women and the
Widows financial assistance of rupees two thousand every month, free medical care and
such other facilities as are necessary for their proper development and welfare. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
estimated that it will incur a recurring expenditure of rupees fifty crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees ten crore is also likely to be involved.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill. Since the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOKLOK SABHA   SA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare of the destitute women and widows and for matters
connected therewith.
————
(Shri J.P. Agarwal, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2363LS(S5)—01.076.2009.