THE CINEMATOGRAPH (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013
By
SHRI J.P. AGARWAL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Cinematograph Act, 1952.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 2013.
2. In section 2 of the Cinematograph Act, 1952 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act), for clause (dd), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
"(dd) 'film' means a cinematograph film but does not include a programme telecast
on television;".
Short title.
Bill No. 32 of 2013
Amendment of
section 2.
37 of 1952.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
3. In section 5B of the principal Act, sub-section ( 2) shall be re-numbered as sub-
section (3) and before sub-section (3) as so re-numbered, the following sub-section shall be
inserted, namely:—
"(2) A film shall not be certified for public exhibition if it depicts scenes involving—
(i) sex, romance or illicit relationship;
(ii) smoking or drinking;
(iii) violence including incitement of violence;
(iv) instigation of communal sentiments;
(v) casteist expressions; or
(vi) damage to the unity and integrity of the country.".
4. After Part II of the principal Act, the following Part shall be inserted, namely:—
"PART IIA
CERTIFICATION OF PROGRAMMES TELECAST ON TELEVISION
9A. (1) For the purpose of sanctioning programmes telecast on television for public
exhibition, the Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish
a Board of Television Programmes Certification with head office at New Delhi.
(2) The Board of Television Programmes Certification shall consist of a Chairperson
and six other members, who shall be appointed by the Central Government.
(3) The Chairperson of the Board of Television Programmes Certification shall
receive such salary and allowances as may be determined by the Central Government, and
other members shall receive such allowances or fees for attending the meetings of the
Board of Television Programmes Certification as may be prescribed.
(4) The other terms and conditions of service of the members of the Board of Television
Programmes Certification shall be such as may be prescribed.
9B. (1) The Board of Television Programmes Certification shall have regional offices
in every State and Union territory.
(2) Every Regional office of the Board of Television Programmes Certification shall
have a Director and four other members, who shall be appointed by the Central Government
in consultation with the Board of Television Programmes Certification.
(3) The terms and conditions of service of Directors and other members in regional
offices of the Board of Television Programmes Certification shall be such as may be prescribed.
9C. All provisions relating to certification of films in this Act shall apply mutatis
mutandis to programmes telecast on television.
9D. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this Part.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.".
Amendment of
section 5B.
Insertion of
new Part IIA.
Establishment
of Board of
Television
Programmes
Certification.
Regional
offices of
Board of
Television
Programmes
Certification.
Provision of
the Act to
apply mutatis
mutandis to
television
programmes.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
There has been a sharp increase in the number of programmes being telecast on
television. The number of television channels both the Government and private channels
has also increased considerably. However, there is virtually no scrutiny by any Government
agency with regard to the nature, content and theme of the programme. There are many
programmes being telecast on the television which are of inferior quality and do not conform
to the prescribed standards. Even a cursory scrutiny is not done before a programme is
allowed to be telecast. This adversely impacts the mind and psyche of our youth and growing
children. In order to provide appropriate motivation to sponsors of various television
programmes, it is felt that there should be a Board to scrutinize television programmes
effectively and issue guidelines for producing healthy and meaningful programmes providing
entertainment and knowledge in conformity with our culture and tradition. Accordingly, it is
proposed that a separate Board may be established to scrutinize the programmes to be
telecast on television.
Besides, viewing of scenes, which promote sex, romance, violence, consuption of
alcohol or smoking, with children is not only a matter of shame but also impacts adversely
the highly-sensitive minds of children and youth. They are prompted to imitate the things in
real life what is seen by them in films and programmes on television. This is one of the major
reasons for increasing incidents of violence, kidnapping, rape etc. across the country during
the last few years. Besides, the films and serials which try to provoke communal and religious
sentiments have the potential of causing rift among various classes of citizens of our country
and they strike at the very root of national unity.
It is, therefore, necessary that films and programmes telecast on television are permitted
for public viewing only after they have been scrutinized properly and fulfil the criteria laid
down in the law for this purpose.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; J.P . AGARW AL
February 8, 2013

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill seeks, inter alia, to establish a separate Board for sanctioning
television programmes. There is also provision for setting up of regional offices in every
State and Union territory. The proposal to establish a Board and regional offices is likely to
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. The Bill, therefore, if enacted
would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an
annual recurring expenditure of about rupees thirty crore will be involved from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred and ten crore is also likely
to be involved.

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to insert, inter alia, a new section 9D in the principal Act,
which empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the purposes of the
Bill. Since the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative power is
of a normal character.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CINEMATOGRAPH ACT, 1952
(ACT NO. 37 OF 1952)
 * * * * *
2. * * * * *
(a) * * * * *
(b) * * * * *
(c) * * * * *
(d) * * * * *
(dd) "film" means a cinematograph film.
 * * * * *
5-B. (1) A film shall not be certified for public exhibition if, in the opinion of the authority
competent to grant the certificate, the film or any part of it is against the interests of the
sovereignty and integrity of India the security of the State, friendly relations with foreign
States, public order, decency or morality, or involves defamation or contempt of court or is
likely to incite the commission of any offence.
(2) Subject to the provisions contained in sub-section (1), the Central Government may
issue such directions as it may think fit setting out the principles which shall guide the
authority competent to grant certificates under this Act in sanctioning films for public
exhibition.
* * * * *
Definitions.
Principles for
guidance in
certifying
films.
6

LOK  SABHA
——————
A
BILL
further to amend the Cinematograph Act, 1952.
————
(Shri J.P . Agarwal, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—5090LS(S-4)—27-02-2013.