1
THE UNEMPLOYED YOUTH (ALLOWANCE AND EMPLOYMENT
OPPORTUNITIES) BILL, 2019
By
SHRI UNMESH BHAIYYASAHEB PATIL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for creation of gainful employment opportunities and for payment of
unemployment allowance to unemployed youth and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Unemployed Youth (Allowance and Employment
Opportunities) Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. 330 of  2019
5
AS  INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “beneficiary database” means a database maintained by the appropriate
Government of all persons eligible to receive allowance under the Act;
(c) “Fund” means the National Employment Fund constituted under section 6;
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(e) “youth” means any citizen who has attained the age of eighteen years but
has not attained the age of forty-five years.
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
every youth shall have the right to gainful employment to be provided by the appropriate
Government in the Government establishments or in private sector, subject to the age,
educational qualifications and ability of the youth as may be prescribed.
4. The appropriate Government shall maintain a beneficiary database of unemployed
youth in such manner as may be prescribed.
5. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
every unemployed youth whose details have been made in the beneficiary database shall be
entitled to receive unemployment allowance, at such rate, as may be prescribed:
Provided that a youth who rejects the employment offered to him shall not be entitled
to unemployment allowance:
Provided further that where a youth earns income from any source which is not less
than the amount of unemployment allowance as prescribed, he shall not be entitled to such
allowance.
6. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Fund to be known as the National Employment Fund for payment of allowance under this
Act.
(2) The Fund shall be credited—
(a) grants by the Central Government and the State Governments; and
(b) voluntary donations from individuals, companies and other organisations
including international organisations.
7. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
8. (1) The Central Government may, be notification in the Gazette of India, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Definitions.
Right to
gainful
employment.
Appropriate
Government
to maintain
database of
unemployed
youth.
Unemployment
allowance to
unemployed
youth.
Constitution
of National
Employment
Fund.
Act not in
derogation
of any other
law.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Despite India’s prowess in maintaining its position as one of the fastest growing
economies in the world, the growth story is accompanied by the endemic problem of
unemployment. The number of jobs that have been added by the economy, even as it has
grown bigger than the previous years, has been unsatisfactory and inadequate. There is a
significant gap between Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth and that of employment
growth, leading to the phenomenon of ‘jobless growth’. This is compounded by the figures
of educated yet unemployed youth. The Annual Status of Education Report states that
ninety-seven per cent. of children in the age group of 6-14 years are now enrolled in school.
Of this the EDUCATIONAL STATISTICS AT A GLANCE (ESAG) Report 2018 released by
the Ministry of Human Resources Development states that the Gross Enrolment Rate at the
level of Higher Education, which includes under graduates and upwards, is at 24.5 per cent.
This rate was 21.1 per cent. in 2014.
Even as young India is attaining more education that ever before, the unemployment
rate has been a cause of concern. In the absence of adequate opportunities for employment,
the youth are forced to resort to low-paying avenues, that results in underemployment.
In other cases, the society loses the youth to anti-social and anti-national influences by
promising them financial stability by resorting to crime and violence. Similarly, the inadequacy
of employment opportunities also lead to brain drain, further denting India’s prospects at
exploiting the demographic dividend the country is blessed with.
It is thus proposed to provide a regular allowance to such unemployed youth, who will
then not have to resort to untoward or illegal means to secure their means of income.
Simultaneously, the problem of unemployment must be eradicated at the earliest through the
involvement of the public and private sector in creation of suitable means of gainful
employment. This is necessary to allow the youth to lead a life of peace and dignity.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; UNMESH  BHAIYYASAHEB  PA TIL
November 6, 2019.

4
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the gainful employment to the unemployed youth by
the appropriate Government. Clause 4 of the Bill provides for maintenance of a beneficiary
details of unemployed youth. Clause 5 provides for payment of unemployment allowance to
every unemployed youth. Clause 6 provides for constitution of National Employment Fund
for payment of unemployment allowance. It also provides that Central Government shall
grant to the Fund. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees two thousand crore
per annum would be involved from Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

MGIPMRND—3259LS(S3)—19-11-2019.
LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for creation of gainful employment opportunities and for payment of
unemployment allowance to unemployed youth and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
—————
(Shri Unmesh Bhaiyyasaheb Patil, M.P .)