1
THE PERSONS BELONGING TO ECONOMICALLY WEAKER
SECTION (RESERV ATION OF V ACANCIES IN POSTS AND
SERVICES) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI RAHUL SHEW ALE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for reservation of vacancies in posts and services in establishments under the
Central Government in favour of persons belonging to the economically weaker
section and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Persons Belonging to Economically Weaker Section
(Reservation of V acancies in Posts and Services) Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 331 of  2015
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “establishment” means an establishment which is owned, established,
controlled, managed or financed by the Central Government and includes—
(i) a Ministry or department or subordinate office or attached office of the
Central Government;
(ii) a public sector undertaking or statutory authority constituted under any
Central Act;
(iii) a corporation in which not less than fifty-one per cent. of the paid-up share
capital is held by the Central Government;
(iv) a Government company as defined under clause (45) of section 2 of the
Companies Act, 2013; and
(v) an autonomous body, organisation or institution receiving grant or aid from
the Consolidated Fund of India;
(b) "person belonging to economically weaker section" means a person whose
annual income does not exceed rupees six lakhs per annum and is not covered under
any of the scheme of reservation and who does not belong to the Scheduled Castes,
the Scheduled Tribes or the Other Backward Classes; and
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) There shall be reserved such percentage of posts, not below ten per cent. of
total posts in every establishment, for persons belonging to economically weaker section
for appointment in civil services by direct recruitment.
(2) The vacancies reserved for the persons living below poverty line under
sub-section (1) shall be filled in such manner as may be prescribed.
4. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained in
any other law for the time being in force or any judgement, decree, order or direction of a
court to the contrary regarding ceiling on reservation.
5. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Reservation
of posts in
establishments
for persons
belonging to
economically
weaker
section.
Over-riding
effect of the
Act.
Power to
make rules.
18 of 2013

 STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
At present, reservation is provided to persons belonging to certain castes and tribes.
Though it is an historical fact that the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes were oppressed for centuries, yet, now with the constitutional guarantee
of reservation in services under the State and other welfare schemes by the successive
Governments, their standard of living has improved to some extent.
However, the persons belonging to economically weaker section with no assistance
or security from any Government are living in a miserable condition. They cannot afford
higher education. Therefore, it is proposed to provide for reservation of vacancies in posts
and services in establishments under the Central Government in favour of persons belonging
to the economically weaker section.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAHUL SHEWALE
 November 13,  2015.
3

4
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to the matters of detail only, the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for reservation of vacancies in posts and services in establishments under the
Central Government in favour of persons belonging to the economically weaker
section and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Rahul Shewale, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3023LS(S3)—09-12-2015.