Bill No. 332 of 2015
THE FOREST (CONSERV ATION) AMENDMENT BILL, 2015
By
SHRI SHRIRANG APPA BARNE, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Forest (Conservation) Amendment Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In Section 2 of the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980, after clause (iv), the following
proviso shall be added, at the end, namely:—
"Provided that the decision on prior approval shall be given within a period
of six months from the date of receipt of request from a State Government or other
authority.".
Short title
and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Amendment
of section 2.
69 of 19805

2
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 was enacted with the purpose of protecting the
fauna, flora and environment. The Act specifically make prior approval of Central
Government for dereservation of forests or use of forest land for non-forest purposes
mandatory. But, in practice, it has been seen that whenever any case is referred to the
Central Government for permission, the permission is not granted immediately and the
Central Government either takes very long time or withholds the permission for no reason.
Moreover, being a welfare State, it is a duty of every State Government to undertake welfare
schemes for the people but this Act is creating a hindrance in the implementation of
developmental works. Therefore, it is necessary to make a provision in the Act that the
Central Government shall take decision on prior approval cases within a period of six months
from the date of receipt of request from a State Government or other authority. It will go a
long way to protect the environment while taking up projects for the welfare of the common
man.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SHRIRANG APPA BARNE
November 16, 2015.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE FOREST (CONSERVATION) ACT, 1980.
(ACT NO. 69 OF 1980)
* * * * * * *
2. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force in
a State, no State Government or other authority shall make, except with the prior approval of
the Central Government, any order directing,—
* * * * * * *
Restriction
on the
dereservation
of forests or
use of forest
land for non-
forest
purpose.
3

GMGIPMRND—2825LS(S3)—09.12.2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980.
————
(Shri Shrirang Appa Barne, M.P.)