1
THE SOLAR ENERGY (DEVELOPMENT AND COMPULSORY USE)
BILL, 2015
By
DR. KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for development of solar power generation and mandatory use of solar power
by every household, business establishment and Government building, in
order to promote use of non-conventional energy and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Solar Energy (Development and Compulsory use)
Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 333 of  2015
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "business establishment" includes any building which is used as an office or
a factory in connection with any trade or business;
(c) "Government building" includes the offices of the Ministries, departments,
public sector enterprises, statutory bodies or bodies owned or administered by the
Government and autonomous bodies, local self Government bodies and residential
areas of Government employees provided by the Government;
(d) "household" means a dwelling unit of any description; and
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. It shall be obligatory for the owners, lessees, tenants, builders and promoters of
every building, to install solar photovoltaic modules and panels, on the top of buildings and/
or in the land forming part of the property, for generating electricity in order to meet a part of
its total electricity requirement in such manner as may be prescribed.
4. For the purpose of this Act, the Central Government shall—
(i) make amendments to the building bye-laws so as to make it obligatory for the
owners, contractors, builders and promoters of all new buildings to install solar thermal
collectors and photovoltaic modules and panels as specified in this Act;
(ii) specify the circumstances and technical grounds under which exemptions
may be granted from the provisions of this Act; and
(iii) make provisions for subsidies and other incentives for the installation of
solar energy systems in new buildings as well as existing buildings.
5. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as possible, prepare an action plan to
educate the masses about the technology and the benefits of use of Solar Energy.
(2) For the purpose of spreading awareness and promotion, the Central Government
shall also associate Non-Governmental Organisations and such other agencies or
institutions, as it may deem fit.
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law,
provide requisite funds to the State Governments for the purposes of this Act, from time to
time.
7. Whoever contravenes the provisions of this Act shall be liable to imprisonment
which may extend to one year and fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees.
8. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Obligations for
the owners,
lessees,
tenants,
builders and
promoters of
buildings.
Central
Government
to amend
building bye-
laws and
provide
incentives to
popularise
and promote
use of solar
energy.
Action plan
to educate
about the
benefits of
use of solar
energy.
Central
Government
to provide
requisite
funds.
Definitions.
Penalty.
Act not in
derogation of
other law.
Powers to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is facing an acute energy scarcity which is hampering its industrial growth and
economic progress. Thus, it is essential to tackle the energy crisis through judicious utilization
of abundant renewable energy resources.
Solar Energy is a clean renewable resource with zero emission and has got tremendous
potential of energy which can be harnessed using a variety of devices. With recent
developments, solar energy systems are easily available for industrial and domestic use with
the added advantageof minimum maintenance. Solar energy could be made financially viable
with Government tax incentives and rebates. Most of the developed countries are switching
over to solar energy as one of the prime renewable energy source. The current architectural
designs make provision for photovoltaic cells and necessary circuitry while making building
plans. Because of its location between the Tropic of Cancer and the Equator, India has an
average annual temperature that ranges from 25
°C-27°C. This means that India has huge
solar potential.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide for development of solar power generation and
mandatory use of solar power by every household, business establishment and Government
building, in order to promote use of non-conventional energy for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI
November 17, 2015.

4
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for certain subsidies and other incentives by Central
Government to promote Solar Energy. Clause 5 provides that the Central Government shall
prepare an action plan to educate the masses about the technology and the benefits of Solar
Energy and associate non-Governmental Organisations and Private sector for the purpose.
Clause 6 provides that the Central Government shall provide adequate funds to the State
Governments for carrying out the purposes of this Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual
recurring expenditure of rupees fifty thousand crore is likely to be incurred.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees ten thousand crore is also likely to be
involved.

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

GMGIPMRND—3083LS(S3)—09.12.2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for development of solar power generation and mandatory use of solar
power by every household, business establishment and Government
building, in order to promote use of non-conventional
energy and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki, M.P .)