THE MAINTENANCE AND WELFARE OF PARENTS AND SENIOR
CITIZENS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
By
SHRI JAGDAMBIKA PAL, M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth  Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior
Citizens (Amendment) Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the official Gazette, appoint.
Short title
and com-
mencement.
Bill No.  334  of  2019
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. After Chapter II of the Maintenance and Welfare of Senior Citizens Act, 2007, the
following Chapter and sections thereunder shall be inserted, namely:—
"CHAPTER  IIA
THE  NATIONAL  COMMISSION  FOR  SENIOR  CITIZENS
18 A. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish
a National Commission for Senior Citizens, hereinafter referred to as the Commission, for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2)  The Commission shall consists of,
(a)  Chairperson;
(b)  a Vice Chairperson;
(c)  One representative each  from the minority, the Scheduled Castes, the
Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes of people;
(d)  One women; and
(e)  two senior citizens or persons working in the field of welfare of  senior
citizens, to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(3) The Commission shall have the power to regulate its own procedure.
(4) The Central Government shall appoint a Secretary and such other officers and staff
as it may deem necessary to the Commssion.
(5) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and  conditions of
Chairperson, Vice Chairperson and other member, of the Commission shall be such as may be
prescribed.
18B. (1) The Commission shall—
(a) investigate and monitor all matters relating to the safeguards provided for
the senior citizens under this Act or the Constitution or under any other law for the
time being in force or under any order of the Central Government;
(b) evaluate the working of safeguards provided under this Act;
(c) inquire into specific complaints with respect to the deprivation of rights and
safeguards of the senior citizens;
(d) participate and advise on the planning process of socio-economic development
of the senior citizens and evaluate the progress of their development under the Central
Government and State Governments;
(e) present to the Central Government annually and at such other times as the
Commission may deem fit, reports upon the working of safeguards provided under this
Act;
(f) make recommendations as to the measures that should be taken by the Central
Government or the State Governments for effective implementation of those safeguards
and other measures for the protection, welfare and socio-economic development of
the senior citizens; and
(g) discharge such other functions in relation to the protection, welfare and
development and advancement of the senior citizens as may be prescribed.
(2) The Central Government shall cause all such reports, as are presented to it under
clause ( e) of sub-section ( 1), to be laid before each House of Parliament along with a
memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations
relating to the Union and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of such
recommendations.
Establishment
of National
Commission
for Senior
Citizens.
Function of
the
Commission.
Insertion of
new Chapter
IIA.
56 of 2007.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(3) Where any such report, or any part thereof, relates to any matter with which any
State Government is concerned, a copy of such report shall be forwarded to the State
Government concerned and the State Government shall cause such report to be laid before
the Legislature of the State along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed
to be taken on the recommendations relating to that State and the reasons for the non-
acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations.
18C. The Commission shall, while performing its functions under section 18B,
have all the powers of a civil court trying a suit and in particular in respect of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of
India and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office;
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and documents; and
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.
18D. The Central Government and every State Government shall consult the
Commission on all major policy matters affecting senior citizens.".
18E. (1) The Central Government shall by notification, constitute  a Fund to be known
as the Senior Citizens Commission Fund for the purpose of administrative and expenses of
the Commission .
(2) There shall be credited to the Fund all the grants made by the Central Government,
after due appropriation made by Parliament, by law in this behalf.
Central and
State
Governments
to consult the
Commission.
Powers of
Commission.
Constitution
of Senior
Citizens
Commission
Fund.
5
10
15
20

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Senior Citizens in India constitute one hundred and four million population as per the
2011  census. Today Senior Citizens on a very large scale continue to  live a life of  misery,
lonelines and exploilation. As a matter of  fact, fifty-one million elderly in India live below the
poverty line.
National Policy on older persons was announced by the Government of India in the
year 1999.  It was set up in the pursuence of UNGA. Regular 47/S to observe 1999 as the
International year of   Older Person.  Also, the well being of the Senior Citizens is mandated
under article 41 of the Constitution . The Planning Commission had also approved the
proposal of the "Working Group on Social Welfare to formulate the Five year Plan."  To
establish a National Commission for Senior Citizens. However, since then no efforts have
been made in this regard.
With  a view to ensure the well-being of senior citizens, by strengthening their legitimate
place in society and extending support for financial and food security, healthcare, shelter,
equitable share in development, protection against abuse and exploitation and fulfillment of
other needs, there is a necessity for setting up a National Commission for the Senior Citizens.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior
Citizens Act, 2007 with a view to establish a National Commission for Senior Citizens for the
protection and welfare of senior citizens.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; JAGDAMBIKA  PAL
November 5, 2019.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to provide for constitution of the National Commission for
Senior Citizens. It also provides for appointment of a Chairperson, Vice Chairperson, other
members, Secretary and other officers and staff of the Commission. It further provides  for
Constitution of  a Senior Citizens Commission Fund for the administration of the Commission.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. At this stage, it is not possible to give the exact amount to be incurred. However, it is
estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees ten  crore will be involved per annum
from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees  fifty crore is also likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 2 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to appoint the Chairperson,
Vice-Chairperson and three members of the National Commission for Senior Citizens in such
manner as may be prescribed by rules made under this Act. As the rules will relate to matters
of detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHAL
————
A
BILL
to amend the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007.
————
(Shri Jagdambika Pal, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—3142LS(S3)—19-11-2019.