1
THE COMPULSORY SPORTS AND PHYSICAL EDUCATION AND
INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT IN SCHOOLS OF
ANDAMAN AND NICOBAR ISLANDS BILL, 2019
By
SHRI KULDEEP RAI SHARMA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory sports education from first standard to senior secondary level
and provision of requisite infrastructure in schools of Andaman and Nicobar
Islands and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventeith Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Sports and Physical Education and
Infrastructure Development in Schools of Andaman and Nicobar Islands Bill, 2019.
Bill  No. 335 of  2019
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "infrastructure" means requisite resources such as playground, articles of
sports, sports instructors and such other physical framework of facilities as are required
for sports and physical education in the school;
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(c) "school' means any recognised school imparting education from class 1 to
class 12th and includes—
(i) a school established, owned or controlled by the Central Government
or a local authority;
(ii) an aided school receiving aid or grants to meet whole or part of its
expenses from the Central Government or the local authority;
(iii) a school belonging to specified category; and
(iv) an unaided school not receiving any kind of aid or grants to meet its
expenses from the Government or the local authority; and
(d) "sports and physical education" means providing children irrespective of
their ability or disability, sex, age, cultural, race or ethnicity, religious or social
background, with the skills, attitudes, values, knowledge and understanding for lifelong
participation in physical activity along with sports specific skill, knowledge of rules
and understanding values revolving around sportsmanship, as also to identify and
develop sporting talent.
3. It shall be the duty of the Central Government to provide free and compulsory
sports and physical education to students from first standard to twelfth standard in all
schools of Andaman and Nicobar Islands.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, within six months of the coming into force of
this Act, formulate a policy for providing sports and physical education and ensuring
requisite infrastructure development in all schools of the Union territory of the Andaman
and Nicobar Islands.
(2) The policy referred to in sub-section (1) shall include the following provisions—
(i) encouraging sports and physical education to create awareness about the
importance of sports among students;
(ii) providing adequate financial assistance for infrastructure development for
sports education in all the schools;
(iii) seeking assistance under khelo India Scheme for infrastructure
development in the schools in rural areas;
(iv) preparing inclusive and quality syllabus for sport education;
(v) providing sports scholarship/stipend to the students with outstanding
performance in sports;
(vi) providing weightage to marks obtained in sports for admission in higher
education; and
(vii) according preference to the outstanding sports persons in recruitment to
posts under Central Government.
(3) The Central Government shall review the progress and quality of sports education
being provided by the schools in the Union territory of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands,
from time to time, in such manner, as may be prescribed.
Definitions.
Central
Government
to formulate
policy for
providing
sports and
physical
education.
Free and
compulsory
sports and
physical
education.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
5. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to
make rules.
5
10

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Foundation of sports education is conceived in school and it progresses as the child
is promoted to the next class. There is ample evidence through research and studies which
prove that sports education and academic learning complement each other and are instrumental
in developing the overall personality of students. An effective policy to ensure implementation
of sports curriculum in school inculcates qualities like discipline, leadership, team spirit,
competitiveness, time management and other such qualities.
The Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD) through its National Policy
on Education (NEP), 2016 recognizes the criticality of Education as the most important
vehicle for social, economic, and political transformation. The strength of our country is that
it is a youth surplus nation which is battling problems like obesity, inactivity, child diabetes
to name a few. The need of the hour is to propose a holistic curriculum program which
combines sports and physical education in order to make India a sports superpower in the
coming years on both fronts-mass general participation as well as distributive specific
performances that produce excellence.
Sports and Physical Education should be made a mandatory part of education ecosystem
in India and should be a parameter for measuring performance of a child. Depending on the
level accomplished by a student, certain benefits to encourage him/her to compete at the
elite level or choose sports as a full time career may be given. The ideal sports education
curriculum for schools should therefore be comprehensive ( i.e. addressing aspects of kin
aesthetic, cognitive and social development) and inclusive ( i.e. addressing the needs of
children of different age and abilities). Sports and physical education standards have been
adopted by more developed nations like Australia, USA, etc.
The Bill seeks to cast a duty on the Central Government to provide Free and Compulsory
Sports and Physical Education to students from first standard to twelfth standard in schools
of Andaman and Nicobar Islands. It also mandates that the Central Government shall within
six months of the coming into force of this Act formulate a policy for providing sports and
physical education and ensure requisite infrastructure development in all schools of Andaman
and Nicobar Islands. The intent of this Bill is to provide legislative backing for introducing
sports and physical education from first standard to twefth standard in all the schools of
Andaman and Nicobar Islands.
The young population and school going children of Andaman and Nicobar Islands
have tremendous potential to become athletes in the future and bring laurels for the country
in national and international events. The inclusion of sports and physical education in
schools of Andaman and Nicobar Islands will be a right step in this direction and lay a solid
foundation for creating awarness about importance of sports amongst the school going
students. Several countries across the world recognize the importance of blending sports
and physical education in the education process. We need to encourage our children to
build their character in a spirit of competition, through sports and healthy physical activities,
as part of the learning process.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KULDEEP RAI SHARMA
31 October, 2019.

55
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the Central Government to provide free and compulsory
sports and physical education to students from first standard to twelfth standard in schools
of Andaman and Nicobar Islands. Clause 4 provided that the Central Government shall also
formulate a policy to provide sports and physical education and ensuring requisite
infrastructure development in all schools of Andaman and Nicobar Islands. The Bill, therefore,
if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. At this stage, it
is not possible to give exact estimate of expenditure, both recurring and non-recurring, which
will be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India. The Bill, if enacted, would involve a
recurring expenditure of about rupees sixty crore per annum from the Consolidated Fund of
India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

66
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purpose of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory sports education from first standard to senior secondary
level and provision of requisite infrastructure in schools of Andaman and
Nicobar Islends and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Kuldeep Rai Sharma, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—3132LS(S3)—19.11.2019.