Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 336 of 2015
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR SUGARCANE FARMERS
BILL, 2015
By
SHRI RAJESH PANDEY, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a National Commission for Sugarcane Farmers and for
matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER  I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Commission for Sugarcane Farmers Act,
2015.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) 'appropriate Government' means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) 'Commission' means the National Commission for Sugarcane Farmers
constituted under section 3;
(c) 'Fund' means the Sugarcane Farmers and Workers Welfare Fund constituted
under section 11;
(d) 'member' means a Member of the Commission and includes the Member-
Secretary;
(e) 'prescribed' means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
(f) 'sugarcane farmer' means a farmer engaged in cultivation of sugarcane and
has no income from any source other than cultivation of sugarcane; and
(g) 'sugarcane workers' means a skilled or non-skilled person engaged in
sugarcane cultivation.
CHAPTER  II
THE  NA TIONAL  COMMISSION   FOR  SUGARCANE   FARMERS
3. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Commission to be known as the
National Commission for Sugarcane Farmers to exercise the powers conferred on, and to
perform the functions assigned to it, under this Act.
(2) The Commission shall consist of—
(a) a Chairperson, committed to the cause of sugarcane farmers livelihood and
welfare to be nominated by the Central Government;
(b)  five members to be nominated by the Central Government from amongst
persons of ability, integrity and standing who had experience in sugarcane farming,
understanding the plight of sugarcane farmers, sugar pricing and international
issues, social justice, law or legislation and are committed to the welfare of sugarcane
farmers;
(c)  Vice-Chancellors of all Agricultural Universities, as members ex-officio;
(d)  a Member-Secretary to be nominated by the Central Government, who shall
be —
(i)  an expert in the field of management, organizational structure on
sugarcane issues, or
(ii)  an officer who is a member of a civil service of the Union or of an
All-India Service or holds a civil post under the Union Government with
appropriate experience, or
(iii)  an expert who has done research on agriculture especially on
sugarcane and equal/equivalent to the post of  Professor in a college or a University.
4. (1) The Chairperson and every member except ex-officio members shall hold office
for such period, not exceeding three years, as  may be specified by the Central Government
in this behalf.
(2) The Chairperson or a member (other than the Member-Secretary who is a member of
a Civil Service of the Union or of an All-India Service or holds a Civil post under the Union
Government) may, by writing and addressed to the Central Government, resign from the
Office of Chairperson or, as the case may be, of the member at any time.
Constitution
of the
National
Commission
for Sugarcane
Farmers.
Term of
Office and
conditions of
service of
Chairperon
and members.
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(3) The Central Government shall remove a person from the office of the Chairperson
or a member, as the case may be, if that person—
(a) becomes an undischarged insolvent;
(b) gets convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which in the
opinion of the Central Government involves moral turpitude;
(c) becomes of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court;
(d) refuses to act or becomes incapable of acting;
(e) without taking leave from the Commission, absent himself from three
consecutive meetings of the Commission; and
(f) in the opinion of the Central Government, has abused his position of
Chairperson or a member so as to render his continuance in office detrimental to public
interest:
Provided that no person shall be removed under this sub-section unless he has been
given an opportunity of being heard in the matter.
(4) A vacancy caused under sub-section (3), shall be filled within one month from the
date on which the vacancy has been arisen.
(5) The Salaries and allowances payable  to, and other terms and conditions of service
of the Chairperson and members shall be such as may be prescribed.
5. (1) The Central Government shall provide suitable officers and employees to the
Commission for its efficient performance under this Act.
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service
of officers and employees shall be such as may be prescribed.
6. The salaries and allowances payable to the Chairperson and the members and the
administrative expenses, including salaries, allowances and pensions payable to the officers
and other employees referred to in section 5, shall be paid out of the grants referred to in
sub-section (1) of section 12.
7. No Act or proceeding of the Commission shall be questioned on the ground merely
of the existence of any vacancy or defect in the constitution of the Commission.
8. (1) The Commission may, for efficient discharge of its functions, constitute such
Committees as may be necessary for dealing with or studying issues that may be taken up
by the Commission from time to time.
(2) The Commission may appoint such members, as it may deem fit, on Committees
constituted under sub-section ( 1):
Provided that the members of the Committee who are not members of the Commission
shall not have the right to vote on matters of the Commission.
(3) The allowances payable to members appointed to the Committees shall be such as
may be prescribed.
9. (1) The Commission shall regulate its own procedure.
(2) All orders and decision of the Commission shall be authenticated by the Member-
Secretary.
CHAPTER III
F
UNCTIONS  OF THE COMMISSION
10. (1) The Commission shall perform all or any of the following functions, namely—
(a) undertake annual income surveys of sugarcane farmers and sugarcane
workers across various categories, including different crops and landholding sizes;
Officers and
employees of
the
Commission.
Salaries and
allowances to
be paid out of
grants.
Vacancies not
to invalidate
proceedings
of the
Commission.
Committees
of the
Commission.
Procedure to
be regulated
by the
Government.
Functions of
the
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(b) make policy suggestions to ensure that minimum income accrues to farmers
across various categories;
(c) design periodically an income security framework for various categories of
farmers, inter-alia including market interventions, compensation, subsidies, reduction
in cost of production, mechanization, capacity building, credit enhancement,
strengthening supply chains or any other tool that the Commission deems fit;
(d) review, from time to time, various schemes of the Central Government
pertaining to agriculture and income of farmers;
(e) make recommendations to Central Government for effective implementation
of policies and schemes ensuring that the minimum income accrues to farmers;
(f) call for special studies and investigations into problems arising out of agrarian
distress, and make timely recommendations to the Central Government for approriate
action;
(g) undertake promotional and educational research to ensure minimum incomes
for farming households, enhancement of income of farmers and productivity in
agriculture;
(h) take suo-moto notice of matters relating to—
(i) sugarcane farmers' distress particularly sugarcane farmers' suicides
across the country;
(ii) non-implementation or poor implementation of policies or schemes of
farmers; and
(iii) non-compliance of policy decisions, guidelines and instructions taken
for farmers.
(i) evaluate the status of livelihood of sugarcane farmers across various regions
in the country;
(j) make periodic reports to the Government on any matters pertaining to sugarcane
farmers;
(k) payment to sugarcane farmers within a week after delivery of sugarcane to
sugar mills;
(l) payment of interest at the rate of fifteen per cent. for the delay in payment by
sugar mills;
(m) training of sugarcane farmers and labourers;
(n) subsidized loan for fertilizers, seeds, pesticides, equipments, labour and
transportation cost to the sugarcane farmers;
(o) compensation to sugarcane farmers in case of loss of crops on non-acceptance
of sugarcanes by sugar mills; and
(p) take up any other matter that may be referred to it by Central Government.
11. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Fund to be known as the Sugarcane
Farmers Welfare Fund for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Fund shall consist of contributions from Central Government and State
Governments in such proportion as may be provided.
(3) The Fund shall be administered by the Commission in such manner as may be
prescribed.
Constitution
of Sugarcane
Farmers
Welfare Fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

5
CHAPTER  IV
FINANCE , ACCOUNTS  AND AUDIT
12. (1) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, make to the Commission by way of grants such sums of money as the
Central Government may think fit for being utilized for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Commission may spend such sums as it thinks fit for performing the functions
under this Act, and such sums shall be treated as expenditure payable out of grants under
sub-section (1).
13. (1) The Commission shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and
prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by Central
Government in consultation with Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The accounts of the Commission shall be audited by Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure  incurred
in connection with such audit shall be payable to Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(3) The accounts of the Commission, as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General along with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Central
Government by the Commission.
14. The Commission shall prepare once every year, in such form and within such time
as may be prescribed, an annual report giving a true and full account of its activities during
the previous year, and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the Central Government.
15. The Central Government shall cause the annual report along with a memorandum
of actions taken on recommendations and reasons for non-acceptance of recommendations,
if any, of any such recommendations to be laid, as soon as may be, after the reports are
received, and the audit report before each House of Parliament.
16. The Central Government shall provide the following facilities to the sugarcane
farmers,—
(i) payment of old-age pension at the rate of five thousand per month to every
sugarcane farmers and workers who have attained the age of sixty years and is
unable to perform his or her job on account of infirmity and incapacity;
(ii) subsidized healthcare facilities to the sugarcane farmers and workers and
dependent family members at the Government and other designated hospitals;
(iii) subsidized education facilities including supply of books, uniform, writing
materials, transportation and hostel facilities for the children of sugarcane farmers
and workers;
(iv) free insurance cover to sugarcane farmers and workers; and
(v) subsidized housing loan to sugarcane farmers and workers.
17. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by the Parliament by
law in this behalf, provide such sums of money to the State Governments, as may be necessary
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
CHAPTER V
M
ISCELLANEOUS
18. The Chairperson, the members, officers and the other employees of the Commission
shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal
Code, 1860.
Grants by
Central
Government.
Accounts and
Audit.
Annual report
and audit
report to be
laid before
Parliament.
Annual
Report.
Facilities to
the sugarcane
farmers and
workers.
Central
Government
to provide
adequate
funds.
Chairperson
members and
staff of the
Commission
to be public
servants.
45 of 1860.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

6
19. The Central Government shall consult the Commission on all major policy matters
affecting farmers.
20. (1) The Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely—
(a) salaries, allowances and terms and conditions of service of Chairperson and
members under sub-section (5) of section 4 and other employees and officers under
sub-section (2) of Section 5.
(b) allowances paid to members appointed to Committees under sub-section (3)
of section 8.
(c) other matters under sub-section (3) of section 4 on the basis of which the
Central Government can remove a Chairperson or member from the Commission.
(d) the form, and timeline as per which the annual statements of accounts shall
be maintained under section 12.
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive session and if before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or successive sessions aforesaid
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule shall thereafter have effect only in
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
Central
Government
to consult
Commission.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Sugarcane is yearly crop and thus multi cropping in the sugarcane farm is not possible.
The labour in the sugarcane farming is required only for less than half of the year and only in
peak season of sowing and harvesting. Due to lack of other crops farming in a year the
labourer remain unemployed. The labour employed in sugar farming is marginal workers who
get employment for less than six months in a year. The price of sugarcane is not decided by
market but fixed by the Government year to year and varies from State to State. It is not a
market regulated produce but Government regulated. The payment to farmers from sugar
mills is also not instant but received only after few weeks of delivering the sugarcane to mills.
In recent years, due to non-payment of their dues by mills, the conditions of farmers and
labourers has become worst. The sugarcane farmers are not able to pay their dues and loans
and meet the family expenditure on time. Moreover, the cases of farmers' suicide has risen
alarmingly. The farmers engaged in sugarcane farming are always burdened with debt and
are not able to pay to labourers on time. Non-payment to labourers lead to their suffering and
thus forming a vicious circle which further leads to migration of labourers leaving the farming
and looking for some other option for livelihood. Many farmers, due to financial stress,
resort to anti-social activities like drinking, family violence, drugs etc. The Bill, therefore,
seeks to ensure provisions of certain safeguards aimed at welfare of sugarcane farmers and
labourers.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAJESH PANDEY
November 13, 2015.
7

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of the National Commission for Sugarcane
Farmers. Clause 6 provides for salaries and allowances to be paid to the Chairperson and
members of the Commission. Clause 8 provides for appointment of Commission to deal with
or study issues that may be taken by the Commission. Clause 11 provides for constitution of
Sugarcane Farmers Welfare Fund for the welfare of sugarcane farmers. Clause 12 provides
that the Central Government shall provide funds to the Commission. Clause 13 provides for
payment of expenditure incurred in connection with audit of the Commission. Clause 16 of
the Bill provides that the Central Government shall provide certain facilities to the sugarcane
workers and farmers. Clause 17 provides that the Central Government shall provide adequate
funds to the States for carrying out the purposes of the Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted,
would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of
rupees one thousand crore will be involved as a recurring expenditure per annum from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved.
8

9
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 20 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

GMGIPMRND—2878LS(S3)—09.12.2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a National Commission for Sugarcane Farmers and for
matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Rajesh Pandey, M.P.)