1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE AIR (PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF POLLUTION)
AMENDMENT BILL, 2019
By
SHRI GAURAV GOGOI, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Air (Prevention and Control of  Pollution) (Amendment)
Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 336 of  2019
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In section 5 of the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 (hereinafter
referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section (2),—
(i) for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
“(a) a full-time Chairman, being a person possessing special knowledge
upon obtaining a degree of post-graduation in Environmental Sciences or
Environmental Management or a degree of post-graduation in engineering or
technology in environmental engineering or an equivalent degree or practical
experience relating specifically to environmental protection while possessing a
graduate degree in science related to subjects of Geology, Botany, Chemistry,
or allied subjects or someone who has rendered remarkable and distinguished
service to the cause of environment protection, to be nominated by the State
Government.”
(ii) for clause (f), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:—
“(f) a full-time member-Secretary, being a person possessing special
knowledge or practical experience relating specifically to environmental
protection, possessing a post-graduation degree in Engineering, Technology,
Environmental Engineering, or allied Sciences where Pollution Control forms a
component of the curriculum, with a demonstrated knowledge and experience in
administering institutions dealing with matters of environment protection, and
who has rendered remarkable and distinguished service to the cause of
environment protection, to be nominated by the State Government; and
“(fa) two persons to represent organisations or academicians or media
representatives or distinguished personalities working for the improvement of
the quality of air, or the prevention, control or abatement of air pollution to be
nominated by the State Government;”.
3. In section 7 of the principal Act, in sub-section (5), for the words “shall be filled by
fresh nomination”, the words “shall be filled by fresh nomination made by the State
Government in a period as early as practicable but not later than six months from the date of
occurrence of such vacancy” shall be substituted.
4.  After section 10 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
“10A. (1) The Central Government shall convene a joint, cross ministerial meeting
on a half yearly basis to track progress, targets achieved, targets missed and new targets to
be set to prevent, control or abate air pollution in the country.
(2) The meeting under sub-section (1) shall be convened at such time and place and
shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business (including the
quorum at the meetings) as may be prescribed.
(3) The Union Minister of Environment, Forest and Climate Change shall preside as
the Head at the meeting.
(4) The meeting shall host mandatory participation from the Chairman and Member
Secretaries of all State Boards as well as cross-ministerial participation and representation
from all relevant ministries.
(5) The Chairman of the Central Board shall convene and prepare, in such form and
time after the meetings as prescribed, its half-yearly report, giving full account of the details
of the meeting, points of coordination established, targets achieved, targets missed, new
targets set, and an efficiency assessment and performance ranking of the State Boards, and
submit a copy to the State Boards and State Governments.
(6) Every report published under sub-section (4), complete in all its aspects, shall be
made public on Central and State Board websites.”.
Amendment
of section 5.
14 of 1981.
Amendment
of section 7.
Insertion of
new section
10A.
Central
Government
to convene
meeting to
prevent,
control and
abate air
pollution in
the country.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
5. In section 16 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),—
(i) for clause (c), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
“(c) co-ordinate the activities of the State Board, resolve disputes among
them, and facilitate active sharing of information between State Boards on issues
relevant to their functioning, including best available technologies, emission
standards, protocols and mechanisms for enforcement, and outcomes of
enforcement actions and processes.”
(ii) after clause (h), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(ha) frame emission standards if there is reason to believe and data to
provide evidence of new harmful pollutants exacerbating air pollution and inform
concerned authorities regarding such evidence.”.
6. In section 17 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after clause (f), the following
clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(fa) to frame emission standards if there is reason to believe and data to provide
evidence of new harmful pollutants exacerbating air pollution and inform concerned
authorities regarding such evidence.”.
7. In section 21 of the principal Act, after sub-section (7), the following sub-sections
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(7A) The State Board may require applicants under sub-section (2) of section
21 to submit a bank guarantee at the time of granting of consent which may be forfeited,
in full or part, in case conditions included in the consent are not complied with, applicant
continues to operate without renewal of consent, if environmental damage is caused
by the applicant, or if directions issued under section 31A to the applicant are not
complied with.
(7B) The amount of bank guarantee to be submitted under sub-section (7A), and
the process to be followed in case of forfeiture shall be prescribed by the State
Governments in consultation with the State Boards.
(7C) Every amount of collected from forfeiture of bank guarantee shall be used
by the State Board for rehabilitation and restoration of damage caused by the applicant.”.
8. In section 22A of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the words, “such order as
it deems fit”, the words “such order as it deems fit in an expeditious manner” shall be
substituted.
9. In section 23 of the principal Act, after sub-section ( 2), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(2A) On receipt of information with respect to the fact or apprehension of any
occurrence of the nature referred to in sub-section (1), the State Board shall ensure the
issuing of public health advisories informing the concerned populace of such fact or
apprehension and the preventive measures that may be taken thereto.”.
10.  After section 23 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“23A. Where the Central Board or a State Board has reason to believe that air quality
has deteriorated exceptionally within a particular region or territory based on available data,
they may, if they find necessary, declare a public health emergency, wherein they may exercise
the power to contain all such activities, industries, operations, that they consider to be
incidental to aforementioned increase in air pollution, including but not limited to directions
of closures for a specific period of time as prescribed.”.
11. In section 26 of the principal Act, after sub-äection (4), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:—
Amendment of
section 16.
Amendment of
section 17.
Amendment of
section 21.
Amendment of
section 22A.
Amendment of
section 23.
Insertion of
new section
23A.
Amendment of
section 26.
Public Health
Emer gency.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
“(5) Notwithstanding anything stated in sub-section (2), the Central Government may
prescribe any other source for data collection on emissions and the same shall be admissible
as evidence in legal proceedings.”.
12. In section 37 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words “six years and
with fine” the words “six years and with fine, as well as an environmental compensation for
the damage caused due to emissions of air pollutants in excess of prescribed standards”
shall be substituted.
13. In section 53 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),—
(i) after clause (a), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
“(aa) the timing, place, intervals, composition, procedure to be followed at
such meetings, quorum necessary for the transaction of business and other
matters incidental thereto under sub-section (1) of section 10A;
(ab) the form in which the half-yearly report of the joint meeting may be
prepared and published under sub-section (4) of section l0A; and
(ii) after clause (e), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
“(ea) determining the use of any new technological development or method
of extracting samples from industries, and the manner of such extraction thereto,
that are admissible as evidence under the courts, as under sub-section ( 5) of
section 26.”
14. In section 54 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2)—
(i) after clause (n), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(na) the details of the bank-guarantee requirements, conditions of
forfeiture or encashment, and all other matters incidental thereto, under sub-
sections (7A), (7B) and (7C) of section 21;
(nb) the time-period, procedure, industries or polluting agencies to be
sent temporary closure notices, and overall region wherein such an emergency
is to be declared under section 23A.”; and
(ii) after clause (x), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(xa) determining the nature such environmental compensation, the
violations of provisions for which such a compensation needs to be made, and
all other matters incidental thereto, under sub-section (1) of section 37.”.
Amendment of
section 37.
Amendment of
section 53.
Amendment of
section 54.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
An escalating rise in air-pollution has gripped most parts of the sub-continent, raising
critical concerns about its impact on human health. Internationally acclaimed research has
posited India as housing some of the most polluted cities in the world. The severe impacts of
air pollution on human health are finally being recognized, in light of the insurmountable rise
of respiratory diseases, reduced life expectancy, and even mortality. According to the World
Health Organisation, as many as ninety eight per cent. children under five years of age in low
and middle income countries like India are exposed to toxic air.  As we face an impending
health crisis, India’s pollution regulatory regime needs to work on an emergency mode to
counter the ill-effects of pollution on human health and to prevent any further transgressions.
While several programmes and policies exist to counter pollution, the lack of a legal mandate
often makes these efforts lax in enforcement. This increases aims at re-energising and
empowering the Pollution Control Boards under the Air Act, 1981.
Over the years, the Pollution Control Boards have been unable to act as powerful
watchdogs over industries and polluting agencies. These observations have especially
been made by the Rajya Sabha’s 192nd Committee Report and National Green Tribunal order
of 2016 that have questioned and deliberated over the functioning and composition of the
Boards. This inefficiency has manifested itself because of certain provisions in the Act that
are now dated in scope.
The aim for this Bill is to align the Air Act with contemporary India and to make it more
relevant in scope. This Bill attempts to refocus the mandate of the pollution control boards
in India towards the detrimental health impacts of rising pollution. With a fresh vision,
focused on alleviating the deleterious health impacts of rising pollution, the Bill strengthens
the composition and functioning of the Pollution Control Boards. It also integrates the
requirement for the Boards to proactively ensure that the public is aware of any impending
public health emergency that arises as a result of increasing emissions. In circumstances of
extreme pollution emissions, the Bill also empowers the State Boards to declare public health
emergencies and temporarily halt all polluting activities within a region. Through provisions
that require joint coordination between the State Boards and the Central Board through half-
yearly meetings, the Bill also improves the coordination and communication between the
two entities.
By including several such changes in the existing Air Act, the legislation gives more
teeth to the Pollution Control Boards in dispensing their duty as the first respondents for the
menace of air pollution in India.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; GAURAV GOGOI
November 1, 2019.
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill vide proposed section 10A stipulates half-yearly joint meetings by
the Central Government with the Central Board, the State Boards, and representation from
Ministries to prevent, control and abate air pollution. It also provides for publishing reports
of the meeting in the Central Board and State Boards on its websites. The Bill, therefore, if
enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, at this
stage the recurring and non-recurring expenditure on this count cannot be estimated.
6

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 4 of the Bill vide proposed section l0A stipulates half-yearly joint meetings by
the Central Government with the Central Board, the State Boards, and representation from
Ministries to prevent, control and abate air pollution in such manner as may be prescribed.
Clause 10 vide proposed section 23A provides for declaration by the State Governments of
public health emergency due to deteriorated air quality for such period as may be prescribed.
Clause 14 provides that the State Government may make rules regarding the details of the
bank-guarantee requirements, conditions of forfeiture or encashment for environmental
damage by the industrial plants, etc. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
7

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE AIR (PREVENTION AND CONTROL
OF AIR POLLUTION) ACT, 1981
* * * *
5. (1)*  *  *
(2) A State Board constituted under this Act shall consist of the following members,
namely:—
(a) a Chairman, being a person, having a person having special knowledge or
practical experience in respect of matters relating to environmental protection, to be
nominated by the State Government:
Provided that the Chairman may be either whole-time or part-time as the State
Government may think fit;
* * *
(f) a full-time member-secretary having such qualifications knowledge and experience
of scientific, engineering or management aspects of pollution control as may be prescribed,
to be appointed by the State Governments:
Provided that the State Government shall ensure that not less than two of the members
are persons having special knowledge or practical experience in, respect of matters relating
to the improvement of the quality of air or the prevention, control or abatement of air pollution.
* * *
7. (1)*  *  *
(2)*  *  *
(3)*  *  *
(4)*  *  *
(5) A casual vacancy in a State Board constituted under this Act shall be filled by a
fresh nomination and the person nominated to fill the vacancy shall hold office only for the
remainder of die term for which the member whose place lie takes was nominated.
* * *
16. (1)*  *  *
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing functions, the
Central Board may—
(a)*  *  *
(b)*  *  *
(c) co-ordinate the activities of the State and resolve disputes among them;
(d)*  *  *
(e)*  *  *
(f)*  *  *
(g)*  *  *
(h) lay down standards for the quality of air;
* * *
* * *
Constitution of
State Boards.
Terms and
conditions of
service of
members.
Functions of
Central Board.
8

9
17. (1) subject to the provisions of this Act, and without prejudice to the performance
of its functions, if any, under the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974
(Act 6 of 1974), the functions of a State Board shall be—
(a)*  *  *
(b) to advise the State Government on any matter concerning the prevention, control
or abatement of air pollution;
* * *
21. (1)*  *  *
(2)*  *  *
(3)*  *  *
(4)*  *  *
(5)*  *  *
(6)*  *  *
(7) Where a person to whom consent has been granted by the State Board under sub-
section (4) transfers his interest in the industry to any other person, such consent shall be
deemed to have been granted to such other person and he shall be bound to comply with all
the conditions subject to which it was granted as if the consent was granted to him originally.
* * *
22A. (1)*  *  *
(2) On receipt of the application under sub-section (1), the court may make such order
as it deems fit.
* * *
23. (1)*  *  *
(2) On receipt of information with respect to the fact or the apprehension of any
occurrence of the nature referred to in sub-section ( 1), whether through intimation under
that sub-section or otherwise, the State Board and the authorities or agencies shall, as early
as practicable, cause such remedial measure to be taken as are necessary to mitigate the
emission of such air pollutants.
* * *
26. (1)*  *  *
(2)*  *  *
(3)*  *  *
(4) When a sample of emission is taken for analysis under sub-section ( 1) and the
person taking the sample serves on the occupier or his agent, a notice under clause ( a) of
sub-section (3), then,—
(a) in a case where the occupier or his agent willfully absents himself, the person
taking the sample shall collect the sample of emission for analysis to be placed in a
container or containers which shall be marked and sealed and shall also be signed by
the person taking the sample, and
(b) in a case where the occupier or his agent is present at the time of taking the
sample but refuses to sign the marked and scaled container or containers of the sample
of emission as required under clause ( c) of subsection ( 3), the marked and sealed
container or containers shall be signed by the person taking the sample,
Functions of
State Boards.
Restrictions
on use of
certain
industrial
plants.
Power of
Board to make
application to
court for
restraining
person from
causing air
pollution.
Furnishing, of
information
to State Board
and other
agencies in
certain cases.
Power to take
samples of air
or emission
and procedure
to be followed
in connection
therewith.

10
and the container or containers shall be sent without delay by the person Caking the
sample for analysis to the laboratory established or specified under sub-section (7) of section
28 and such person shall inform the Government analyst appointed under sub-section (1) of
section 29, in writing, about the wilfull absence of the occupier or his agent, or, as the case
may be, his refusal to sing the container or containers.
* * * *
37. (1) whoever fails to comply with the provisions of section 21 or section 22 or
directions issued under section 31A, shall, in respect of each such failure, be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year and six months but which
may extend to six years and with fine, and in case the failure continues, with an additional fine
which may extend to five thousand rupees for every day during which such failure continues
after the conviction for the first such failure.
* * * *
53. ( 1) The Central Government may, in consultation with the Central Board by
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules in respect of the following matters namely:—
(a) the intervals and the time and place at which meetings of the Central Board or any
committee thereof shall be held and the procedure to be followed at such meetings, including
the quorum necessary for the transaction of business thereat, under sub-section ( 1) of
section 10 and under sub-section (2) of section 11;
(b)*  *  *
(c)*  *  *
(d)*  *  *
(e) the functions to be performed by the Central Board under clause (j) of sub-section
(2) of section 16;
* *  *
54. (1) * *  *
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a)*  *  *
* * *
(n) the authorities or agencies to whom information under subsection (1) of section 23
shall be furnished;
* * *
(x) the form in which the accounts of the State Board may be maintained under the sub-
section (1) of section 36;
* * *
Failure to
comply with
the provisions
of section 21
or section 22
or with the
directions
issued under
section 31A.
Power of
Central
Government
to make rules.
Power of State
Government
to make rules.

MGIPMRND—3169LS(S3)—19.11.2019.
LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981.
————
(Shri Gaurav Gogoi, M.P.)