1
Bill No. 337 of  2015
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE POPULATION CONTROL BILL, 2015
By
SHRI RAJESH PANDEY, M.P.
A
BILL
to control the growth of population in the country and for matters connected therewith
and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Population Control Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such a date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —
(i) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5
Definitions.

2
(ii) "Board" means the National Population Control Board constituted under section 3;
(iii) "Fund" means the Population Control Fund constituted under section 5; and
(iv) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, within six months of the coming into force of
this Act, constitute a Board to be known as the National Population Control Board.
(2) The Board shall consists of—
(a) a Chairperson, having such qualifications and experience, as may be
prescribed, to be appointed by the Central Government;
(b) Secretaries of the Union Ministries of Human Resource Development,
Health and Family Welfare, Social Justice and Empowerment, Panchayati Raj
and Minority Affairs as members;
(c) Chief Secretaries of State Governments as members;
(d) Director of the Institute of Population Studies as member;
(e) Director of the National Institute of Health and Family Welfare as
member;
(f) one representative each from the Medical Council of India and Family
Planning Association of India as member;
(g) two members from non-Governmental Organisations working in the
field of population control as members to be appointed by the Central
Government in such manner as may be prescribed; and
(h) two persons having experience in the field of population studies to be
appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
4. The Board shall—
(i) formulate two child norm policy within six months of its constitution;
(ii) implement two child norm policy;
(iii) recommend to the Central Government the penalty to be imposed on persons
who do not follow the two child norm policy;
(iv) recommend to the Central Government the incentives to be given to persons
who follow two child norm policy;
(v) formulate a coherent, integrated and comprehensive long-term plan which
shall ensure continued implementation of two child norm policy;
(vi) organise family planning workshops and launch family planning clinics;
(vii) undertake, promote and publish studies and investigations on Indian
population in all its aspects;
(viii) assemble and disseminate technical and scientific information relating to
medical, social, economic and cultural phenomena which affect or are affected by
population;
(ix) call upon any department, bureau, office or agency or instrumentality for
such assistance as it may require for the efficient performance of its functions;
(x) establish and adopt qualitative goals for the implementation of two child
norm policy;
(xi) undertake study on the effects of alternative rates of population growth on
family;
Functions and
Duties of
Board.
5
10
15
20
25
35
30
40
Constitution
of National
Population
Control
Board.

3
(xii) frame syllabus for inclusion of family planning in the school curriculum and
higher education;
(xiii) provide safe and effective means to couples desiring to space or limit
family size;
(xiv) suggest measures to reduce mortality and morbidity rates;
(xv) formulate policies and programs aimed at guiding and regulating labour
force, internal migration and spatial distribution of population;
(xvi) co-ordinate with international agencies and private organizations concerned
with population problems to overcome the problem of rising population; and
(xvii) undertake such other tasks as may be assigned to it by the Central
Government.
5. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Fund to be known as the Population
Control Fund for carrying out the purpose of this Act.
(2) The following shall be credited to the Fund—
(i) contributions and grants from the Central Government; and
(ii) donations and grants from sources within and outside India.
(3) The Fund shall be utilised by the Board in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that not more than fifteen percent of the Fund of the Board shall be utilized
for meeting expenses of the Board.
6. (1) The Board shall meet at least once in a month at such place and shall observe
such procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including the quorum
at such meetings) as may be prescribed.
(2) The Chairperson or, if he is unable to attend, such other member of the Board, as
may be chosen by the members present at the meeting from amongst themselves, shall
preside over the meeting.
7. The Board shall constitute continuing or ad-hoc committees consisting of such
number of members of the Board or such other experts as may be deemed necessary to
conduct studies for the Board, or to assist it in the efficient discharge of its functions.
8. (1) The Board shall appoint an Executive Director who shall be the Secretary to the
Board.
(2) Subject to the direction and supervision of the Chairperson of the Board, the
Executive Director shall be responsible for the operation of the national population program,
preparing periodic progress of program and annual budget estimates, and for recommending
policy to the Board, and perform such other duties as may be prescribed.
(3) The Board shall appoint such other staff as may be necessary to carry out the
provisions of this Act and shall arrange for such services as the Chairperson may deem
necessary for the performance of the Board's work.
9. The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
Chairperson, members, Executive Director and other staff and officers of the Board shall be
such as may be prescribed.
National
Population
Fund.
Meetings and
Committees.
Board to
constitute
Committees.
Other Staff of
the Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Salary and
allowances of
Chairperson
and members
of the Board.

4
10. (1) The Board shall prepare once every year in such form, as may be prescribed, an
annual report giving summary of its activities including information relating to plans, programs
and policies relating to population control during the previous year and such report shall
contain statements of annual accounts of the Board.
(2) A copy of the report shall be forwarded to the Central Government and the Central
Government shall cause such report to be laid, as soon as may be, after it is received, before
each House of Parliament.
11. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
12. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, provide such amount of funds to the State Governments, as may be
necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
13. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,  make rules
for carrying the purpose of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modifications in the rule of both the Houses  agree that the
rules should not be made, the rules shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect as the case may be; so, however that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice  to the validity of anything previously done under the rule.
Annual
report and its
laying before
Parliament.
Overriding
effect of the
provisions of
the Act.
Central
Government
to provide
adequate fund.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
One of the most serious social and economic problems that are being faced by India
today is its large population and rapid growth. Our Government has regarded a growing
population as a catalyst for bringing about swift economic development. We have been
following the growth differently, with one-fifth of the world's population but only five
per cent, of the world's arable land. Continuing rapid population growth would bring about
hardships, extreme poverty, and famine in the country. Soon we are going to be the number
one country in the world in population. The need is to frame a policy to ensure that India
which has been historically prone to severe floods and natural disasters and facing problems
of high urban growth of population and migration, is able to feed its people. The rapid
population growth that occurred after the independence could not be controlled by
subsequent Governments with policies prevalent from time to time. We don't have legislation
for population control. The existing policies has at times been praised as an effective tool
for ensuring the moderate control but not able to control its large population. To increase
the share of each Indian in the fruits of economic progress and meeting the grave social and
economic challenge of a high rate of population growth, a national legislation which respects
the secular beliefs of the Constitution and applies to all equally is required to be framed.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAJESH  PANDEY
November 13, 2015.
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of the Population Control Board. Clause 4
provides for providing incentives to the persons following two child norm policy. It also
provides for publishing of studies of the Board. Clause 5 provides for constitution of the
Population Control Fund. Clause 11 provides that the Central Government shall provide
adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes of the Act. The
expenditure relating to States shall be borne out of the Consolidated Funds of respective
States. Moreover, the expenditure in respect of Union territories shall be borne out of the
Consolidated Fund of India. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees
one thousand crore will be involved as a recurring expenditure per annum from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved.
6

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 13 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
7

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to control the growth of population in the country and for matters connected therewith
and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Rajesh Pandey, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3182LS(S3)—09-12-2015.