1
THE  CLINICAL ESTABLISHMENTS (REGISTRATION AND
REGULATION) AMENDMENT
BILL, 2015
By
SHRI A.P. JITHENDER REDDY, M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the Clinical Establishments (Registration and
Regulation) Act, 2010.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation)
Amendment Act, 2015.
 (2) It shall come into force on such date  as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Act, 2010 (hereinafter
referred to as the principal Act), in section 2,—
(i) after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(da) "injured person" means any individual in need of medical examination
and treatment as a result of an emergency medical condition;"; and
Short title
and
commencement.
Bill No. 338 of  2015
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Amendment
of section 2.
5
23 of 2010.
10

2
(ii) after clause (o), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(p) "transfer" means, with respect to stabilizing an individual, the
movement, including discharge of an injured person from a clinical establishment
at the direction and assistance of any person employed by, or affiliated or
associated, directly or indirectly, with such clinical establishment, but does not
include such a movement of an individual who—
(a) has been declared dead, or
(b) leaves such clinical establishment without the permission
of management of the clinical establishment.".
3. In section 12 of the principal Act, for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall
be substituted, namely:—
"(2) The clinical establishment shall be required to provide within the staff and
facilities available, without any delay or denial in treatment as a result of any delay in
furnishing medical costs and expenses by any individual requiring treatment, such
immediate medical examination and treatment as it considers necessary in order to
improve the emergency medical condition of any such injured person who comes or is
brought to such clinical establishment:
Provided that where a clinical establishment is unable to provide necessary
medical treatment to an injured person due to non-availability of requisite staff or
facility, such clinical establishment shall provide the best available treatment or
undertake such measures within its capacity which minimizes the risks to the health of
an injured person, in order to stabilize him, before any transfer is issued to the nearest
clinical establishment where such appropriate facilities and staff is available.".
4.  After section 40 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
"40A. (1) Notwithstanding any action that may arise under section 32, if any
clinical establishment does not comply with condition for registration prescribed under
section 12, such clinical establishment shall be liable with a fine which may extending
to five lakh rupees.
(2) For the purpose of adjudging under sub-section (1), the authority shall hold
an inquiry in the prescribed manner after giving the person concerned a reasonable
opportunity of being heard for the purpose of imposing any monetary penalty.
(3) While holding an inquiry, the authority shall have the power to summon and
enforce the attendance of any person acquainted with the facts and circumstances of
the case to give evidence or to produce any document which in the opinion of the
authority, may be useful for or relevant to the subject matter of the inquiry and if, on
such inquiry, it is satisfied that the person has failed to comply with the provision
specified in sub-section (1), it may by order impose the monetary penalty specified in
that sub-section to be deposited within thirty days of the order in the account specified
under sub-section (8) of section 42.
(4) While determinig the quantum of monetary penalty, the authority shall take
into account the category, size and type of the clinical establishment and local conditions
of the area in which the establishment is situated.
(5) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the authority may prefer an appeal
to the State Council within a period of three months from the date of the said decision.
Amendment
of section 12.
Insertion of
new section
40A.
Penalty for
non-
compliance
of condition
for
registration
by clinical
establishments.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(6) The manner of filing the appeal referred to in sub-section (5), shall be such as
may be prescribed.".
5. In section 42 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 8), for the words and figures
"sections 41 and 42", the words, figures and letters "sections 40A, 41 and 42" shall be
substituted.
Amendment
of section 42.
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
In India, the basic standard of care that is required of healthcare institutions for
providing emergency treatment is alarmingly low.
Injured patients in need of immediate medical treatment are denied life-saving treatment
at the most critical hour due to delay in payment of medical costs and expenses, and what
makes matters worse is the fact that there is not even a standardized protocol for inter-
hospital transfer of such patients.
The unregulated practice of transferring uninsured patients without first providing
them immediate minimum care or basic treatment seriously risks the health and well-being of
helpless citizens.
In view of the above, the Bill seeks to amend the Clinical Establishment (Registration
and Regulation) Act, 2010 with a view to—
(i) define who an injured person is;
(ii) define what constitutes a transfer, while dealing with the stabilization of a
patient;
(iii) raise the standard of care being provided by a clinical establishment, including
the basic requirements for a transfer in any emergency medical condition; and
(iv) provide for punishment for non-compliance of the conditions for registration
by clinical establishments.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; A.P.  JITHENDER REDDY
November 13, 2015.
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE  CLINICAL ESTABLISHMENTS (REGISTRATION AND REGULATION) ACT, 2010
(23 OF 2010)
* * * * * *
12. (1) * * * * *
(2) The clinical establishments shall undertake to provide within the staff and facilities
available, such medical examination and treatment as may be required to stabilize the
emergency medical conditions of any individual who comes or is brought to such clinical
establishments.
* * * * * *
42. (1) * * * * *
(8) The monetary penalty levied under section 41 and 42 shall be credited to such
account as the State Government may by order specify in this behalf.
* * * * * *
5
Condition for
Registration.
Disobedience
of direction,
obstruction
and refusal of
information.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Clinical Establishments (Registration and
Regulation) Act, 2010.
————
(Shri A.P. Jithender Reddy, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3022LS(S3)—10-12-2015.