Bill No. 33 of 1958. @ 
THE MINES AND MINERALS (REGULA-
TION AND DEVELOPMENT) AMEND-
MENT BILL, 1958 
( As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA) 

Bill No. 33 of 19S8. 
THE MINES AND MINERALS~GULATION AND 
DEVELOPMENT) AMEND NT BILL, 1958 
(As INTRODUCED IN THE U'1¥4 :BRA) 
A 
BILL 
to a1.'lpnd the lI-lines find lIJifLHats (Regulation and Development) Act, 
J 957, for the P'( rpu;e of t:xempting mining leases granted before 
the 25th day of October, 1949, in respect of coal from certain pro-
visions of that Act in view of the importance of such 
leases in the conte;t:t of coal production generally. 
BE it emicted by Parliament in the Ninth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may he called the Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Short title. 
Development) Amendment Act, 1958. 
S 2. After section :.;0 cf the Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Insertion of 
10 
IS 
Development) Act, 1957, the following section shall be inserted, and neW ~ection 
shall be deemed always to have been inserted, namely: - ~~f~:S~. 
"30A. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Special pro-
provisions of sub-section (1) of section 9 and of sub-section v:isions ~la­
(1) of section ]6 snaIl not apply to or in relation to mining leases~: rear:; 
granted before the 25th day of October, 1949, 1n respect of coal, f~ ~figran­
but the Central Go-vernment, if it is satisfied that it is expedient !sth~:r.' 
so to do, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that 1949· 
all or any of the said provisions (including Hny rules made under 
sections 13 and 18) shall. apply to or in relation to such leases 
subject to such exceptions and modifications, if any, as may be 
specified in that or in any subsequent notification.". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In view 0$ its importance as a basic fuel and the position it occupies 
in the country's economy, coal has always been treated dilferently 
from other minerals. It is in recognition of this that no rules have 
been framed so far under section 7 of the Mines and Minerals (Regu-
lation and Development) Act, 1948, in regard to modification of the 
terms and conditions of mining leases for coal granted before the 
commencement of that Act, though other minerals have been covered. 
2. The Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act, 
195'1· (67 of 1957), which repJaces the Act of 1948, however, specifically 
extends the rate of royalty prescribed in the Second Schedule to 
mining leases granted befor~ the 25th October, 1949, in respect of 
coal also and makes it obligatory for the other terms and conditions 
of such leases t~ be brought into conformity with the provisions of 
the Act and the rules made under sections 13 and 18. It is considered 
that these changes will have numerous undesirable consequences. 
The areas covered by these mining leases are principally in West 
Bengal and Bihar'and they account for as much as 80 per cent. of the 
total coal production in the country. The royalties paid on this coal 
vary over a wide range but are generally much below the rate per 
ton pre:;cribed in the Second Schedule. A sudden and uniform 
increase of these royalties is.1ikely to have an unsettling effect on the 
industry and may retard the programme of coal production under the 
Second Five Year Plan. The same adverse effect would be felt by a 
sudden modification of the other terms and conditions. 
3. The object of the present Bill is accordingly to exempt mining 
leases for coal granted before the 25th October, 1949, from the opera-
tion of sub-section (1) of section 9 and sub-section (1) of section 16 
of the Act, with powers to Government to extend these provisions 
to such leases at a future date, subject to such exceptions and modifi-
cations as may be considered necessary. 
SWARAN SINGH. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 19th March 1 1958. 
2 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Section aOA proposed to be inserted in the principal Act by 
clause 2 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to apply 
to mining leases granted before the 2,5th day of October, 1949, in 
respect of coal certain provisions of that Act and the rules made 
thereunder subject to such exceptions and modifications as the 
Central Government may think fit to make. Coal being a basic 
fuel in the economy of the country has required and continues 
to require special consideration. Approximately 80 per cent. of 
the total production of coal in the country is attributable to pre-
1949 leases, and such leases have, therefore, always been treated 
on a footing different from that obta~g in the case of leases for 
other minerals. Thus, no rules have been made under section 7 of 
the Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act, 1948, 
in respect of such leases, although rules have been made in respect 
of le1'lse~ for other minerals. Royalties payable under the pre-
1949 leases in respect of coal vary over a wide range and are much 
below those payable under sUb-section. (l) of section 9. The imme-
diate application of sub-section (1) of section 9 and sub-section 
(1) of section 16 to such leases, resulting in a sudden and uniform. 
increase of royalties and in the modification of the period and area, 
may have an unsettling effect on the industry and may adversely 
affect the programme of coal production. Power is accordingly 
being taken to apply the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 9 
and sub-section (1) of section 16 as and when it is convenient to 
do so, subject to such exceptions and modifications, if any, as may 
be necessary. It is possible that the rules under sections 13 and 18 
may also have to be modified in their application to such leases. 
In the circumstances of the present case the power delegated is of 
a normal character. 
.3 

ROJ8Itica in 
relpect of 
minina 1caIca. 
power to 
modify mi-
aina Ielte. 
~thbe-
October. 
1949· 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRAC1'S FROM THE rvIINES ANI) MINERALS (REGULATION AND DEVELOP-
MENT) ACT, 1957 
(No. 67 OF 1957) 
9. (1) The holder of a mining lease granted before the com-
mencement of this Act shall, notwithstanding anything contained 
in the instrument of lease or in any law in force at such commence-
ment, pay royalty in respect of any mineral removed by him 
from the leased area after such commencement, at the rate for the 
time being specified in the Second Schedule in respect of that 
mineral. .. 
(2) The holqer of a mining lease granted on or after the com-
mencement of this Act shall pay royalty in respect of any mineral 
removed by him from the leased area at the rate for the time being 
speciiietl in the Second Schedule in respect of that mineral. 
(3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, amend the Second Schedule so as to enhance or reduce 
the rate at which royalty shall be payable in respect of any mineral 
with effect from such date as may be specified in the notification: 
Provided that the Central Government shall not-
(a) fix the rate of royalty in respect of any mineral so as 
to exceed twenty per cent. of the sale price of the mineral at 
the pit's head, or 
(b) enhance the rate of royalty in respect of any mineral 
more than once during any period of four years. . 
. . . . -.., 
16. (1) All mining leases granted before the 25th day of Octo-
ber, 1949, shall, as soon as may be after the commencement of this 
Act, be brought into conformity with the provisions of this Act and 
the rules made under sections 13 and 18: 
Provided that if the Central Government is of opinion that in 
the interests of mineral development it is expedient so to do, it 
may, for reasons to be recorded, permit any person to hold one or 
more such mining leases covering in anyone State a total area in 
excess of that specified in clause (b) of section 6 or for a period 
exceeding that specified in sub-section (1) of section 8. 
4 

5 
(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules for the purpose of giving effect to the provi-
sions of sub-section (1) and in particular such rules shall ~ 
provide-
(a) for giving previous notice of the modification or alter-
ation proposed to be made in any existing mining lease to the 
lessee and where the lessor is not the Central Government, 
also to the lessor and for affording him an opportunity of 
showing cause against the proposal; 
(b) for the payment of compensation to the lessee in res-
pect of the reduction of any area covered by the existing min-
ing lease; and 
(c) for the principles on which, the manner in which, and 
the authority by which, the said compensation shall be deter-
mined. 
• • • • 

LOKSABHA 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Mines and Minera13 (Regulation and Development) 
Act, 1957, for the purpose of exempting mining leases 
granted before the 25th day of October, 1949, in respect of 
coal from certain provisions of that Act in view of the impor-
tance of such leases· in the context of coal production 
generally. 
(Sardar Swaran Singh, 
Minister of Steel, 
Mines and Fuel.) 