apr 909
As ivrtopuce In Lox 54884

Bill No. 33 of 1992

‘THE NATIONAL WATERWAY (KOLLAM-KOTTAPURAM
STRETCH OF WEST COAST CANAL AND CHAMPAKARA AND
UDYOG-MANDAL CANALS) BILL, 1992.

A
BILL

to provide for the declaration of the Kollam-Kotitpuram stretch of West
Coast Canal and Champakara and Udyogmandal Canals to be 6
national waterway and also to provide for the regulation and deve-
lopment of the said stretch and the Canals for purposes of shipping
and navigation on the said waterway and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-third Year of the Republic
of India as follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the National Waterway (Kollam-
Kottapuram Stretch of West Coast Canal and Champakara and Udyog-
mandal Canals) Act, 1992,

Short
title and
Com-
mence-
ment.


Declara-
tion of
Kollam_
Kotta.
puram
stretch of
West
Coast

and
Champa-
Kara and
Udyog.
mandal

lobea

national

water-
way.

Declara-
tion as
to expe.
diency of
control
by the
Union of
Kollam.
Kotta-
puram
stretch
of West

Canal
and
champa-

Udyog-
mendal
Canals

purpo-
ses.

4 2

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. The Kollam-Kottapuram stretch of West Coast Canal and
Champakara and Udyogmandal Canals, the limits of which are specified
in the Schedule, is hereby declared to be a national waterway.

3. It is hereby declared that it ig expedient in the public interest that
the Union should take under its control the regulation and development
of Kollum-Kottapuram stretch of West Coast Canal and Champakara and
Udyogmandal Canals for purposes of shipping and navigation on the
national waterway to the extent provided in the Inland Waterways, Autho-
rity of India Act, 1985.

10 82


See

THE SCHEDULE
(See section 2)

Luts or THE Nationa, Waterway (KobtaM-KorTAruRAM STRETCH OF
Wesr Coast CANAL AND CHAMPAKARA AND UDYOGMANDAL CANALS)

The northern limit of the West Coast Canal shall be a line drawn
across the river Periyar parallel to Kottapuram road bridge (NH-17)
connecting Maliankara and Valiapanikan Thuruthu at a distance of 1.0
kilometer upstream, and the southern limit shall be a line drawn across
the Ashtamudi Kayal at a distance of 100 meters south of Kollam jetty.

‘The Champakara Canal starting from the confluence with the West
Coast Canal and ending at the railway bridge (railway siding for Cochin
Oil Refinery) near Fertilizers and Chemicals Travancore Limited, boat
basin.

The Udyogmandal Canal starting from the confluence with West
Coast Canal and ending at the Padalam road pridge (Eloor-Edayar).


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

In view of lack of suitable organisation and the paucity of resources
with the State Governments, the development of Inland Water Transport
has not made much headway. There are certain advantages in this mode
of transport, such as low cost of transport, energy efficiency, generation of
employment among weaker sections of the community and less of pollu-
tion. The various committees set up by the Government for the purpose
of looking into this matter recommended that the Central Government
should declare certain waterways as national waterways and assume
responsibility for their development.

2. The Central Government have already constituted the Inland
Waterways Authority of India under the Inland Waterways Authority
of India Act, 1985 (82 of 1985) for the regulation and development of
inland waterways for purposes of shipping and navigation,

3. Allahabad-Haldia stretch of the Ganga-Bhagirathi-Hooghly river
and the Sadiya-Dhubri stretch of the Brahmaputra river have already
been declared as national waterways and the Inland Waterways Autho-
rity of India has taken up the development, maintenance and manage-
ment of these waterways.

4. It is now proposed to declare the Kollam-Kottapuram stretch of
West Coast Canal and Champakara and Udyogmandal Canals as the third
national waterway. Information currently available indicates that the
infrastructural facilities essentially required for safe and convenient
shipping and navigation are not adequate for sustained operation by large
mechanised crafts. Regulation and development of Kollam-Kottapuram.
stretch of West Coast Canal and Champakara and Udyogmandal Canals
for purposes of shipping and navigation on the proposed national water-
way under the control of the Union is in the public interest and declara-
tion to that effect has also been made in the Bill,

9, The छा] seeks to achieve the above objects.

New Detar;
The 14th February, 1992, JAGDISH TYTLER.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

The effect of clause 3 of the Bill will be to entrust the responsibility
to regulate and develop the proposed national waterway for the purposes
of shipping and navigation to the Union, The regulation and develop-
ment of the proposed national waterway will be carried out by the
Inland Waterways Authority of India constituted under the Inland
Waterways Authority of India Act, 1985 (82 of 1985). Consequently,
three distinct functions, namely, development, maintenance and manage-
ment will devolve on the Inland Waterways Authority of India. The
financial implications are indicated in the succeeding paragraphs,

2. It has been visualised that the total originating and terminating
traffic in the region is 16.60 million tonnes. Out of this, the estimated
share of Inland Water Transport would be 2.00 million tonnes, After
full development of the proposed national waterway, the anticipated
Inland Water Transport traffic may be 3.5 million tonnes by 199495, ‘This
traffic is expected to be handled at 15 terminals, namely, Kottapuram,
Emakulam, Cochin, Vaikom, Shartallai, Vechoor, Ambalapuzha, Trikkurn
mapuzha, Arattupuzha, Kayamkulam, Chavara, Ashtamudi, Arookutty,
Allepey and Kollam,

3. The development of the canals and the infrastructural facilities so
as to.cater to the requirements of shipping and navigation to handle the,
above-mentioned traffic include development of the waterway for navi-
getion, channel marking; construction of jetties, transit sheds, installa-
tion_of handling equipment, ete. It is estimated that the expenditure With
respect to the said infrastructural facilities will be of the order of
Rs. 62.00 crores. This expenditure will be of a non-recurring nature.

4. In addition to the said expenditure of non-recurring expenditure,
it is estimated that an expenditure of recurring nature of the order of
Rs, 5.28 crores annually will be incurred for operating the waterway and
terminals, |

5. The declaration of the proposed stretch of the West Cousi Canal
and Champakara and Udyogmandal Canals as National Waterway and to
provide for the regulation and development of the said canal for purposes
of shipping and navigation is not expected to involve any other expendi-
ture of recurring or non-recurring nature.


LOK SABHA

a
BILL

to provide for the declaration of the Kollam-Kottapuram stretch of West
‘Coast Canal and Champakara and Udyogrndal Canals to be a national
waterway and elso to provide for the regulation and development
‘of the said stretch and the Canals for purposes of shipping and
navigation on the said waterway and for matters connected there-
with or incidental thereto,

(Shri Jagdish Tytler, Minister of State of the
Ministry of Surface Transport)