AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

=1) 1998

B

Bill No. 33 of 1998

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1998
By
Sunt G.M. Banarwatta, M.P,
A
BILL,

‘further to amend the Constitution of India.

| it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as

1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1998.

2. In article 15 of the Consutution, alter clause (4), the following clause shall be
namely:

>(5) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, save the provisions of
articles 25, 26, 28 and 29, the State shall, in exercise of its authority, under clauses
(3) and (4) of this article, have free and complete power to decide in its discretion
‘the nature and extent of any special provision, including the percentage of reservation,
any, made to give effect to any special provision.”.

Short utle.

Amendment of
article 15.


‘Amendment 3. In article 16 of the Constitution, —
of article 16. ‘
(0) in clause (4A), for the words “the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes” substitute “the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the backward
classes of citizens”; and

5. (igfter Clause (4A), the following clause shall be added, namely:—
“(4AA) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, —

(a) the State shall, in exercise of its authority under clauses (4) and
(4A) of this article, have free and complete power in regard to the
identification of a class or classes of its citizens and in regard to the
percentages of reservation made for any or all of such backward classes.

Explanation —The expression “free and complete power" shall
include the free and complete power to decide in its discretion whether
the benefit of reservation may or may not apply to any specific
appointments or posts and also whether the benefit of reservation may or
may not be subject to any restriction the State may deem fit without in
any way affecting the operation of the provision contained in sub-clause
(b) of this clause; and

(0) the State shall not deny benefit of reservation to any section of
a class identified as a backward class of citizens on economic

consideration.”.

Amendment 4. In the Ninth Schedule to the Constitution, after entry 257A and before the
ofthe Ninth Explanation, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:—
Schedule

“2S7B. The Kerala State Backward Classes (Reservation of Appointments or
Posts in the Services under the State) Act, 1995.".


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Reservation of seats in educational institutions and of appointments or posts in
Services are key factors in a policy directed towards securing social justice for various
‘ections of the society. The practice of reservation, has a long history,

particularly in the
South. Articles 15(4), 16(4) and 16(4A) form the constitutional basis

for reservations in

2. In Indira Sawhney and others versus Union of India and others (AIR 1993 SC
7), the Supreme Court held that the total reservations under article 16(4) should not
fifly per cent.

3. Judicial pronouncements have placed certain sections outside the purview of
rvation and have also led to the denial of benefit of reservation to certain sections of
Backward Classes, styled as the ‘creamy layer’, on extraneous economic considerations,
se restrictions and exclusions not only upset the age-long schemes of reservations in
5, particularly in Tamil Nadu and Kerala, but are also destructive of any effective
policy of reservation and social justice

4. The Bill seeks (o restore the derailed policy of reservation by providing that the
te shall have free and complete power (i) to decide, in its discretion, the nature and
nt of any special provisions made pursuant to articles 15(3) and. 15(4) and (4) to
ide, in its discretion. whether the benefit of reservation, made pursuant to clauses (4)
(4A) of article 16, may or may not apply (0 any specific appointments or posts and
whether the benefit of such reservations may or may not be subject to any restrictions,
6 Bill also secks to provide that the State shall not deny benefit of reservation to any
ction of the backward class, on economic consideration.

__ 5. Reservation ih promotion available to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
ribes is also ought to be extended to Backward Classes,

6, Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to bring the Kerala State Backward Classes (Reservation

pointments or Posts in the Services under the State) Act, 1995 within the purview of

linth Schedule to the Constitution so that it gets due protection in regard to judicial

, Earlier, the Constitution (Seventy-sixth Amendment) Act, 1994 had placed the

il Nadu Backward Classes, Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Reservation of

in Educational Institutions and of apy
?) Act, 1993, in the Ninth Schedules

‘The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.

ointments or posts in the services under the

6. M. BANATWALLA.


Prohibition of
discrimination
on grounds of
religion, race.
caste. sex oF
place of bith,

Equality of op-
portumty in
matters of pab-
licemployment

Atmendment of
the Ninth
Schedule

EXTRact FROM THE

*

ANNEXURE

*

|ONSTITUTION OF INDIA

a

*

*

15. (1) The State shall not discriminate against any citizen on grounds only of religion,
race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them.

*

*

(4) Nothing in this article or in clause (2) of article 29 shall prevent the State from
ly and educationally

making any special provision for the advancement of any sociall
backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.

16. (/) There shall be equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to

employment or appointment to any office under the State,

*

*

*

»

*

*

(4A) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision for
of posts in the services under
the State in favour of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes which, in the cpinion

reservation in matiers of promotion to any class or clas

of the States, are not adequately represented in the services under the State.

*

*

NINTH SCHEDULE

*

(Article 31B)

*

*

*

287A. ‘The Tamil Nadu Backward Classes, Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
(Reservation of Seats in Educational Institutions and of appointments or posts in the Services
under the State) Act, 1993

*

*

’


MGIP(PLU)MRND—203LS—8-5.98.

LOK SABHA

A

BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri G.M. Banatwalla,, M.P)