Bill No. 33 of ItS' 
THE DOWRY PROIllBITION BILL, 
1959 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
ON 24m APRIL, 1959) 

of 1860. 
Bi!!~o._ 3~ of_!?S9 
THE DOWRY PROHIBITION BILL, 1959 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to prohibit the giving or taking of dowry. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Tenth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1959. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu ~~~~ ~tJe • 
.5 and Kashmir. commence-ment. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, and . 
different dates may be appointed for different States. 9~fi~ldowry 
2. In this Act, "dowry" means any property or valuable security 
10 given or agreed to be given to one party to a marriage or to any 
other person on behalf of such party by the other party to the 
marriage or by any other person on behalf of such other party 
either at the marriage or before or after the marriage, as considera-
tion for the betrothal or marriage of the said parties, but does not 
15 include-
(i) dower or mahar in the case of persons to whom the 
Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) applies; or 
(ii) any presents made at the time of the marriage to either 
party to the marriage in the form of ornaments, clothes and 
20 other articles not exceeding two thousand rupees in value in the 
aggregate. 
Explanation.-The expression "valuable security" has the 
same meaning as in section 30 of the Indian Penal Code. 

Penalty 
for giving 
or taking 
dowry. 
3. If any person, after the commencement of this Act, gives or 
takes or abets the giving or taking of dowry, he shall be punishable 
with imprisonment which may extend to six months, or with fine 
which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both. 
Penalty 4. If any person, after the commencement of this Act, demands, J 
~~manding directly or indirectly, from the parents or guardian of a bride or 
dowry. bridegroom, as the case may be, any dowry, he shall be punishable 
Agree-
ment for 
giving. 
or taking 
dowry to 
be void. 
with imprisonment which may extend to six months, or with fine 
which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both. 
5. Any agreement for the giving or taking of dowry shall be void. 10 
Dowry to 6. (1) Where, in contravention of the provisions of this Act, any 
~~e fbrenefit dowry is received by any person other than the woman in connec-
of. the tion with whose marriage it is given, that person shall transfer it to 
h'::eh~irs. the woman within one year of the date of the marriage or, if the 
woman is a minor, within one year after she has attained the age IS 
of eighteen years, and pending such transfer, shall hold it in trust 
for the benefit of the woman. 
(2) If any person fails to transfer any property as required by 
sub-section (I) and within the time limited therefor, he shall be 
punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six months, or 20 
with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both; 
but such punishment shall not absolve the person from hit obliga-
tion to transfer the property as required by sub-section (1). 
(3) Wh2rc the woman entitled to any property under sub-
section (1) dies before receiving it, the heirs of the woman shall be 25 
entitled to claim it from the person holding it for the time being. 
(4) Nothing contained in this section shall affect the provisions 
of section 3 or section 4. 
Cogni:lance 7. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
of offences. P ed 1898 roc ure, ,- 30 
(a) no court inferior to that of a magistrate of the first class 
shall try any offence punishable under this Act; 
(b) no court shall take cognizance of any such offence 
except on a complaint made within one year from the date of 
the offence. 35 

j 
8. Every offence under this Act shall be non-cognizable, ba;lable 0t,!febnces 
u e non-
and non-compoundable. cognizable. 
bailable. 
non-
compound-
able. 
9. (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Power to 
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. ~~ 
5 (2) All rules made under this Act shall be laid before the State 
Legislature, as soon as may be, after they are made. 
Andhra 10. On the date on which this Act comes into force in the State Repeals. 
~~~dis~f of Andhra Pradesh or the State of Bihar, the Andhra Pradesh Dowry 
1958. Prohibition Act, 1958, or, as the case may be, the Bihar Dowry Res-
~Jh~f fg5~. 10 traint Act, 1950, shall stand repealed. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The object of this Bill is to prohibit the evil practice of glvmg 
and taking of dowry. This question has been engaging the atten-
tion of the Government for some time past, and one of the methods 
by which this problem, which is essentially a social one, was sought 
to be tackled was by the conferment of improved property rights 
on women by the Hindu Succession Act, 1956. It is, however, felt 
that a law which makes the practice punishable and at the 
same time ensures that any dowry, if given, does enure for the 
benefit of the wife will go a long way to educating public opinion 
and to the eradication of this evil. There has also been a persistent 
demand for such a law both in and outside Parliament. Hence the 
present Bill. It, however, takes care to exclude presents in the form 
of clothes, ornaments, etc., which are customary at marriages, pro-
vided the value thereof does not exceed Rs. 2,000/-. Such a provi-
sion appears to be necessary to make the law workable. 
NEW DELHI; ASOKE K. SEN. 
The 21st April, 1959. 

MEMORANDUM ttEGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the State Government to make 
l'ules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. as occasions may 
arise, in practice, for the making of rules in respect of minor mat-
ters, like the manner in which any dowry shallbl! transferred un-
der clause 6, The delegation of power is of a normal character. 

"' .. 
LOK SABH! 
A 
BILL 
.. ) '. 
to prohibit the giving or taking of dowry 
(Shri Asoke K. Sen, 
Minister oj Law.) 