· 8W No •. 3J of 1"1 
THE BANARAS HINDU :UNIVERSITY 
(AMENDMENT) BaL, ;I¢I 
(As INTRODUCED IN Lolt SABRA 
ON sm l\AAy, I¢I) 

• 
LOK SABRA 
CORRIGENDA 
TO 
fHE BANRAS HINDU UNIVERSITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1961 
(To be/As introduced in'Lok Sabha) 
1. Page 1, against line 7,-
for "1 of 1915" read "16 of 1915" 
2. Page 2, line 23,-
for "principle Act" read "principal Act" 
3. Page 10, clause 14,-
in the margiool heading to section 16D, for "ingood" read 
"in good" 
4. Page 13, lines 10 and 11,-
after "University" for ", "read" ;" 
5. Page 16, in th~ marginal heading to Statute No. 3,-
for "Pro. Vice-Chancellor" read "Pro-Vice-Chancellor" 
6. Page 22, line 4,-
for "senioriy" read "seniority" 
7. Page 23, line S,-
after "direct" omit "." 
S. Page 23, line 23,-
for "ominlated" read "nominated" 
9. Page 23, line 23,-
after "Chancellor" omit ":" 
10. Page 25, line 1,-
after "Rector" om.it "." 
11. Page 26, lines 22 and 23,-
for "Exe-tive Council" read "Exe-cutive Council" 
12. Page 27, line 11,-
after "Vice-Chancellor" insert "," 
13. Page 29, line 35,-
for "member" read "members" 
14. Page 30, line 32,-
after "according" insert "to" 
15. Page 31, line 5,-
for "Academi Council" read "Academic Council" 
• 16. Page 31, line 9,-
for "Shalll" read "shall" 

17. Page 32, line 32,-
for "The" read "the" 
2 
18. Page 35, in the m8lrginal heading to Statute No. 34,-
jor "privilege" read "privileges" 
19. Page 37, line 27,- . 
for "(D.Se)" read "(D.Se.)" 
20. Page 38, in the marginal heading to Statute No. 40,-
for "Uniersity" read "University" 
21. Page 41, line 17,-
for "Accounts" read "Amounts" 
22. Page 41, in Form B,-
for column 4, read-
''Deduction from Salary" 
23. Page 41, in Form B,-
for column 6, read--
"Rateable interest or Profit" 
24. Page 41, in Farm B,-
for column 9, read-
"Repayment" 
25. Page 41, in Form B,-
for column 10, read-
"Closing Balance" 
26. Page 42, lines 30 and 31, in Column 4,-
for "Pro.-Vice-Chan-cellor." read "Pro-Vice-Chan-cellor," 
27. Page 48, in the marginal heading to section 8,-
for "vacan cies" read "vacan-cies" 
28. Page 48, in the marginal heading to section 14,-
for "charge" read "charges" 
29. Correct line numbers on pages 2, 3, 6 to 8, 11, 12, 32, 36 and 41. 
NEW DELm, 
May 4,1961. 
VaiBakha 14, 1883 ""(Saka) 

I, of 1915. 
• 
p6(B)CS-1 
8W No. U of 1,,1 
THE BANARAS HINDU UNIVERSITY (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1961 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA) 
A 
BIlJ.. 
further to amend the Banaras Hindu University Act, 1915. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twelfth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Banaras Hindu University Short title 
(Amendment) Act, 1961. ::'ce::;. 
S (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central-Govern-
10 
IS 
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In the Bananlc) Hindu University Act, 1915 (hereinafter refer- Amendment 
red to as the principal Act), for section 2, the following section shall of lection 2. 
be substituted, namely:-
'2. In. this Act, unless the context otherwise :requires,-
(a) "Academic Council" means the Academic Council of the 
University; 
(b) "College" means a college or teaching institution (other 
than a secondary, primary or infant school or pathasala) main-
tained by, or admitted to the privileges of, the University; 
(c) "Court" means the University Court; 
(d) "Executive Council" means the University Executive 
Council; 
(e) "Faculty" means a Faculty of the University; 
• 
Definition •. 

2 
(f) "Ordinances" means the Ordinances of the University 
for the time being in force; 
(g) "Regulations" means the Regulations of the University 
for the time being in force; 
(h) "Statutes" means the Statutes of the University for the 5 
time being in force; 
(i) "teacher" means a salaried profeasor. reader, lecturer or 
tutor who imparts instruction in a college of the University and 
includes any other person who is declared to be a teacher by 
the Academic Council; 10 
(j) "University" meanS' the Banaras Hindu University.'. 
A.eadmlat I. In section 3 of the principal Act,-
., MCtion 3. 
(a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(1) The Chancellor, the Pro-Chancellor and the Vice- 15 
Chancellor and the members of the Court and the Academic 
Council. for the time being, shall be a body corporate by the 
name of the Banaras Hindu University."; 
(b) in sub-section (3) ,-
(i) after the word "religion", the words "and in moral 20 
and spiritual values" shall be inserted; 
(ii) the words "and moral" shall be omitted. 
A __ meat 4. In section 4 of the principle Act, in the proviso, for the words 
., Hc:tion 04. "to those who have consented to receive it", the words "to those who 
or, in the case of minors, whose parents or guardians have given their 2S 
consent thereto in writing" shall be substituted. 
Ameadmellt 
of lect io. 
ttA· 
5. In section 4A of the principal Act,-
(a.) for clauses (2) and (3), the following clauses sh,all be 
lubltftuted, namely:-
"(2) to promote Oriental stu~ies i~cludin~ Ve~ic, Hindu, 30 • 
Buddhist and Jain studies, to gIve instructIon In Hindu 
theology and religion end in moral and spiritual values and to 
impart physical training; • 

S 
10 
15 
(.9) to hold examinations and to grant and confer de;-
!'eel and other academic distinctions to and on persons-
(a) who shan have pursued a course of study in 
the University or in a College and passed the examina-
tion or who shall have carried. on research work in the 
manner prescribed by the Ordinances, or 
(b) who are teachers of the University or any col-
lege under conditions laid down in the Statutes or the 
Ordina_~ces and shall have passed the examinations of 
the University under like conditions, or 
(c) who, being women, shall have pursued a course 
of private study in subjects provided for by the Ordi-
nances and shan have passed the examinations of the 
University in their subjects under conditions laid down 
in the Ordinances;"; 
(b) after clause (9), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
.. (9A) to institute, establish, maintain, reconstitute, 
amalgamate, divide or abolish departments, faculties or col-
20 leges and carry out ins~ion thereof and inquiry in rela-
tion thereto;"; 
25 
(c) after clause (12), the following clause shall be· inserted, 
namely:-
.. (12A) to regulate and enforce discipline among sala-
ried officers, teachers and other employees of the University 
in accordance with the Ordinances;"; 
(d) in clause (13), the word "and" at the end shall be 
omitted; 
(e) after clause (13), the following clauses and word shall 
30 be inserted, na:rnely:--
• 
3S 
"(l3A) to acquire, hold, manage and dispose of property 
movable or immovable. including trust or endowed property, 
for the purposes of the University; 
(13B) with the approval of the Central Goverrunent, to 
borrow, on the security of University property, money for 
the purposes of the University; and" . 
• 

4 
Amendment C. In seetion 5 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after the of 18ction S. 
word "equipment", the words, ",of any College" shall be inserted. 
Substitution 7. For sections 6 and 7 of the principal Act, the following sections 
ofDCW teC- h 11 b b' d 1 tiCIDS for eec- s a e su stItute , name y:-
lioas 6 and 
7· 
Rector. 
Officers of 
the Univer-
sity. 
ChanceUer. 
Powers of 
Chancellor. 
"6. The Governor of the State of Uttar Pradesh shall be the 5 
Rector of the University. 
7. The following shall be the officers of the University, 
namely:-
(a.) the Chancellor, 
(b) the Pro-Chancellor, 
(c) the Vice-Chancellor, 
(d) the Pro-Vice-Chancellor, 
(e) the Treasurer, 
(t) the Registrar, , 
(g) the Deans of Faculties, 
(h) the Dean of Students, 
(i) the Librarian, 
(j) the Chief Proctor, and 
(k) such other persons in the service of the University 
10 
15 
as may be declared by the Statutes to be the officers of the 20 
University. 
7A. (1) The Chancellor shall be elected by the Court and 
shall hold office for a period of three years: 
Provided that, notwithstanding the expiry of the said period 
of three years, he shall continue to hold office until the election 25 
of his successor. 
(2) Where a casual vacancy arises in the office of the 
Chancellor, the Pro-Chancellor shall exercise the functions of 
the Chancellor until a new Chancellor is elected. 
7B. (1) The Chancellor shall, by virtue of his office, be the 30 
Head of the University. 
(2) The Chancellor shall, if present, preside at convocations 
of the University for conferring degrees and at all meetings of 
the Court. 

5 
& 
?C. (1) The Pro-Chancellor shall be elected by the Court Pro-Chanc:e· 
and shall hold office for a period of three years: lIor. 
Provided that, notwithstanding the expiry of the said period 
of three years, he shall continue to hold office until the election 
of his successor. 
(2) Any casual vacancy in the office of the Pro-Chancellor 
shall be filled by a person appointed by the Chancellor on the 
recommendation of the Executive Council; and the person so 
appointed shall hold office until the election of his successor. 
10 7D. (1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by Ute ~Chan-
Visitor from a panel of not less than three persons who shall be CI 
recommended by a committee conSisting of three members: 
Provided that, if the Visitor does not approve of any of the 
persons so recommended, he may call for fresh recommendations. 
IS (2) Two members of the committee shall be persons not 
connected with the University or college nominated by the Exe-
cutive Council and one member shall be a person nominated by 
the Visitor who shall also appoint one of the three members to 
be the Chairman of the committee . 
. w (3) The Vice-Chancellor shall be a whole-time salaried 
~fficer of the University. 
(4) The Vice-Chancellor shall hold office for a period of 
three years and shall be eligible for re-appointment: 
Provided that, notwithstanding the expiry of the said period 
2.5 of three years, he shall continue to hold office until his successor 
is appointed and enters upon his office: 
Provided further that the Visitor may direct that a Vice-
Chancellor whose term of office has expired shall continue to 
hold ofBce for suc)). period not exceeding one year as may be 
30 specified in the direction. 
35 
• 
(5) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of ser-
vice of the Vice-Chancellor shall be prescribed by the Ordinan-
ces. 
(6) In the case of a casual vacancy in the office of the Vice-
Chancellor, the Pro-Vice-Chancellor, if any, shall, until the 
appointment of a new Vice-ChancellC!l', perform the functions of 
the Vice-Chancellor: 
Provided that if there is no Pro-Vice-Chancellor, the Regis-
trar shall carryon the current duties of the Vice-Chancellor and 
• 

Powers and 
duti.s or Vi· 
(''C Chancel· 
lor. 
call a meetIng of the Executive Council forthwith and take itl 
directions for the carrying on of the work of the University. 
7E. (1) The Vice-Chancellor who shall be the principal exe-
cutive and academic officer of the University, shall take 'rank 
next to the Pro-Chancellor and shall exercise general supervi- S 
sion and control over the affairs of the University and give eft'el.~ 
to the decisions of its authorities. 
(2) The V,ice-Chancellor ~hall be the ex-officio Chairman 
of the Executive Council, the Academic Council and the Fin-
ance Committee and shall, in the absence of the Chancellor and 10 
the Pro-Chahc~llor, preside at convocations to confer degrees 
and also 6t meetings of the Court; he shall be entitled to be 
present at and to address any meeting of any authority or body 
of the University but shall not be entitled to vote thereat unless 
he is a member of such authority or body. IS 
(3) The Vice-Chancellor shall be responsible for the main· 
tenance of discipline in the University and may delegate such of 
his powers in this regard to such persons in the employment of 
the University as he may deem necessary, 
(4) It shall be the duty of the Vice-Chancellor to see that 20 
the provisions of this Act, the Statutes, the Ordinances and the 
Regulations are duly observed. 
(5) The Vice.Chancellor shall have power to convene meet-
ings of the Court, the Executive Council and the Academic 
Council and shall perform all such acts as may be necessary to 2S 
carry out or further the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and 
the Ordinances. 
(6) If, in the opinion of the Vice-Chancellor, any emer-
gency has arisen which requires immediate action to be taken, 
the Vice-Chancellor shall take such action as he deems neces- 30 
lary and shall report the same for approval at the next meeting 
to the authority which, in the ordinary course, would have dealt 
with the matter: 
Provided that, if the actien taken by the Vice-Chancellor is 
not approved by' the authority concerned, he may refer the mat- 3S 
ter to the Visitor, whose decision thereon shall be final: 
Provided further that, where any such action taken by ,the 
Vice-Chancellor affects any person in the service of the Univer-
sity, such person shall be entitled to prefer, within thirty days 
from the date on which he receives notice of such action, all 40 
. 'appeal to, the Executive Council. 

5 
(7) The Vice-Chancellor shall have power to take discipli-
nary action against teachers and salaried officers of the Univer-
sity and impose the penalty of warning or censure: 
Provided that no teacher or salaried officer shall be censur-
ed unless he has been given 6 reasonable opportunity to ('!xplain. 
(8) The Vice-Chancellor shall exercise such other powers as 
may be prescribed by the Statutes, the Ordinances or the Regu-
lations.". 
8. In section 8 of the principal Act, for the words "the offtcers Amendment 
10 of the University", the words "the other ofRcers 'of the University" of union'. 
15 
30 
• 
35 
shall be substituted. 
t. After section 8 of the principal Act, the ~ollowing section shall ::rtion IC~~ 
be inserted, namely:- tion SA. 
"SA. The following shall be the authorities of the Univer- Authoritiel 
sity, namely:- of the Uni-venity. 
(a) the Court, .....• 
(b) the Executive Council, 
(c) the Academic Council, 
(d) the Finance Committee, 
(e) the Faculties, and 
(f) such other authorities as may be declared by the 
Statutes to be the authorities of the University.". 
10. For sections 9 and 10 of the principal Act. the following sec- SubldtutiOl1 
tions shall be substituted, namely:- ~~:e:. ~-
"9. (1) The Court shall be the supreme governing body of and 10. 
the University and shall have power to review the acts of the The Court. 
Executive Council and the Academic Council (save where those 
authorities have acted in accordance with the powers conferred 
upon them by this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances): 
Provided that the power of review under this sub-section 
shall not be exercised except by a majority of not less than 
two-thirds of the total number of members . 
(2) The Court shall also have power to suggest measures 
for the improvement of the affairs of the University and shall 
exercise all the powers of the University not otherwise provided 
for by this Act or the Statutes . • 

Meetloa 1of 
Court. 
lllec:utive 
Council. 
8 
(3) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (1), the Court 
shall not interfere with the Executive Council in the day-to-day 
administration of the University. 
(4) If any question arises as to whether a matter does or 
does not relate to the day-to-day administration of the Univer- 5 
sity. the question shall be referred to the Visitor whose decision 
thereon shall be final. 
9A. (1) An annual meeting of the Court shall be held on a 
date fixed by the Executive Council. unless some other date has 
been fixed by the Court, and at such annual meeting, n report 10 
of the proceedings of the Executive Council and a report of the 
working of the University during the previous year together 
with a statement of the receipts and expenditure and the baI.mce 
sheet as audited and the financial estimates shall be presented 
by the Executive Council; and any vacancies among the officers IS 
of the University or among the members of the Court or the 
Executive Council which ought to be filled up by the Court shall 
also be filled up. 
(2) A copy of the statement of receipts and expenditure 
and of the balance sheet and the financial estimates referred to 20 
in sub-section (1) shall be sent to every member of the Court at 
least seven days before the date of the annual meeting and 
shall be open to inspection by members of the Court and the 
Academic Council at the office of the University during the year 
following such meeting at such reasonable hours and under such 25 
conditions as the Executive Council may determine. 
(3) Special meetings of the Court may be convened by the 
Executive Council or the Vice-Chancellor, or if there is no Vice-
Chancellor, by the Pro-Vice-Chancellcr or if there is no Pro-
Vice-Chancellor, by the Registrar: 30 
Provided that a special meeting of the Court shall also be 
convened if not less than thirty-three members make a requisi-
tion in writing in this behalf. 
10. (1) The Executive Council shall, subject to the control 
of the Court, be the executive body of the University and shall 35 
have charge of the management and administration of the reve-
nue and property of the University and the conduct of all admi-
nistrative affairs of the University not otherwise provided for. 
• 
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Executive 
Council shall exercise such other powers and perform such 40 
other duties as may be conferred or imposed on it by the Statutes 
or the Ordinances.", • 

.. 
11. in section 11 of the principal Act, the words "and cUscip- AmendmtDt 
Une" shall be omitted. of KCtioa II. 
12. For sections 12 and 12A of the principal Act, the following SrbatitutiOD 
sections shall be substituted, namely:- ~~~,~:A 
aad IzB. 
sl "12. Subject to the 'provisions of this Act, the functions, at!- .. tho-
powers and duties of the other authorities of the University riUeI. 
shall be provided for by the Statutes. 
12A. (1) No person shall be qualified for election or nom!- D' Ufi 
nation as a member of any of the authorities of the University, ti:'~~ . e.,-
10 if-
(a) he is of unsound mind or is a deaf-mute or suffers 
from contagious leprosy, or 
(b). he is an undischarged insolvent, or 
(c) he has been convicted by a court of an offence in-
IS volving moral turpitude and sentenced in respect thereof 
to imprisonment for not less than six months, and a period 
of five years has not elapsed from the date of expiry of the 
sentence. 
25 
(2) Any dispute as to whether a person is disqualified for 
election or nomination under this section shall be referred to the 
Vice-Chancellor whose decision shall be final and not be liable 
to be questioned in a court of law. 
12B. Any member of the Court, the Executive Council, or RCDlOftI of 
the Academic Council may be removed by a resolution of the :U'd1~J:,n 
Court, the Executive Council or the Academic Council, as the 
case may be, passed by a majority of its total membership and 
by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members pre-
sent at the meeting, on anyone or more of the following 
grounds, namely:-
(a) that the member has become incapable of perform-
ing his duties, or 
(b) that the member has become unsound in mind or 
a deaf-mute, or 
(c) that the member suffers from contagious leprosy, or 
31 (d) that the member has become an undischarged in-
solvent, or 
(e) that the member has been convicted by a court of 
law of an offence involving moral turpitude and sentenced in 
respect thereof to imprisonment for not less than six months, 
426 (B) LS. 

Ammdmmt 
of aection 
14. 
i 
10 
and a period of five years bas not elapsed from the date of 
expiry of the sentence." .. 
13. In section 14 of the principal Act, in the proviso, for the 
figures "1886", the figures "1920" shall be substituted. 
tDlorti~ of 14. After section 16A of the principal Act, the following sections S 
~::~ shall be inserted, namely:-
Caaditionl 
of lInice of 
officen aud 
1nCherI .. 
Proceedinp 
DOt to be ID-
wlIdatod .b,. 
. vaclDc:iel,ctC. 
DccIlioD of 
ditpUta. 
"16B. (1) Every salaried officer and teacher of the Univer-
sity shall be appointed under a written contract, which shall be 
lodged with the Universi.ty and a copy of which shall be fur-
nished to the officer or teacher concerned. 10 
(2) Any dispute arising out of a contract between the Uni-
versity and any of its offic~rs or teachers shall, at the request of 
the officer or teacher concerned or at the instance of the Univer-
sity, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of one 
member appointed by the Executive Council, one member nomi- IS 
nated by the officer or the teacher concerned and an umpire 
appointed by the Visitor. 
(3) Any request made by an officer or teacher under sub-
section (2) shall be deemed to be a submission to arbitration 
upon the terms of this section within the meaning of the Arbit- 20 10 of 1940. 
ration Act, 1940, and all the provisions of that Act, with the 
exception of section 2 thereof, shall apply accordingly. 
(4) The decision of the Tribunal shall be final, and no suit 
or proceeding shall lie in any court in respect of the matters 
decided by the Tribunal. 25 
16C. No act or proceeding. of any authority or body of the 
University shall be invalid by reason only of the existence of 
any vacancy among its members or any defect in the constitu-
tion thereof. 
1GD. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie 30 
against any officer of the University or any member of any 
authority or body of the University for anything in good faith 
done or intended to be done by him under this Act or the Sta-
tutes, the Ordlinances or the Regulations. 
16E. If any question arises whether any person has been 3' 
duly elected or appointed as, or is entitled to be, a member of 
any authority or body of the University, it shall be referred to 
the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final.". • 
. '\" ~ 

11 }OI 
15. For section 17 of the principal Act, the following 
shall be substituted, namely:-
section Subldaatioa 
ofnew 1000 
dOD 17. 
"17. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes Scat1UOI. 
may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:-
5 (a) the constitution of the Court and the constitution, 
powers and duties of the other authorities of the University 
other than the powers and duties provided for in this Act; 
(b) the election and appointment of members of the 
authorities of the University. their continuance in oftice, the 
10 filling of vacancies of members thereof and all other matters 
relatin¥ to the authorities; 
(e) the appointment, powers and duties of the officers of 
the University; 
(d) the institution of degrees, diplomas, certificates and 
15 other academic distinctions; 
(e) the conferment of honorary degrees; 
(f) the holding of convocations to confer degrees; 
(g) the establishment, re-constitution, amalgamation, 
division or abolition of faculties, departments, hostels, coI-
20 leges and institutions; 
(h) the conditions under which colleges and other 
institutions may be admitted to the privileges of the Univer-
sity and the withdrawal of such privileges; 
(i) the institution of fellowships, scholarships. student-
25 ships, medals and prizes; 
(;) the registration of graduates and the maintenance 
of a register of registered graduates; 
(k) the classification and the manner of appointment 
of teachers in the University and the colleges; 
• 
(l) the constitution of a pension or provident fund and 
the establishment of an insurance scheme for the benefit of 
the officers, teachers and' other employees of the University; 
and 
(m) all other matters which are to be or may be pro-
S vided for by the Stat1,1tes, 
• 

(2) The Statutes in force at the commencement of the 
Banaras Hindu University (Amendlment) Act, 1961, shall. be 
those set out in the Schedule. 
(3) The Court may from time to time make new or "addi-
tional Statutes or may amend or repeal the Statutes in the man- 5 
ner hereinafter provided. 
(4) The Executive Council may propose to the Court the 
draft of any Statute and such draft shall be considered by the 
Court at its next meeting: 
Provided that the Executive Council shall not propose the 10 
draft of any Statute or of any amendment of a Statute affecting 
tlie status, powers or constitution of any existing authority of 
the University until such authority has been given an oppor-
tunity of expressing its opinion upon the proposal; and any 
opinion so expressed shall be in writing and shall be considered IS 
by the Court. 
(5) The Court may approve any such draft as is referred 
to in sub-section (4) and pass the Statute or reject it or return. 
it to the Executive Council for re-consideration, either in whole 
or in part, together with any amendments which the Court may 2G 
suggest. 
(6) Any member of tlie Court may propose to the Court the 
draft of any Statute, and the Court may either reject the pro-
posal or refer such draft for consideration to the Executive 
Council which may either reject the proposal or submit the 25 
draft to the Court in such form as the Executive Council may 
approve. 
(7) Every new Statute or addition to a Statute or any 
amendment or repeal of a Statute shall require the previous 
approval of the Visitor who may sanction or disallow it or remit 30 
1t for further consideration." . 
.AJDeDdmcmt 18. In section 18 of the p'I'incipal Act,-ef MCIioD 18. 
(a) in sub-section (1) ,-
(i) for clause (e), tlie following clause shall be substi-
tuted, namely: - 35 
"(e) the qualifications for admission to courses of 
study for degrees, diplomas, certificates and other aca-
demic distinctions and to examinations of the Univer-
sity and the award of degrees, diplomas, certificates and 
other academic distinctionsj"; 040 

1S 
(ii) in clause (d), for the words uand for admission to 
the examinations, degrees and diplomas of the University", 
the words "for admission to the examinations, degrees and 
diplomas of the University and for registration of gradu-
S ates" shall be substituted; 
(iii) after clause (f), the following clause shall be in-
serted, namely:-
"(11) the remuneration and allowances including 
travelling and daily allowances to examiners, moderators 
10 and other persons engaged on the business of the Uni-
versity,"; 
(iv) in clause (k), for the word "teachers", the words 
"officers and teachers" shall be substituted; 
(v) in clause (m), the word "and" at the end shall be 
IS omitted; 
20 
(vi) after clause (m), the following clause and word 
shall be inserted, namely:-
"(mm) the powers and duties of teachers and 
salaried officers and the powers which may be delegated 
to them; and"; 
(b) in sub-section (3), for the proviso, the following pro-
viso 'shall be substituted, namely:-
"Provided that no Ordinance shall be made-
(a) prescribing the examinations to be recognised 
as eqUivalent to the University examinations, or 
(b) affecting the conditions, mode of appointment 
or duties of examiners or the conduct or standard of 
examinations or of any course. of study, 
unless a draft of such Ordinance has been proposed by 
30 the Academic Council."; 
35 • 
(c) for sub-sections (5) and (6), the following sub-sections 
shall be substituted, namely:-
.. (5) Where the Executive Council has rejected the 
draft of an Ordinance proposed by the Academic Council, 
the Academic Council may, within two months of the date 
of such rejection, appeal to the Central Government and 
the Central Government may, by order, direct that the pro-
posed Ordinance shall be laid before the next meeting of 
• 

14 
the Court f5>T its approval and that pending such approval, 
it shall have effect from such date as may be specified in the 
order: 
Provided that if the Ordinance is not approved by ·the 
Court at such meeting, it shall cease to have effect. S 
(6) All Ordinances made by the Executive Council shall 
be submitted, as soon as may be, to the Visitor and the 
Court, and shall be considered by the Court at its next meet-
ing; and the Court shall have power, by a resolution passed 
by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members 10 
present and voting, to cancel any Ordinance made by the 
Executive Council, and any such Ordinance shall, from the 
date of such resolution, cease to have effect."; 
(d) in sub-section (7). for the words "two months from the 
date of sucli order", the following shall be substituted, namely:- IS 
"one month from tlie date of such order or on the expi-
ration of fifteen days from the date of consideration of the 
Or.dinance by the Court, whichever period expires later"; 
(e) after sub-section (7), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely: - 20 
"(8) The Visitor may. at any time, after any Ordinance 
has been considered by the Court. si~ify to the Executive 
Council his disallowancf> of the Ordinance, and from the 
date of receipt by the Executive Council of intimation of 
such disallowance. the Ordinance shall cease to have effect.". 2S 
ofAmCD~t 17. In section 19 of the princioa1 Act, to sub-section (3), the fo1-ICCtlOD 19 .. 
• lowing proviso shall be added, name1y:-
"Provided that any authority of the University which is 
dissatisfied with any s~ch direction may, within two months of 
the date of such direction, appeal to the Court, whose deeision 30 
thereon shall be final". 
~~~nm;9A~ 18. Section 19~. of the principal Act sliall be omitted. 
Transitional 19. (1) On the commencement of this Act,-provisions. 
(a) the Standing Committee of the Academic Council shall 
stand dissolved and the members of the Standing Committee 3f 
shall vacate their offices as such members~ 
(b) the office of Chief Rector shall stand abolished. 

1& 
(2) Every authority of the University functioning imrnediately 
before the commencement of this Act shall, until the corresponding 
authority is constituted in accordance with the provisions of the prin-
cipal Act as amended by this Act, exercise all the powers and per-
S form all the duties of the correspondiing authority under the principal 
Act as so amended. 
(3) Every officer of the University holding office immediately 
before the commencement of this Act shall, on and from such com-
mencement, hold his office by the same tenure and upon the same 
10 terms and conditions as he. held it immediately before such com-
mencement. 

Definition •• 
THE SCHEDULE 
[See section 17 (2) ] 
THE STATUTES OF THE UNIVERSITY 
1. In these Statutes,-
(a) "Act" means the Banaras Hindu University Act, 1915; S 
(b) all words and expressions used herein and de1J.n~ in 
the Act shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in 
the Act. 
A~bDent 2. (1) The Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the Exe-
~hlDccJ!~ cutive Council on the recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor: 10 
Duties end 
PowerBof 
Pro. Vice-
ChaDcellor. 
Provided that where the recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor 
is not accepted by the Executive Council, the matter shall be refer-
red to the Visitor who may either appoint the person recommended 
by the Vice-Chancellor or ask the Vice-Chancellor to recommend 
another person to the Executive Council. IS 
(2) The term of office of the Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall ordinarily· 
be coterminous with the term of office of the Vice-Chancellor: 
Provided that, notwithstanding the expiry of the term of his 
office, the Pro- Vice-Chancellc:r shall continue in office until his suc-
cessor is appointed and enters upon his office. 20 
3. (1) The Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall assist the Vice-Chancellor 
in all matters; when the Vice-Chancellor, by reason of illness or 
absence for any other cause, is unable to exercise the powers and per-
form the duties of his office, the Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall exercise 
all the powers and perform all the functions of the Vice-Chancellor. 2S 
(2) In the absence of the Chancellor, the Pro-Chancellor and the 
Vice-Chancellor, the Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall presi~ at meetings 
of the Court. 
(3) The Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall be entitled to be present at 
and to address any meeting of any authority or body of the Univer- 30 
sity but shall not be entitled to vote thereat unless he is a member 
of such authority or body. 
:R-oJDtment 4. (1) The Treasurer shall be appointed by the Executive Coun-
rcuwer. Cil. from amongst persons who are not employees of the University 
and shall be a whole-time officer. 35 

5 
10 
15 
17 
(2) He shall hold office for a period of ftve years: 
Provided that, notwithstanding the expiry of the term of his 
.mce, the Treasurer shall continue in office uatil his successor is ap-
pointed and enters upon his office: 
Provided further that, when the office of the Treasurer is vacant 
or when the Treasurer is, by reason of illness or absence for any 
other cause, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties or 
the office, shall be performed by such person as the Vice-Chancellor 
may appoint for the purpose. 
5. (1) The Treasurer shal1:- DuaeslIDd 
Powcnof 
(4) exercise general supervision over the funds of the Un i- the 
versity and shall advise it as regards its financial policy; and Trcaluror. 
(b) perform such other financial functions as may be assign-
ed to him by the Executive Council or as may be prescribed by 
these Statutes or the OrdinaJ)ces: 
Provided that the Treasurer shall not incur any expenditure or 
make any investment exceeding Rs. 10,100 without the previous 
approval of the Executive Council. 
(2) Subject to the control of the Executive Council, the Trea&1:r-
zo er shall-
(a) hold and manage the property and investments includ-
ing trust and endowed property for furthering any of the objects 
of the University; 
(b) see that the limits fixed by the Finance Committee for 
25 recurring and non-recurring expenditure for a year are not ex-
ceeded and that all moneys are expended on the purposes for 
which they are granted or allotted; 
(e) be responsible for the preparation of annual estimates 
and the statement of accounts and for their presentation to the 
30 Executive Council; 
(d) keep a constant watch on the state of the cash and bank 
balances and on the state of investments; 
(e) watch the progress of collection of revenue and advise 
on the methods of collection employed!; 
35 (I) have the accounts of all institutions regularly audited 
by an internal audit party; • 
(g) see that the registers of buildings, land and eqUipment 
are maintained up-to-date and that the stock checking is con-
ducted of equipment and other consumable materials in an offices 
40 and c.Ueges, and in the P.W.D. and Workshop stores; 
426 !B) LS-3. 

t8 
(h) call for explanation for unauthorised expendtture and 
for other financial irregularities and suggest disciplinary action 
against the persons at fault; 
(i) call for from any office or institution under the Univer-
sity any information or returns that he may consider necessary S 
to discharge his flnancial responsibilities. 
(3) The receipt of the Treasurer or of the person or persons duly 
authorised in this behalf by the Executive Council for any money 
payable to the University shall be sufficient discharge for the same. 
1lqiItrar. 6. (1) The Registrar shall be appointed by the Executive Coun- 10 
cil on the recommendation of a Selection Committee constituted for 
the purpose and shall be a whole-time officer. 
(2) When the office of the Registrar is vacant or when the Regis-
trar is, by reason of illness or absence for any other cause, unable 
to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the office shall be IS 
performed by such person as the Vice-Chancellor may appoint for 
the purpose. 
(3) The Registrar shall be the ex-officio Secretary of the Court, 
the Executive Council, the Academic Council, the Selection Com-
mittees, the Finance Committee and the Faculties, but shall not be 20 
deemed to be a member of any of these authorities. 
(4) The Registrar shall-
(a) be the custodian of the records, the common seal and 
such other properties of the University as the Executive Coun-
cil shall commit to his charge; 25 
(b) issue under the direction of the Vice-Chancellor, all 
notices convening meetings of the Court, the Executive Coun-
cil, the Academic .Council, the Finance Committee, the Selection 
Committees, the Faculties, the Boards of Studies, the Boards 01 
E~aminers, the Boards of Moderators and of the Committees 30 
appointed by the authorities of the University; 
(c) maintain the minutes of all meetings of the Court, the 
Executive Council, the Academic Council. the Finance Commit-
tee, the Selection Committees, the Faculties and of the Commit-
tees appointed by the authorities of the University; 3S 
(d) conduct the official correspondence of the Court, the 
Executive Council and the Academic Council; 
(e) control the conduct of examinations and all other ar-
rangements necessary therefor and the execution of all proces-
ses connected therewith; 40 

19 
(f) supply to the Visitor copies of the agenda of meetings 
of the authorities of the University as soon as they are issued 
and the minutes of the meetings of the authorities ordinarily 
within a month of the holding of the meetings; 
5 (g) in an emergency, when neither the Vice-Chancellor nor 
the Pro-Vice-Chancellor is able to act, call a meeting of the 
Executive Council forthwith and take its directions for carry-
ing on the work of the University; 
(h) represent the University in suits or proceedings by or 
10 against the University, sign powers of attorney and verify plead-
ings or depute his representative for the purpose; 
(i) perform such other duties as may be prescribed by 
these Statutes, the Ordinances and the Regulations or as may 
be required, from time to time, by the Executive Council or the 
IS Vice-Chancellor. 
(5) (a) The Registrar shall have power to take disciplinary 
action against the employees belonging to the ministerial, subordi-
nate-executive and class IV services and impose on them the penalty 
of warning, censure, withholding of an increment or suspension 
20 pending enquiry: 
Provided that no such penalty shall be imposed unless the person 
concerned has been given a reasonable opportunity to explain. 
(b) An appeal shall lie to the Vice-Chancellor against any order 
of the Registrar imposing any penalty other than warning or censure. 
2S (c) In a case where the enquiry discloses that a punishment 
beyond the powers of the Registrar is called for, the Registrax shall, 
upon conclusion of the enquiry, make a report to the Vice-Chancel-
lor along with his recommendations, and the decision of the Vice-
Chancellor shall be final. 
30 7. (1) The Lihrarian shall be a whole-time officer appointed by Librari8a. 
the Executive Council on the recommendation of a Selection Com-
mittee appointed by it and shall possess such qualifications as may 
be prescribed by the Executive Council. 
(2) When the office of Librarian is vacant or when the Librarian 
35 is, by reason of illness or absence for any other' cause, unable to per-
form the duties of his office, the duties of the office shall be perform-
ed by such person as the Vice-Chancellor may appoint for the pur-
pose. 
(3) The duties and powers of the Librarian shall be regulated by 
40 the Ordil1ancel. 

Dean of 8. (1) The Dean of Students shall be appointed, from amongst 
StudCnlt;. employees of the University who are or who have beEm teachers of 
the University, by the Executive Council on the recommendation of 
the Vice-Chancellor; the Dean shall be a whole-time employee of 
the University, shall hold office for a term of three years and shall S 
be eligible for reappointment. 
Chief 
Procror. 
DOIIDlof 
Faculties. 
(2) The person who is appointed as the Dean of Students shall 
continue to hold his lien on his substantive post and shall continue to 
subscribe to the University Provident Fund. 
(3) When the office of the Dean of Students is vacant or when 10 
the Dean of Students is, by reason of illness or absence for any other 
cause, unable to perform the duties of his office; the duties of the 
office shall be performed by such person as the Vice-Chancellor may 
appoint for the purpose. 
(4) The duties and powers of the Dean of Students shall be regu- 15 
lated by the Ordinances. 
9. (1) The Chief Proctor shall be a person not below the rank of 
Reader of the University, shall be appointed by the Executive Coun-
cil from amongst the teachers of the University on the recommenda-
tion of the Vice-Chancellor and shall exercise such powers and per- 2.0 
form such duties as may be assigned to him by the Vice-Chancellor. 
(2) The Chief Proctor shall hold office for a term of two years 
and shall be eligible for reappointment for an additional term. 
(3) When the office of Chief Proctor is vacant or when the Chief 
Proctor is, by reason of illness or absence for any other cause, un- 2.5 
able to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the oftlce shall 
be performed by such person as the Vice-Chancellor may appoint 
for the purpose. 
10. (1) There shall be a Dean for each It'aculty; the head of each 
of the Departments within the Faculty, who is a Professor, shall, by 30 
rotation according to seniority, act as the Dean of the Faculty for 
a period of two years: 
Provided that, in any Faculty,-
(i) if there is no Professor, the senior-most Jltader shall act 
as Dean, and 3S 
(ii) if there is no Professor or Reader, the Vice-Chancellor 
or the Pro-Vice-Chancellor, if so designated by the Vice-Chan-
cellor, shall act as the Dean. 

21 
(2) The Vean shall be the Chairman of the Faculty and be res-
ponsible for the due observance of these Statutes, the Ordinances 
and the Regulations relating to the Faculty. 
(3) The Dean shall be responsible for the organisation and con-
S duct of teaching and research work tn the Departments comprised in 
the Faculty. 
(4) The Dean shall exercise such other powers and perform such 
other functions and duties as may be assigned to him by the Execu-
tive Council or the Vice-Chancellor. 
10 11: (1) The Court shall constst of the following members, name- The Court. 
15 
20 
30 
35 
ly:-
A. Ex-Officio Members: 
(i) The Chancellor 
(ii) The Pro-Chancellor 
(iii) The Vice-Chancellor 
(iv) The Pro-Vice-Chancellor 
(v) The remaini7lg members of [he Exe-
cutive Council who are not other-
wise members of the Court 
(vi) The Treasurer 
(vii) The Librarian 
(viii) The Dea:1 (If Students 
(ix) The Chief Proctor 
B. Representatives of Departments a.,d Colleges : 
(x) All Dea:1S of Faculties 
(xi) Heads of Teaching Departments who 
are not Deans, by rOlatio:1 ao.:ord-
ing to seniority as indicated below : 
From the Faculty of Arts 
From the Faculty of Science 
From the Faculty of Technology 
From the Faculty of Oriental Learning 
and Theology . 
From the Faculty of Medicine and 
Surgery (Ayurveda) 
From the Faculties of Education and 
Agriculture 
C. Representatives Of Professors antI Principals : 
(xii' Professors who are not Heads of 
Departments, by rotation accord-
• ing to seniority 
J 
6 
I 
I 
9 
I:. 
3 
3 
3 
I 
I 
I 
I 

(Xiii) The Principal, Women'!!! Colle~c; and 
if there are two or more women's 
Colleges, the Principals by rota-
tio •• according to scnioriy I 
(xiv) The Principal, Central Hhldu College 
(Kamachha) 
D. Representatives of Teachers Ol~r than Professors 
(xv) Two Readers by rotation according 
to seniority 
(xvi) Two Lecturers by rotatiO:1 accorJin.g 
to seniority 
E. Representatives of registered graduates: 
(xvii) Ten representatives none of whom 
shall be a member or employee of 
2 
10 
any U:1.iversity, to be elected by IS 
the registereJ gradU'ltes perm 1-
nently residing in each of the five 
regions mentioned below, from 
amongst themselvec;, through the 
system of proportional represen- 20 
Tation by means of the single 
transferable vote, namely-- fO 
(1) the northern region comprlsmg the States of 
Panjab, Rajasthan and Jammu" Kashmir and the Union 
teITitories of Delhi and Himachal Pradesh; 25 
(2) the central region comprising the States of Uttar 
Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh; 
(3) the eastern region comprising the Statp.s of Bihar, 
West Bengal, Orissa and Assam and the Union territory of 
Manipur and Tripura; 30 
(4) the western region comprising the States of Bom-
bay and Mysore; 
(5) the southern region ccmprtsmg the States of 
Andhra Pradesh, Madras and Kerala. 
F. Represematives 0/ DonOrS (i.e. persons who have donated 341 
to the University rupees one lalch Or more or properlY of J 
like value): 
(xviii) (a) Representatives of donors who 
are individuals, to be nominated 
by the Visitor 12 
(b) Representatives of donors who 
are corpprate bodies. to be 
nominated b)' the Visitor I 

5 
ty. J(epresentatives of Parliament : 
(xix) Three represrntatives of Parliament, 
two to be elected by the Lok 
Sabha b such manner as the 
Speaker may direct and one to 
be elected by the Rajya Sabha in 
such manner as the Chainnan 
may direct. 
H. PerSons representing uarned Professions, InduStry and 
3 
~o COP1l17l£rcc : 
(xx) Ten rersons representir!.g learned pro-
fessions, to be nominated by the 
Executive Council 10 
(xxi) Five rersons representing Industry 
15 and Commerce, to be nominated 
by the Visitor S 
I. Other Nominated Members: 
(xxii) Not more than twelve persons, to be 
nominated by the Visitor 12 
20 (xxiii) Not more than two persons, to be 
nominated by the Rector 2 
(xxi\") Not more than three persons, to be 
.ominated by the Cha:lccllor : 3 : 
Provided that i.n making nominations under items (xx), (xx-i), 
2S (xxii) and (xxiv), due regard shall be haa to the representations of 
the different interests, professions, culture and learning and also of 
the different areas of the country: 
Provided further that no employee of any University shan be eli-
gible to be a member under any of the items (xvii), (xviii), (xix), 
30 (xx), (xxi), (xxii), (xxiii) and. (xxiv). 
(2) When an elected member of the Court becomes an ex-officio 
member before the expiry of his term, he shall cease to be an elected 
member. 
(3) Save as otherwise expressly provided, a member of the Court 
3S shall hold office br a period of 3 years. 
12. Notice of meetings of the Court shall be issued by the Secre- Notice of 
tary at least 30 days before the date of the meeting with an agenda mectinl· 
paper, and nu business which does not arise out of matters noted or 
mentioned in the agenda paper shall be considered unlt'5s the con-
40 sent of at least two-thirds of the members of the Court present at 
the meeting be obtained thereto. 
13. Every member who intends to bring forward any speci:ll busi- Notice °If p roposa 5 or 
ness at a meeting of the Court or to propose any person for f'1c>ctirm IImmd-
. as Chancellor or Pro-Chancellor shall give notice of such business cr m.:nls. 
4S of the name of the person to be proposed, to the Secretary at least 

Notice of 
special 
mecrin,. 
24 
20 days before the date appointed for such meeting; and every mem-
ber who intends to propose an amendment shall give notice thereof 
to the Secretary ten days before the date fixed for the meeting. 
14. A notice of twenty-~e days of any special meeting of the 
Court stating generally the nature of the business to be transacted 5 
shall be sent to each member of the Court, and no such meeting shall 
be competent to transact any business other than that mentioned in 
the notice or directly arising cut of it; any member desixing to send 
a proposal relating to the nature of the business specified in the 
notice shall send such proposal to the Secretary so as to reach him 10 
at least ten days before the date of the meeting. 
J: l::il. 15. (1) The Executive Council shall consist of the following mem-
bers, namely:-
(i) The Vice-Chancellor I 
(ii) The Pro-Vice-Chancellor T IS 
(iii) Two Deans, one from each of the 
following two groups, by rotation 
according to seniority 2 
Group 1 
(a) Faculty of Arts 2.0 
(b) Faculty of Oriental Learning and Theology 
(e) Faculty of Education 
(d) Faculty of Law 
(e) Faculty of Music and Fine Arts 
Group 2 2S 
(a) Faculty of Science 
(b) Faculty of Technology 
(c) Faculty of Agriculture 
(d) Faculty of Medicine and Surgery (Ayurveda) 
(iv) The Den of Students I 30 
(v) The Chief Proctor 
(vi) The Principal, Women's Co~e, and 
if, there are two or more omen's 
(jollegefl, the Principals by rotatiOn 
according to seniority 3S (vii) Two persons, neither of whom shall 
be an employee of any University, 
elected by [he Court from amongst 
its members of whom one shall be 
a person oU[lIide the State of Uttar 40 
PraJ.esh. 2 
(viii) Four persons nominated by the Visitor 4-

~~ 
...... I 
(B) ,0. peJDl' DINIIireted br tile 1W1tXI. 
00 ~ amnin'ted by the CUD· 
I 
Total 
5 Provided that no employee of the University shall be eUslbl. fe 
be a member under any of the items (vW), (ix) and (x). 
(Z) Members of the Executive Councll referred to in items (iii) 
and (vi) shall hold ofBce for a term of two years and thoee ftferred. 
fA.items (vii) to (x) shall hold dice for a Utrm of three yean. 
10 (B) Seven members of the Ezecutive CoUDdl shall form the 
quorum. 
(4) The Registrar shall be the ez-o{ficio Secretary of the execu-
tive Council without any right of participation in the diIcuukm or 
voting. 
IS (5) When an elected member of the Executive Council becomes 
also an ez-otfi.cio member, he shall cease to be an elected member. 
16. Subject to the provisions of the Act, these Statutes and the ro ... ot 
OrdiDanCIII, the Executive Council shall, in addition to any other t ~ dJ. 
powers vested in it, have the following po-wers, namely: - .. aD 
20 (i) to appoint from time to time such Professors, Readers, 
Lecturers and other members of the teaching staff as may be 
necessary, on the recommendation of the Selection Committee 
constituted for the purpose, and to provide for filling temporary 
vacancies therein; 
2$ (ii) to fix the emoluments and define the duties and condi-
tions of service of Professors, Readers, Lecturers and other mem-
bers of the teaching staff: 
Provided that no action shall be taken by the Executive CC'lunefi 
in respect of the number, the qualifications and the emoluments of 
~o teachers otherwise than after consideration of the recommendation 
of the Academic Council; 
(iii) to appoint the Registrar, the Dean of Students. the 
Chief Proctor, the- Librarian and other salarjed officers and staff 
of the University and to fix their emoluments and define their 
3' duties and conditions of service; 
(iv) to manage and regulate the finances, accounts, i.'1vest-
ments, property, business and all other administrative affairs of 
the University aDd, for that purpose, to appoint such agents as 
it may tbiDk ftt; 
ae(B)".LS--4. 

2CS 
(".) to invest any money belonging to· the University, In-
cluding any unapplied income, in snch stocks, funds, shares or 
securities, as it shaU, from time to time, think At, 'or in the pur-
chase of immovable property in India, with the like powers of 
varying such investments from time to time; 5 
(vi) (a) to accept on behalf of the University any trust, be-
quest, donation or transfer of any movable. or immovable pro-
perty to the University; and 
(b) to transfer any movable or immovable property on be-
half of the University; 10 
(vii) to provide the buildings, premises, furniture, appara-
. tus, and other means needed for carrying on the work of the 
University; 
(viii) to enter into, vary, carry out and cancel contracts on 
behalf of the University; 
(i.%) to entertain, adjudicate upon, and if it thinks fit, to 
redress, any grievances of the salaried officers of the University. 
the teaching Staff and the University servants who may for any 
reason feel aggrieved: 
IS 
Provided that, in matters of discipline and punishment, 20 
where the final power has been vested in the Vice-Chancellor or 
any other officer of the University, no appeal shall lie to the Eze.. 
tive Council; 
(z) to appoint examiners and moderators and, if necessal'J, 
to remove them. and to fix their fees, emoluments and traveWn, 25 
and other allowances after conSidering the recommendations of 
the Examination Committee constituted for the purpose, consist-
ing of (a) the Vice-Chancellor, (b) the Pro-Vice-Chancellor, (c) 
three Deans of Faculties for two years by rotation according to 
seniority, and (d) the Registrar who shall be the member Secre- 30 
tary; 
(=) to maintain registers of Registered Graduates and of 
Donors to the University; 
(zii) to select a common seal for the University, and pro-
vide for the eustody and use of the seal; 35 
(ziii) to manage Departments, Institutions of Research Of ... 
Specialised Studies, Laboratories, Museums, and Hostels mana,-
ed by the University: 
(xiv) to arrange for and direct the inspection of Collegell, 
Departments, Institutions and Hostels aneJ to issue instructlonl40 

S 
JO 
~1 
for mamtainfilg their efficiency and ensuring proper condition. 
of employment for members of their staff; 
(zu) to matre arrangements, from time to time, far periodi-
cal assessment of the work of the teachers of the University; 
(%Vi) to institute and award fellowships including travel-
ling fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prlzesj 
(zuii) to regulate admission, and to appoint committees for 
admission, to the University; 
(zufii) to direct the conduct of examinations in conformity 
with the Ordinances and the publication of the results thereof; 
(m) to. delegate any of its powers to the Vic .. Chancellor, 
the Pro-Vice-Chancellor, the Registrar or such other officer of 
the University or to a Committee appointed by it as it may deem 
fit. 
IS 17. The Executive CO\lncil shall, from time 'to time, appoint such CantraCts 
person or persons as it may think proper, either by office or by name, 
to enter into, execute and sign contracts for and on behalf of the 
University, and to present them for registration according to the law 
In force for the time being. 
~ 18. (1) The Academic Council shall consist of the following mem- Academic: 
ben, namely: - CouDcIL 
(i) The Vice-Chancellor 
(ii) The Pro-Vice-Chancellor 
(iii) The Deans of Faculties 
~S (i,,) The Heads of Teaching Departments 
(v) All Professors who are not Heads of Teaching Depart-
ments 
(vi) The Librarian 
("ii) The Dean of Students 
30 (.nii) The Chief Proctor 
(io1:) Two Readers and four Lecturers by rotation according 
to seniority. • 
(z) The Principal, Women's College, and if there are two or 
more Women's Colleges, the Principals. " 
35 (zi) The Principal, Central Hindu College, Kamachha 
(zii) Not more than five persons, not being employees of the 
UDlvers!ty;. co-opted by tlae Academic Councll for their ,spec::fallI.. 
eel Imhledae. 

t,;:r .. "", 
(I) All membere al the Aademie Cou.nci1. otMJ; ~ • ...otdo 
membeI'l, shall hold ofB.ce for a term of three years: 
ProWled that a member co-opted in his eapaeity • a member ot 
• partkular body or u the holder of • parUcuJat poll ..u Iaolci 
otIce 10 loDg only u he cODtinuu to be a member at that bod,. or J 
the holder of that post. 
(3) Twenty-five membars of the Academic Council shall form the 
quorum. 
. 
JI'owat, dud- 19. Subject to the provisions of the Act, the Academic Council 
~af':aC'" shall, in addition to all other powers vested In it, have the foDowing 10 
Ac:Idemic powers, duties and functions. namely:-
CNDc:P 
(i) to report on any matter referred to it by the Court or 
the Executive Council; 
(ii) to make recommendations to the Executive Council with 
regard to the creation and abolition of teaching posts in the Uni- IS 
versity and the Colleges, and the classification of the said posta 
and the emoluments and duties attaching thereto; 
(iii) to formulate, modify or revise schemes for the orpm-
&ation of, and assignment of subjects to, Faculties and to report 
to the Executive Council as to the expediency of the abolition, ~. 
reconstitution or division of any Faculty or the amalgamatiOD. 
of one or more Faculties; 
(iv) to promote research within the University and to re-
quire, from time to time, reports on s~h research; 
(v) to consider proposals submitted by the Facu1tta; 2! 
(vi) to recognise diplomas and degrees of other UmersiU. 
and lnatitutions and to determ1De their equivalent dipl~.aDd 
degrees of the Banaras Hindu Universlqr; 
(vii) to make special arrmaements, if any, for the teaehlnl 
of women students and for prescribing for them tpeCtal COlU'lel 3D 
of atudy, after conaultJDg the Advisory Board of Women'. Edu· 
cation; 
(viii) to mallie IRICh afranpmmts fw the in8truc~oZ1 and 
eumfnation of perIODS, Dot be1ni members of the Uaivaraltr. u 
mar be necessary; IS' 
(iz) to fix. lubject to any conditloDi aceepted by the becu-
11ft CcnmeI1, the time. mode and condiUO!UI of eompeUtlon for 
.'.. ~lp., 1Ch0larsbipa and other prizes IDd to award the REne; . . 

~ 
<~ to make recommeadations regarding the coafarmeat or 
grant of degrees (including honorary degrees), academic diGlAo-
tioDS, honours, diplomu. licenses, titles and marks of honour; 
(zi) to publish lists of prescribed or recommended text-
S books and to publish the syllabus of prescribed courses of study; 
(:di) to prepare such forms and registers as are, from time 
to time, prescribed by the Ordinances; 
<_) to recommend to the Executive COUDdl the ratal of 
fees ad charges; 
10 (:riv) to make proposals to the Executive Council for the 
establishment of Colleges, Departments, Institutions of Research 
and Specialised Studies, Libraries, Laboratories. and Mvsewns; 
(zt1~ to make proposals to the Exeeutive Coun.ci1 for the 
institution of fellowships, travelling fellowships, acbo1ar.shtpl, . 
IS studentships, medals and prizes; 
(m) to recommend! to the Executive Counell draft 0rdiD-
ances regarding examinations of the University and the c0ndi-
tions on which students should be admitted to such examina-
tions and the working. maintenaDCe and use of the University 
Library; 
(%Vii) to maintain proper standards of examinations; 
(mU) to perform, in relation to academic matters, all such 
duties and to do all such acts as may be neceHllf'Y tor th& proper 
carrying out of the provisions of the Act, these Statutes and the 
~.s Ordinances. 
ZOo (1) The Finance Committee shall consist of the follOWing 'lDIIDce 
members, namely:- Q)nHDI--. 
(i) The Vioe-Caancellor; 
(ii) The Ptro-Vice-Chancellor; 
30 (iii) Two persons nominated by the Visitor; 
(i17) Two persona, who are not employees of a,.. Univeratty, 
one elected by the Court and one nominated by the Ex.eaatlw 
Couneil; 
. (v) The Treasurer. 
35 (2) Three member of the Finance Committee shall farm the 
quorum. 
(.3) AU members of the Firumce Committee, other tbaaez-of1ieio 
members, Ihall bdJal dee for a term c4. ~ Jill .... 

3<; 
(4) The V'iee-Chancellor shall preside at meetingi of the i'!nanee 
Committee. 
(5) A member of the Finance Committee shall have the right to 
record a minute of dissent if he dissents from the other members. 
(6) Th~ Finance Committee shall meet at least twice every year S 
to examine accounts and to scrutinise proposals for expenditure. 
(7) The annual accounts and financial estimates of the Univer-
lity prepared by the Treasurer shall be laid before the Finance Com-
mittee for consideration and comments and thereafter submitted to 
the Executive Council for approval. 10 
(8) The Finance Committee shall fix limits for the total recur-
ring expenditure and the total non-recurring expenditure for the 
year, based on the income and resources of the University which, in 
the case of productive works, may 'include the proceeds of loans; no 
expenditure shall be incurred by the University in excess 01. the 15 
limits so fixed. 
21. (1) The University shall include the Faculties of-
(i) Oriental learning and Theology, 
(ii) Arts, 
(iii) Science, 
(iv) Law, 
(v) Technology, 
(vi) Medicine and Surgery (Ayurveda) , 
(vii) Agriculture, 
(viii) Education, and 
(~) Music and Fine Arts. 
1,1 '"',t, " I,' 
eon.tltudOD 22. (1) Each Faculty shall consist of the following members, 
ofPICUltin. namely:-
(i) the Dean of the Faculty who shall be the Chairman: 
(ii) the Heads of Departments of atudies in the FaCulty: 30 
(iii) all Professors in the Faculty: 
(iv) one Reader and one Lecturer, by rotation according 1 
aemority, from each Departmel1t in the Faculty. 

31 
(1') one teacher, by rotation according to seniority, from 
the Women'. College(s); 
(vi) persons not connected with the University having ape--
cial knowledge of the subject or subjects concerned, nommated 
·5 by the Academi ~Councn, one for each Department of the 
Faculty: 
Provided that the number of members to be nominated to each 
of the Faculties of Law, Agriculture, Education and Music and Fine 
Arts under this sub-clause, sham be five. 
,I \ 
10 23. (1) The Faculties shall have such powers and shall perform Powereof. 
such duties as may be assigned to them by these Statutes and the tJMI Pacu1tiee 
OrdIinances and shall, from time to time, appoint such and 80 many 
Boards of Studies in di1!erent branches of knowledge as may be 
prescribed by the Ordinances. 
15 (2) The Faculties shall also consider and make such recommen-
dations to the Academic Council on any question pertaining to thtdr 
respective spheres of work as may appear to them necessary or on 
any matter referred to them by the Academic Council. 
2'- (1) Each Faculty shan consist of such Departments at DepartlMllll 
20 Studies as may be assigned to it by the Ordinances. of JlaculdIl. 
(2) No Department shan be established, reconstituted, amal8B-
mated with another, or divided or abolished except in accordaJee 
with the provisions of these Statutes. 
, 
(3) Eac:h Department shall consist of the following members, 
2.5 namely:-
30 
(i) Teachers of the Department; 
(ii) Persons conducting research in the Departments; 
(iii) Dean of the Faculty or Deans of the Faculties concern-
ed; 
(iv) Honorary Profeuors, if any, attached to the Depart-
ment; 
(,,) Such other persons as may be members of the Depart-
ment in accordance with the provisions of the Ordinances. 
(4) Each Department shall have a Head who may be a UnJvel'ld'fy 
35 Professor or, if there is DO Professor, a Reader, and whOle duties, 
• 

32 
!anctfODI and tenns and conditione of appOIntmeDt '1Ihall be laid down 
by the Ordinances: 
Plwlded that, if there are two or more Profe.>rl 011' Rea&n in 
-tIllY 'Department, DO persOD shall be appointed to be the Head of the 
:Department otherwise than in accordance with the proYislODl made 5 
in respect thereof by the Ordinances: 
Provided further that, if there is DO Professor or Reader in a De-
partment, the Dean of the Faculty concerned shall act as the Heed 
of the Department. 
Committees. 25. The Court, the Executive Council, the Academic Counell and 10 
I" :.- • 
. ~ :" 
the Facultiel may, from time to time, appoint such and so many 
Special Committees or Boards as may seem to them fit, and may, 
-.lfthey think fit, place on them persons who are not members of the 
·appoiDting bodies; and any such Committee or Board may deal with 
any IUbject delegated to it, subject to subsequent confirmation .by IS 
the appointing body. 
28. (1) The Selection Committee for making recommendatioll8 
to the Executive Council in respect of any appointment specified in 
column (1) of the Table below shall consist of the Vice-Chancellor 
who shall be the Chairman thereof, the Pro-Vice-Chancellor and 20 
the persons specified i.ll the corresponding entry in column (2) of 
the said Table. 
(1) 
Profe"or 
THE TABLE 
(2) 
Three persons not connected with the University, 
nominated by the Executive Council, who have special 
knowledge of the subject with which the person to be 
appointect will be concerned. 
ReadeT. Lecturn 
(1) The Dean of the Faculty concerned; 
(2) The Head of the Department concerned; and 
(3) two persons not eonnected with the University, 
nominated by the Executive Council, who have special 
knowledge of the subject with which the person to be 
appointed will be concerned. 
Three members of the Executive CO'U!1CU nominated 
by it. 

33 
(.2>, The procedure to be followed by the Selection Committee in 
making recommendations shall be determined by the Executive 
Council. 
(3) If the Executive Council is unable to accept any reeommen-
5 dation made by the Committee, it shall record its reasons and 
submit the case to the Visitor for orders. 
27. Where, by these Statutes, no provision is made for the Presi- Blected 
dent or Chairman to preside over a meeting of any University autho- ~ lit 
rity, Board or Committee, or when the President or Chairman so wbae DO 
10 provided for is absent, the members present shall elect one among ::ar::':a 
themselves to preside at the meeting. Scatutel. 
28. Save as otherwise provided in the Act, these Statutes or the R c-appomc-
Ordinances, every officer of the University and every member of any me:~ 
University authority whose term of office or of membership has re-
IS expired shall be eligible for re-appointinent or re-election, 88 the 
case may be. . 
29. (1) Any member other than an e:r-officio member of the Court, R~IiaDadoa' 
the Executive Council. the Academic Council or any other Univer-
sity authority may resign his membership by letter addressed to the 
20 Registrar, and the resignation shall take effect as soon as such letter 
is received by the Registrar. 
(2) An Officer of the University (whether salaried or otherwise), 
other than a Dean, may resign his office by letter addressed to the 
Registrar: 
2S Provided that such resignation shall take effect only on the date 
from which the same is accepted by the authority competent to 
appoint such officer. 
30. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the terms of his Rc:movaI 
contract or appointment, an employee of the University, salaried or from eenice. 
30 otherwise, may be removed from the service by the authority which 
3S 
is competent to appoint the employee, on anyone or more of the 
followinr grounch, namely:-
(i) the employee has become physically incapable 01 per-
fonning his duties; or 
(ii) the employee has become unsound in mind, deaf~ute 
or blind; or 
(iii) the employee sufters from contagious leprosy; or 
(i,,) the employee haa become an undischarged insolvent; 
or • 4IICB)LS--5. 

34 
(v) the employee has been convicted by a court of 
• an offence involving moral turpitude and sentenced in respect 
thereof to imprisonment for not less than six months, and a 
~iiod of fti9'e years has not elapsed' from. tiRe date' of eXJHtY of 
the'sentence: 5 
Provided that no such action shall be taken unless t'le employee 
h"u been: given a reasonable opportunity to explain: 
Pro9fdlMl further that nothmg in this claus~ shall be cleerMd to 
~t an,. rigbU accruing to an empl1lyee appointed on contnct m 
accordance with the terms of that contract. 10 
(Z) Notwtthitanding anythtng contained in the teFml of his con-
tratt ar appbtntmmt, the Executive Council may term1:nate the 
_~l of an employee-
(4) fCJt-
(i) misconduct, or 
(ii) physical unfitness, or 
(iii) ineffteieiicy, or 
(iv) breach on his part of one or more of the terms of 
his contract with the University, 
IS 
i.ti eaCh case, after calling fbr and considering his explanation; or 20 
(b) after giving four months' notice or four month.' salary 
in lieu thereof. 
ltatod.,.. 3l. (1) Whenever, in accordance with these Statutes, any person 
is to hold any office or be a member of any authority of the Univt!r-
sttt by rotation acCording to seniority, such seniority as between 25 
two pet 80fts holding pemiament posts of similar rank or grade shall 
be dl!!tE!l1I1ined. in accordance with the length of continuous penna-
nett serviee in sueh rank or grade and in the case of two persons in 
temporary service in similar rank or grade, seniority shall be deter-
mined in accordance with the length of continuous temporary service 30 
in sUch rank or grade; between a permanent emplOYeE! and a tem-
porary employee in the same rank or grade, the ~rmanent etnployee 
jJiW' be ieniOl'. 
(Z), It shall be the duty of the Re!gistrar to ptepai'e and maintain 
III ,reapect of each class of persons to whom the provisions of this 35 
Statute apply, a complete and up-to-date seniority list in accordance 
with the provisions of the foregoing clause. 
~ 

3~ 
(.9) If two or more persons have equal length of continuous ser-
vice in a partielilar grade or post, or ·the relative seniority of any 
person or persons is otherwise in doubt, the 'Registl!ar may, en his 
own motion, and shall, at the request of any such person,' submit the 
5 matter to the Executive Council whose decdsionthereon 'Ihall be 
tinal. 
32. Notwithstanding anything contained. in these :Statu'ell, a per- Ten .. III 
son who holds any office in the University or 'is a member .of ~y O8lco. 
authority or body of the ·University in his capacity asa meJ1l~ 01 
10 8!1b' other a\1thority .or body or as the holder of ~y ._p~tm&!lt, 
shall hold the office or be a member of the authority or .bQcbr .of the 
University so long only as he continues to be a member of that other 
authority or body, or the 'holder of that particular appointment, 81 
the case may be. 
IS 83. All casual vacancies in the office of member (other :thtQl·aJl ~., 
ex-of1i.cio member) of any authority or body of the Unive11lity Bh,.u. ftCIDdcI. 
be fi~led, as soon as conv~nient1y may be, by the ofticer or authority 
or body who ·has power to appoint, elect or co-opt the member whose 
place has become vacant, and the person so ,appointed, elected or ~ 
20 opted in a casual vacancy shall be a member of such authority 'Or 
body for the residue of the term for which the person whose ·place 
lie fills would have been a member. 
34. (1) Colleges and other institutions within a radius uf fifteen Admillicm 
miles from the main temple of the University may be admitted to a; ~viIeF 
2S such privileges of the University as the Executive Council ,may de- ~tJ. Diwr-
cide on the following conditions, namely:-
3S 
(i) every such college or institution shall have a regularly 
constituted Managing Body, consisting of not more than twenty 
persons, approved by the Executive Council and including, 
among others, at least two representatives of the University and 
at least three representatives of the teaching staff, pf whoJ!l.~e 
Principal of the college or institution shall be one; 
(ii) every such college or institution shall satisfytbe Exe-
cutive Council on the following points, namely:-
(a) the suitability and adequacy of its accommodation 
and equipment for teaching; 
(b) the qualifications and adequacy of its teaching.staff 
and the conditions of their service; 
(c) the arrangements for the residence, welfare, discip-
line and supervision of its students; and 
(d) such other matters as are essential ·for the 
maintenance of the standards of University education; and 
• 

(iii) no college or institution shall be admitted to any pri-
Yilept of the University except on the recommendation Gf the 
Academic Council made after considering the report of a Com-
mittee of Inspection appointed for the purpose. 
(2) Appointments to the teaching st8ft of such college or institu- S 
tion shall be made on the recommendation of a Selection Committee 
which shall include the Principal (unless the post to be filled is that 
of the Principal), at least one of the representatives of the Univer-
sity on the Managing Body and one e%pert nominated by the Acade- 10 
mic Council. 
(3) Every such college or institution shall be inspected at least 
once every year by a committee appointed by the Academic Council 
and the report of that committee shall be submitted to the Acade-
mc Council which shall forward the same to the Executive Council 
'with such recommendations as it may deem fit to make. 15 
(4) The Executive Council. after considering the report and the 
recommendations, if any, of the Academic Council shall forward a 
copy of the report to the Managing Body of the college or institution 
with such remarks, if any, as it may deem fit, for auitable action. 
(5) The Executive Council may, after consulting the Academic 20 
Council, withdraw any privileges granted to a college or institution 
if at any time it considers that the college or institution is not ful-
Illing the requisite conditions: 
Provided that before any privileges are so withdrawn the Manag-
ing Body shall be given an opportunity to represent to the Execu- 25 
tive Council why such action should not be taken. 
(6) Subject to the conditions set forth above, the Ordinances ma, 
prescribe any other conditions which may be considered necessary 
and also the procedure for the admission of colleges and institutions 
to the privileges of the University and for the withdrawal of those 30 
privileges. 
35. (1) Every graduate of the University of not less than :s years' 
standing "hall be entitled to be registered and to have his name en-
tered in the register of Registered Graduates, the period of 5 years 
being computed from the date of conferment of the first deeree by 35 
the University Oli the person concerned. 
(2) Every person who intends to become a registered graduate 
.hall make an application to the Registrar in such fonD. and on pay-
ment of such fee as may be prescribed by the Ordinances. 

~; 
(3) If any queaJtion arises as to whether a person is entitled. to 
have his name entered! in the Register of Registered Graduates, it 
shall be decided by the· Vice-Chancellor whose decision .UU be 
ftDal. 
S (4) No registered graduate shall be entitled to vote at, or stand 
as candidate for, an election to the Court from among the Register-
ed Graduates unless his name has been entered in the Register of 
Registered Graduates for at least one year prior to the date of the 
election. 
10 36. (1) The names and addresses of all persons who have made a Lllt of 
donation of Rs. 1 lakh or upwards or have transferred property of DODorl. 
the like value to the University ihall he maintained in • register kept 
for the purpose by the Secretary of the Court. 
(2) A similar register shall be kept showing the names and ad-
IS dresses of representatives of corporate bodies, finns, companies, 
trusts and joint Hindu families, who have made to the University a 
donation of Rs. 1 lakh or upwards or have transferred property of like 
yalue. 
(3) Every person whose name is entered in either register shall 
20 be a registered donor of the University. 
37. (1) The Degree of Doctor of Letters (D. Litt.) , or Mahamaho- HODOrUJ 
padhyaya, Honoris Causa, shall be conferred upon such persons as Degreel. 
have .contributed substantially to the advancement of Literature, 
Philosophy, Art, Music, Painting or any other subject assigned to the 
2S Faculty of Arts, or for conspicuous service rendered by them to the 
cause of education. 
(2) The Degree of Doctor of Science (D.Sc) Honcni8 Causa, shall 
be conferred upon such persons as have contributed substantially to 
the advancement of any branch of science or technology or to plan-
30 ning, organising or developing scientific and technological institutions 
in the country. 
38. (1) A retired Professor of the Banaras Hindu University who Eaeritul 
has acquired distinction in the field of scholarship and research and !'!dfeViddq 
has published any wcxrk of merit may, on the recommendation of the PIofcuor. 
3S Vice-Chancellor supported with reasons and of the Academic Coun-
cil, be appointed 3S Emeritus Professor on such terms as may be 
• prescribed by the Ordinances in this regard. 
(2) A scholar of eminence who has acquired distinction in the 
field of scholarship and research and has published any work of 
40 merit may. on the recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor supported 

Provision 
for mainte-
DllDCle of 
Centnl 
Hindu 
School. 
38 
with reueM, be invited by the Academic Council to deliver .tu-
res iDthe University for a .,eciAed perWd en.such terms.as may .be 
prescribed by the Ordinances. 
39. (1) The Executive Council shall make provision for the main-
tenance of the Central Hindu School BDd otherlehools which .have S 
baen established in accordance with the Act, theJe Statutes ·or ,the 
Regulations. 
(2) The management of such schools shall be in accordance with 
the Ordinances made in this behalf. 
~ertica of 40. The schools referred to in the preceding Statute and all their 10 
:: be ~ls buildings, properties, furniture, apparatus and books and accounts 
~.ofthe shall be the property of the University. 
Unic:nJty. 
PROVIDENT FUND OF EMPLOYIZS 
Subscription 41. Every employee of the University, appointedperrnanently to 
by employee. a substantive post, carrying a salary of rupees twenty per mensem. or IS 
upwards, shall, as a condition of his service, subscribe to the Provi-
dent Fund eight and one-third per cent. of his salary; such subscrip-
tion shall be deducted from his salary f!!Vf!!rJ month, fractions of a 
rupee of the salary being omitted. 
Comdbu-
don'by 
University • 
Deposit in 
BaJik. 
InVCItJIUDt 
in IeCUritiU. 
42. The Universityahall contribute to the Fund a aum equal to 20 
such percentage of the salary of each employee as may be approved 
. by the Central Government and such contribution shall be credited 
to the account of 8ueh employee and charged to the Univenity 
. accounts under the head "Provident Fund". 
43. The amount of the deduction made from the salary of an 2S 
employee under Statute 41 and the amount of the contribution made 
by the University under Statute 42 shall be deposited in the Pqst 
Office Savings Bank or in the State Bank as the Executive Council 
may direct, in the name of the Fund as early as practicable or at any 
rate within three days of the date on which the payment of the 30 
salary. is made. 
44. (1) The University may. from time to time, invest .• uc4 part 
of the Provident Fund, as may be considered expedient, in such Gov-
ernment securities as the Executive Council may determine, and may 
shange the nature of the securities. 
3S 
(2) All interest or profit realized from the securities or . from any 
deposit or account arising out of the Fund, shall, after deduc:tinatbe 
incidental expenses of investment or realization, be credited .to the 

39 
Provident Yund a:ccdUllt to be diltrt1:ru.ted nteably in the account of 
each subscriber. 
4&. (l} On a written application tram a subscriber to the Provi- r= of 
dent Fund and with the approval of the Executive Council, the Uni- pJCmia. 
, ve:rsity may aUow premia on the Life Insurance policy of the subscri-
ber to be paid out of' the subscriber's share in his Provident Fund. 
(2) In all such cases, the Life Insurance policy for which the pre.-
mia are-so paid shall be assigned in favour of the University and the 
policy shall, on the retirement of the subscriber from the service of 
10 the University, be re-assigned to him by the University. In cue of 
maturity of the policy during the service of the subscriber in the 
University, the full amount of the policy shall be credited to the Pro-
vident Fwad of the subscriber and in the case of the death of the 
_bseriber dwing the service, the full amount of the policy shall be 
15 pIIid to the legal rept'eSentative of the deceased entiUed to the Pro-
nient J\md. 
20 
30 
46. The amount at the credit of any subscriber shall be payable- Amount 
when 
(a) on the death of the subscriber, to the person or persons payable. 
nominated by him or, when no such nomination is made, to his 
legal heir or heirs; 
(b) on his ceasing to be in the service of the University, to 
such sub~ber provided--
(i) that no subscriber who has been dismissed for what 
is considered by the Executive Council as gross misconduct, 
shall, if the Executive Council so directs, be entitled to the 
beneftt or to receive any part of any sum at any time contri-
buted by the University to the Fund or the interest or profit 
thereon; 
(ii) that if any subscriber resigns his appointment before 
putting in five years' service, the University may withhold 
the contribution allotted to him, together with the interest 
thereon, and pay to the subscriber only the balance at his 
credit without such contribution or the interest on or proft1 
from such contribution. 
35 47. The University shall not be entitled to recover from the amOUnt kelO\llllY of 
• to the credit of any subscriber on account of subscriptions made by =:.. 
him thereto (including interest on or profit from such subscrip-
tions), any sum on account of any loss or damage sustained by the 
University through the misconduct or negligence of the subscriber . ' 

Lapse of 
or any other sum due by him: any such lOIS or damage sustained by 
the University or other liability incurred by the subscriber to the 
University, shall, however, be recoverable from the contribution 
made by the University to his account including interest or profit 
thereon. 5 
~~~~~tion. 48. Any contribution and interest or profit, withheld under these 
Statutes, shall lapse to the University. 
Advancea. 49. (1) In case of urgent necessity, which in the opinion of the 
Executive Council justifies the course, the University may allow a 
subscriber an advance of a sum, not exceeding his salary for three 10 
months, out of the amount subscribed by him with interest thereon 
(excluding the contribution of the University and the interest or pro-
fit thereon). 
(2) The advance shall be recovered in such number of monthly 
instalments, not exceeding twenty-four as the Executive Council may IS 
fix, and shall be recovered by deduction from the salary payable by 
the Univenity to such subscriber; the amount of such instalments 
shall be fixed. in whole rupees, and the deductions shall commence 
from the ftrst payment of a full month's salary, after such advance 
has been made, and the last instalment shall cover the entire balance 20 
then due. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything in clause (1), if an advance is 
required for the purpose of building or purchasing a house, the maxi. 
mum limit of the advance may be equal to twelve months' salary of 
the subscriber out of his subscription to the Fund, to be repaid in such 2S 
number of instalments, not exceeding forty-eight, as the Executive 
Council may determine. 
(4) A subscriber may at his option pay at any time any additional 
sum above the amount fixed. 
(5) No subsequent advance shall be made until the lapse of three 30 
months from the date when the previous advance has been fully 
repaid. 
Subac:rlptlan SO. An employee, who is on leave on full pay, shall continue to 
durina reave. subscribe to the Provident Fund and may do so at his option, if he is 
on leave on less than full pay. 35 
Amtual 51. A separate account in Form A shall be kept in the office of the 
::=t of University on account of every employee subscribing to the Prov1~ 
dent Fund. and a copy of the account shall be furnished to evf1rY 
such employee at the end of each financial year and on his ceasing to 
be an employee. 40 

41 
FORMA 
Provident Fund, Banaras Hindu University Deposit Account for 
the year ending the 31st of March, 196 
Appointment 
----------
Deposits I 1 
Withdra- Repa,-ate OpeoiDl D 
10 Balance tioD .,.... _kJTotoI"· educ- \ Conui-
from bution wal ment Balance in~t credit 
tor Protl 
I 
IS 
salary tr. B.H. added a 
theeod 
I I 2 
-1--1 
I I 
~.~ 3 4 S 6 7 8 9 
\ I 
I I 
I I I I I i I I II \ I, I 
I 
I 1 
10 
-
52. (1) Accounts credited or debited to the Provident Fund shall p i.den 
on the same day be posted to the Providenlt Fund Ledger P:d t 
in Form B, given below. The figures for column 6 in the ledger will Lcdpr. 
be calculated yearly as also the net balance of each account entered 
20 in columns 7 and 10. 
FORM B 
Provident Fund Ledger, Banaras Hindu University, Banaras 
I I 
I i 
, I 
328 (B) LS-8. 

42 
(2) No voluntary deposits from employees will be credited to the 
Provident Fund. 
CloliDa of 
account. 53. If a subscriber dies or his services otherwise terminate, 11M 
Transfer 10 
deposit 
acCOUlIt. 
account shall be closed, and. the sum due to him shall cease to beal' 
interest or carry any profit after the expiry of the month in whic:h hiJ 5 
death or the tennination of his services occurs. 
54. When an account is closed, any sum remaining unclaimed shall 
be removed from the Provident Fund Ledger and transferred to a 
deposit account at the end of the year and be dealt with like any ordi-
nary deposit. 10 
RomiDation. 55. (1) Every subscriber shall be required to sign a written 
declaration that he has read these Statutes and that he agrees to 
abide by them and hand over for registration in the University 
Oftlce the name of the person to whom he wishes the balall.ce at his 
credit to be paid in the event of his death. J 5 
(2) When nominating more than one person. he may state the 
proportion in which the said balance mly be paid to each of them 
respectively. In case the nominee or any of the nominees is a minor, 
he should state the date of birth of the minor nominee; a·nd the pay-
ment shall be made to the next friend of the nominee or the guardian 20 
who may be authorised by law to receive payment on his behalf 
while he is a minor. 
(3) 'nle subscriber may, from time to time, add to or change his 
nominee or nomin·ees and the proportion in which the balance at 
credit is to be distributed, by written application to the University. 25 
(4) A register of nominees shall be kept in the University Office 
in Fonn C givcn below:-
Name of 
Subacriber 
I 
FORM C 
---.--------------- ( 
I Name and address of hi. . 
nominee With date of birth 
, and the name of his ncxt 
friend if he is a minor 
2 
--------,----" 
SilDature of the 
Signature of Pro.-Vic:c-Chan-
Subscriber cellor. B. H. U. 
3---,---4 -
I 
I -------------------------;---
30 

·b 
58. Notwithstanding anything contained in these Statutes, Do B:,I~i t 
employee of the University shall be entitled to the benefit of the diaib':. " 
Provident FLI'1d if he is otherwise entitled to a .pension or the 
University cl-ntributes towards his pension and leave allowance or 
5 he has been· appointed by the University on a conlOlidated salary 
on special terms. 
GRATUITY AND COMPASSIONATE FUND 
57. The University shall set apart a sum of Rs. 1,000/- every year Compalllo-
and invest the same at interest in order to form a fund for the nate Pund. 
10 payment of gratuities to the servants or employees of the University 
and for the payment of compassionate allowance to ,taeir families, 
as hereinafter provided. 
58. If the unspent balance of that fund at the close of any finan- Balance in 
cial year exceeds Rs. 3,000/-, the University may stop further ~c:.DORt to ex ........ s. 
I S payment to the fund under the preceding Statute till the balance 3,000. 
falls below that amount or reduce the amount ,payable thereunder so 
as not to exceed that amount. 
59. GratUity will be paid unly to a servant or employee of the Gratuity. 
University-
20 (i) who is permanent; 
(ii) who has not less than five years service; and 
(iii) who is getting n salary of less than rupees 20/- per 
mensem· 
60. (1) The amount of the gratuity shall be equal to half month's Payment of 
25 pay for every completed year of service, but the total amount of gratuity. 
gratuity shall not exceed Rs. 240/- in any case. 
(2) Gratuity shall be payable to the servant or employee at the 
time of his retirement from the Service of the University on account 
of physical incapacity or on reaching the age of superannuatioo. 
30 (3) If a servant or employee of the University who was eligible 
for gratuity under Statute 59 begins to draw pay of Rs. 20/- or more 
per mensem, he may be allowed gratuity in respect of his period of 
service rendered on pay of less than Rs. 20/- per mensem, but the 
amount of such gratuity shall be paid only on retirement or discharge. 
3S 61. If 8 servant or employee of the University dies while in the eompaasio-
service of the University after comp1etin6 a service of ten years, na:~­
such compassionate allowance not exceeding three months' pay may :mily. 
be paid to such members of his family who are dependent on him for 
their livelihood as the Executive Council may, in the circumstanees 
• 40 of each case, determine. 
62. The payment of gratuity or compassionate allowance may be ModO:f. 
made either in a lump sum or in instalments or in such other manner paJl1l 
as the Executive Council may determine . 
• 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS' 
The report of the Banaras Hindu University Enquiry Committee 
appointed by the President, in his capacity as the Visitor of the 
University, to enquire into the state of affairs at the University bad 
revealed certain disquieting features and unhealthy influences which 
had been undermining the discipline of the University. On a preli-
minary consideration of the recommendations of the Committee, the 
President promulgated the Banaras Hindu University (Amendment) 
Ordinance, 1958 on the 14th June, 1958 which was later replaced by 
the Banaras Hindu University (Amendment) Act of 1958. Both the 
Ordinance and the Amending Act were temporary measures to tide 
over the difficult situation which was prevalent in the University at 
that time and the intention was to bring before Parliament in due 
course a comprehensive long-term legislation for the University 
after a detailed examination of the various recommendations of the 
Enquiry Committee. The recommendations have been examined. in 
consultation with the authorities concerned and the present Bill 
. embodies the long-term legislative proposals for the University. 
The main features of the Bill are:-
(4) the restoration of the supreme governing status to the 
Court of the University; 
(b) the reconstitution of the Executive bodies of the 
University, e.g., the Court, the Executive Council and the 
Finance Committee; 
(c) the abolition of the Reviewing Committee and the 
Standing Committee of the Academic Council of the University; 
(d) the conferment of power on the University to borrow 
money with the approval of the Central Government and the 
abolition of the University's power to withdraw degrees; 
(e) the revision of the procedure for the appointment of 
the Vice-Chancellor; and 
<1> other measures of reform in the administration of the 
University. 
K. L. SHRIMALI. 
NEW DI:un; 
The 27th April, 1981. 

ANNEXURE 
hTaAcrs FROM THE BANARAS HINDU UNIVERSITY Ar:r, 1915 
(ACT No. 16 OF 1915) 
... • • • • 
2. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject DeIlaidODI. 
or context,-
(a) "College" means any college or institution maintained 
or admitted to privileges by the University; 
(b) "Executive Council" means the University Council; 
(c) "Court" means the University Court; 
(d) "Faculty" means a Faculty of the University; 
(e) "Ordinances" means the Ordinances of the University 
for the time being in force; 
(f) "Academic Council" means the Academic Council of 
~he University; 
(g) "Statutes" means the Statutes of the University for the 
time being in force; and 
(h) "University" means the Banaras Hindu University. 
3. (1) The First Chancellor, Pro-Chancellor and Vice-Chancellor I.Dcorpor •• 
who shall be the persons specified in this behalf by a notification of UOD. 
the Central Government in the Official Gazette, and the persons 
indicated in Schedule I as members of t'1e Court and the Academic 
Council, and all persons who may hereafter become, or be appointed 
as, such ofticers or members, so long as they continue to hold such 
office or membership, shall be constituted a body corporate by the 
name of the Banaras Hindu University . 
• • • ... 
(3) The University shall be deemed to have been incorporated 
for the purposes, among others, of making provision for imparting 
education, literary, artistic and SCientific, as well as agricultural, 
technical, commercial and professional, of furthering the prosecution 
of original research, and of giving instruction in Hindu theology and 
religion, and of promoting the study of literature, art, philosophy, 
history, medicine and science, and of imparting physical and moral 
training. 
4S 

46 
~u:aVO::~1 ,. The University shall be open to persons of either sex and of 
cl!saea,casteB whatever race, creed, caste or class, and it shall not be lawful for the 
and creed.. University to adopt or impose on any person any test whatsoever of 
POWcnof 
the Univer-
lity. 
Visitor. 
relieious belief or profession in order to entitle him to be admitted 
therein, as a teacher or student, or to hold any office therein, or to 
graduate thereat, or to enjoy or exercise any privilege thereof; except 
in respect of any particular benefaction accepted by the University, 
where such test is made a condition thereof by any testamentary or 
other instrument creating such benefaction: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent 
religious instruction being given in the manner prescribed by the 
Ordinances to those who have consented to receive it.· 
4A. The University shall have the following powers, namely:-
• • • • • • 
(2) to promote Oriental studies, and in particular Vedic, 
Hindu, Buddhist and Jain studies, and to give instruction in 
Hindu religion and to impart moral and physical training; 
(3) to hold examinations and to grant and confer degrees 
and other academic distinctions to and on persons who-
(a) shall have pursued a course of study in the 
University or in an institution maintained under sub-section 
(1) of section 15 or admitted .to the privileges of the Uni-
versity under sub-section (2) of that section, or 
(b) are teachers in educational institutions, under condi-
tiona laid down in the Statutes and the Ordinances, and shall 
have passed the i.!xaminations of the University under like 
conditions, or 
(c) being women, shall have pursued a course of private 
study and shall have passed the examinations of the Uni-
:veraity under conditions laid down in the Ordinances; 
• ... • • 
(13) to create administrative, ministerial and other neces-
sary posts ~nd to make appointments thereto; and 
... • • • 
5. (1) • • • • 
(2) The Visitor shall have the right to cause an inspection to be 
made, by such person or persons as he may direct, of the University, 
Its bmldinp, laboratories and eqUipment and of any institution 

47 
maintained by the University, and also of the examinations, teaching 
and other work conducted or done by the University and to cause an 
inquiry to be made in like manner in respect of any matter connected 
with the University. 
• • • • • 
Chief Rector 
I. (1) T·he Governor of the State of Uttar Pradesh shall be the and Rectors. 
Chief Rector of the University. 
(2) Such persons, as may be appointed in this behalf in accord-
ance with the States, shall be the Rectors of the University. 
Offtcenaad 
7. The following shall be the officers and authorities of the authorities of the Unl-University: - venity. 
OP'nCERS OF THE UNIVERSITY 
(I) The Chancellor, 
(ii) The Pro-Chancellor: 
Provided that until one of the two Pro-Chancellors 
holding office at th:, commencement of the Banaras Hindu 
University (Amendment) Act, 1951, ceases to hold office, 
there shall be two Pro-Chancellors. 
(iii) The Vice-Cha~cellor, 
(tv) The Pro-Vice-Chancellor, 
(v) The Treasurer. 
(vi) The Registrar, 
(vii) The Deans of the Faculties, and 
('I1iii) Such other persons in the service of the University as 
may be declared by the States to be the officers of the 
University. 
AUTHORITIES OF THE UNIVERSITY 
(i) The Court, 
(ii) The Executive Council, 
(iii) The Academic Council, 
(iv) The Standing Committee of the Academic Council, 
(v) The Finance Committee, 
('I1i) The Faculties, and 
(vii) Such other authorities as may be declared by the 
States to be authorities of the University. 

Powers and 
duties of 
ofIic:ers, 
tonnlof 
oftice and 
filling of 
casual wean 
ci~l. 
The Court. 
48 
8. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the powers and duties of 
the ofBcers of the University, the term for which they Shall hold 
ofBce, and the filling up of casual vacancies in such offices, shall be 
provided for by the Statutes. 
9. The functions of the Court shall be--
(CI) to advise the Visitor in respect of any matter which 
may be referred to it for advice; 
(b) to advise any authority of the University in respect of 
any matter which may be referred to the Court by such 
authority; and 
(c) to perform such other duties and exercise such other 
powers as may be assigned to it by the Visitor or under this 
Act. 
Thec:n~- 10. (1) The Executive Council shall be the executive body of the 
ave Cl • Un,iversity. 
(2) The Executive Council shall exercise such powers and per-
form such duties as may be vested in it, by the Statutes. 
The Acade- 11. (1) The Academic Council shall be the academic body of the 
mic Council. University and, subject to the Act, the Statutes and Ordinances shall 
have charge of the organization of instruction in the University and 
the Colleges, the courses of study and the examination and discipline 
of students and the conferment of ordinary and honorary degrees . 
• • • • • 
fhe J::d~ 12. There shall be a Standing Committee of the Academic 
:: of the flUt- Council which shall exercise such powers and perform such duties 
~~c as may be vested in it by the States. 
Pro~~s UA. No act or proceeding of any authority or body of the Uni-
~~~ri:~: versity shall be invalid by reason only of the existence of any 
bo~ie8 ~ot to va.cancy among its members or any defect in the constitution thereof. be mvalidat- . 
c:d by vacan-
des. etc. •••••• 
Permanent 
reserve to 
cover re-
curriD& 
chal'JlC. 
14. tThe University shall invest, and keep invested, in securities in 
which trust funds may be invested, in accordance with the provi-
sions of the law relating to trusts in India, a sum of fifty lakhs of 
rupees as a permanent endowment to meet the recurring, charges of 

49 
the lhai"....ty Mlaer tlaaD. cmu,es in respect of IIC!holaPShtps. prizes 
and IeW1ll'da: 
Provide4 that-
r~ of 1886. (1) ~f (;}PV~~Dt .~urities, U. d.$.~ P1 ~e II\4ian 
~~i~ A~, 1886, W~~ may be held. py the Uriiverm~1 @au, 
for the purpose of this section, be reckoned at their face-value; and 
• • • • 
~1. (1) Sl1QjifilCt t9 the provi~ions Qf ~~ Act, the StatqtlitS JDay Statutes. 
pro~4~ f9:r aU pr any of UJ.e fallowing mattera, nrunel~:-
(a)· the constitution, powers and duties of the Court, the 
E¥ecu~V~ C,,~f!:U, ~! Ac,.de~e CQUl1fJU, t~e $t~1 Commit-
tee 0( ~e M"'~em.ie C~cil, the F~ance CQlllqUt~e ~d .uch 
other bodies, as may be deemed. n~ to Cf)~stitute from time 
to time; 
(f» ~, "t~tiOJl IP.l4 ~D~wuance in oftl~ of the members 
of the said bodies, including the pontinuance in ofB~ of the first 
members, and the filling Qf vacancies of mem.bers, anp all other 
matters relative to those bodies for which it may be necessary 
or desirable to Pl'ovtUj 
(c) the appointment, ppwers ~ml duties 01 the officers of 
the University; 
(d) the constitution of a pension or provident fund and the 
establlshment af an insurance scheme fGr the benefit of the offi-
cers, teachers and other employees of the University; 
(e) the conferment of honorary degrees; 
(f) the withdnwal Gf degrees, diplomas, certificates and 
other aoademic distinCtiGDSj 
(g) the establishment and abolition of faculties, depart-
ments, halls, colleges and institutionsj 
(I{.) the ~iitia_ llnder which coUeges anci other insti-
WotiOM ~ay b, a~tted to the privileges of the URiversity and 
the withdrawal of such· Drivthtl8lti 
(i) ~t! ~,,~t"~~Dn of f~Qwsnips, schQlarmiP$, ,tudentships, 
~:J.lUbjtiq~ ~~ RIJ.~ F~~i .~ 
(;) all other matters Vt'Im~h by ·UliJI ~ct are to. btt· tn' may be 
prov~ded by tpe Statutes. 
(2) TIle first Statutes shall be those set out in Schedule t. 
426 (B) LS-7. 

50 
(3) The Executive Council may, from time to time, make new or 
additional Statutes or may amend or repeal the Statutes; but every 
new Statute or addition to the Statutes or any amendment or repeal 
of a Statute shall require the previous approval of the ViSitOll' who 
may sanction, disallow or remit it for further consideration. 
OrdinlDceS. 18. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the 
Ordinal'lces may provide for all or any of the following matters, 
namely:-
• • • • 
(c) the degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic 
distinctions to be awarded by the University, the qualiftcations 
for the same, and the means to be taken relating to the granting 
and obtaining the same; 
(d) the fees to be charged for counes of study in the 
University and for admission to the examinations, degrees and 
diplomas of the University; 
• • • • 
(k) the emoluments and the terms and conditions of service 
of teachers of the University; 
• • • • • • 
(m) the supervision and inspection. of colleges and other 
institutions admitted to privileges of the University under 
sub-section (2) of section 15; and! 
• • • • • • 
(3) The said Ordinances may be amended, repealed or added to 
at any time by the Executive Council: 
Provided that--
(i) no Ordinance shaIl be made afteeting the conditions of 
residence or discipline of students, except after consultation with 
the Academic Counell; 
(Ii) no Ordinance shall be made-
(0) affecting the admission or enrolment of students or 
prescribing examinations to be recognised 81 equivalent to 
the University examinations, or 
(b) aftecting the conditions, mode of appointment or 
duties of examiners or the conduct or standard of exami-
Dationl or any COUI'IIe of study, 
unl .. a draft of such Ordinance has been proposed by the Academic 
CounclJ. . 

• • • • 
(5) Where the Executive Council has rejected the draft of an 
Ordinance proposed by the Academic Council, the Academic Council 
may appeal to the Visitor who may pass such order thereon as he 
thinks fit: 
(6) All Ordinances made by the Executive Council shall be sub-
mitted, as soon as may be, to the Visitor who may within two months 
from the date of receipt thereof disallow any such Ordinance or 
remit it to the Executive Council for further consideration. 
(7) The Visitor may. by order, direct that the operation of any 
Ordinance shall be suspended until he has had an opportunity 0'" 
exercising his power of disallowance, and any order of suspension 
under this sub-section shall cease to have effect on the expiration 
of two months from the date of such order. 
• • '" • 
ItA. (1) Every salaried officer and teacher of the University Conditions 
shall be appointed under a written collltract, which shall be lodged g~=C::J 
with the University and a copy of which shall be furnished to the tC8chCl's. 
officer or teacher concerned. 
(2) Any dispute arising out of a contract between the University 
and any of its officers or teachers shall, at the request of the officer 
or teacher concerned. or at the instance of the University, be referred 
to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of one member appointed. by 
the Executive Council, one member nominated by the ofBcer or tea-
cher concerned and an umpire appointed. by the Visitor. and the 
decision of the Tribunal shall be final. 
• • • • 

LOK SAB," .. , .. 
A 
BILL 
fllnlleT fO aDJ.el1~ tpe aWnls Hindu Ulliversity N;t, 1915 
(Dr. K. L ... %rimaii, 
Minister of Educar:.:m.) 