BW .0. 83 of 1953 
THE I:t\TDUSTRIES (DEVELOPMENT AND REGULATION) 
AMENDMENT BILL, 1953 ' 
[As INTRODUCED IN TD HousR O. TUB PBOPLE] 
I 
A. 
BILL 
io amend the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, Hl51. 
BB it enacted by Parliament as follows:--
1. Short title and commencement.-(l) This Act may pe c~Jled the 
Industries (Developm.ent and Regulation) Amendment Aot, 1958. 
(2) It shall come into force on such dote as the Central Government 
may, by notifj~ution in the Official Gazette, appoint. 6 
2. Amendment of section S, Act LXV of 19t51.-·In sootion 3 of the In· 
dustries (Development and Regulation) Aot, 1951 (hereinaIter referred to 
as the 'principal Act '),-
(i) after clause (b), the following cla\1se shall be inserted, 
namely:- 10 
• (bb) "existing industrial undertaking" means-
(a) in the case of an inriustrial undertaking pertaining to 
any of the industries specified in the First Schedule as' origi-
nally enacted, an industrial undertaking which was in existenoe 
on the commencement of this Act or for the establishment of llS 
which effective steps had been taken before such commenoe-
ment, and 
(b) in the case of an industrial undertaking pertaining tu 
any of the industries added to the First Solledule by an amend-
ment thertl, an industrial undertaking. whiclilia in existenoe to 
on the coming into foree of .uch amendment ell for . the estab-
lishment·of which effective steps had been takm,· -before the 
aoming into force of such amendment; '; 

I 
10 
15 
2 
(il) after clause (4), the following olauae ahaUbe m..tecI. 
name1:r:-
'(tid) "new article", in relation to an industrial underlakinc 
whioh is registered or in respect of whioh a licenoe or penniuion 
has been issued under this Aot, mean&-
(a) any article which falls under an item in the First 
Schedule other than the Item under which articles ordinarily 
ma~ufactured or produced in the industrial undertaking at the 
date of registration or issue of the licence or permission, a_ 
the case may be, fall; 
(b) any article which bears a mark as defined in the Trade 
Marks Act, 1940 (V of 1940), or which is the subject of a 
patent, if at the date of registration or issue of the licence 
or permission, as the case may be, the industrial undertaking 
W9.8 noil m"nufacturing or producing such article bearing that! 
mark or which is the subject of that patent. '. 
S. Omission of section 4, Act LXV of 1951.-Section 4 of the prinoipal 
Act shall be omitted, 
4. Amendment 01 secttoD 10, Act LXV of 1951.-In section 10 of the 
20 principal Act-,-
(a) for sub-section (I), the following sub-section shall be _ubsti· 
tuted, namely:-
"(1) The owner of every existing industrial ullnertaking, no' 
being the Central Government, shall, within such period a8 the 
nentral Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
fix in this behalf with respect to industrial undertak:nr generally 
or with respect to any cl888 of them, register the ~ndertaking in 
the preacribed manner."; 
(h) Itfter sub-flection (2), the following sub-section shlill be in-
lIerted, namely:-
.. (3) Where an industrial undertaking is registeren llnder this .. 
SE'ctiOIl, th('!'e !'hllll bf issued to the owner of the undertaking or 
the Central Government, as the oase may be, a certificate of reo ~ 
gistration containing such particulars aa may be prescribed.". 
36 6. InaertiOD of Dew lecUon lOA in Act LXV of 1951.-After section 16 
01. the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, na.mely:-
"lOA. B6"OQation of. 1sgiitration in oertain ca.t6l.-If the Central 
Oovllrnment is satisfied that the registration of any industrial under-
t'lking hn.a been obtained by miBrepl'esentation as to an essential fr.c' 
or that any industria.} undel1a.king hal eeaaed to be registrahle under 
this Act by reason of a.ny exemption granted under this A.ot becoming 
a.pplicable thereto or that for any other reason the registration hal I 
become uaelell Or- -ine1f80Wve IUld tberefOl'6 requires to be revoked. 
the Central Gonm..-t'1n81 reyoQ the ,.is~tiQ~,". 

3 
e. Iuertlon of Dew HCtion ll.A. in Act LZV of INI.-After section 11 
rOt She prinoipnl Aot, the following seotion shall be inserted, namely:-
"HA. Licence for producing or manufacturing new articlu.-The 
ownf'lr of an industrial undertrJdng which is registered under seotion I 
10 or in respect of which a lioence or permission haa been issued under 
section 1,1 shall not produce or manufacture any new article unless-
(a) in the oase of an industrial undertaking registered under 
section 10, he hal> obtained a licence for producing or manufactur-
ing such new article; and 
(b) in the case of an industrial undertaking in respect of 10 
which a. licence or permission has l)een issued under section 11, he 
has had the existing licence or permission amended in the prescrib-
ed .manner by the inclusion of such new article. 
7. Amendment of section 12, Act LXV of l{'51.-ln section 12 of the 
prinoipal Act.-
(a) after the words and figures 'under section 11' in both the 
plaueR where they occur, the words, figures and letter 'or section llA' 
shall be inserted; 
16 
(b) after the words 'new industrial undertaking' in both the pl&ce8 Jo 
where they occur, the words 'or to produce or manufacture the new 
article' shall be inserted. 
8. Sul)stltution 01 new section for section 13 in Act LXV of 1951.-For 
eection 13 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, 
namely:-
., 18. Further provi.ion for licensing Of indu.trial undertaking. in 26 
.pecial caBBR,-(l) No person or Buthority, other than the Central 
Government, shall-
(a) in the case of an industrial undertaking required to be 
registered under section 10, but. which has not been registered with-
~n the time fixed for the purpose under that section, carryon the 30 
business of that. undertaking after the expiry of such p'3riod, or 
(b) in the case of an industrial undertaking the registration in 
respect of which has been revoked under section lOA on the ground 
that. it had been obtained by misrepresentation as to an essential 
fact. carry on the Lusiuess of the undertaking after the revocation, 36 
« 
(c) in the caRe of an industrial undertaking to which the pr0-
visions of this Act did not originally apply but became appliCJPtble 
after the commencement of this Act for any reason, ('arry on the 
business of the undertaking after the expiry of three months • 
from the date on which the provisions aof this Act became 80 
applicable. or 
(d) effect any substantial expansion of an industrial under-
iaking which haa been registered. or 
(e) change the location of the whole or any pari of an iDcl.. • 
trial uniieriakiRA' whiCh 'has been regiJtered. 

exoept under, and in accordance with, a. licence i"'"l1~ in thai 1:. 
haH by the Central Governme.nt, and, in the cuse of a t;tate Govern-
ment, except under and in accordance with the previous permission of. 
the Central Government. 
a (2) The provisions of sections 11 and 12 shall apply, BO fllr as 
may be, in relation to the grant. of licences or pennisMiou to any in-
dustrial undertaking referred to in thh'l ~ection flS thp~1 npply in re-
latinn to the grant of licences or pemlissiollS to a new industrial undtll'-
iaking. 
10 Explanation.-~·or the, purposes of this section, 'substantial G-
pansion' means the expansion of Bll existing mdustl'illJ undertaking 
which substantially increases the productive cRpacity of the undertaking, 
or which is of .such a nature as to Ilmount virtually to a new industrial 
undertaking, but does not include any such expansion as is normal to 
US the undertaking having regard to its nature and the circumstances re-
.lating to such expansion. " 
9. Amendment. of 16Ct.10n li, Act. LXV of 19U.-In seotion 14 of 
~e principal Act, for the words and figures 's~ction 11 or section 13' the" 
words, figures and letter 'section 11, section 11A or section 13' shall be 
10. 8\lbstit.ut.ed. 
10. Amendment 01 section 115, Act LXV of 1951.-1n section 15 of the 
principal Act, for clause (b), t.he following clause shall be substituted, name· 
ly:--
.. (b) any industrial undertaking is bein.g managed in a manner 
highly detrimental to the scheduled industry concerned or to pub· 
lic interest.;". 
11. OmJasion of l8etlan 1'7. Act LXV of 1951.-Bection 17 01 the Ilrin· 
c~pal Act shall be omitted. 
12. Insertion of Ohapters m A &Dd m B In Act LXV of 1951.-
ao Afber Chapter HI of the principal Act.. the following ChRpters,. "hall be 
inserted, namely:-
.... 
"CHAPTER lIlA 
DmBOT MANAGBMBNT OR CONTROL OF INDUSTRIAL UNDBRTAKINGS BY COTaAII 
GOVBBNMBNT IN CBRTAIN OASKs 
l8A. Power of Central Government to assumo management 01' 
control of an industrial unde1'taking in oe1'tain co .... -(1) n the Oell· 
nal Government is of opinion that.-
fa) an industrial 1)ndertakjn~ to which directions hRVe been 
iRRued in pursuance of section 16 has failed to comply with such 
directions, or 
(b' an industrial undertaking- in reSDect. of which an investiga-
t.ion has been made under section 15 (whether or not any direoti01l8 
have been issued to the undertaking in pursuance of section 16). 
is being managed in a manner highlv detrimental to the achedUled 
industry concerned or to public interest, 
Ute Central Government may, by notified order, authorise any person or 
body of persons to take over the management. of the whole or any pari of 

5 
the undertaking or to exercise in respect of the whole or any part of the 
UDdertakiug such functions of control as may be specified in the order. 
(2) Any notified order issued under sub-section (1) shall. ~ave. effect 
for such period not tlxceeding five years as ~ay be specified m the 
order. 
Explanation.-The power to authorise a body of persons under this 
lection to take over the management of an industrial undertaking 
which is a company includes also 0. power to appoint any individual 
firm or cOlllpuny to be the managing agent of the industrial under-
tltking on such terms and conditions as the Centra.l Government may 
think fit. 
18B. Effect of notified order under section 1SA.-(1) On the issue 
of a Jlotitled order under section 18A authorising the taking over of the 
.management of an industrial undertaking,-
10 
(a) aU persons in cha.rge of the management, including I'Pl'flonR 1. 
holding office as mano.ge~ or directors of the industriru undt·rtak-
ing immediately before the issue of the notified order, shall be 
deemed to have vacated their offices as such; 
(b) any contract of management between the industrial un-
dertaking and any managing agent or any director thereof hold- 10 
i.llg office as such immediately before the issue of the notified or-
der shall be deemed to have terminated; 
(c) the managing agent, if any, appointed under section 18A 
.hall be deemed to have been duly appointed as the managing agent • 
in pursuance of the Indian Companies Act, 1918 (VII of 1918) and 21 
the memorandum and articles of association of the industrial under-
taking and the Drovisions of the said Act and of the memorandum 
and articles sh&J.I, subject to the other provisions oontained in this 
Act, apply accordingly, but no suoh managing agent shall be re-
moved from office except with the previous consent of the Central 80 
Governweut : 
(d) the person or body of persons ~uthorised under section 18A 
to take over the management shall take all such steps as way be 
necessary to take into his or their custody or control all the pro-
pert"., effects and actionable claims to which the industrial S6 
undertaking is or appeara to be entitled. and aU the property and 
effects of the industria.l undertaking shall be deemed to be in the 
custody of the person or, as the caSe may be, the body of persona 
.a from the date of the notified order; and 
(e) the peraons, if anv, authorised under section l8A to take 
·.,vpr the management of a.D industrial undertaking which is 8 ~ 
company shall he for aU purposes the directors of the industrial 
unrlertnking dilly constituted under the Indian Comp&nieB Act, 
19]11 (VIT of 19]3) Rnd sha.ll alone be entitled to exercise 011 the 
powera of the directors of the industrial undertaking, whether auell .. 
pow8ra are derived from the said Aot or from the memorandum at 
articles ot association of the industrial undertaking or from an1 
~er IIOUl"Oe. 

10 
16 
• 
ao 
.. 
6 
(9) S'ubject to the other proviai0D8 contained in this Actl and ~ 
the oontrol of the Central Government, the person or body of pel"BOD& 
authorised to take over the management of an industrial undertaking. 
ahall t.flke such steps 8S may be necessary tor the purpose of efficiently 
lJlanngillS the business of the industrial undertaking and shall exerci.ae 
such other powers and have such other dutIes as may be prescribed. 
(3) Where any person or body of persODS has been authorised to 
exerCl8{J any functioIls of control in reiationto an industrial undertak-
ing, the undertaking shall be carried on pursuant to any direotions 
gh-en by the authorised person in a.ccor4allce with the provisioDS of 
the notified order, and any person having any functions of mr.nage-
ment in rel&tion to the undertaking or part thereof shall comply with 
all such dire.ctions. -
(4) The person or body of persons authorised under section 18A 
shall in aU cases exercise his or their functions in accordance with 
any instructions given to him or them by the Central Government so, 
however, that he or they shall not have any power to give any other 
person any directions under this section inconsistent with the provi-
sions of any Act or instrument determining the functions of tbe autho-
rity oarrying on the undertaking except in so far BS mBy be specifically 
provided by the order. 
lac. ContTactB in bad faith, eto., may be cancelled OT vaTied.-With-
out prejudice to the provisions contained in section ISB; the persOD' 
Or body of persons authorised under section 18A to take over the 
manallement of an industrial undertaking may, with the previous 
approval of the Central Government. make an application to any 
court having jurisdiction in this behalf for the purpose of cancelling 
. or 'Varyjng any contract or agreement entered jnto, at any time before 
the issne or the notified order under section l8A, between the indus· 
trial undertaking and any other person and the court may, if satisfied 
afttor due inquiry that luch contract or ~eml"nt had been enterecl 
into in bad faith and is detrimental to the c.'terests of the industrial 
undertaking, make au order cancelling or v9rying (either uncondition· 
ally or suhject to such. conditions as it may think fit to impose) that 
contract Cl' agreement, and the contrr.ct or agrpement shall have etleot 
accor(JjngJy _ 
18D. No right to oompensation fOT termination of office (Yf con-
tTact.--}\;ctwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time 
being in force, no person who ceases to hold any office by reason of 
tile provisions contained in clause (a) of section 18B, or whose oontract 
of Illanhg~tnt>nt is tenninated by reRson of the provisions contained in 
clnuse (/.) of that section, nhall be entitled 1.0 IIIlV compensation for the 
loss of offiee I)r for the premature termination .. ,r his contract of manage-
ment: 
Provided that nothing contained in this eection shall .freet the 
right of any s\Jch person to recover from the industrial undertakinr 
moneys rGc~vera.ble otherwise than by wliy of such compensation. 
18E. Application of Aot VlT of 1918.-(.1) Where the management 
of an .ndustrial undertaking, being a compnn-~ 8S defined in the JndiaD 
OompanielJ Act, 1918 {Vn of 1918), is takall over by Ule Central 

7 
iIournmen\, $ben. notwithat6ud~g anythil'l8.o.:w-.ajned ill th~~cI 
... or in the memoraudum or articles of 8088C)01ation of .uch unci"",--
.. ,_. 
(G) it shall not be lawful for t.~e shareholde~s of such under- 6 
taking or any other person to nommata or appomt any person to 
~ a director of the eoncem; 
(b) no resolut.ion passed at any meEltivg of tho shareholder!f 
of su('h undertaking shall be given effO\.:t tv unless approved by 
the Central Government ; 
(el no proceeding for the winding up of suoh undertaking or 10 
for th(', arpointment of a reoeiver in respect thereof shall lie in any 
eourt except with the consent of the Central Government.. 
(2) t:iubject to the provisions contained in sub-section (I), and to ' 
the other provisions contained in this Act and ~ubject to such other 
exceptions, restrictions and limitations, if any, as the Central Govern- 115 
mi:lllli mil), Ly not.ification in the Officiul Gazet.te, specify in this behalI, 
the Indian Companies Act., 1913 (VII of 1913), shall continue to apply 
to such undertaking in the same manner as it applied thereto before 
the issue of the notified order under sect.ion 18A. -
181". jlI)w8r 01 Central Gov8rnm8n.t to mnpctl notified o,d,f' undef' to 
sec:tion 18,\ .-If at any time it appears to the Central Government on 
the apphct.tion of the owner bf the industrial undertnking or otherwise 
tbl\t the purpose of the order made under section leA has been fulfilled 
or thnt for. any other reason it is not necessal',v tha,t the order should 
remain in force, the Central Government may, by notified order, 2lS 
cancel sllch order and on :the cancellatioll of any such order the 
mnnagement or the control, &8 the CBse may be. of the industrial un-
certaking &hull vest in 'the owner of. the unJertnking 
CHAPTER III-B 
OoNnOL OF SUPPLY, DiliTBIBUTION,PB.lC., BTO., 011' OEBTAIN ARTIOLES 80 
18G. Powe, '0 eo",t,ol ,upply, distribution, price, etc., 01 cerial'n 
&rt.eleR.- (1; 'The Central Government, so far as it appears to it to 
~e ueoeBPRry or expedient for securing the f.'1uitabI6 distribution and 
availability nt fair prices of hny article or class' of artioles relatable to 
any .8oheduled industry, may, notwithstanding anything contained in 86 
lIPly other provision of this Act, by no~i1i~d order, provide for regu-
lating the supply and distribution thereof and trade and commerce 
therein. 
(.g) Without prejudice to the generality of the powers oonferred 
~ Rub-section (1), a notified order mOOe thereunder may provide-
(a) for controllin. the prices at which any such article Or class 
~ereof may be bought or sold; 
(I,) for regulating by lioences, permits or otherwise the distri-
lJution, transport, disposal, acquisition, possession, use or consump-
tion of any such arti"le or class thereof; 
'r) fO,r prohibiting th~ ~ithqoldin~ Jrorq 8~ed of anI auch 
article or clas8 thereof ordmalily kept for sale; 
40 

IS 
10 
15 
30 
tS 
(d) for req uiring any person holding stock of finy lueh artiole 
t)l' clas& thereof to sell lihe whole or 11 spflcified part of the' stoc:k 
lit Imeh prices and to suoh person8 or oln~8 of 'perBOllS and in such 
cmmuuitanCCy as mlly be speoified in tue order: . 
If') 1:or regulating or prohibiting Imy class of commercial ()r 
bnllll('ial t·ransftotions relating to such ar~icl6 or olass thereof whioh 
In the opinion of the authority makin~ lone order are, or if unre-
guJatoottre likely to be, detrimental to public interest; 
U, for requiring persons engaged in the distribution and trade 
and commerce in any such Ilrticle or class thereof to mark the' 
IIrticJt's (~xposed or intended for 8&.le with thE' sale price or to ex-
hibit at some easily accessible place on the premises the price-lists 
,}f crticlee held for sale and also to similarly exhibit on the first 
day of every month, or at such time as m~v be pro8cribed, a state-
ment of the total quantities of any such articles in stock; 
(g) {or collecting any infonnation (',1' rta1i8tic8 with a view to 
It'ljulal:ing or prohibiting any of the aforesaid matters; and 
(It) tor any incidental or supplemC::'lItary matters, including. 
in particular, the grant or issue of licences, permite or other docu-
ments and the charging of fees thereof. 
(1) !-:o order made in exercise of any power conferred by this 
seotion Shull be called in question in any .::ourt, 
(4) Where an order purporta to have b~n made and signed hJ 
au authcrity in exerci'JC of any power conferred by this section, a court 
shull. within the meaning of the Indian EvidellCtl Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), 
pres1ID1') that such ordtr was 80 made by th'lt aut.hority, 
Ezplallafion.-In this section, the expression 'article or C)&SB of 
articles' relatable to any scheduled industry includes any artide or 
class of artioles imported into Indi& which is of the same nature or des-
cription as the article or class of articles manufactured Or produ('ed in 
the soheduled industry". 
18. Substitution or Dew section for I8ctlon sa 1D Act LXV of 1961.-
Fpr section 28 of the principal Aot, the following section shall 8e 8ubsti- ~ 
tuted, namely;-
"28, Deci.ion of Centrtl! Got/emment fintl! r6Bpeoting cert4ift 
mattBr,,-If for the purposes of this Aot any question aris88 as to" 
whether-
(a) there baa been a substantial expansion of an industrial 
undertaking. or • 
(b) an industrial undertaking is producing or manufacturing 
any new article, 
the decision of the Central Government thereon sha.ll be fina.l." 
14. AmeadmeDt of aecUOD H. Act LXV of 19&1.-ln section 24 of the 
principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words, brackets and figures '~r of 
~ sub-tlection (1) of section 11 read with section la or of Bub-section (.~) of 
s(lCtion 17 cr of any direOtiOIlS issued under sectiol1 ]!" th~ worda. bracketa, 
figures snd letters 'or of tection llA or of Bub·section (1) of section 18 or 
of any direotioD iaaued under aection 16 or 8ub-taction (3) of seotioD 18B .. 
of aDf order made UDder eeotioD 18G' aball be IUbetituted. ,~ 

9 
l~. lDIertlon of new section 24A in Act. LXV of 1951.-Af:.er section 
::u of the pnaclpll! Act, the iollowmg sect.ion shall be inserted, namely:-
.. ~4A. Penalty /or /als/) statomollts.-If any person,-
(a) when required by this Act or by any order under this 
Act to make a.ny st.atelJ.1ent or furnish any information, makes any 
statement or furnishes allY information which is false in any 
material pllrticular Ilnd whiCh he knows or has rea;;onable cause to 
believe to be fa.lse or does not believe to be t.rue; or 
(b) makes any such statement us Ilforeshid in any book, ac' 
could" Hlcora, declaration, return or other document which he ill 
required by any order made under this Act to maintain or furnish; 
he shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to three 
months, or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, or 
with both. ". 
I 
10 
16. SUbst.itutlOD or new sections tor sections 25, 28, 27, 28 and 29 111 16 
,.Act LXV of 1!'51.-For sections 25, 26, 27, 28 nnd 29 of the principal Act, 
t.he following sections shall be substituted, name!y:-
"25. V"iegation 0/ powers.-(1) The Centr&] Government may, 
by notified order, direct that uny power c.<el·ciscble hy it under this 
Act (other than the power given to it by secti'Jns 16 and 18A) shall, in JO 
relation to such matters and subject to such .. ~()nditions, if any, as mlloy 
be I;p(~citit'd in the direction, be exercisable Ilh:o by such officer or 
authority (including in the said expressiolUl Blly Development Council, 
~tHte (Juvernment or officer or lluthority sllbor~inht.e t() the Central 
Llovornmoltj as mAy be specified in the duccti.)l'. 16 
(2) Any power exercisable by a State Ouvemment by virtue of a 
diructioll :Jader sub·section (1) may, unless othprwise provided in such 
dh'l'ct,ioll, be exercised also by such officer or authority subordinate to 
that State Uoverllment as it may, by notified order, specify in thi'l 
behaU. . SO 
26. PmVtT to ;SSU8 dir8ctions.-The Ce'l.,ral Govel-nment may giv~ 
dircctic·ns to any State Government as to the carrying into execution 
in th~ Htnt,£, of a.ny of the provisions of this Act or of any order or 
directioll mucJe thereunder. 
27. Coqnizanr,e of oftenceR.-No COllrt sholl take cognizance of 36 
any offence punishable under this Act except on a report in writing of 
, thp fllct~ constituting such offence made b,Y 1\ person who is a publio 
s(·rvlln~. as defined in section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (Act, LXV 
oi 1800). 
28. Burden 01 prool in certain cases.-Where any person is pro-
.ecuted for contravening any order made under section 18G whicb 
prohibits him from doing an act or being in possession of B thing with· 
Ollt lawful authority or without a permit, Ii'!£'nce or other document. 
the bll',lell of proving that he has such suthority, permit. licence or 
other dO:lument shall be on him. 
29. Jurisdiction 01 courts.-(l) Subject to the provisions of sub. 
eection (2) no court inferior to that of B presidency magistrate or a magia-
n.t.e of the firat 01 ... ahall try any ofleD08 punishable under .au. Aol 

I 
II 
II 
II 
• 
10 
(9) Any magiatrate or bench of magittrates empowered, for tOe· 
time beillg, to try in a summary way the ofitJlJces specified in Bub-If)()-
tion (1) of section 260 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (V of, 
1898), may, on application in this behalf being made by the prosecu-
tion, try, in aocordanoe with the provisions contained in sections 262-
to 265 of the said Code any off£'oce which oonsists of a contravention of. 
e order made under section 18G. 
29A. Special provision regarding fine8.-Notwithstanding anything· 
contained in section 32 of tha Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (V of 
1898), it shall be lawful for any magistrate of the first class and for 
any presidency magif;trate to pass a sentence ot' fine p.xoeeding one 
thouSBnd rupees on any person convioted of Ilny offenoe under thi.· 
A.ct_ 
29B. Power to szempt in 8pecial casu,-If the Central Govern-
ment is o( opinion, having regard to the smallness of the number 
of workers employed or to the amount invested in any industrial un-
dertaking or to the desirability of encouraging small undertakings ge-
nerlAHy or to the stage of development .of any sehedule.d. 
industry. that it would not be in the public interest to apply cJ.l or 
any of the provisions of this Act thereto, it may, by notifioation in· 
thl:: Official (;'azette, exempt, subjeot to such con-litions fl.s it Play think 
fit to impose, any industrial undertaking or class of industria1 undertak-
ingOi or any scheduled industry or clflS8 of soheduled industries &S if!· 
may speoify in the notification from the operation of lill or any of the 
provisions of this Act or of any rule or order made thereunder. 
290. Protection of action taken unaer the Act.-(l) No suit, pro-
.ecut·ion or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person for any 
tbill~ which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this. 
Act or any rule or order made thereunder. 
I 
\.2) No suit or other legal proceeding shnll lie against the Govern-
ment for an~· damage caused or likely to b'3 caused by Ilnything whioh 
it in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act 01' 
any rule or order made thereunder. 
11. Amendment of I'lrst Schedule, A.ct LXV of 19l51.-ln the First 
.. libhedule to the principal Aot,-
(il) for item (10), the following item ahan b. .ubBtituted, 
namely:- II 
.. (5), Mathematical, surveYing, drawing and other acientifio-in-
atrumen."i 
(n) for item (10), the following item shall be substituted, namely:-
"(10) teriJu-
(a) made wholly or in part of co~ton, including cotton 
lant, hosiery and rope, 
(b) made wholly pr in pan of jute, inoludin, jute 'Brn, 
twino and rope, 
(c) made of wool, including woollen yam, hOSiery, carpe ... 
and druggeta, 
(d) made of .ilk, 
(.) made of ·ariifioillll Iilk, includiDg arti5ciOl .ilk yam";. 

11 
• (iii) in item (16), Ute word 'UA'Vy' shall be omitted: 
(iv) to item (00), ~6 following words shall be added a* the end, 
.. ·eIJ·:-
.. and aemi-manufaoturea thereof"; 
(v) in item (21), for the words 'and paper board', *he word. 'paper 
board and straw board' shall be substituted; 
(VI) for items (25) and (26), the following items shall b •• ubsti~u" 
ed, uameJy:- . 
"(25) Leather, leather goods and piokers. 
(26) Glue and gelatine"; 
ftn_) in item (30), the words 'and parts tlle~f' shall be omitted; 
("ji.) after item (87), the folJowing items shall be inserted, 
.. ame11:-
"(88) Dye-stuft's. 
I 
}. 
(lUI) ~oap, II 
(40) Plywood. 
(41) Ferro-manganeae."; 
(b) the following •• EzplaMticms" shall be added at the eud. Dame-
Jr:-
"EzpZGMtion I.-In item (4), 'Iron and steel' shall include II 
an1 manufactured produot of iron and steel. 
EzplGMtion S.-In items (1), (7), (9). (11), (18). (17), (:h 
(80), (82), (88), (84) and (85), the articles speciAed *herein. 
iDolude each of their component parts also." 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Industries (Development and Regulatian) Act, 1951, came into 
iort'.e on the 8th MHY, 1952. In the Course of the working of this Act, 
oertain practical difficulties have come to light. 
2. Some of those difficulties are:-
(a) the period allowed under section 10 of the Act for the regia-
traticm of undertakings has not been found to be adequ .. te in actual 
practice, and therefore requires to be extended; 
(b) while powers are available in the sisting Act to revoke 
licences in certain cases, no such powers are available for the revooation 
of registration where it is necessary to do so; 
(a) the provisions relating to licensing nre not complete inasmuch 
as they do not apply ta-
(I) industrial undertakings which though required to be re-
gistered are not registered within tll.l time limited for the purpose t 
(it) industrial undertakings which, though not registrable at 
the commenoement of the Act, become registrable subsequently 
by reason of the definitions in the Act becoming applioable 
thereto; 
(iiI) industrial undertakings proposing to change their loca-
tion; 
(iv) industrial undertakings proposing to take up the manu-
facture of goods of new brands (anl types) within the same sche-
duled industry or of goods pertaining to any other scheduled 
industry, without any additional plant and machinery or factory 
buildinglf; 
(d) the explanation of the term "substantial expansion" is not 
free from ambiguity; " 
(e) Government cannot take over the management of any indus-
trial undertaking. even in a situation calling for emergent aotion. 
without first Issuing directions to it and waitiug to see whether or not 
they are obeyed; -
(f) the law. as it stands, does not deal in any detail with the 
I'onBequenoeB of Government taking over, tbe management of an under-
taking; . 
(g) certain items in the First S')hedule are not sufficiently dee-
criptive 80 Btl to inolude all important sections of the industries oem-
oerned. 
The object of this Bill 18 mainly to remOTe suell di8lculties. 
rt-

13 
8. A_ ~nt, the power to control prices and distribution of ftrioUi 
goods under this Act il confined to industrial undertakings regiafleloed or 
licensed under the .lot. In all other easel, Jt is neoeuBl)" to have feOOune 
to powers derived from the EaaentirJ Supplies (Tempora.ry Pow-en) AM, 
1946 and the Supply and Prices of Goods Act. 1950. Both theae enaot· 
mentS have a limited reriod of life. It is proposed to add a cha.pter 
taking power to contra the diltribution and price of goods produced in 
scheduled industries and of similar goods even though they may be at. 
imported origin. . 
4. Opportunity il also taken to remove & doubt which may arise by 
reason of the phraseology of section 4 which says that nothing in the 
Act shall a.pply to industrial undertakings of whieh the capital inveated 
does no" exceed rupees one lakh. This provision is liable to be mis-
construed to mean that even the declaration contained in section 2 it 
inapplicable to RUch undertakings. It is also difficult to define "capital 
invested" suitably for the purpose of the Act. It is, therefore, proposed 
to omit section 4, Bnd wherever r.ecessary, exemptions would be granted 
under the new section 28 to any undertakings or scheduled industries. 
Incidentally, six more important industries, namely, the silk, the artifieial 
silk, the dye-stuff, thtl soap, the plywood and the ferro-manganese indus-
mes are being added to the Sehedule. 
NBW DIILIII; 
'I'M 3rd April, 1963. 
T. T. KRISRNAlrlACHARI. 

14: 
ANNEXURE 
J!jrJ'I\AOTI no,. THI INDU8TRIB8 (DBVELONIBN'I.' 4ND BBOOLATIOlf) AJtr, 
19151 (LXV or 19tH) 
• • • • 
Slotion 4 
,. Savtng.·-Nothiug in this Act shall apply to an industrial und~kiDI 
of the capite.! invested therein does not exceed rupees one lakh . 
.. * * * 
Section. 10(1) 
10. Registration of emting industrial undertaktngl.-( 1) The owner of 
every exh;tiug industrial undertaking .sud the t)wner of any industrial 
undertf\king for the establishment of which effective steps have been taken, 
. not being the Central Government, shall, within a period of six months 
from the ('omm~'ncement of this Act. register the undertaking in the pres-
cribed lOlInUHr . 
.. * * * 
Section. 12 
12. Revocation and amendment of Ucences In certain cases. -( 1) If the 
Central (iovel'llJnent is satisfied, either on a ref~rellce made to it in this 
·behalf or oth('rwise, tha.t allY perRon or authority, to whom or to which, a 
.licence has been issued under section 11, has, without rea.sonable ca.use, 
failed. tu e~'HhJiBh or to take effective steps to establish the new industrial 
undertaJdng i~ mf>pect of which the licence has be"n issued within the time 
. specitied th(~refor or withiu such extendE'd time flS the Central Government 
may think fit to grant in any case, it may 1'I"voke the licence. 
(2) I::iubjech to any rule~ that mlAy be made in this behalf, the Cent.ral 
Havernmen~ may also vary or amend any bcence issued under section 11: 
Provided that no such power shall be exercised lifter efiectJv~ steps have 
been t.nkE'1l to ~!'tnblish the new industrial undertuki!Jg in accordance with 
the liconoe issued in this behalf. 
Seotion 18 
13. Llcensingof substantial ezpanalons of industrial UDdertakinas.-The 
provisionR of st'ctions 11 Ilnd 12 shall apply in relution to the effecting .)f 
lIll)' subHtantial expltn!1ion of an industrial unde.·tnking as they apply in 
relatioll to the t'(.tablishin~ of any new industrilll undertaking, 
t::rp1.anat,oll.-For the purposes of this section ""ubstantial expansion" 
mea.ns th~ explIllsion of an existing industrial u1lde:"tuking which is of sue. 
a nature us to amount virtually to a new industrial undertuking, but d~. 
not include any such expansion as is normal U: thA undertllking ha~ 
regord to ih~ Lhture and the circumstllnces relatillg t. such eXp1lnsion. 
Section. 14 
16. Procedure for the grant of Ucence or permfssion.-Before t?r8uting 
;.ny lit'.ence or permiBSion under section 11 or section 18', the Central Go?-
'«'Dment may require such officer or Buthority as it may appoint for the 
purPOSI.". to r:lI,l,l' 8 full and complete investigation III rtlspect of application. 
rt.'ueived ill this behalf and report to it the resuh llf such investigati!>D an~ 
~I'I m&1dng allY such investigation, the officer or authority shan: fOllow IJUOQ 
:f~u", ;U61n.y 'be prescribed. 

10 
Section 15(h) 
16. Power to OIuse investigation to be made into scheduled IDdunne. 
• lDdulUtal UDdertak1Dg8.-Where the Central Governmen, is' oltha 
opinion ihat-
• .. • • • 
(b) any industrial undertaking is being managed in a mann~r 
likely to cause serious injury or damage to the iuterest:; of the 
consumers or a substantial body thereof, for whom the articles or 
any class of art4cles manufactured or produced therein are or is in. 
tended; 
tht' Central Government ma,Y make or cause to be made a full and com-
plete investigation into the circumstances of the case by such person or 
body of persons as it, may appoint. for the purpose. 
• • • • • 
Seciio1' 17 
17. Speclill proviSions for direct control by 06ntral Government In. 
certa.tn c&IU.-(l) If after a direction has been issued in pursuance of 
,section 16, the Central Government is of opinion that the direction has 
aot heen complied with and that hlly industrial undertaking in respect of 
which the direction has been issued is being managed in a manner highly 
detrimental to ihe scheduled industry concerned or to the public interest., 
~e Central Government may, by notified order, authorise for a period not 
exceeding five years shy pel'8on or a Development Council or any other 
body of persons (hereinafter referred to as tbe authorised person), either 
to take over the management. of the whole or any part of the undertakinl 
in supersession of any other person or body of persons in oharge thereof or 
to exercise with r£'spect to the whole or !lny pnrt of such undertaking such 
functions of control as may be provided by that order. 
(2) Where the authorised person hAs been authorised to take over the 
management of tbp industrial undertaking, be shall take all such stePs III 
may be necessary to take into his custody or under his control all the 
property, effects and nctionuble olaims to which tbe industrial undertaking 
is or appearR to be enti{'led, Bnd all the property and effects of the industrial 
undertaking shall be deemed to be in the custody of th& authorised persOD 
as from the date of the notified order. 
(3) Where the authorised person has been authorised to exeroise any 
functions of ~ontrol in relation to an indust.rial undertaking, the undertak-
ing shall be carried on in aocordance with any directioDti given by the 
authorised person in accordance with the provisions of the na.t;fied order 
and any person having any functions of management in relation to the 
undert.lking or part thereot shall comply with auy such directions. 
(4) The authorised person shall in all cases exeroise his functions in 
accordance with any instructions given to him by the Central Government, 
so, however. that he IIhall not have any power to give to any other person 
any directions under tJhis section inconsistent with the provisions of any 
Act or instrument determining the functions of the authOl'i~~ carrying 
on the undertaking except in so far RS may be specifioally proviaed by the 
anim'. . . 
(8) If at any time it appears to the Central Government on theapplica. 
tion o! ~e owner of the industrial undertaking or otherwise, that ,the pur. 
pose of the order made under this section has been fulfilled or that for any 
otb{1r reason, it is not necessary thc.t the order should remain in foroe, the 

16 
Central Government may by notified order cancel such order and un the 
'Can(lellution of any such order, the management or the control, 8S the csee 
may be, of the industrial undertaking shall vest in the owner of the 
undertaking. . 
(6) Any order made under this section shall have effect, notwithstand· 
inl anything inconsistent therewith contained in any enactment other than 
this A<.'t or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any enactment 
other than this Act. 
* • • • • 
Section 23 
28. Que.tiona relating to amount of capttal IDvelted ID an undertak· 
ing to be decided by Oentral Govemment.-If, for the purpose of section 
4, any question arises with respect to the amount of capital invested in an 
industrial undertaking, the decision of the Central Government thereon 
shall be final. 
Seotion 24(1) 
2 •• Penaltle •. -(l) Whoever contravenes or attempts to contravene. 
-or abet4; the contravention of, the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 
10 or of sub-section (I) of ~eotion 11, or of sub-section (1) of section 11 read 
with section 13, or of Bub-section (3) of section 17 or of any direction 
issued under section 16, or of any rule the contrllvention of which is 
,punishable under this section shall be punishable with imprisonment 
which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five 
thousand rupees, or with both f and, in the case of a continuing contraven· 
tion, with an additional fine which may extend to five hundred rupees for 
every day during which such contravention contin~es after convictioo for 
the firsb such contravention. 
* • • • • 
Seotionl 25, 26, 27, 28 and 29 
215. Power to de1elate.-The Central Government may, b~' notified 
()rder, direct that any power exercisable under this Act by it, other than 
the power specified in section 16 and sub·section (1) of section 17 may 
lw exercised in such cases and subject to such conditions, if any, as may 
be sp('(;itied in the order by such officer or [iuthority (including in the said 
expressions any Development Council, State Government, officer or 
authority of the State Government) 8S may be specified in the direction. 
28. Prev1oa. I&1lctioll of Olntral GOYwnment fer proI8cutlODl.-No 
rJrosl'cution for any offence punishable under section 24 shQ.ll be instituted 
except with the previous sanction of the Central Government.. 
27 JurIId1ctloD of Coartl.-No court inferior to that of a presidency 
mSj.\"istrate or a magistrate of the first class shall try Ilny offence punishable 
under section 24. 
28. :lxemptlon ID IP'ctal CUM.-The Central GOTernment may, if 
9atisfled tjlat it is in the public interest 110 to do, exemp~ any scheduled 
industry or any industrial underf.aking for such period as it may specify, 
from the operation of, all or nny of the provisions of this Act or any rule. 
made thereunder. 

17 
29. ~tion of ~D ~ iI1 aood faith.-No suit. prosec"4tio~ or 
other legal proceeding, whatever, shall' lie against any person for any-
thing which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this 4c1i 
or the rules made thereunder. 
* • • • • 
Th, F,irst Sch,dul, 
Any industry engaged in the manufacture Or production of any of the-
followinB. namely:-
• • • • 
(5) Mathematical and scientific instruments. 
* * • , 
(10) Textiles made wholly ~ in part of cotton or jute. 
* • • • , 
(16) Heavy machinery U!!e4 in ind,u,try including b&1.l and roller 
bearing and gear wheels and parts thereof, boilers and steam generating 
equipment. . 
* • • • • 
(20) Non-ferrous metals including alloys. 
(21) :paper iDCludin8 newsprint and paper ~ard. 
* * • • • 
(25) Leather and leath~ good~. 
(26) Textiles made of wool. 
* • • • • 
(30) Bicycles. and p~s thereof. 
* .. • • .. 

HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE 
A 
BILL 
.. ,. 
-to amend the~Indu8trie8 (Development and Regulation) 
Act, 1951. 
(lJMi T. T. K riahnamachari, 
Ministef' Jor Oommerce and bw,fUltry) 
GIPD-31 P8- 10-4.38-1,750. 