10 
1,5 
16 AUG 1'~3 
-
.111 Jilo. po' 1p63 
Q 
THE CUSTOMS AND CENTRAL EXCISES 
(AMENDMENT) BnL, 1963 
A 
BILL 
'~". 
to am.end the Customs Act, 1962 An.d fv.rth,8f' to a'fl\etl&d the C.tr.l 
E:rciBes 4nd Salt Act. 19H. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fourteenth Year of. Ule 
Repub1le of India &.'1 follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Customs and CtmU'a1 Exci811 SMtt • 
(Amendment) Act, 1963. aa4 .... .. ~. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Offtcial Gazette, appoint. 
Z. In section 12 of the Customs Act, 1962, for sub-aeetion (2). tl1e AlDCIICiMaa& 
following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:- ~A:;: ~ 
I •• 
"(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply in resped 
of all goods belonging to Government as they apply in respeet at 
goods not belonging to Government.". 
3. In section 3 of the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944, fOf·· aub- MI .... 
section (1A), the following sub-section shall be substituted. name-~ ~ .; 
ly:-- I~ 
.. (lA) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply in r-. 
peet of all excisable goods other than salt which are produced 
Os manufactured in India by, or on behalf of, Government, ., 
ttiey apply in respect of loods which are not produee4 01 maau .. 
factured by Government.". 

• 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Clause (1) of article 289 of the Constitution provides that "the 
property and income of a State shall be exempt froIn Union taxa .. 
tien". Clause (2) of that article, however, permits the Union to 
impose taltes ill respect of a trade or business of any kind carried on 
by Il State Governm~nt, or any operations connected therewith. 
2. The question whether customs and excise duties though levied 
in respect~f goods, were taxation on property and as such when any 
goods were imported or exported, or produced or manufactured, by 
State. Govel"nments, they enjoyed exemption under clause (1) of 
article 289 of the Constitution, was examined from the legal and 
consWutional points of view and the Government of India were 
advised that such duties were not taxation on property. It was, 
therefore, proposed that provision be made in the Customs Act and 
the Central Excises and Salt Act for the levy of import duty and 
excise duty on all goods imported or exported, or produced or manu· 
taeitured, by State Governments, whether such import, export, pro-
duction or manufacture was in connection with any trade or busi-
~esscarried on by the State Governments or not. 
3. In view of the importance of the matter, and the objections 
raised by the State Governments to the proposed provisions, a special 
reference was made by the President to the Supreme Court for its 
opinion under article 143 of the Constitution on the interpretation of 
article 289 of the Constitution. The Supreme Court confirmed that 
the prnposed provisions would bc' eonsistent with the provisions of 
article 289. 
4. Thtt legal position having been clarified, it is proposed to amend 
the Customs Act, 1962 and the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944, 
so as to provide that duties of customs and excise will be leviable on 
all goods imported or exported, or produced or manufactured by 
State Governments. Hence this Bill. 
NIW DliAII; 
The 1st August, 1963. 
1..-., ,''',:''' 
,..~.- .. 
MORARJI DESAI. 
2 

PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 117 AM) 
274 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
{Copy of letter No. 2/9/61..cus. VI, dated the 8th August, 1M3 
from Shri Morarji Desai, Minister of Finance to the Secretary,LOk 
Sabha.] 
The President having been i.nformed of the subject matter of the 
proposed Bill recommends under Articles 117(1), 117(3) and 274(1) 
of the Constitution of India the introduction and consideration of the 
Bill. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM .. 
Clauses 2 and 3 of the Bill would have the effeet of render-in, lia-
ble to Customs and Central Excise duties respectively certain goodl 
which heretofore were free of duty. To that extent it would add to 
the work of the Customs and Central Excise Departments. No addi-
.onal expenditure is likely on this account. 
...... 

ANNEXURE 
• I .,. '~'. 
EXTRACTlii nOM Tim CONSTITUTION OF INDIA . 
•• •• 'II. •• 
143. (1) If nt any time it sppears to the President that a question Power of 
of law or fact has arisen,. or is likely to arise, which is of such a Prea:1e~ to 
nature and of such public importance that it is expedient to obtain =: b::~. 
the opinion (If the Suprem(~ Court upon it, he may refer the question 
to that Court for consideration and the Court may, after such hear. 
ing as it thinks fit. report to the President its opinion thereon. 
(2) The President may, notwithstanding anything in the proviSO 
to article 13], refer & dispute of the kind mentioned in the said 
proviso to the Supr€me Court for opinion and the Supreme Court 
shall, after such hearine, as it thinks fit, report to the President its 
opinio!l thereon. 
'II. •• • • •• 
281. (1) The property nnd income of a State shall be exempt from BxcmPt:OD 
Union taxation. ofl~pertY 
aD Income 
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall prevent the Union from imposing, of I S~ate 
or authorising the imposition of, any tax to such extent, if any, al ~=~~.on 
Parliament may by law provide in respect of a trade or business of 
any kind carried on by, or on behalf of, the Government of a State, 
or any operations connected there~th, or any property used or 
occupied for the purposes of such trade or business, or any income 
accruing or arising in connection therewith. 
(3) Nothing in cl:lu."le (2) shall apply to any trade or business, 
or to any cIa !IS of trade or business, which :Parliament may by law 
declare to be incidental to the ardim.ry functions of government . 
•• •• •• •• 
ExTRACT PROM THB CUSTOMS Aerr, 1962 (52 01' 1962) . 
•• •• .. •• 
CHAPTER V 
LEVY 01', AND EXEMPTION PROM, CUSTOMS DUTIIlS. 
12. (1) Except as otherwise provided in this Act, or any other law Dutiable 
for the time being in force, duties of customs shall be levied at such ,oodl. 
3' or 1934. rates as may be specified under the Indian Tariff Act, 1934, or any 

Dut'o.lpe-
cified in the 
First Sche-
dule to be 
levied. 
• 
... 6 
other law for the time being in force, on goods imported into, or 
exported from India. 
(2) The pruvisions of sub-section (1) shall apply in respect of-
(a) all ~oods belonging to the Central Government; and 
(b) all goods belonging to the Government of a State and 
used for the purposes of a trade or business of any kind carried 
on by, OT on behalf of, that Government, Or of any operatIons 
eonnec~ with such trade or business; 
as they apply in respect ,of goods not belonging to any Government 
•• •• •• • • 
EXTRAC'!' FROM THE CENTRAL EXCISES AND SALT Aer, 1944 (1 OF 1944) . 
•• •• •• • • 
3. (1) There bhall be levied and collected in such manner as may 
be prescribed duties of excise on all excisable goods other than salt 
which are produced or manufactured in India, and a duty on salt 
manuf-aetured in, or imported by land into, any part of India as,and 
at the rates, set forth in the First Schedule. 
(lA) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply in respect of 
all ~xcisab]e goods other than salt which are produced or manufac-
tured in India by, or on behalf of, the Government of a Part A State 
or a Part B State and used for the purposes of a trade or business of 
any kind carried on by, or on behalf of, that Government or of any 
operations connect~ with such trade or business as they apply in 
respect of goods which are not produced or manufactured by any 
Government; 
(2) The Central Government m'ay, by notification in the otftcial 
Gazette, fix, for the purpose of l~ing the said duties, tariff values 
of any articles enumerated, either specifically or under general head-
ings, in the First Schedule .as chaz:geable with duty ad valorem and 
may alter any tariff values for the time being in force; 
(3) Different tariff values may be fixed for different classes or 
descriptions of th~ same article. 
•• •• • • 

.... . . . . 
LOK SABRA 
A 
BnJ... 
to amend the Customs Act, 1962 and further to amend the 
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944. 
(Shri Morarji Desai, 
Mi"i,ter of FI"ance.) 