THE NOTARIES BILL, 1952 
(As IN1'BODUCED IN TUB HOl:SE OF TUE PEOPLE) 
~ 
BILL 
to regulate the professiott of notaries. 
DE.it ellueted by Purliflment us follows:-
BW No. 33 01 195Z 
1. Short title, eztent and commencement.-(l) This Act muy be I.:sllf.ld 
the Notaries Act, 1952. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of. Jammu anti 
Kashmir. 5 
(3) It shall come into force on such date BS the Central Government 
may, by notification irl the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. DelnltloDl.--In this Aet, unlt-ss the context otherwise requfres,-
(a) "India" means the territories to which this Act extends; 
(b) "instrument" inoludes evcry document by which any right Or 10 
liability is, or purports to be, created, transferred, limited, extended, 
e~tjngujshed or rec<Jl'ded; 
(c) "legal practitioner" means an advocate, vakil or attorney of 
the Supreme Court or of Imy High Court, or a pleader practising in 
fmy Rubordinate eivil court; 15 
(d) "notary" means a pcrson appointed as Slll'h under this Act: 
Prm'jded that for a period of one yeoI' from the (·.ommencemeqt of 
this Act it shall include also a perRon who, before such commencement, 
was appointed a notary public either under the Negotiable Instruments 
Act, 1881 (:x;KVI of 1881), or by thfl ]\f88ter of FaCilities in England, 20 
and is, immediately before such eommencement, in practice in any 
part of India; 
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(f) "Register" means a. Register of Notaries maintained by the 
Government under section 4; 20 
(g) "Stnte Government", in relution to n Purt C State. means t.he 
IJie\ltEma~t Governor, or, as the case may be, the Chief enm-
missioner. 
3. POwer to appoint notarie •. -The Central Government. for the whol~ 
-or any part of India, and any State Government, for the whole or any 80 
part of the State, may, on such conditions, if any, as it thinks fit, appoint 
·a8 notnriE'R any le~1l1 prMtitioners or other persons who. in its opinion. arc> 
.duly q\lalifled to discharge the functions of notaries undet' this Act. 
f. Reglsters.-(l) The Centrnl Governmflnt Hnd flVCry Stst,e Govern-
ment shall mRintain, in such form as mny be prescribed, n. Registicr of the 33 
notaries appointad by that Government and entitled to practise as sl1ch 
;\mder this .Aot. 

2 
(2) Ev£,ry such Register shall inn,lude the following particulars about 
every IlOt.:lI'Y WhOSl~ IIlml(.' is elltered therein, namely:-
(u) hili ruB name, date of bit·th, l'csidential u.nd professional 
uddl'ess; 
(b) the date on which his lIame is entered in the Register; 
(c) hiFi qualificatioDs; and 
(tl) any ather particulars which may be presc:tibed. 
5. Entry of names in the Begister and 18Sue or renewal of certlAcatct. of: 
practice.-(1) E,ery notary who intends to practise as such shull, 011 
10 application to the Government appointing him and pl,yment of the pIC-
scribed fee, if any, be cntitled-
(t!) tu have his name entered in the Register mainta.i.ned by that 
Government under SectiOll 4. and 
(b) to a ~ertific8te author-iRing him to practise for II period of three 
15 years from the date on which the eertificate is issued to him. . 
(:1) Evel'y 8u(!h notary who wiElhes to eontinue to pract,ise after the 
expiry 01 ttw period for which his certificate of practice has been issued 
under this SE'ctiOll shall, OIl application made to the GClVernment appointing 
him nnd pUYlTH:nt of the llrt:seribeJ fen, if /lilY, be entitled to have his 
.20 certifbute of practke renewed for three years at a time. 
6. Annuai pubUcation of lilts of notane8.-The Central Government 
and every State Government shall, during th(l month of Janua.ry et\oh yeal', 
publi!!h in the Offic·.ial GR1.tltte a list of notaries appointed b~ that Govern-
ment and in pract.ice at the beginning of that year together WIth such detailil 
26 pertaining to them as ruay be prescribed. 
30 
35 
1. Seal 01 notarl88.-Every notary shall havo and utle, as occasi6n m(~y 
arise, a seal of such form and design as may be prescribed. 
S. 1'1'.J\ctiona of notaries.-(l) A notary may do all or o.ny of the 
following n.ctH hy virtue of his office, namely:-
(Il) verift' , authenticate, certify or attest the execution of any 
instrument; . 
(II) present any promil'lsory note, hnndi or bill of exchange for 
Iwcepto nce or paymont; 
(ll) note or protest tho dishonour by non-acceptance or non-
payment of any promissory note, hlmdi or bill of exchange or protest for 
bettf'r security or prepare nets of honour und'cr the Negotiable Iustru-
nu~nts Act, ]SS] (XXVI of 1881), or serve notice of such note or proteflt; 
. (Ii) note and draw up ship's protest, boat's protest or protest relat-
illg to llemUlTllge alld other commercial ma.tters; 
(Il) administer oath to, or take a.fIidavit from, any person; 
(f) prepare bottomry and respondentia bonds, charter parties nnd 
othor mercantile documents; 
(g) prepare, attest or authenticate I\ny instrument intended to 
take eRect in any country or plsce outsic}.e India in such form and 
language as may conform to the Jaw of the place where such deed is 
intended to operate; . 
(h) t~nr;lnk;, and verify thc-l translation of, any document fram cne 
lung-URge mto another; . 
(i) any other Bct whigb ma.y be presl!ribed: 

3 
Provided that no notary shall do any act wbioh he is not, under' the 
terms of his appointment, authorised to do. 
(2) No act specified in sub-seotion (1) shall be de6med to be a notarial· 
Bct except when it is done by a notary tmder his signa.ture and official seal. 
D. Bar of practice without cerWlcate.-(1) Subject. to the provisions of 6 
this scetieD, no person sha.ll practise 80S 0. notary or do any notarial . act 
Hilder the official seal of !I. notary unless he holds a certificate of prootioe 
ill force issued to him under section 5: 
P"ovided that the presentation of any promissory note, hundi or bill 
or e:lwh.mge for acceptance or payment by the derk of a notary shall not 10 
he deoDled to be a notarial Ilct within the meaning of this sub-section. 
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall, until the expiry of ODe 
yenr from the commencement of this Act, a.pply to any such pefBOn as is 
referred to ill the proviso tq dl\u8e (d) of flf'ction 2 
10. Removal of namel from B.egister.-'fhc Government appointing II 
any nota~y may, by order, remove from the Register mainta.ined by it under 
Rent,joll 4 the nlYIle of the notury if he-
(II) ma.kes a request to that effect; or 
(b) hne not paid any prescribed fee required to be paid by him; or 
(c) jf!. an undischarged insolvent; or 20 
(d) hl\8 becn found, upon inquiry in the prescribed manner, to be 
guilty of such profct:lsionnl or other misconduct as, in the opinion of the 
Oovermnlmt, renders him unfit t.o practise as a notary. 
11. Construction of references to notar.tes pllblio in oth81 I&ft.-Any 
referellce t,; a not.ary public in any ether law shall be construed as a :efer- 21 
AJlf!d til u notary entitled .to practise under this Act. 
12. Penalty ior falsely representing to be a notary, etc.-Any person 
wh~ 
(a) falsely represents tllBt he is a notary without being appointed 
IlS such, or 30 
(~) practises as a notary or does I\ny notarial act in contravention 
of section 9, 
shall be IIlJlli6hubie with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
three months, or with fine, or with both. 
13. Reciprocal arrangements for recognition of notarial acts done by • 
foreign notarleB.-If the Central Government is satisfied that by the law or 
pl'l\ctioe of nny country or pluce outside India, the notarial acts done by 
l]otariefl within Indiu are recognised for all or any limited purposes in that 
'!ountry or place, the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Ollicinl Gn!lEltte. declare that the notarial acts lawfully done by notaries 40 
within such l!Ountry or place shall be recogniBed within India for all pur-
po!;es or, as the Cll.flll may be, for such limited purposes I\S may be specified 
in the: notification. ' 
14. pow6r to make ruleB.-(l) The Central Government may, by notifi-
\:I\tion if( the Officinl GllIwtte, malte rules to carry out tho purposes of this 46 
Act. ' , 

10 
11 
20 
4 
(~) In P'¥'tic\llar, aDd without preju~ice to the geuerality of the forego-
ing POWtil', such rules may proyide for 811 or any of the following z;nattars, 
namely~ 
(a) the falm and mlUlDer in whieh applicaii(}Ils for appointment 
as B notary may be made and the disposal of such applieations; 
(b) the certifioates, testimonials or proofs as to character, integrity, 
ability and oompetance whioh any person applying for appointment a8 
a Dotary way be required 00 furnish j 
(c) the fees payable for appointment us c. notary and for the issue 
and rAlltlwal of a certifieate of practice, and exemption from such fr.eB 
ill apecified 01ass6s of C88es i 
(ti) the fees paya.ble to a notary for doing any notarial act; 
(tJ) the form of Registers and the particulars to be entered therein; 
(f) the form and design of the seal of a notary i 
(g) thf' manner in which inquiries into allegutions of professiona.l 
or Qthflf misconduct of notaries may be made; 
(I.) the aots which a notary may do in addition to those specified 
in section 8 and thtl manller in which Q notary may perform his 
functions; • 
(i) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed. 
15. Repeal.-Chapter XVII of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1·181 
(XXVI of 1881), is hereby repealed. 

'.. ,of' .. ,1:.\,'J I 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under saotion 188 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, the Gov-
erWDent of India have ~e power to appoint notaries public, bu' only for 
the limited purpose of performing functions under that Act. .By virtue 
of an ancient English Statute, the Master of Faculties in England used 
to appoint notaries public in India for performing all reoognised Ilotarial 
functions, but it' is no longer a.ppropriate that persons in this country 
who wish to funotion as notaries should derive their authority from au in-
stitutioll in the United Kingdom. 
The ob.iect of the present Bill is to empower the Central and State 
UovernUlent .. to appoint notaries, not only for the limited purposes of the. 
Nt'gotiable {nstruments Act, but generally for atl recognised notarial pur-
p.oSt1S, and to regulate the profesllioll of such notaries. 
A Bill on the subject \1'&8 accordingly iniroduced in the provisional 
Parliament on the 19th A jlril, 1951 and referred to 8 Select Committee 
on the 18th August. 195]. The report of th~ t:)elect Committee Will> pres .. u;~:; 
t~d on the 4th October, 1951, but the Bill could not be proceeded with m: •. ; 
the last Session of I'arliament for want of time and, therefore, lapsed. ',;: 
Apart frow Ollt> or two minor drafting changes, the present Bill follow& 
closely the Notaries Bill, 1951, as amended by the Select Committee. 
NIIW DJlLllIi 
'l'he 15th Mar, 1952. 
O. C. BISWAS. 

HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE. 
BILL 
IiO reguJate the profession of notaries. 
(SMi O. 0 . BwQ,IJ. 
Minister fo'" Law.) 