8W No. 3f of 195' 
THE RESERVE BANK OF INDIA 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1956. 
(As INTBODUOlllD IN LOK SABRA) 

a of 1934. 
6a of 19411. 
BiU No. 33 of 1'5' 
THE RESERVE BANK OF INDIA (AMENDMENT) 
BILL,I9S 6 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Reserve Bank of India (Amend- :3~~e 
ment) Act, 1956. menccment. 
5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
ment may. by notification in the Official Gazette. appoint, and 
different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act. 
2. In section B of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (hereinafter ~~ent 
referred to as the principal J\ct),- 0 aect on~. 
10 (a) in sub-section (1),-
(i) clause (b) shall be oJ!1itted; 
(ii) in clause (c), for the word "six", the word "ten" shall 
be substituted; . 
(b) for sub-section (6), the following sub-sectlon shall be 
IS substituted, namely:-
20 
"(6) Out of the six Directors, first nominated under 
clause (c) of sub-section (1) as in force immediately aftE'r the 
commencement of the Reserve Bank (Transfer to Public 
Ownership) Act, 1948, two shall retire at the end of one 
year, two at the end of two years and the last two at the 
end of three years, the Directors so to retire being deter-
mined by lot 
• 

Omiaaionof 
aec:tion 9. 
Amendment 
of aec:tion 10. 
Ameodment 
of lICtion 
II. 
• 
2 
Out of the four Directors, first nominated after 
the commencement of the Reserve Bank of India (Amend-
ment) Act, 1956, under clause (c) of sub-section (1), 
such nomination having been made by reason of the fact 
that the number of Directors to be nomintted under the 5 
said clause has been incr~ased, two shall retire at the end 
of one year and the other two shall retire at the end of 
two years. the Directors so to retire being determined by 
lot.". 
3. Section 9 of the principal Act shall be omitted. 
4. In section 10 of the principal Act,-
(4) in sub-section (1), the words "or a ·member of a Local 
Board" shaH be omitted; 
JO 
(ib) in sUb-section (2), the words "or members of the same 
Local Board" shall be omitted. 15 
5. In section 1) of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), the words "or any member of a Local 
Board" shall be omitted; . 
(b) 'in sub-section (2), the words, brackets and letter "clause 20 
(b) or" shall be omitted; 
(c) in sub-section (3), for the words "and the Centra<l Bc,ard 
shall remove from office any member of a Local Board, if such 
I;>irector or member", the words "if such Director" shall be 
substituted; 
(d) in sub-section (4),- 25 
(i) the words "or member of a Lo<;al .Board" shall be 
omitted; 
(ii) for the words "either as Director or as member of 
a Local Board", the words "as Director" sha<l1 be substituted; 
(e) in suh-section (5),-
(i) the words "or member of a local Board" occurring 
twice shall be omitted; 
(ii) t.he words "or member of the Local Board" shall be 
omitted; 
(f) in suh-section (6), the words "and a member of a Local 35 
Board may resign his office to the Centra<l Board" shall be 
omitted. 
Amc:nd1DCllt 6. In section 12 of the principal Act, sub-section (3) shall be 
of aectioo u. omitted. 

s 
J 
7. In section 19 of the principal Act, after the figures "18", the Amendment 
figures "42" shall be inserted. • of.ection 19· 
8. In section 33 of the principal Act,~ Amendment 
of section 33. 
(a) for sub-section (2). the following sub-section 
substituted, namely:-
shall be ' 
"(2) Of the total amount of the assets, the amount of 
gold coin or gold bullion and the amount of foreign securities 
shall not at any time be less than one hundred and fifteen 
crores of rupees and four hundred crores of rupees respec-
10 tively in value."; 
(b) in sub-section (4), for the figures "8.47512", the figures 
"2.88" shall be substituted. 
9. For section 37 of the principal Act, the following section shall Substitution 
be substituted namely: - ofn~ , lectlOn for 
section 37. 
IS "37. Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing Suspension 
provisions, the Bank ma'y, with the previous sanction of the of~eten· le-t . " . qUlrcm 8 
Central Government, for perIods, not exceeding SIX months m .s to foreign 
the first instance, which may, with the like sanction, be extended. securities 
from time to time by periods not exceeding three months at a 
20 time, hold as assets foreign securities of less amount in value 
than that required by sub-section (2) of section 33: 
35 
Provided that the amount of foreign securities so held shall 
not at any time be less than three hundred crores of rupees in 
value.". 
10. "1n section 42 of the principal Act,-
(a) for sub-section (1), the following 
substituted, namely:-
sub-sections shall be 
(1) Every ·bank included in the Second Schedule shall 
maintain with the Baz1k an average daily balance the amount 
of' which shall not be less than five per cent. of the demand 
liabilities and two per cent. of the time liabilities in India of 
such bank as shown in the return referred to in sul>-section 
(2): 
Provided that the Bank may, by notification in the 
Gazette of India. increase the said rates to such higher rates 
as may be specified in the notification so however, that the 
rate shall not be more than twenty per cent., in the case 
of demand liabilities and more than eight per cent., in- the 
case of time liabilities. 
Amendment 
of section 43. 

4 
Eplanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) 'average daily balance' shaH mean the average 
of the balances held at the close of business on each 
day of a week; 
(b) 'we.?k' shall mean the period from Saturday to 5 
the following Fridary, both days inclusive; 
(c) 'liabilities' shall not include the paid-up capital 
or the reserves, or any credit balance in the profit and 
loss account of the bank or the amount of any loan 
taken from the Bank, the State Bank, or any other bank JO 
notified by the Central Government in this behalf. 
(lA) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section 
(1), the Bank may, by notification in the Gazette of India, 
direct that every scheduled bank shall, with effect from 
such date as may be specified in the notification, maintain 15 
with the Bank, in addition to the balance prescribed by or 
under sub-section (1), an additional average daily balance 
the amount of which shall not b.? less than the rates speci-
fied in the notification, such additional balance being 
calculated with reference to the excess of the demand and 20 
time liabilities of the bank as shown in the return referred 
to in sub-section (2) over its demand and time liabilities at 
the close of business on the date specified in the notification 
as shown by such return so however, that the additional 
balance shall, in no case, be more t~an such excess: 25 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall make it 
necessary for any scheduled bank to maintain with the Bank 
any ,balance which shall be more than twenty per ccnt. of 
its demand liabilities and eight per cent. of its time liabilities 
as shown in the return referred to in sub-section (2). 30 
(1B) Where any scheduled bank maintains, in pursuance 
of a notification issued under-the proviso to sub-section (1) 
or under sub-section (lA), any balance with the Bank the 
amount of which is not less than that required to be main-
. tained by such notification, the Bank may pay to the 35 
scheduled bank interest at such rate or rates as may be 
determined by the Bank from time to time on the amount 
. by which such balance actually maintained is in excess of 
the balance which the scheduled bank would have to main-
tain, if no such notific~tion was issued: 40 
Provided that no interest shall be payable on any such 
amount actually maintained as is in excess of the balance 

s 
10 
20 
25 
8 
required to be maintained by or under sub-section (1) or 
under sub-section (lA)."; 
(b) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(3) If the average daily balance held at the Bank by a 
scheduled bank during any week is below the minimum 
prescribed by or under sub-section (1) or sub-section (lA), 
such schedul~d bank shall be liable to pay to the Bank in 
respect of that week penal interest at a rate of three per 
cent. above the bank rate on the amount by which such 
balance with the Bank falls short of the prescribed mini-
mum, and if during the next succeeding week, such average 
daily balance is still below the prescribed minimum, the rates 
of penal interest :;hall be increased to a rate of five per cent. 
above the bank rate in respect of that week and each subse-
quent week during which the deafult continues on the 
amount by which such balance at the Bank falls short of 
the prescribed minimum."; 
(c) in sub-section (3A), for the portion commencing with the 
words "if thereafter on the day fixed for the next return" and 
ending with the words "receiving after the said day any fresh 
deposit", the following shall be substituted, namely:-
"if thereafter the average daily balance held at the Bank 
during the next succeeding week is still below the prescribed 
minimum,-
(a) every director, manager or secretary of the 
scheduled bank, who is knowingly and wilfully ai party 
to the default, shall be punishable with fine which may 
extend to five hundred rupees and with a 'further fine 
which may extend to five hundred rupees for each subse-
quent week during which the default continues, and 
(b) the Bank may prohibit the scheduled bank frrom 
receiving after the said week any fresh deposit,". 
11. In clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 46A of the principal Amendment 
35 Act - of section , 46A. 
(a) the words "for agricultural purposes" shall be omitted; 
and 
(b) after the words "by the Bank", the words "and such 
loans and advances may be made for agricultural purposes or for 
40 such other purposes connected with the agricultural activities as 
the Central Board may, from time to time, by regulation or 
otherwise, determine" shall be inserted .. 

8 
Amendment 12. In sub-section (2) ot section 58 of the principal Act, clause (9) 
of acction 58. shall be omitted. 
Omiaaion of 13. The First Schedule to the principal Act shall be omitted. 
the First 
Schedule. 
Amendment 14. 1n sub-section (2) of section 24 of' the Banking Companies Act, 
of scction 24 1949 for the words brackets and figureS "sub-section (1) of section of the' , 
Banldq, 42", the word and figures "section 42" shall be substituted. 
~~Q . 
Act. 1049. 
S 
10 of 1949. 

" 
STATEMENT,OF OBJ·ECTS AND REASONS 
The existing provisions "in the Reserve Bank of India Act in re-
gard to reServe requirements place a serious limitation on the 
ability of tile Reserve Bank to regulate the eXpa<nsion of currency 
to meet the'requirements of the Second Five' Year Plan. The pro-
cess of planned economic development necessarily implies 8 cer-
tain amount of credit creation and a consequent increase in the 
note issue. At the same time, as'8 -result of the' same process of 
investment and development,' foreign exchange reserveS are likely 
to decrease. It is, therefore, necessary to vary the existing mini-
mum currency reserve requirements; Moreover, deficit financing 
in the Pla,n may also result in a large addition to bGlIlk reserves 
with consequent increase in the capacity of banks to create credit. 
In order to control such oreation of credit by banks it is, necessary 
to grant additional powers. to the Reserve Bank to regulate credit 
extension and to check any infiationSlry trend developing. It is, 
therefore, considered. necessary to amend the ,Reserve Bank, of India 
Act to achieve these objects. The Bill thus includes the, following 
principal amendments to the Reserve aank of India Act with a 
consequentiall amendment of a routine nature in the Banking 
Companies Act, 1949 ;-' ." 
(1) section 33 (2) 'IS 1 being amended to provide for a mini-
mum holding of Rs. 400crores in foreign securities and Rs.115 
crores in gold in the Issue Department of the Reserve Bank; 
(ii) section 33(4) is being a~~nd~d to. ~evaiue gold ~t Ute 
rate ~reed to by t~e Interpatlonal. Mon~taI:Y ,Fund;, , ' 
(iii) section 37 is being amel'lQ.ed· to provide ,fof"the tempo... 
rary suspension of assets requirements in respect of foreign 
security withol)t parn;t,nt·.of ~ytax: to Government; and 
j ·t 
(iv) section 42 is ~ing amended. so ~at the machinery of 
the Reserve ;~8f1k for credit control may be strengthened. 
l' . ~ 1 ••. . • • 
2. The opportullity to' amema ·the., Act, is·-al~o being utilised to 
carry out~rtain; ,further .. amendments, of :mino~' import1l~e. One 
::1' C "1" .• ' Z' ',' .... , ", '. 
o· ': . . ' I , l. 

a 
such amendment is to enable the Reserve Bank to make- advances 
from the newly-created National Agricultural Credit (Long Term 
Operations) Fund to State co·operative banks for such purposes as 
are allied to or assist agricultural activities and the others are to 
abolish the Local Boards which have lost their importance after 
the nationalisation of the Bellik. 
C. D. DESHMUKH. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 13th April, 1956. 

• N otu on clauses 
Clause I.-This clause empowers the Central Government to 
bring the various provisions c,f the Act into force on such different 
dates as may be found convenient. 
Clauses 2 to 6.-Clause 3 seeks to abolish Local Boards and 
other amendments are consequential. The Local Boards at Bombay, 
Ca'cutta,' Delhi and Madras are mainly attending to the work of the 
Reserve Bank connected with the transfer of shares, scrutiny of 
claims to shares belonging to deceased share-holders, etc., with the 
transfer of the Reserve Bank to public ownership and the dis-
appearance of share-holders, the Local Boards have no longer any 
important functions to perform. 
Clause 7.-This amendment is consequential to the amendment 
of section 42 proposed in clause 10. 
Clause 8.-The reasons for amending section 33 of the Act have 
been explained in the Statement of Objects and Reasons. Sub-
section (2) is being amended tQ provide for statutory minimum 
reserves of gold and foreign securities in absolute terms in the 
place of a ratio between reserves and note circulation as at 
present. 
Amendment of sub-section (4) provides for gold held as cur-
rency reserves being valued at 2.88 grains of fine geld per rupee 
as sgainst the present valuation at the rate of 8.47512 grains. 
Clause 9.-Under the existing section 37, the assets requirements 
of the Issue Department of the Reserve Bank may be suspended 
initially for a period of 30 days only which may subsequently be 
extended from time to time by periods not exceeding 15 days at a 
time. This clause seeks to permit such suspension initially for a 
period of six months which may be extended from time to time by 
periods not exceeding three months at a time. . 
The existing provision regarding payment of tax to Govern-
ment when the holding of the assets of the Issue Department falls 
below the minimum prescribed by sub-section (2) of section 33 is 
being omitted as with the nationalisation of the Reserve Bank, the 
entire surplus profit of the Bank is payable to Government and 
this provision has lost its significance. 
Clause lO.-This clause vests the Reserve Bank with the power 
. to vary reserve requirements of scheduled banks within the range 
of 5· to 20 per cent., in respect of demand liabilities and 2 to 8 per 
cent., in respect of time liabilities and to require them to maintain 
additional reserves in respect of any increase in deposits with them 
after a specified date and the additional reserves required to be 

10 
maintained may be upto one hundred per cent. of 8Uch increase. 
The overall reserves so to be maintained should not, however, 
exceed 20 per cent. of,demand liabilities and 8 per cent. of time liabi-
lities. Within the above limits, the Reserve Bank is being authoris-
ed to prescribe ratios in such a manner as to immobilise the maxi-
mum amount of reserves necessary without 8ft the same time 
adversely affecting such banks as have not participated in the rise 
in deposits. The clause also provides for payment of interest to 
scheduled banks, at the discretion of the Reserve Bank. 0'" the 
additiond reserves maintained by them with the Reserve Bank, 
but such interest is not payable if the prescribed minimum balance 
is not maintained. 
Clause n.-Under section 17 (4A) of the Act, the Reserve Bank 
is authorised to make loans and advances' from the' Nationa~ Agri-
cultural Credit (Long Term Operations) Fund established under 
section 46A. Such loans and advances include medium-term loans 
to State co-operative banks for agricultural purposes, as specified in 
sub-section (2) (b) of section 46A. It is doubtful whether under 
section 46A (2) (b), the Reserve Bank can make any advances to 
State co-operative banks, even in proved cases of necessity, to enable 
them to lend to small and medium cunivators 10r such purposes 
as are allied to or will assist agricultural activities, such 81 purchase" 
of shares in co-operative societies and con~nis: .. This amendment 
is intended to remove the doubt by enlarging'the scope, of s\1b-
section (2(b) of section 46A in order to enable the Reserve 'Bank' 
to make aavances for such purposes. 
Clauses 12 and 13.-These' clauses are conseqUential amendments . 
arising out of the abolition- of Local Boards. ' , 
C~use 14 . ....:this ·cla~.'~endB sec:tm,n)4 of t~e ~~~~ .. Cq~- . 
panies Act 1949 and i$, copsc;~wenti.\ to the amendmgiit (,f section 
42 of the Re$e;';e Bank of rn~U. ''Act. 
• I. (1"1 • t.' ' ,. .' fI ," .. ~ 1 -" 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE REsERVE BANK OF INDIA ACT, 1934 
(No. 2 OF 1934) 
• • • • • • 
8. (1) The Centrl1 Board shall consist of the following Directors, Composition 
namely'- of the Central . ~m,md 
• • • • • • term of oftlce 
of Directon. 
(b) four Directors to be nominated by the Central Govern-
ment, one .froll} each of the four Local Boards as constituted by 
section 9; 
(c) six Directors to be nominated by the Central. Govern-
ment; and 
• • • • • • 
(6) Out of the six Directors first nominated under clause (c) of 
sub-section (1), two shall retire at the end of one year, two at the 
end of two years and the last two at the end of three years, the 
Directors so to retire being determined, by lot . 
• • • • • • 
9. (1) A Local Board shall be constituted for each of the four Local Boards, 
areas specified in the First Schedule and shall consist of five members th~ CODSdti-tutlon an to. be appointed by the Central Government to represent, as far as fUDctions. 
possible, territorial and economic interests and the interests of co-
operative and' indigenous ban'ks. 
(2) 'The members of the Local Board shall elect from amongst 
themselves one person to be the chairman of the Board. 
• • • • • • 
(3) The members of the Local Board shall hold office for a term 
of· four years and shall be eligible for re-appointment. 
(4) A Loc.al.Board shall advise the Central Board on such matters 
as may be generally or specifically referred to it and shall perform 
such duties as the Central Boa~ may delegate to it . 
. ,10 .. (1) N~' ,person Play be a Director or a member of a 
Board who-:- . 
, (a)·· is a salm;ied Government. official, 'or 
Local Disqua1ifi-
. cations, of 
,Directors md 
Memben of 
Local Boards. 
'(b) is, or at anytime . has b~n,adjridicated an inSQlvent,· 
or· has ,.stlSpende<ipayment or has compounded with his creditors,· 
or 
II 

12 
(C) is found lunatic or becomes of unsound mind, or 
(d) is an officer or employee of any bank, or 
(e) is a director of any bank, other than the State Bank 
or any of its subsidiary banks or a bank which is a society 
registered or deemed to be registered' under the Co-operative 
Societies Act, 1912, or any other law for the time being in force 2 or 1912. 
in India relating to co-operative societies. 
(2) No two persons who are partners of the same mercantile 
firm, or are directors of the same private company, or one of whom 
is the general agent of or holds a power of procuration from the 
other, or from a mercantile firm of which the other is a partner, 
may be Directors or members of the same Local Board at the same 
time. 
• • • • • • 
Removal 11. (1) The Central Government may remove from oflice the 
t"ro!n and vra- Governor, or a Deputy Governor or any other Director or any canon 0 
office. member of a Local Board. 
(2) A Director nominated under clause (b) or clause (c) of 
sub-section (1) of section 8 shall cease to hold office if without 
leave from the Central Board he absents himself from three conse-
cutive meetings of the Board convened under sub-section (1) of 
section 13. 
(3) The Central Government shall remove from office any 
Director, and the Central Board shall remove from office any 
member of a Local Board, if such Director or member becomes 
subject to any of the disqualifications specified in sub-section (1) or 
sub-section (2) of section 10. 
(4) A Director or member of a Local Board removed orce~ing­
to hold office under the foregoing sub-section shall not be eligible 
for re-appointment either as Director or as member of a Local Board 
until the. expiry of the term for which his appointment was made. 
(5) The nomination as Dii'ector or mE!mber of a Local Board 'of', 
any person who is a member of Parliament or the Legislature ,of 
, .. any State shall be void, unless, within two months of the date. of'~is;., 
.", ',nomination, he ceases to be such member, and, if any Director or-
-member of a Local' Board "is ·elected or nomInated as a meinber of 
Parliament or any such Legislature, he shall cease to be a Director 
or .. lnem~;r of ~he Local Board asfrom·the date·\'If such election or 
nomination, as the case may be. ... 

• 
13 
(6) A Director may resign his office to the Central Government, 
and a member of a Local Board may resign his office to the Central 
Board, and on the acceptance of the resignation the office shall 
become vacant. 
12. (1) 
'" '" '" '" '" 
Casual 
vacancies 
and 
(3) Where any casual vacancy in the office of any member of a absences. 
Local Board occurs, the Central Board may nominate thereto any 
person recommended by the other members of the Local Board. 
'" '" '" '" '" 
19. Save as otherwise provided in sections 17, 18 and 45, the Bank Business 
may not- which the ", Bank may 
'" '" '" '" '" '" not transact. 
33. (1) 
'" '" '" '" '" '" 
(2) Of the total amount of the assets, not less t~n two-fifths 
shall consist of gold coin, gold bullion or foreign securities: 
Provided that the amount of gold coin and gold bullion shall not 
at any time be less than forty crores of rupees in value. 
'" '" '" 
(4) For the purposes of this section, gold coin, and gold bullion 
shall be valued at 8·47512 grains of fine gold per rupee, rupee coin 
shall be valued at its face value, and securities shall be valued at 
the market rate for the time being obtaining. 
'" '" '" • '" '" 
Assets of 
the issue 
Department. 
37. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing Suspension 
provisions, the Bank may, with the previous sanction of the Central ~:~::~ 
Government, for periods not exceeding thirty days in the first ins- mentS. 
tance, which may, with the like sanction, be extended from time to 
time by periods not exceeding fifteen days, hold as assets gold coin, 
gold bullion or foreign securities of less aggregate amount than that 
required by sub-section (2) of section 33 and, whilst the holding is 
so reduced, the proviso to that sub-section shall cease to be opera-
tive: 
Provided that the gold coin and gold bullion held as such assets 
shall not. be reduced below the amount specified in the proviso to 
sub-section (2) of section 33' so long as any foreign securities remain 
held as such assets. 
(2) In respect of any period during which the holding of gold 
coin, gold bullion and foreign securities is reduced under sub·sec-

14 
tiOD (1), the Bank shall pay to the Central Government a tax upon 
the amount by which such holding is reduced ·below the minimum 
prescribed by sub-section (2) of section 33; and such tax shall be 
payable at the bank rate for the time being in force, with an addi-
tion of one per cent. per annum when. such holding exceeds thirty-
two and a half per cent. of the total amount of the assets and of a 
further one and a half per cent. per annum in res~ct of every further 
decrease of two and a half per cent. or part of such decrease: 
Provided that the tax shall not in any event be payable at a rllte 
less than six per cent. per annum. 
* ... ... • * ... 
Cash reaerv- 42. (1) Every bank included in the Second Schedule shall main-
d~~~~k8 tain with the Bank a balance the amount of which shalll'lot at the 
to be kept close of business on any day be less than five per cent. of the demand 
=.the liabilities and ·two per cent. of the time liabilities of such bank in 
India as shown in the return l'e.err~".1 (Cl In sub-section (2). 
E.xplanatth..-For the purposes of this section liabilities shall not 
include the paid-up capital or the reserves, or any credit balance 
in the profit and loss account of the bank or ~e amount of any loan 
taken from the Bank, the State Bank or any other bank notified by 
the Central Government in this behalf. 
... • • • • • 
(3) If at the close of business on any day before the day 
fixed for the next retum, the balance held at the Bank by 
any scheduled bank is below the InlmmUm prescribed in 
sub-section (1), such scheduled bank shall be liable 
to pay to the Bank in respect of each such day panel 
interest at a rate three per cent. above the bank rate on the amount 
by which the balance with the Bank falls short of the prescribed 
minimum, and if on the day fixed for the next return such balance 
is still below the prescrib~ minimum as' disclosed ,by this return, 
the rates of penal interest shall be increased to a rate five per cent. 
above the bank rate in respect of that day and each subsequent day 
on which the balance held at the Bank at the close of busines on 
t,hat day is below the prescribed minimum. 
(3A) When under the provisions of sub-section (3) penal interest 
at the increased rate of. five per cent. above-the bank rate has be-
come payable by a Scheduled Bank. if thereafter on the day fixed for 
the next return the balance held at the Bank is still below the pres-
cribed minimum as disclosed by this return,- . 
(a) Every director and any manager or secretary of the 
scheduled bank, who is knowingly and wilfully a party to the 
• 

IS 
default, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five 
hundred rupees and with a further fine which may extend to five 
hundred rupees for each subsequent day on which the default 
continues, and 
(b) the Bank may prohibit t.he -scheduled bank from receiv-
ing after the silid day any fresh deposit, 
and, if default is made by the scheduled bank in complying with the 
prohibition referred to in clause (b), every director and officer of 
the scheduled bank who is knowingly and wilfully a party to such 
default or who through negligence or otherwise contributes to such 
default shall in respect of each such default be punishable with 
fine which may extend to five hundred rupees and with a further 
fine which may extend to five hundred rupees for each day after the 
first on which a deposit received in contravention of such prohibition 
is retained by the scheduled bank. 
Explananon.-In this sub-section "officer" includes a manager, 
secretary, branch manager, and branch secretary. 
46A. (1) National 
'" '" '" '" Agricultvral 
(2) The amount in the said Fund shall be applied by the Bank 
only to the following objects, namely:-
'" • • '" • 
(b) the making to State co-operative banks of loans and 
apva~es for agricultural purpo'~s, repayable 'on the expiry of 
fixed periods not being less than fifteen months and not exceed-
ing five, years from the, da.te of making such loan or advallC'e. 
against 'such sec;:urities as may be specified' in this "'behalf by the Bank: "1 . , :. . 
Provided that such loans and advances are fully guaranteed 
as to t~e repayment of the principal and payment of interest by 
the State Government; 
Credit (Lona 
TermOpcra-
tions) Fund. 
Power of the 
58. '(I)' Central 
Board to 
(2) In par!icular and without prejudice to the generality of the reauI~n,. 
foregoing provision, such regulations may provide for all 'or any 
of the following matters, namely:-
• • '" • 
(g)' the conduct of business of Local Boards and the delega-
tion to such Boards o~ powers and functions; 
. '" '" . 

Maintenanc:e 
of • percent-
ase of .aactlo 
16 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
(See section 9) 
1. The Western Area shall consist of the States of Bombay, 
Madhya Pradesh, Hyderabad, Saurashtra, Cutch. Madhya Bharat and 
Bhopal. 
2. The Eastern Area shall consist of the States of West Bengal, 
Bihar, Orissa, Assam, the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Manipur, 
Vindhya Pradesh and Tripura. 
3. The Northern Area shall consist of the States of Uttar Prades~, 
Punjab, Delhi, Ajmer, Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, 
Patiala and the East Punjab States Union, Bilaspur and Rajasthan. 
4. The Southern Area shall consist of the States of Madras, 
Andhra,. Coorg, Mysore and Travancore-Cochin . 
• ... • • 
EXTRACTS FROM THE BANKING COMPANIES ACT, 1949 (10 OF 1949) 
• • ... • 
24. '(1) 
... ... • • 
(2) In computing the amount for the purposes of sub-section (1), 
the deposit required under the proviso to sub-section (2) of section 
11 110 be made with the Reserve Bank by a banking company incor-
porated outside India and any balance maintained by a banking 
t::ompany with the Reserve Bank or its agent or both, including in 
the case of a scheduled bank the balance required under sub-section 
(1) of section 42 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, to be so a of 1934, 
maintained, shall be deemed to be ca~h maintained, 
... • ... • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (1) of article 117 
of th~ Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha 
the introduction of the Bill. 
(Shri C. D. Deshmukh, 
Minister of Finanee) 
M.N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 