LOK SABHA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK BILL, 1966 
-(Tal As introduced in Lok Sabha) 
1. Page 2, line 12,-
..tQr "paragraph It read "parag raphsll 
2. Page 2,-
In the marginal heading to clause. 5,. 
for Uem-loyees." read nemployees." 
3. Page 2, line 36,~ 
aft~r /I services It add t1rendered.,·n 
4. Page 4, line 15,-
after lip arti cular 11 insert II, n 
5. Correct line numbers on pages 2,5 and 6. 
NEW DELHI; 
April 26, .. 1966 
Vaisakha 6, 1888 .(Saka) 
S (2) It extends to the whole of India. 
)rt 
title, 
extent 
and 

As INTRODUCED IN Lolt SABHA ON 
Bill No. 33 of 1966 
1 HE ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK BILL, 1966 
A 
I BILL 
to implement the international agreement for the esta.blishmen.t and 
operation of the Asian Development Bank and for matters con-
Meted therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventeenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Asian Development Bank Act, Short 
1966. title, 
extent 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. and 
comm.e~~ 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern .. 
ment, 
~ent may, by notification in the Qfticial Gazette, appoint. 

Deftnitlons. 
Payments 
to Bank. 
Reserve 
Bank to 
be deposi-
tory for 
.. Bank. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "Agreement" means the Agreement for the establish-
ment and operation of the international body known as the Asian 
Development Bank; 
(b) "Bank" means the Asian Development Bank established 5 
under the Agreement. 
3. (1) There shall be paid out of the Consolidated Fund of India, 
after due appropriation made by P8rliament by law inihis behalf, 
all such sums as may, from time to time, be required for the purpose 
of paying,- 10 
(a) the subsrl'iptions payable by the Central Goverwnent 
to the Bank ,meter paragraph 1, 2 and 3 of ArHcJe 5 of the 
Agreement; 
(b) any cummission, fees or other charges payablc by the 
Central Government to the Bank under ArHcle 16 of the Agree- IS 
ment; 
(c) any sums payable by the CC·ltral Cavernment to the 
Bank under paragraph 1 of Article 25 of the Agreement. 
(2) The Central Government may, if it thinks fit so to do, create 
and issue to the Bank, in such form as it thinks fit, any such non- 20 
interest bearing and non-negotiable notes or other obligations as are 
provided for by paragraph 3 of Article 6 of the Agreement. 
4. The Reserve Bank of India shall be the depository of tlae Indiu 
currency holdings of the Bank. 
Conferment 5. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any 25 
of other law, the provisions of the Agreement set out in the Schedule .tatus and shall have the force of law in India: 
certain 
immunlt1el. Provided that nothing in Article M of the Agreement shan bl 
exemptions construed as-
and pri-
vileges on 
Bank 
<\nd conf .... 
mentof 
certain 
immunities, 
• ~xemptions 
andprivi_ 
leges on 
its 
offtcet's 
and em-
loy_e •• 
(a) entitling the Bank to import into India goods free of any 30 
duty of customs without any re:striction on their subsequent s<:lle 
therein; or 
(b) conferring on the Bank any exemption from duties or 
taxes which form part of the price of goods sold; or 
\ . 
(c) conferring on the Bank any exemption from duties or 
taxes which are in fact no more than char~es for ~erv1~ 

(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, amend the Schedule in conformity with any amendments, 
duly made and adopted, of the provisions of the Agreement set out 
therein. 
6. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Power 
S Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. to make 
rules. 
7. Every notification issued under sub-section (2) of section 5 and Notiftca-
f!very rule made under section 6 shall be laid as soon as may be after tions • 
it is issuf'd or made before each House of Parliament while it is in issued under 
10 session fer a total period of thirty days, which may be comprised in section 
one session or in two succe.ssive sessions, and if, before the expiry 5 and 
of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately Iollow- rules made 
ing, both Houses agree in making any modification in the notification u.nde~ s~~. 
or, as the case may be, in the rule, or both Houses agree that the ~o~aid 
15 notification or rule should not be issued or made, the notification or b~rore 
rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified fann or be of Pal'l.i.arnEoJ,.il~ 
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modifica-
tion or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of any-
thing previously done under that notification or rule. 

THE SCHEDUL~ 
(See section 5) 
ftWVISIONS OF THE AGREEMENT WHICH SHALL HA VB 
FORCE OF LAW 
CHAPTER VIII 
STATUS, IMMUNITIES, EXEMPTIONS AND PRIVILEGES 
ARTICLE 48 
PURPOSE OF CHAPTER 
5 
To enable the Bank effectively to fulfil its purpose and carry out 
the functions entrusted to it, the status, immunities, exemptions and 10 
privileges set forth in this Chapter shall be accorded to the Bank in 
the ter~!~ory of each member. 
ARTICLE 49 
LEGAL STATUS 
The Bank shall possess full juridical personality and, in particular IS 
full capacity: 
(i) to contract; 
(ii) to acquire, and dispose of, immovable and movable 
property; and 
(iii) to institute legal proceedings. 
ARTICLE 50 
IMMUNITY FROM JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS 
1. The Bank shall enjoy immunity from every form of legal 
process, except in cases arising out of or .~'l connexion with the exer .. 
cise of its powers to borrow money, to guarantee obligations, or to '5 
buy and sell or underwrite the sale' of securities, in which cases 
actions may be brought against the Bank in a court of competen~ 
jurisdiction in the territory of a country in which the Bank has its 
principal or a branch office, or has appointed an agent for the purpose 

of accepting service or notice of process, or has issued or guaranteed 
securities. 
2. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1 of this Article, 
nc action shall be brought against the Bank by any member, or by 
S any agency or instrumentality of a member, or by any entity or 
person directly or indirectly acting for or deriving claims from a 
member or from any agency or instrumentality of a member. Mem-
bers shall have reccurSe to such special procedures for the settlement 
of controversies between the Bank and its members as may be pres-
10 cribed in this Agreement, in the by-laws and regulations of the Bank, 
or in contracts entered into with the Bank. 
3. Property and assets of the Bank shall. wheresoever located and 
by whomsoever held, be immune from all forms of seizure, attach-
ment or execution before the delivery of final judgment against the 
15 Bank. 
ARTICLE 51 
IMMUNlTY OF' ASSETS 
Property and assets of the Bank, wheresoever located and by 
whomsoever held, shall be immune from search, requisition, confis-
lO cation, expropriation or any other form of taking or foreclosure by 
executive or legislative action. 
ARTICLE 52 
IMMUNITY OF ARCHIVES 
The archives of the Bank and, in general, all documents belong-
lS ing to it, or held by it, shall be inviolable, wherever located. 
ARTICLE 53 
FREEDOM OF ASSETS FROM RESTRICTIONS 
To the extent necessary to carry out the purpose and functions of 
the Bank effectively, and subject to the provisions of this Agr~~ent, 
aU property and assets of the Bank shall be free from restnctions, 
30 . f t regulations, controls and moratona 0 any na ure. 

6 
-ARTICLE 54 
PRIVILEGE FOR COMMUNICA TIONS 
Official communications of the Bank shall be accorded by each 
member treatment not less favourable than that it accords to the 
official communications of any other member. 
ARTICLE 55 
IMMUNITIES AND Pl:~vrwI:GES OF BANK PERSONNEL 
All Governors, Directors, alternates, officers and employees of the 
Bank, including experts performing missions for the Bank: 
5 
(i) shall be immu!le from legal process with respect to acts 10 
performed by them in their offic:al capacity, except when th~ 
Bank waives the immunity; 
(ii) where they are not local citizens or nationals, shall be 
accorded the same immunities from immigration restrictions, 
alien registration requirements and national service obligations, 15 
and the same facilities as regards exchange regulations, as are 
accorded by members to the representatives, officials and em-
ployees of comparable rank of other members; and 
(iii) shall be granted the same treatment in respect of travel-
ling facilities as is accorded by members to representatives, 20 
officials and employees of comparable rank of other members. 
ARTICLE 56 
EXEMPTION FROM TAXATION 
1. The Bank, its assets, property, income and its operations and 
transactions, shall be exempt from all taxation and from all customs 25 
duties. The Bank shall also be exempt from any obligation for the 
payment, withholding or collection of any tax or duty. 
2. No tax shall be levied on or in respect of salaries and emolu-
ments paid by the Bank to Directors, alternates, officers or employees 
of the Bank, including experts performing missions for the Bank, 30 
except where a member deposits with its instrument of ratification 
or acceptance a declaration that such member retains for itseU and 
its political sub-divisions the right to tax salaries and emolument. 
paid by the Bank to citizens or nationals of such member. 

5 
7 
3. No tax of any kind shall be levied on any obligation or security 
issued by the Bank, including any dividend or interest thereon, by 
whomsoever held: 
(i) which discriminates against such obligation or security 
solely because it is issued by the Bank; or 
(ii) if the sole jurisdictional basis for such taxation is the 
place or currency in which it is issued, made payable or paid, 
or the location of any office or place of business maintained by 
the Bank. 
10 4. No tax of any kind shall be levied On any obligation or security 
guaranteed by the Bank, including any dividend or interest thereon, 
by whomsoever held: 
(i) which discriminates against such obligation or security 
solely because it is guaranteed by the Bank; or 
IS (ii) if the sole jurisdictional basis for such taxation is the 
location of any office or place of business maintained by the 
Bank. 
• • • • • 
ARTICLE 58 
WA.IVF:R OF IMMUNITIES, EXEMPTIONS AND PRMLl!:G!!! 
The Bank at its discretion may waive any of the privileges, immu-
nities and exemptions conferred under this Chapter in any ease or 
instance, in such manner and upon such conditions as it may deter-
mine to be appropriate in the best interests of the Bank. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In pursuance of an International Agreement to which India will 
. be a signatory, a new financial institution called the Asian Develop-
ment Bank is being established for accelerating the economic 
development of Asia and the Far East. Chapter VIII of the Article. 
of Agreement provides for the granting to the Bank and its officers 
and employees certain status, immunities, exemptions and privileges 
in the territory of each member country. Article 57 of the Agree-
ment stipulates that each member country, in accordance with its 
juridical system, shall promptly take such action as is necessary 
to make effective in its own territory, the provisions set forth 
in Chapter VIII of the Agreement. By this Bill, it is proposed to 
enact the necessary legislation to give effect to the provisions of the 
said Chapter VIII of the Articles of Agreement. Provision has also 
been made in t.he Bill empowering the Central Government to make 
payments to the Bank towards subscriptions, fees and other charges 
and for matters connected therewith. 
NEW DELHI; SACHINDRA CHAUDHURI. 
The 16th Aprit 1966. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATIONS UNDER A1tTICLES 1]7 
AND 274 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of Letter No.2 (39) 166-FBI, dated the 16th April, 1966 from 
Shri Sachindra Chaudhuri, Minister of Finance to the Secretary, 
Lok Sabha.]. 
The President having been informed of the subjeet matter of the 
proposed Bill' to implement the international . agreement for the 
establishment and operation of the Asian Development Bank in so 
far as it relates to the status, immunities, exemptions and privileges 
of the Asian Development Bank, and for matters connected there-
with recommends the introduction of the Bill in the Lok Sabha as , 
required under articles 117 (1), 117 (3) and 274 (1) of the Constitution 
of India. 
8 

I 
l 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
India has been allotted a share of $93 million (Rs, 44' 29 crores) 
in the total capital stock of $1,000 million of the Asian Development 
Bank and is the second largest Asian Contribu~or to the capital of 
the Bank, 
2, Under Article 5 (1) of the Articles of Agreement of the Bank, 
only half of each member's capital subscription will be initially pay-
able and the other half shall be subject to calls only as and when 
required by the Bank to meet its obligations on borrowings of funds 
for making or participating in direct loans or for guaranteeing loans 
for economic development, The payment of the paid-in-capital i. 
to be made, under Article 6 of the Agreement, in five equal annual 
instalments, the first of such instalments being payable within 30 
days after the entry into force of the Articles of Agreement or on 
or before the date of deposit of its instrument of utification by the 
member, whichever is later, 
3, The Agreement is likely to be entered into force shortly, and 
on this basis, India's payments towards the capital subscription of 
the Bank are expected to be phased as shown below:-
Amount Likely dates 
(U,S, $ million) ot payment 
in in Total 
Foreign Indian 
Exchange Rupees 
4'65 4'65 9'3 June-July, 1966 
4'65 4'65 9'3 July, 1967 
4'65 4'65 9'3 July, 1968 
4'65 4'65 9'3 July, 1969 
4'65 4'65 9'3 July, 1970 
23'25 23'25 46'5 
----
9 

10 
The remaining amount of $46' 5 million will be payable as and 
when called-up by the Bank for meeting its obligations referred to 
above. 
4. Article 5 of the Agreement also provides that the capital stock 
of the Bank shall be reviewed at intervals of not less than five years. 
The earliest of such a review will therefore take place in 1971. If 
and when such a review leads to an increase in the Bank's capital 
stock, each member shall be given an opportunity to subscribe to. 
proportion of the increase in the Bank's capital stock. Any payments 
that may have to be made by India on account of such an increase, 
cannot be foreseen at this stage and will in any case be at hu 
own option. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 5 (2) of the Bill confers power on the Central Governmt!nt 
to amend the Schedule in conformity with any amendments, duly 
made and adopted, of the provisions of the Agreement set out therein. 
2. Clause 6 of the Bill confers power upon the Central Govern-
ment to make rules for carrying out the purposes of the Act. The 
immunities, exemptions and privileges of the Asian Development 
Bank and its officials and employees having been specified in the 
Schedule to the Bill, occasions for making rules, if any, will be ff"w 
and far between. The Asian Bank has not yet started its functions. 
It is not possible, therefore, to envisage at this stage the matters 
which may have to be provided for by rules. But as the immunities. 
exemptions and privileges have been speCified in the Bill, it is clear 
that rules, if any, will be confined to matters of procedure and other 
matters of minor detail relating to the enjoyment of those immuni-
ties, exemptions and privileges and their waiver. For instance, if 
the Bank decides to waive any of the immunities, exemptions ot" 
privileges, a rule may be necessary prescribing the manner in which 
and the officer of the Government to whom such 'VIaiver should be 
communicated. 
3. The delegation of legislative power is thus of a normal 
.haracter. 
.--T'~ 11 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to implement the international agreement for the establishment 
and operation of the Asian Developmex:t Bank and for 
matters connected therewith. 
(Shri Sachindra Chaudhuri, 
Minister of Finance.) 