1
THE POWERLOOM SECTOR (WELFARE) BILL, 2013
By
SHRI SURESH KASHINA TH TAWARE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the protection and welfare of the weavers, workers and small
entrepreneurs engaged in powerloom sector and for matters
connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Powerloom Sector (Welfare) Act, 2013.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
Bill No. 33 of  2013
Short title
and extent.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. (a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of that
State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "weaver" means a person who works or operates on a powerloom for the
production of cloth;
(c) "worker" means a worker who is engaged in any activity of production of
cloth on powerloom for any remuneration or wages either in cash or in kind; and
(d) "small entrepreneur" means a person engaged in buying cloth and yarn
produced from powerlooms but whose total investment in plant and machinery does
not exceed rupees five crore.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, within one year from the commencement of this
Act, formulate a National Welfare Policy for the weavers, workers and small entrepreneurs
engaged in powerloom sector.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the National Welfare
Policy shall include the following provisions:—
(a) interest free loans to powerloom weavers and workers;
(b) payment of ex-gratia amount to the family of such weavers, who die in
harness;
(c) supply of cotton yarn and other raw materials at subsidised rate to the
powerloom weavers;
(d) measures for stabilising the price of cotton yarn;
(e) insurance cover to all powerloom weavers and workers;
(f) health care facilities to powerloom weavers and workers and their dependent
family members;
(g) educational facilities including vocational training for the dependent children
of weavers, workers and small entrepreneurs of powerloom sector;
(h) measures for revival of powerloom units which are on the verge of closure
due to any reason; and
(i) such other welfare measures as the Central Government may deem necessary.
(3) The appropriate Government shall implement welfare measures provided for the
weavers, workers and small entrepreneurs under this Act, in such manner as may be
prescribed.
4. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by law by Parliament
in this behalf, provide adequate funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
5. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from
the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid
before each House of Parliament.
Formulation
of National
Welfare
Policy for
weavers,
workers and
small
entrepreneurs.
Definitions.
Central
Government
to provide
adequate
funds.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
5
15
20
25
30
35
40
10

3
6. The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall come into effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
7.  (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.  5
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Powerloom sector is one of the most important segments of the textile industry in our
country. There are more than five lakh powerloom units in the country and nearly twenty-
three lakh powerloom from which nearly six million workers earn their livelihood. These
powerloom units are located mainly in the States of Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh,
Tamil Nadu, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. Bhiwandi, Malegaon and Ichalkaranchi
in the State of Maharashtra are its main centres. In fact, powerloom units are spread across
the length and breadth of the country. Most of the weavers are engaged in this profession
for many generations. Powerloom is the only source of sustenance for the weavers, workers
and for small entrepreneurs. Cloth made from powerlooms is in vogue not only at home but
also abroad.
It is unfortunate that the weavers, workers and small entrepreneurs are facing a lot of
difficulties. In Bhiwandi, in the State of Maharashtra, many units have been closed down and
several others are on the verge of collapse. There are a number of reasons for it. The foremost
reason for this is non-availability of yarn at affordable prices. There is no uniformity in the
price of cotton yarn. Packets of yarn don't indicate price, which leads to the purchase of yarn
at inflated prices. As a result, a large number of powerloom units have to be closed down
because their operation becomes unviable.
If no concrete remedial measures are taken to save powerloom sector, there is a risk of
extinction of this sector in near future.
The most disturbing and sad part is that most of the weavers are debt-ridden and
poverty-stricken for long and their condition has become miserable. The families of helpless
weavers, workers are facing starvation. The business of small entrepreneurs in the sector is
suffering. Therefore, it requires intervention on the part of the Government to take immediate
remedial measures in order to save the powerloom sector. There is an urgent need for
formulation and implementation of a national welfare policy for welfare of weavers, workers
and small entrepreneurs engaged in powerloom sector in the country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SURESH KASHINATH TAW ARE
February 8, 2013
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the formulation and implementation of a national
welfare policy for weavers, workers and small entrepreneurs. Clause 4 provides that the
Central Government shall provide requisite funds to carry out the provisions of this Bill. The
Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees five thousand crore per annum from
the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of  the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the matters will relate to detail only, the delegation of legislative
powers is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for the protection and welfare of the weavers, workers and small
entrepreneurs engaged in powerloom sector and for matters
connected therewith.
—————
(Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—5146LS(S4)—27.02.2013.