Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
                   
                                                       
          
Bill No.  33 of  2024
THE COMMISSION FOR REGULATION AND DEVELOPMENT 
OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY  
BILL, 2024
By
Sඁඋං C. N. Aඇඇൺൽඎඋൺං,  M.P.
A
BILL
to  provide  for the setting up of a  Commission to regulate and promote the development
 of Information Technology industry in the country and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—     
1. (1) This  Act may be called the Commission for Regulation and Development of 
Information Technology Industry Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and commencement.

2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
   ( a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the government of that 
State and in all other cases, the Central Government.
  ( b) "Commission" means the Commission for Regulation and Development of 
Information Technology Industry established under section 3; and
 ( c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3.(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in 
force, the Central Government shall by notification in the official gazette, establish 
a Commission to be known as the Commission for Regulation and Development of 
Information Technology Industry to regulate and expedite growth of information 
technology Sector in the country. 
(2) The Commission shall consist of a Chairperson and four other members to be 
appointed by the Central Government having such qualifications as may be prescribed. 
(3) The Commission shall have such number of officers and staff as may be 
required for the efficient functioning of the Commission.
(4) The conditions of service, salaries and allowances of Chairperson, members, 
officers and staff of the Commission shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. The Commission shall,–
(i) take appropriate steps to set up information technology parks in cities with 
population of more than one million and in cities having potential for development of 
information technology parks;
(ii) recommend to the Central Government regarding concessions or incentives to be 
given to the Information Technology industry for the promotion of export of hardware and 
software; and
(iii) such other functions as may be assigned to it by the Central Government, from time 
to time.
5. The appropriate Government shall provide all assistance to the Commission in 
making available land free of cost infrastructural facilities including electricity, water 
and roads for setting up Information Technology parks in the cities as mentioned 
under section 4.
6. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as possible, but in no case later than six 
months from the commencement of this Act, by notification in the official Gazette, formulate 
a national policy on setting up of information technology parks.
(2) The policy formulated under sub-section (1) shall be reviewed at least once in every 
three years or earlier, if such review is deemed necessary by the Central Government.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by 
law in this behalf, provide adequate funds for the implementation of the provisions of 
the Act.
8. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other 
law for the time in force.
9. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the 
difficulty: 
Power to 
remove 
difficulty.
Act not in 
derogation of 
other law.
Central 
Government to 
provide funds.
Definitions.

     Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years 
from the commencement of this Act.
 10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry 
of the session immediately following the session, or the successive sessions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule 
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of 
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
 
Power to make 
rules.

STATEMENT  OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 Information technology industry is one of the fastest growing industries of the country. 
There is tremendous potential for further growth of this industry. What is needed is the 
formulation of a proper policy and assistance from the Government. If these are put in 
place, there is no doubt that our country will rank number one in terms of export of software 
and hardware. 
 At present, there is no clear policy for the development of information technology in 
the country. The Government does not give any assistance to the companies working in this 
field. Several foreign companies are willing to set up their offices in our country but due to 
lack of required infrastructure they prefer to stay away. As a result these companies go to 
other countries who offer better infrastructure. This industry can prove to be a major source 
of revenue for the Government and also provide immense employment opportunities to our 
people but so far the Government has not done much to tap the huge growth potential of 
Information Technology industry. 
 Therefore, it is proposed that a National Commission on Information Technology be 
set up to regulate and promote the development of information technology industry in the 
country. It is also proposed that a national policy on information technology be formulated. 
 Hence this Bill.
     Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                               C.N. ANNADURAI
 July 3,  2024.

 FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
 Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a Information Technology 
Commission for Regulation and Development of Information Technology Industry. It 
also provides for the composition of the Commission and salaries and allowances of the 
Chairperson and members of the Commission. Clause 4 provides that the Commission 
shall set up information technology parks in cities with population of one million or 
more. Clause 5 provides that the appropriate Government shall provide all assistance to 
the Commission in setting up of information technology parks. Clause 7 provides for the 
Central Government to provide adequate funds. The expenditure relating to States shall be 
borne out of the Consolidated Funds of the respective States. However, the expenditure in 
respect of Union territories shall be borne out of the Consolidated Fund of India. The Bill, 
therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is 
estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees ten thousand crore will be 
involved.
 A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five thousand crore is also likely to be 
involved.
  

 MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
 Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the setting up of a  Commission to regulate and promote the 
development of Information Technology industry in the country and
 for matters connected therewith or
 incidental thereto.
————
(Shri C.N. Annadurai, M.P .)