As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

20 ape ? ७

Bill No. 33 of 2000.

THE AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE (REMUNERATIVE SUPPORT
PRICES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS) BILL, 2000
By
‘Suri 0.5. Basvaral, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of an Agricultural Produce Price Fixation Board to fix

the remunerative support price of agricultural produce including fruits and vegetables on
annual and seasonal basis and timely intervention by the Government at the time of steep

fall in prices of such produce in the open market and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows: —
1. (1) This Act may be called the Agricultural Produce (Remunerative Support Prices
and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 2000.
(2) It extends to the whole of India,
(3) It shall come into force at once.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires;

(@) “Agricultural produce” includes wheat, paddy, pulses, sugarcane, cotton,
oil seeds, coarse grains like maize, millet, jowar, bajra, gram, soyabean, fruits,
vegetables such as potato, onion, tomato, cauliflower, cabbage including such other
agricultural or horticultural produce which are used’for human consumption or for
any medicinal purpose;

‘Short title,
extent and
‘Commence-

Definitions.


Establishment
of an Agricui-

2

(b) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the State Government and

in other cases, the Central Government;

(०) “Board” means the Agricultural Produce Price Fixation Board established under

section 3;

(4) "Government agency" means and includes any agency of the Government by

whatever name called or which receives grants from the Government and which is engaged
in procurement, distribution and canalising agricultural produces; and

(०) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3: (12 The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but not later than six months

the date of commencement of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, estab.

Price Fisation lth a Board to be known as Agricultural Prodee Price Fixation Board.

Board.

Function of the
Board.

(2) The Headquarters of the Board shall be at Mumbai.
(1 The Board shall set up one zonal office each in the eastern, westem, northern,

north easter, central and southern parts of the country comprising of such States and Union
Zemitories, as may be determined by the Board and shall consist of such members as may
be prescribed.

(4) The Board shall consist of —

(a) A Chairperson and a Deputy Chairperson with agricultural background and
holding agricultural qualifications, to be appointed by the Central Government;

(0) one member from each zonal office of the Board;

(०) one member each to represent the Union Ministries dealing with agricul-
ture, food, food processing and fertilisers;

(4) one member to represent the Indian Council of Agricultural Research;

(०) ten members to be appointed by the Central Government from amongst the
farmers and agricultural labourers, in rotation from various States; and

(0 five members of Parliament of whom three shall be from Lok Sabha and two
from Rajya Sabha, respectively; and

@) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual

fuccession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose off property,
both movable and immovable, and to contract and shall by the said name sue and be

(6) The term of office of the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and the manner of

filling vacancies and the procedure to be followed in the discharge of their functions shall
be such as may be prescribed.

4. (1) The Board shall,—

(0) fix and declare minimum remunerative support prices of agricultural produce
before every sowing season after’ examining the recommendations of all the zonal
offices:

Provided that different prices may be fixed for different produce and for
different zones;

(ii) fix the issue prices of foodgrains for retail sale to consumers every year,
(2) The Board shall perform its functions in close liaison with Government agencies,

institutions including co-operative societies and such other authorities concerned with the
Procurement, supply, distribution, trade of agricultural produce and avoid duplication of
efforts. ५

20

25

30

35

45


3
(3) The Board shall give wide publicity to the renfunerative prices fixed for agricul-
tural produce through electronic and print media throughout the country well in advance.

5. (1) It shall be the duty of each zonal office of the Board to recommend to the Board
the remunerative support prices of agricultural produce in respect of its jurisdiction.

5 (2) Every zonal office of the Board, before recommending the minimum support
remunerative prices of agricultural produce, shall take into account all relevant factors, but
in particular, the following, namely;

(a) average capital investment made by farmers in growing the produce;
(b) average labour charges;
10 (न

(4) premium for crop insurance, if any;

interest on loans borrowed for growing the produce;

(०) maintenance cost of the lang;
(f) expenditure on fertilisers, seeds and electricity, ete;

(g) any concession, rebate or subsidy provided by Government in relation to
15 agricultural produce;

(hy
@

prevailing open market price of each product;

climatic conditions and incidence of natural calamities like floods, droughts,
hailstorms, cyclones, untimely rains, etc.

(0) average monthly household expenditure of an average farmer; and
20 (0 any other incidental expenditure.

6. (1) In case any farmer fails to sell his produce in the open market at the desired
prices, the Central Government shall purchase his produce at the price fixed by the Board
through Government agencies.

(2) If there is a steep fall in the prices of agricultural produce in the open market, it

25 shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to intervene through its agencies in the
market to ensure that farmers get minimum support price of the produce and take such
other measures as it may deem necessary to handle the situation and protect the interests of
the farmers.

7. The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall have effect notwith-
30 standing anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in
force.

8. The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

Function of
the Zonal
office.

Government
agencies to
purchase
agricultural
produce.

Act to have
Over-riding
effect,

Power to
make rules.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

of unscrupulous traders who exploit them to the maximum Possible.

Similarly, it is now very common that whenever there is bumper crop of; ‘anything, be
it foodgrains or vegetables, the Prices of such items fall very steeply. For instance when
there is bumper crop of any commodities, their prices fall to the extent that the growers
have no choice but to throw them on the roadsides and it has been noticed that the farmers
sometimes burn their sugarcanes on the fields. But even the Government does not come to
their rescue. Hence, there is an urgent need to provide that Government should intervene at
such times to protect the interests of the farmers.

The Agricultural Ministry of the Union Government fixes the minimum support
Prices of agricultural produce but generally such prices are not realistic ones and there has
always been discontentment amongst the farmers regarding such Prices because they re-
main far below the expectations of the farmers. It is, therefore, necessary to set up a statu-
tory autonomous agricultural produce price fixation Board including therein the representa-
tives of the farmers and agricultural labourers to fix the remunerative prices for agricultural
Produce taking into consideration all the aspects. It will also be mandatory for the Govern-
‘ment to purchase agricultural produce from the farmers through their agencies. It is felt that
the guarantee of a minimum assured price will further Bive the requisite boost to our agri-
culture sector and our farmer will prosper for which he really deserves.

Hence this Bill.

New Det; G.S. BASVARAJ
February 10, 2000.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM.

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of Agricultural Produce Price
Fixation Board. It further provides for setting up of zonal offices. Clause 4 provides that the
Board shall give wide publicity through electronic and print media about the prices fixed
Clause 6 provides that the Central Government shall purchase agricultural produce at the
prices fixed by the Board. The Bill, if enacted and brought into operation, will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees sixty
crore may be involved as recurring expenditure per annum.

A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one crore may also be involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to the matters of detail only.

The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the establishment of an Agricultural Produce Price Fixation Board to fix

the remunerative support price of agricultural produce including fruits and vegetables on

annual and seasonal basis and timely intervention by the Government at the time, of steep

fall in prices of such produce in the open market and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.

(Shri 6.5. Basvaraj, M.P)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—3585LS—19.2.2000,