AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

sao 9
: 3 ' VES

Bill No. 33 of 2005

_ THE AIRLINES (PENALTY FOR DELAYS) BILL, 2005
By |
SHRI inne ans MP.
| A
BILL

ide for imposition of penalty on the airline companies for cancellation/delay in
operations of their schedule services and for matters connected therewith

8 it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-—
(1) This Act may be called the Airlines (Penalty for Delays) Act, 2005
(2) It shall extend to the whole of India

(3) It shall come into force immediately

(4) It shall apply to all airline companies registered in India and/or operating their
m/to India from anywhere in the world

005

Short title,
extent,
commence-
ment and
application.


Definition.

Airline
companies
not to cancel
their flights.

Penalty in
case of
cancellation
of flights.

Airlines not
to be held
responsible in
certain cases.

Power to .
make rules.

2

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, "airlines" means any airline
company registered with the Directorate General of Civil Aviation (D.G.C.A) in India and
includes its Chairman and other members of the Board of Directors of the company and Chief
Operating Officer.

3. No airline shall cancel any of its scheduled flights except on such grounds as
mentioned in section 5.

4. In case of delay of more than one hour from the scheduled time of departure of the
flight or cancellation of the flight due to any other reason as mentioned in section 5, the
airline company shall,—

(i) pay at least five times the price of the ticket to the valid ticket holding passenger —
of the flight so cancelled/delayed;

(ii) make arrangements for the boarding, lodging and such other facilities as may
be prescribed for the passenger at the station of cancellation/delay of flight till such
time as the passenger boards the next flight to his destination:

Provided that arrangements for boarding, lodging and such other facilities as 1
may be prescribed shall be made only when the flight is delayed by more than four
hours; and

(iii) pay at least three times the price of the ticket of the connecting flight to the
valid ticket holding passenger when passenger misses the connecting flight on account
of cancellation or delay in the departure of the flight.

5. The airline shall not be held responsible for payment of penalties to the passenger in
case of cancellation or delay of more than one hour of a scheduled flight on account of bad
weather as certified by Airports Authority of India, and/or genuine technical problems.

Explanation: For the purpose for this section, a certificate by the Authority of the
airport concerned that the weather is bad and not conducive to flying or there are genuine
technical problems in the aircraft which made the aircraft inoperative shall be required.

6. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

In the last few years the airline traffic has gone up manifolds in the world. However,
many instances have come to light wherein the passengers were put to a lot of inconvenience
due to the cancellation of scheduled flight by the Airlines without due notice. The airlines
cancel their flights on various grounds like bad weather, technical problems, strike by its
employees and go slow adopted by the airport and the airlines officials. The passengers who
have booked in these flights lose heavily as they have fixed up their engagements, meetings,
etc. well in advance. They have to spend time at the airports due to cancellation of flights and
_ have no other means of reaching their destination. The European Union is considering to

impose heavy penalties on airlines who cancel their flights on any ground. This measure is
likely to make the airlines punctual and more responsible and save the passengers from
hardships. In our country also this type of law is very much required which imposes penalties
on airlines for cancellation of flights. However, in case of bad weather or technical snags as
certified by the Airports Authority, the airlines may be exempted from such penalties.

The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.

New DELHI; KASHIRAM RANA
February 10,2005.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only. The delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character. ह


LOK SABHA
A
BILL,

to provide for imposition of penalty on the airline companies for cancellation/delay in
operations of their schedule services and for matters connected therewith.

(Shri Kashiram Rana, M.P)

MGIPMRND—(S1)}—4370LS—01.03.2005.