THE SCHEDULED CASTES AND THE SCHEDULED TRIBES
(RESERV ATION IN POSTS AND SERVICES) BILL, 2011
By
SHRI ARJUN M EGHWAL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for reservation in appointments or posts in civil services for members of the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in establishments and
for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes
(Reservation in Posts and Services) Act, 2011.
(2)  It shall apply to every establishment under the State.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In  this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appointing authority”, in relation to a service or post in an establishment,
means the authority empowered to make appointment to such service or post;
Bill No. 33 of 2011
Short title,
application and
commencement.
Definitions.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(b) “establishment” means every such establishment owned, established,
controlled, managed or financed by the Government and includes—
(i) a Ministry or department or subordinate office or attached office of the
Government;
(ii) a public sector undertaking or statutory authority constituted under
any Central Act;
(iii) a corporation in which not less than fifty-one per cent. of the paid-up
share capital is held by the Government;
(iv) a university established by a Central Act and its affiliated colleges,
including medical and engineering colleges and institutions;
(v) a primary or secondary school or any other educational institution;
(vi) an industry, trade or business;
(vii) a Government company as defined under section 617 of the Companies
Act, 1956; and
(viii) an autonomous body, organisation or institution receiving grant or
aid from the Consolidated Fund of India;
(c) "Government" means the Central Government;
(d) "Group 'A' post" or "Group 'B' post" or "Group 'C' post" or "Group 'D' post"
means a post which is classified as such by the President in exercise of the powers
conferred by the proviso to article 309 of the Constitution or by or under any Act of
Parliament and includes an equivalent post in any establishment;
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(f) "promotion by non-selection" means promotion made on the basis of seniority-
cum-fitness;
(g) "promotion by selection" means promotion made on the basis of merit-cum-
seniority;
(h) "recruitment year" means the calendar year for which the recruitment is
made; and
(i) "Scheduled Castes" and "Scheduled Tribes" shall have the meanings
respectively assigned to them in clauses (24) and (25) of article 366 of the Constitution.
3. (1) The Government shall reserve such percentage of posts for members of the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes for appointment in civil services by direct
recruitment and promotion, in such manner, as may be prescribed.
(2) The vacancy reserved for members of the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled
Tribes under sub-section (1) shall be filled in such manner, as may be prescribed.
4. In the case of promotion by selection from one Group 'A' post to another Group 'A'
post which carries the scale of pay, the maximum of which is equal to or less than the
maximum of the scale of pay of a Director in the Central Secretariat Service or equivalent
posts in other establishments, the officers belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes shall be considered for appointment.
5. (1) Appointment to an unreserved vacancy shall be open to all eligible persons
including a person belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes.
(2) Where such unreserved vacancy is filled by direct recruitment or promotion by a
person belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes on the basis of merit,
then, such person shall be appointed against the unreserved vacancy:
Provided that no such appointment shall be made for promotion by non-selection.
Reservation in
appointment
by direct
recruitment and
promotion.
1 of 1956.
Inclusion of
Scheduled
Castes and
Scheduled
Tribes officers
in select list in
case of
promotion
within Group
'A'.
Unreserved
vacancies to
be  open to
members of
Scheduled
Castes and
Scheduled
Tribes.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
6. (1) The maximum age limit fixed for direct recruitment to a service or post shall be
increased by five years for members of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.
(2) The maximum age limit fixed for promotion to a post, if any, shall be increased by
five years for members of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.
7. The examination fee or application fee, determined for recruitment to a service or
post through competitive examination or otherwise, may be reduced to such extent for
members of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, as may be prescribed.
8. (1) Any standard of suitability, excluding the essential and desirable qualifications,
required for appointment by direct recruitment to a post may be relaxed for members of the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, if sufficient number of such candidates
possessing requisite standards are not available to fill the vacancies reserved for them:
Provided that no such appointment shall be made where the candidate is found unfit to
hold the post.
(2) The experience required for appointment by direct recruitment to a post may be
relaxed for members of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, if at any stage of
selection, sufficient number of such candidates possessing the requisite experience are not
available to fill the vacancies reserved for them.
9. (1) Where a qualifying examination is held to determine fitness of eligible persons
for promotion by non-selection and sufficient number of members of the Scheduled Castes
and the Scheduled Tribes fulfilling the qualifying standards are not available to fill the
vacancies reserved for them, such qualifying standards may be relaxed, consistent with the
minimum standards of fitness required for appointment to the post, in the case of members of
the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.
(2) Where qualifying examination is held to determine merit of eligible persons for
promotion by selection and sufficient number of members of the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes fulfilling the qualifying standards are not available to fill the vacancies
reserved for them, such qualifying standards may be relaxed, consistent with the minimum
standards of merit required for appointment to the posts, in the case of members of the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.
10.  The vacancies reserved for members of the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled
Tribes shall respectively be filled by members of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes only.
11. Where posts in an establishment are to be abolished and as a result thereof, the
services of certain persons are required to be either surrendered or terminated, no such
surrender or termination shall be made in respect of members of the Scheduled Castes and
the Scheduled Tribes, if it results in lowering their representation in relation to the percentage
of reservation fixed for them.
12. (1) Every establishment shall designate an officer of such rank, as may be prescribed,
to function as a liaison officer for the purpose of ensuring that the provisions of this Act or
the rules made thereunder or any direction or instruction issued by the Government regarding
reservation are not contravened.
(2) The liaison officer  shall, from time to time, inspect and verify the documents,
records and reports with respect to appointments of members of the Scheduled Castes and
the Scheduled Tribes made by the appointing authority by direct recruitment or promotion.
Relaxation of
age.
Fee
concession.
Relaxation in
qualifications
and
experience.
Reserved
vacancies to
be filled by
members of
Scheduled
Castes and
Scheduled
Tribes.
Reservation in
case of
promotion.
Abolition of
posts not to
affect the
representation
of members of
Scheduled
Castes and
Scheduled
Tribes.
Liaison
officer.
.5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
(3) Where the liaison officer is satisfied that any establishment has contravened the
provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder or any direction or instruction issued, he
shall submit a report of such contravention to the head of the establishment.
(4) On receipt of the report of contravention under sub-section ( 3), the head of
establishment shall take disciplinary action under section 17 against the person responsible
for such contravention.
13. (1) Every appointing authority, or an officer authorised by him in this behalf, shall
maintain such documents and records, and furnish every year a report on the appointments
of members of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes made by direct recruitment
and promotion, in such manner and at such time, as may be prescribed.
(2) The appointing authority or any other officer authorised by him shall make available
such documents and records for inspection, furnish such information, and render such
assistance, to the liaison officer, as may be necessary, to enable him to carry out his functions
under this Act.
14. The Government shall, subject to the availability of finance and other resources,
develop and organise training programmes to advance the competence of members of the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes for appointment to services and posts.
15. Whoever knowingly makes a false claim that he is a member of the Scheduled Caste
or the Scheduled Tribe, as the case may be, shall be liable to punishment for a term which may
extend to three years or with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees or with both.
16. Whoever knowingly issues a false Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe certificate
shall be liable for punishment for a term which may extend to three years or with fine which
may extend to fifty thousand rupees or with both.
17. Where any person responsible for implementing the provisions of this Act or the
rules made thereunder, intentionally contravenes any of the provisions thereof, he shall be
liable for disciplinary action under the service rules applicable to such person.
18. The Government may, for giving effect to the provisions of this Act or the rules
made thereunder, issue such directions to establishments, as it deems fit.
19. All memoranda issued or purported to have been issued by the Government in
relation to reservation of posts in civil services for members of the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes, immediately before the commencement of this Act, shall, in so far as they
relate to the matters for which provisions have been made in this Act and are not inconsistent
therewith, be deemed to have been issued under this Act as if this Act had been in force on
the date on which such memoranda were issued.
20. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the percentage of posts for reservation and the manner of reservation under
sub-section (1) of section 3;
(b) the manner of filling vacancies under sub-section (2) of section 3;
(c) the extent of reduction in examination fee and application fee under
section 7;
Maintenance
of documents
and records
and furnishing
of report by
appointing
authority.
Training
programme
for Scheduled
Castes and
Scheduled
Tribes.
Penalty for
making false
claim.
Penalty for
issuing false
caste
certificate.
Disciplinary
action for
contravention
of provisions
of Act.
Power to issue
directions.
Existing
office
memoranda
to continue.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

5
(d) the rank of the officer to be designated as the liaison officer under
sub-section (1) of section 12;
(e) the documents and records to be maintained and the time and manner of
furnishing report under sub-section (1) of section 13.
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this section shall be laid, as soon
as may be, after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
At present, administrative instructions issued by the Central Government from time to
time, provide for reservation in appointments or posts in favour of the persons belonging to
the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in Civil  Services under the control of the
Central Government. These instructions have been issued in pursuance of clauses (4) and
(4A) of article 16 and the proviso to article 335 of the Constitution which empower the State
to make provisions for reservation in appointments or posts in favour of the persons belonging
to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.
2. Being sensitive to the need for providing adequate representation for the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in  Civil  Services under the control of Central Government
and to give statutory backing to the instructions in the matter, it is proposed  to bring forward
a suitable legislation which will elevate the provisions of the reservation to a statutory right
and also instil greater  confidence amongst members of the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes. It will go a long way in meeting the constitutional goal of securing justice,
liberty and equality for all citizens of the country and in promoting fraternity amongst them
all.
3. In the light of M. Nagraj case decided by the Supreme Court in the year of 2006 the
reservation in promotion has not been granted by many States of  Union of  India and
litigation in this regard has also reached in the complex situation. So, it is also urgent need to
make a law in this connection and clause 16(4A) of the Constitution of India is needed further
clarification and that clarification will meet with an enactment.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW DELHI; ARJUN MEGHWAL
July 18, 2011
6

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Sub-clause (1) of clause 3 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to prescribe the
extent and manner of reservation by direct  recruitment and promotion in civil services for the
members of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. Sub-clause (2) thereof empowers
the Central Government to prescribe the manner of filling such vacancy.
2. Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to prescribe the extent of fee
concession for the members of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.
3. Sub-clause (1) of clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to prescribe
the rank of the officer who may be designated as the liaison officer.
4. Sub-clause (1) of clause 13 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to prescribe
the manner of maintaining documents and records, and the manner and time of furnishing
report on appointments of the members of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes
made by direct recruitment and promotion, by the appointing authority.
5. The matters in respect of which rules may be made or notification may be issued are
essentially matters of detail or procedure. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of
a normal character.
7

LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for reservation in appointments or posts in civil services for members of the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in establishments and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
—————
(Shri Arjun Meghwal, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—588LS(S3)—29-07-2011.