Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE PRICE CONTROL BILL, 2010
By
SHRI ARJUN MEGHWAL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Commission for determining the prices of all
consumer and industrial goods and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Y ear of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Price Control Act, 2010.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) "commission" means the Price Commission constituted under section 3; and
(ii) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Definitions.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 33 of  2010
5

2
3. The Central Government shall constitute a Commission to be known as the Price
Commission for determining the prices of all consumer and industrial goods, including
life saving drugs and medicines, whether manufactured indigenously or imported.
4.  (1) The Commission shall consist of—
(i) two members representing manufacturers of goods;
(ii) two members representing consumers;
(iii) two members representing labourers;
(iv) two members representing wholesalers and retailers of all consumer and
industrial goods;
(v) two members representing farmers;
(vi) one member  each representing State Governments, who shall be nominated
by the respective State Governments; and
(vii) two members representing the Central Government.
(2) The members of the Commission, except the members representing the State
Governments, shall be nominated by the Central Government in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(3) The Central Government shall appoint a member from amongst the members of
the Commission to act as its Chairperson.
(4) The Chairperson and every member of the Commission shall hold office for a term
of two years from the date on which he assumes office.
(5) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service, of the Chairperson and members of the Commission, shall be such as may be
prescribed.
(6) The Central Government shall make available to the Commission such number of
Officers and employees as may be necessary for the efficient performance of its functions.
(7) The salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service
of, the officers and employees of the Commission shall be such as may be prescribed.
5. It shall be the duty of the Commission to determine, from time to time, the prices of
all consumer and industrial goods after taking into account such factors as it may deem
necessary.
6. If any person sells any consumer or industrial goods at a price higher than the price
determined by the Commission, he shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to five years or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees or with both.
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Constitution
of the Price
Commission.
Composition
of the
Commission.
Duty of the
Commission.
Punishment
for selling
goods at a
price more
than the price
determined by
the
Commission.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The prices of all essential consumer goods and medicines are continuously increasing.
The producers of consumer and industrial goods fix the prices of such goods with huge
profit motives, while wholesalers and retailers arbitrarily charge further increased prices from
the consumers. Thus, at present, there is no effective mechanism to control the prices of
essential consumer goods. The Central Government has taken some limited measures to
contain the prices of essential goods but they have not been successful. The common
people are suffering a lot due to steep hike in prices of all consumer goods and life saving
drugs. It is becoming very difficult for them to survive with their meager income due to price
rise of all consumer goods. Moreover, the poor people are totally dependant on dispensaries
and hospitals run by the Government for necessary treatment and medicines. There is no
provision to make available life saving drugs to these people at cheaper rates.
Therefore, it is proposed to constitute a Commission which shall determine the prices
of all consumer and industrial goods.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; ARJUN MEGHWAL
February 11, 2010.
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a Price Commission for determining
the prices of all consumer and industrial goods. Clause 4 provides for the payment of salaries
and allowances to the Chairperson and Members and officers and employees of the
Commission. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees five crore
will be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore is also likely to be involved.
4

5
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 7 empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the purposes
of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative power
is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Commission for determining the prices of all
consumer and industrial goods and for matters connected therewith.
—————
(Shri Arjun Meghwal,  M.P.)
GMGIPMRND— 1002LS(S5)—12-03-2010.