Short title, 
extent and 
commencement.
AS  introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 33 of  2023
THE URBAN AREAS (DEVELOPMENT AND REGULATION) 
BILL, 2023
By
Shri Manoj Kotak, M.P.
a 
BILL
to establish an Urban Areas (Development and Regulation) Committee to 
ensure regulation and development of urban areas in the country and  
for all matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
 Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:— 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Urban Areas (Development and Regulation)
Act, 2023. 

2
  ( 2) It extends to the whole of India.
  ( 3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the State 
Government of that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “Committee” means the Urban Areas (Development and Regulation)  
Committee established under section 3;
(c) “Municipality” means an institution of Self-Government constituted 
under article 243Q of the Constitution;
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(e) “urban areas” means the territorial areas of a Municipality as is notified 
by the Government under article 243Q of the Constitution.
 3. ( 1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, establish a Committee to be known as the Urban Areas (Development 
and Regulation) Committee for carrying out the purpose of this Act. 
  ( 2) The Committee shall consist of— 
(a) the Prime Minister of India who shall be the ex-officio Chairperson 
of the Committee; 
(b) the Union Minister of Housing and Urban Affairs — ex-officio 
member;
(c) one member of Parliament each from the House of the People and 
the Council of States to be nominated by presiding officers of the Houses 
concerned— ex-officio Member;
(d) a representative of NITI Aayog to be appointed by the Central 
Government in such manner as may be prescribed— ex-officio Member;
(e) a representative from Indian Administrative Services to be appointed 
by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed who shall 
be the Member-Secretary to the Committee; and
(f) one senior architect engineer to be appointed by the Central 
Government in such manner as may be prescribed— Member.
  ( 3) The salary, allowances and terms of conditions of services of officers 
and staff of the Authority shall be such, as may be prescribed.
  ( 4) The Committee shall meet at least twice in a month:
Provided that the Committee shall meet at such time as the Chairperson 
deems fit.
  ( 5) The Union Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs shall provide 
secretarial assistance to the Committee.
Definitions.
Establishment 
of Urban 
Areas 
(Development 
and 
Regulation) 
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

3
 4. The Committee shall recommend the State Governments to,—
(a) ensure availability of means for the development and regulation of 
urban areas under this jurisdiction;
(b) impart modern training in techniques of urban development to the 
institutions and persons involved in the regulation and development of urban 
areas;
(c) the method for financing the development of urban areas and to ensure 
that seventy five per cent. of the expenditure shall be borne by the Central 
Government and rest of the twenty-five per cent. by the State Government;
(d) put an obligation of the District Magistrate concerned to ensure 
appropriate development and regulation of urban areas under his jurisdiction;
(e) establish durable, strong and inclusive infrastructure required for 
development and regulation of urban areas in the country;
(f) establish natural land cover including parks and playgrounds in the 
urban areas in the country;
(g) ensure availability of safe housing, clean water, water management, 
healthcare facilities and appropriate educational facilities in the urban areas of 
the country;
(h) ensure complete ban on encroachment upon lakes, wet lands and rivers;
(i) establish balance between supply and demand of public transport 
facilities in the urban areas;
(j) ensure availability of electric buses, establish bus corridor and bus rapid 
transit system for promoting green mobility in the urban areas;
(k) promote e-participation of urban local bodies in development and 
regulation of urban area under their jurisdiction;
(l) establish satellite cities along with metropolitan cities to make a balance 
between population and resources; and
(m) undertake such other measures as are required for regulation and 
development for urban areas.
 5. ( 1) The Committee shall prepare once every year, as may be prescribed, 
an annual report giving the summary of its activities, including schemes it has 
undertaken and recommended to the Government during the previous year and it 
shall contain statements of annual accounts of the Authority. 
  ( 2) A copy of the report shall be forwarded to the Central Government, and 
the Central Government shall lay the report before each House of Parliament as 
soon as it is received.
 6. The Central Government, shall from time to time provide, after due 
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, requisite funds for 
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Functions 
of the 
Committee.
Annual report.
Central 
Government 
to provide 
funds.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

 7. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government, in consultation with the State Governments, may make such 
order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as 
appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the removal of any difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after expiry of three years 
from the date of commencement of this Act.
 8. ( 1) The Central Government may, in consultation with the State 
Governments, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of this Act. 
  ( 2) Every rule made under this section, shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before the Parliament while it is in session for a total period of fourteen 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions and  
if before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately 
following, the Parliament makes any modification in the rule or decides that the 
rules should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified 
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however that any such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.
Power to 
remove 
difficulty.
Power to make 
rules.
5
10
15
4

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India’s biggest tragedy after independence is the migration of about fifty crore 
people from their ancestral homes, villages. Studying the changes in this socio-
economic structure reveals that almost one-third of the country’s population (about 
31.16 per cent.) is now living in cities. Census data of 2011 shows that the number 
of people leaving the villages and migrating to the cities is increasing continuously 
and now thirty-seven crore and seventy  lakh people live in the cities. Comparing the 
figures of 2001 and 2011 census, it is found that during this period the population 
of cities increased by nine crore and ten lakh, whereas the population of villages 
increased by only nine crore and five lakh.
The population of villages in the country is still about 68.84 crores, that is, 
two-thirds of the total population of the country, but the contribution of agriculture 
in the country’s GDP has been continuously decreasing to only fifteen per cent. 
There is a decline in the standard of living in villages, lack of education, health, 
basic facilities, lack of employment, so people from there are coming to the cities 
in search of a better life. As a result, all other big cities including the metropolitan 
cities of the country have turned into slums. Out of a total of 7.89 crore families 
living in cities across the country, 1.37 crore families live in slums.
Urbanization should be seen as an opportunity and urban centres as engines of 
growth. Urban and rural development in the country should complement each other. 
If we analyse from the point of view of development in the field of urbanization 
in different States of India, it would be found that the amount and speed of 
urbanization in different States are not the same. For urbanization and development 
to go on the same track, there should be people-centric urban development, which 
can weave the fabric of such cities, which shall be built according to the required 
global standards. A city that is two steps ahead of people’s aspirations...a  city built 
on global best practices...a city that integrates technology, transportation, energy 
efficiency, proximity to work, etc. A city in which all urban development plans are 
taken forward with people’s participation.
As per a United Nations Report, globally, a total of 31 such cities are home to 
an estimated 5 crore people. This is 6.8 per cent. of the world’s total population.  
By the year 2030, the number of mega cities shall increase to 41 and their population 
shall be 7.3 crore, which would be 8.7 per cent. of the population of the entire world. 
The administrative boundaries of the cities have not been relied upon in this report. 
instead of this, priority has been given to use the concept of growing urban area. 
The report reveals that only people from urban areas live in these mega cities. About 
21 per cent. of the world’s people live in these, whose population is between 50 
thousand and one crore. By the year 2030, 60 per cent. of the world’s population 
shall live in small and big cities, which is currently 54 per cent. Most developing 
cities in Asia and Africa are seeing population growth, and by 2030, 33 of the  
41 mega cities shall be in third world countries.
According to this report by the United Nations Department of Economics and 
Social Affairs, by the year 2030, India shall have seven mega cities, each with 
a population of 96 lakh. Among these seven, Delhi shall be second in terms of 
population.
5

The World Cities Report, 2016 states that at present, the country has five  
(Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata, Bangalore and Chennai) mega cities, each with a 
population of more than one crore. Hyderabad and Ahmedabad shall also join them 
by the year 2030.
The need is to create development centres across the country instead of adopting 
foreign models for urbanization. Inequality and imbalance shall increase further 
by adopting foreign models. Uneven and imbalanced urbanization is not correct 
considering the diversity of India. We cannot replicate in India what China has 
done, development in China has been more in the coastal areas, while other areas 
are still lagging behind.
In view of the above, the present Bill is very important so that  the people of the 
urban areas of India may be able to live in conditions suitable for humans. 
Hence this Bill.
   New Delhi;                                                                                 MANOJ KOTAK 
January 20, 2023.
6

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of an Urban Areas (Development 
and Regulation) Committee. It also provides for appointment of senior architect 
engineer to the Committee. Clause 6 provides for the Central Government to 
provide funds. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of 
about rupees two hundred crore per annum will be involved from the Consolidated 
Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be 
involved.
7

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
 Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to frame rules for 
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail 
only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 
8

LOK SABHA
a 
BILL
to establish an Urban Areas (Development and Regulation) Committee to  
ensure regulation and development of urban areas in the country and  
for all matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
(Shri Manoj Kotak, M.P .)