1
Short title
and
commence-
ment.
Bill No.  33  of 2015
Amendment
of Order
XXI.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRIMATI MEENAKASHI  LEKHI, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend  the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the First Schedule to the Code of  Civil Procedure, 1908, in Order XXI,—
(i) in rule 1, in sub-rule (3), clause (d) shall be omitted;
(ii) in rule 6, clause (c) shall be omitted;
(iii) in rule 7, the words “order for execution, or of ” shall be omitted;
(iv) rule 10 shall be omitted;
5 of 1908. 5

2
(v) after rule 10, the following rule shall be inserted, namely:—
“10A. (1) Every endeavor shall be made to ensure that the execution order
is drawn up as expeditiously as possible and, in any case, within the time limit as
prescribed in the judgement:
Provided that passing of judgement and decree shall be sufficient for the
preparation of execution order and a separate application by parties shall not be
necessary except for the provisions of rules 4, 15, 16 and 18.
(2) The execution order shall bear the date of pronouncement of the
judgement.
(3) The execution order shall be signed by the judge only after he is
satisfied that the order has been drawn up in accordance with the judgement.”.
(vi) in rule 11, sub-rules (2) and (3) shall be omitted;
(vii) rule 17 shall be omitted;
(viii) in rule 22, in sub-rule (1), for the words ‘‘application for execution” and the
word “application”, wherever they occur, the words, “order for execution” and the
word “order”, respectively, shall be substituted;
(ix) in rule 26, in sub-rule (1), the words ,“or if application for execution had been
made thereto” shall be omitted;
(x) in rule 37, in sub-rule ( 1), the words “an application is for the” and “in
pursuance of the application” shall be omitted;
(xi) in rule 41, in sub-rule (3), for the words “not exceeding three months”, the
words “which shall not be less than one year but which may extend upto three years”
shall be substituted;
(xii) in rule 46C, in the proviso, for the words “execution case”, the words
“execution of the case” shall be substituted;
(xiii) in rule 57, in sub-rule (1), the words “the application for” shall be omitted;
and
(xiv) in rule 92, in sub-rule (5), the word “proceeding” shall be omitted.
Preparation
of execution
order.
5
10
15
20
25

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In light of the vast number of cases that are pending with the Indian courts, there is an
urgent need to dispense with procedures that unnecessarily prolong litigation. The objective
is to streamline legal processes in the interest of speedy and fair justice to the parties
involved. This Bill seeks to remove cumbersome steps involved in the execution of a judgement
of the court by the judgement-debtor without delay.
The Code of Civil Procedure as it stands now allows a decree-holder to make a separate
application for executing a judgement after a judgement and decree has already been passed.
The question that naturally arises is why is there a need for a decree-holder to file an
execution suit over and above a clear judgement and decree.
The force of law should be adequately placed within such judgement and decree, and
there should be no room for a judgement-debtor to parry or complacently disobey the orders
of the courts. As such, defaulting parties should be penalised without allowing another
opportunity for prolonging legal affairs in the form of execution proceedings.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to remove the need for a separate application for execution
and places execution orders in continuation of the judgement and decree process.
However, only in certain cases of complex nature like Transfer to Court of Small Causes
(Rule 4), Application for execution by joint decree holders (Rule 15) and Execution in case of
cross decrees (Rule 18), the provision for a separate application has been retained in the
Code.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MEENAKASHI LEKHI
November 26, 2014.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE, 1908
ORDER XXI
EXECUTION OF DECREES AND ORDERS
Payment under decree
*******
1. (1) All money, payable under a decree shall be paid as follows, namely:—
* * * *
(2)* * * *
(3) Where money is paid by postal money order or through a bank under clause
(a) or clause (b) of sub-rule (1), the money order or payment through bank, as the case
may be, shall accurately state the following particulars, namely:—
* * * *
(d) the number of the execution case of the Court, where such case is
pending; and
* * * * *
6. The Court sending a decree for execution shall send—
(a)* * * *
(b)* * * *
(c) a copy of any order for the execution of the decree, or, if no such order has
been made, a certificate to that effect.
* * * * *
7. The Court to which a decree is so sent shall cause such copies and certificates to be
filed, without any further proof of the decree or order for execution, or of the copies thereof,
unless the Court, for any special reasons to be recorded under the hand of the Judge,
requires such proof.
* * * * *
10. Where the holder of a decree desires to execute it, he shall apply to the Court which
passed the decree or to the officer (if any) appointed in this behalf, or if the decree has been
sent under the provisions hereinbefore contained to another Court then to such Court or to
the proper officer thereof.
17. (1) On receiving an application for the execution of a decree as provided by rule 11,
sub-rule (2), the Court shall ascertain whether such of the requirements of rules 11 to 14 as
may be applicable to the case have been complied with; and if, they have not been complied
with, the Court shall allow the defect to be remedied then and there or within a time to be fixed
by it.
(1A) If the defect is not so remedied, the Court shall reject the application:
Provided that where, in the Court, there is some inaccuracy as to the amount referred
to in clauses (g) and (h) of sub-rule (2) of rule 11, the Court, instead of rejecting the application,
decide provisionally (without prejudice to the right of the parties to have the amount finally
decided in the course of the proceedings) the amount and make an order for the execution of
the decree for the amount so provisionally decided.
Modes of
paying money
under decree.
Procedure
where Court
desires that its
own decree
shall be
executed by
another
Court.
Court
receiving
copies of
decree, etc. to
file same
without
proof.
Application
for execution.
Procedure on
receiving
application
for execution
of decree.
4

5
(2) Where an application is amended under the provisions of sub-rule (1), it shall be
deemed to have been an application in accordance with law and presented on the date when
it was first presented.
(3) Every amendment made under this rule shall be signed or initialled by the Judge.
(4) When the application is admitted, the Court shall enter in the proper register a note
of the application and the date on which it was made, and shall, subject to the provisions
hereinafter contained, order execution of the decree according to the nature of the application:
Provided that, in the case of a decree for the payment of money, the value of the
property attached shall, as nearly as may be, correspond with the amount due under
the decree.
* * * * *
22. (1) Where an application for execution is made,—
(a) more than two years after the date of the decree, or
(b) against the legal representative of a party to the decree or where an application
is made for execution of a decree filed under the provisions of section 44A, or
(c) against the assignee or receiver in insolvency, where the party to the decree
has been adjudged to be an insolvent, the Court executing the decree shall issue a
notice to the person against whom execution is applied for requiring him to show
cause, on a date to be fixed, why the decree should not be executed against him:
Provided that no such notice shall be necessary in consequence of more than
two years having elapsed between the date of the decree and the application for
execution if the application is made within two years from the date of the last order
against the party against whom execution is applied for, made on any previous
application for execution, or in consequence of the application being made against the
legal representative of the judgement-debtor if upon a previous application for execution
against the same person the Court has ordered execution to issue against him.
* * * * *
26. (1) The Court to which a decree has been sent for execution shall, upon sufficient
cause being shown, stay the execution of such decree for a reasonable time, to enable the
judgement-debtor to apply to the Court by which the decree was passed, or to any Court
having appellate jurisdiction in respect of the decree or the execution thereof, for an order to
stay execution, or for any other order relating to the decree or execution which might have
been made by such Court of first instance or Appellate Court if execution had been issued
thereby, or if application for execution had been made thereto.
* * * * *
37. (1) Notwithstanding anything in these rules, where an application is for the execution
of a decree for the payment of money by the arrest and detention in the civil prison of a
judgement-debtor who is liable to be arrested in pursuance of the application, the Court
shall, instead of issuing a warrant for his arrest, issue a notice calling upon him to appear
before the Court on a day to be specified in the notice and show cause why he should not be
committed to the civil prison:
* * * * *
41. (1) Where a decree is for the payment of money the decree-holder may apply to the
Court for an order that—
(a)* * * *
(b)* * * *
Notice to
show cause
against
execution in
certain cases.
When Court
may stay
execution.
Discretionary
power to
permit
judgement
debtor to show
cause against
detention in
prison.
Examination
of judgement-
debtor as to
his property.

6
(c)* * * *
(2)* * * *
(3) In case of disobedience of any order made under sub-rule (2), the Court making the
order, or any Court to which the proceeding is transferred, may direct that the person
disobeying the order be detained in the civil prison for a term not exceeding three months
unless before the expiry of such term the Court directs his release.
* * * * *
46C. Where the garnishee disputes liability, the Court may order that any issue or
question necessary for the determination of liability shall be tried as if it were an issue in a
suit, and upon the determination of such issue shall make such order or orders as it deems fit:
Provided that if the debt in respect of which the application under rule 46A is made is
in respect of a sum of money beyond the precuniary jurisdiction of the Court, the Court shall
send the execution case to the Court of the District Judge to which the said Court is
subordinate, and thereupon the Court of the District Judge or any other competent Court to
which it may be transferred by the District Judge shall deal with it in the same manner as if the
case had been originally instituted in that Court.
* * * * *
57. (1) Where any property has been attached in execution of a decree and the Court,
for any reason, passes an order dismissing the application for the execution of the decree,
the Court shall direct whether the attachment shall continue or cease and shall also indicate
the period upto which such attachment shall continue or the date on which such attachment
shall cease.
* * * * *
92. ( 1)* * * * *
(2)* * * * *
(3)* * * * *
(4)* * * * *
(5) If the suit referred to in sub-rule (4) is decreed, the Court shall direct the decree-
holder to refund the money to the auction-purchaser, and where such an order is passed the
execution proceeding in which the sale had been held shall, unless the Court directs, be
revived at the stage at which the sale was ordered.
Trial of
disputed
questions.
Determination
of attachment.
Sale when to
become
absolute or be
set aside.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
————
(Shrimati Meenakashi Lekhi, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4335LS(S3)—23-02-2015.