THE COMPULSORY REGISTRATION OF MARRIAGES BILL, 2007
By
SHRI L. RAJAGOPAL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the compulsory registration of all marriages solemnized in the country
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Registration of Marriages  Act, 2007.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State, and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “designated authority” means an authority or an officer appointed for the
purpose of registration of marriages under section 4; and
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
Bill No.  33 of  2007
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
10

2
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
or in any custom or usage to the contrary, every marriage solemnized after the commence-
ment of this Act, shall be compulsorily registered.
(2) It shall be the duty of the bridegroom to get his marriage registered with the
designated authority within sixty days of the date of solemnization of the marriage in such
manner as may be prescribed.
4. (1) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
appoint an officer or an authority in each district for registration of marriages.
(2) The designated authority shall maintain a register of marriage in such form and
manner as may be prescribed and shall also keep the record in electronic form.
(3) The appropriate Government shall prescribe the documents relating to solemniza-
tion of marriage to be furnished at the time of registration of marriage for record.
(4) The designated officer or authority shall, if satisfied with the documents and
details furnished by either party to the marriage for registration of marriage, issue a
marriage certificate to such person.
5.  Any marriage which is not registered within sixty days of its solemnization shall not
be treated as a valid marriage and shall be null and void.
6. Any person who violates the provisions of this Act shall not be entitled to any
benefit under any welfare scheme by the appropriate Government or its agencies.
7. Any person who fails to apply for registration of marriage within the prescribed
period or furnishes false information or documents for registration of his marriage shall be
liable to pay a fine which may extend to rupees twenty-five thousand.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made in this behalf, provide
such sums of money as it may think necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
9. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty.
10. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding any provision incon-
sistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force, but save as aforesaid,
the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other law for
the time being applicable to marriages.
11. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Compulsory
registration
of Marriages.
Appointment
of designated
authority.
Marriage
without
registration to
be null and
void.
Disincentives.
Penalty.
Central
Government
to provide
money.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
In our country, marriage is considered as a sacred union. Our culture assigns a great
value to the solemnization of marriage. But, of late, there are numerous instances of abuse of
the institution of marriage. On many occasions unscrupulous husbands altogether deny
marriage, leaving their wives in lurch, be it for seeking maintenance, custody of children or
inheritance of property. The cases of child marriage are reported from various parts of the
country. Every year, lakhs of marriages are solemnized throughout the country but people do
not opt for registration of marriages for one reason or another. Recently, the Supreme Court
has observed that all marriages should be registered in order to prevent child marriages,
check bigamy and polygamy, help women in exercising their rights of maintenance from
husband and custody of children and enable widows to claim inheritance. At present, there
is no law providing for compulsory registration of marriages in the country. In the States of
Maharashtra, Gujarat, Karnataka and Himachal Pradesh, Government have enacted laws for
compulsory registration of marriages. The proposal for a uniform law for the country has
been pending for the last many years. Therefore, it is high time that a law on compulsory
registration of marriage is enacted.
This Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; L. RAJAGOPAL
February 9, 2007.
3
SERVER 3 \ BILL 2004 \ LS \ 379LS.PM65

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides that the apropriate Government shall appoint designated
authority or an officer for registration of marriages. The expenditure in relation to Union
territories in this regard shall be borne by the Central Government. Clause 8 of the Bill
provides that the Central Government shall provide funds required for carrying out the
purposes of the Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consoli-
dated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of rupees twenty
crore is likely to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one crore is also likely to be incurred.
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 11of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill. The rules will relate to the matters of detail only. The delegation
of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
5

LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for the compulsory registration of all marriages solemnized in the country and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
—————
(Shri L. Rajagopal, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—379LS(S3)—07.03.2007.