12 06

"As IntropuceD ए Lox SABHA

Bill No. 33 of 2006

THE SPECIAL COURTS FOR WOMEN BILL, 2006
By

Surimati KrisHNna TiratH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for constitution of special courts for women and for
matters connected therewith.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—

1. (7) This Act may be called the Special Courts for Women Act, 2006. Short title,
be extent and

has

5 (3) It shall come into force at once.

(2) It extends to the whole of India. = commencement.


Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) ‘appropriate Government’ means the State Government in case of a State
and the Central Government in other cases;

(b) ‘employer’ means,—
(i) in relation to an establishment which is under the control of the
appropriate Government, a person or an authority appointed by the appropriate

Government, for the supervision and control of employees or where no person
is so appointed, the head of the department;

(ii) in relation to an establishment under any local authority, the person
appointed by such authority for the supervision and control of employees or

where no person is so appointed, the Chief Executive Officer of the local
authority;

(iii) in any other case, the person who, or the authority which, has the
control on the affairs of the establishment or is entrusted to any other person,
whether called a manager, managing director, managing agent, supervisor or by
any other name, who has been entrusted with the affairs of the establishment,
such person;

(c) ‘offence’ means any offence committed against a woman including rape,
criminal assault, mental injury and sexual harassment at work place;

(d) ‘prescribed’ means prescribed by rules made under the Act;
(e) ‘sexual harassment’ means and includes,—
(i) harassing any employee by virtue of her being a female;

(ii) indecent representation of women with a view to annoy or irritate a
female employee and which causes mental agony to the employee;

(iii) detaining a female employee before or after normal working hours in
the absence of other employees and when there is no work to be performed by
that female employee, with a view to outrage her modesty or molest her;

(iv) paying less wages or allocating more work to a female employee, than
her male counterparts;

(y) refusing to grant leave of absence to a female employee or permission
to her during her pregnancy/termination of pregnancy or other periods when she
would not be physically or biologically fit to perform her work to her fullest
capacity; ;

(vi) passing of obscene or lewd comments against a female employee;

(vii) making a female employee attend office on holidays or come to such
place where her presence is not required in connection with her employment;

(viii) compelling a female employee to attend a party/dance or any musical
programme or to dine with her employer or any other person, if the female
employee is not willing to do so;

(i) refusing to allow rest to female employees as provided under the
provisions of any other law for the time being in force;

(x) compelling a female employee to dress in a way which would present
her in an obscene manner;

(xi) making a female employee perform such a job or duty which would
denigrate her personality; .


10

35

3

(xii) fondling or touching a female employee in the guise of teaching her
or helping in her job;

(xiii) gestures or actions either by word or by written material intending to
insult or cause mental injury to a female employee;

(xiv) showing pornography or other obscene literature to a female
employee;

(xv) sexual advances with a view to assault or molest or outrage the modesty
of a female employee;

(xvi) making female employee perform such duties which she is not able
to perform with her physical condition;

(xvii) offering unwanted suggestions or advise about physical appearances
or on other matters to a female employee with a view to hurt her;

(zviii) doing of any other act or causing any act by using position as an
employer with a view to exploiting a female employee.

3. (1) The appropriate Government shall set up sufficient number of special

courts to deal exclusively with matters arising out of atrocities or offences
committed against women.

(2) Every special court shall consist of a Chief Judge and such number of
other Judges as the appropriate Government may deem fit.

4. (1) A person shall.not be qualified for appointment as the Chief Judge, unless he:-—
(a) is, or has been, a district Judge; or
(8) has, for atleast two years, held the office of the Judge of the special court;
and has, for atleast five years, been associated with women's cause.
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a judge, unless he—
(a) is, or has been, a judicial magistrate; or
(b) has, for a period of not less than five years, been practising law, and has, for
atleast five years, been associated with women's cause.
(3) Every Chief Judge of a special court in a Union territory shall be appointed by the
President.
(4) Every Chief Judge of a special court in a State shall be appointed by the Governor
of the State concerned.

(5) Every other Judge of a special court shall be appointed by the appropriate
Government.

(6) Atleast half of the total number of posts of Judges and other Judges of a special
court shall be reserved for women.

5. (1) In the event of occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the Chief Judge of a
special court by reason of his death, resignation or otherwise, the senior most judge of that
court shall act as the Chief Judge until a new Chief Judge, appointed in accordance with the
provisions of this Act to fill such vacancy, enters upon his office.

(2) When the Chief Judge is unable to discharge his functions owing to his absence
from duty due to any reason, the senior most judge of that special court shall discharge the
functions of the Chief Judge until the Chief Judge resumes his duties.

Establishment
of special
courts for
women.

Qualification
for
appointment as
Chief Judge
and other
Judges of
special court.

Senior most
Judge to act as
2 Chief Judge
or to discharge
his functions in
certain
circumstances.


Term of office.

Resignation.

Salary,
allowances and
other
conditions of
service of the
Chief Judge
and other
Judges.

Financial and
other powers of
the Chief
Judge.

Staff of the
special court.

Jurisdiction,
power and
authority of
special courts.

Powers of
special courts.

Exclusion of
jurisdiction of
cases of special
court except
the High Court
concerned and
Supreme
Court.

Transfer of
pending cases.

4

6. Every Chief Judge and other Judges shall hold office for a period of five years from
the date on which he enters upon his office or until he attains, —

(a) in the case of the Chief Judge, the age of sixty five years, and
(0) in the case of any other Judge, the age of sixty years whichever is earlier.

7. Every Chief Judge or a Judge may, by notice in writing under his hand addressed to
the President in case he is a Chief Judge or a Judge of a special court in a Union territory or
to the Governor, in case he is a Chief Judge or a Judge of a special court in a State, resign
from his office:

Provided that the Chief Judge or any other Judge shall, unless he is permitted by the
President or the Governor, as the case may be, to relinquish his office sooner, continue to
hold office until the expiry of three months from the date of receipt of such notice or until a
person duly appointed as his successor enters upon his office or until the expiry of his term
of office, whichever is the earliest.

8. The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of
service including pension, gratuity and other retirement benefits of the Chief Judge or
a Judge of a special court shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government:

Provided that neither the salary and allowances nor the other terms and conditions of
service of the Chief Judge or a Judge of a special court shall be varied to his disadvantage
after his appointment.

9. Every Chief Judge shall exercise such financial and administrative powers over the
special court as may be vested in him in such manner as may be prescribed.

10. The appropriate Government shall determine the nature and categories
of the officers and other employees required to assist a special court in the discharge
of its functions.

11. Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, every special court shall exercise
all the jurisdiction, powers and authority exercisable immediately before that day by all
courts except the concerned High Court and the Supreme Court in relation to all matters of
offences or atrocities committed against women under the Indian Penal Code, 1860 or any
other law for the time being in force relating to women.

12. Every special court constituted under this Act shall have the same powers to hold
any inquiry as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 and ina
criminal court under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

13. On the date of coming into force of this Act, the jurisdiction, powers and authority
in relation to any offences or crimes or atrocities committed against women, shall be
exercisable by a special court and no other court except the High Court concerned and the
Supreme Court shall have, or be entitled to exercise any jurisdiction, powers or authority in
relation to such offences or crimes or atrocities committed against women.

14. Every suit or other proceeding pending before any other court or any authority
immediately before the date of coming into force of this Act, being a suit or proceeding the
cause of action wherein it is based, is such that it would have been if it had arisen after such
constitution, within the jurisdiction of a such special court, shall stand transferred on that
date to such special court:

Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to a suit or other proceedings
pending in a High Court or the Supreme Court.



S$

15. The appropriate Government shall make necessary arrangements and
provisions for free legal aid to women for meeting the cost of litigation in special courts.

16. Every case ina special court shall be heard on daily basis and disposed of as early
as possible and in any case not later than six months from the date of filing of the suit in the

5 court.
17. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.

make rules

Free legal aid
to women.

Disposal of
cases by
special courts.

Power to make
tules.


STATEMENT.OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

In our society, atrocities against women are increasing day by day. Cases of atrocities
against women are piling up in court. Courts take a long time in disposing of the cases.
Sexual harassment takes place at work places. By the time the courts give their judgement,
the life of the women becomes miserable. Ordinary courts take unduly long time for deciding
the cases. Therefore, the special courts should be set up to exclusively deal with cases against
women expeditiously.

The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.

New DELHI; KRISHNA TIRATH
March 6, 2006.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides that every State Government and Union territory
administration shall set up sufficient number of special courts to deal exclusively with matters
arising out of atrocities committed against women. Clause 8 provides for payment ‘of salaries
and allowances to the Chief Judge and other. Judges. Clause 10 provides for appointment
and provision of officers and staff required for special courts. Clause 15 provides for free
legal aid to women. The expenditure in respect of special courts in respect of Union territories
shall be met out of the Consolidated Fund of India and the expenditure in respect of special
courts in States will be met out of Consolidated Funds of the respective States.

It is likely that an amount of rupees one thousand crore will be involved for setting up
special courts in Union territories and by way of grants to States per annum.

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 17 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. Since the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.



LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for constitution of special courts for women and for matters connected
therewith.

(Shrimati Krishna Tirath, M.P)

MGIPMRND—6792LS (S-3}—18.04.2006.