1
THE  PATENTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
BY
SHRI KESINENI SRINIV AS, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Patents Act, 1970.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called as Patents (Amendment) Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title
and
commencement.
Bill No. 340 of  2015
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In section 73 of the Patents Act, 1970 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in
sub-section (2), the following proviso shall be added at the end, namely:
"Provided that each patent office shall employ at least one permanent patent officer
with expertise in nanotechnology.".
3. After section 94 of the principal Act, the following Chapter and sections thereunder
shall be inserted, namely:—
"CHAPTER XVIA
COUNCIL FOR THE ADAPTA TION OF PATENT SYSTEM TO NANOTECHNOLOGY
95. (1) The Central Government shall establish a Council to be known as the Council
for the Adaptation of Patent System to Nanotechnology (CAPS-NT).
(2) The Council shall consist of a Chairperson and two whole-time Members to be
appointed by the Central Government.
(3) The Chairperson of the Council shall be a person of ability, integrity and outstanding
scientific calibre with a doctorate degree or equivalent degree in the field of sciences from a
University recognized by the University Grants Commission or a university or institute
established by law for the time being in force, and having not less than fifteen years of
experience in a leadership role in a scientific organisation, scientific institution or scientific
agency, or similar organisation or institution or agency, out of which at least five years shall
be as head of the organisation or institution or agency or unit or division, as the case may be.
(4) A member shall be a person of ability, integrity and outstanding scientific calibre
with a doctorate degree or equivalent degree in the field of sciences from a university
recognized by the University Grants Commission or a university or institute established by
law for the time being in force, and having not less than ten years experience in a leadership
role in a scientific organisation, scientific institution or scientific agency or unit or division:
Provided that the Central Government shall, while appointing the Members, ensure
that one such Member has requisite knowledge and experience in the fields of nanotechnology,
nanosciences and areas connected therewith, respectively.
(5) The Chairperson and whole-time Members of the Council shall be appointed on the
recommendation of the Selection Committee constituted under section 97.
(6) The Chairperson or the whole-time Member of the Council shall not hold any other
office during the period of holding his office as such.
(7) The Central Government shall, within a period of two months from the date of
occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the Chairperson or Member, by reason of death,
resignation or removal of the Chairperson or a Member and six months before the
superannuation or completion of the term of office of the Chairperson or a Member, make a
reference to the Selection Committee constituted under section 97 for filling up of such
vacancy.
96. (1) The Council shall function as the independent body and its recommendations
shall be binding on the Patent Office.
(2) The Council shall have the mandate of adapting the patent system to
Nanotechnology and such other new technologies as may be notified by the Central
Government from time to time.
(3) The Council shall develop standardised terminology for patent classification and
create a system for collecting nano-related patents in one single patent class within such
time period as notified by the Central Government.
(4) The Council shall develop a Framework for Patenting of Nanotechnology Inventions
(FPNI) by balancing the test of novelty, non-obviousness, industrial application and the
intrinsic nature of nanotechnology.
Amendment
of section 73.
Insertion of
new Chapter
XVIA.
Establishment
of Council for
the Adaptation
of Patent
System to
Nanotechnology.
Functions of
the Council.
39 of 1970.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(5) The patent applications falling within the scope of nanotechnology and nanoscience
as per the provisions of sub-section ( 4) shall be certified as nanotechnology related
applications and shall be further processed within the Framework for Patenting of
Nanotechnology Inventions (FPNI) as per sub-section (4).
97. (1) The Central Government shall, for the purpose of selection of the Chairperson
and Members, constitute a Selection Committee consisting of—
(a) Cabinet Secretary to the Government of India—Chairperson, ex-officio;
(b) Secretary, Union Ministry of Health and Family Welfare—member, ex-officio;
(c) Secretary, Union Ministry of Agriculture—member, ex-officio;
(d) Secretary, Union Ministry of Science and Technology, Department of Bio-
Technology, member, ex-officio;
(e) Secretary, Union Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change,
member, ex-officio;
(f) Secretary, Union Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions,
Department of Personnel and Training, member, ex-officio;
(g) two eminent nanotechnologists to be nominated by the Central Government,
members.
(2) The Selection Committee shall recommend a panel of two names for every vacancy
referred to it.
(3) Before recommending any person for appointment as a Chairperson or a Member of
the Council for the Adaptation of Patent System to Nanotechnology (CAPS-NT), the Selection
Committee shall satisfy itself that such person does not have any financial or other conflict
of interest, which is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as Chairperson or Member, as
the case may be.
(4) No appointment of the Chairperson or Member of the Council shall be invalid
merely by reason of any vacancy in the Selection Committee.
(5) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (3) and (4), the Slection Committee may
regulate its own procedure.
(6) The salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service
of the members shall be such as may be prescribed by rules made under this Act.
98. (1). The Central Government shall determine the nature and categories of the
officers and other employees required to assist the Council for the Adaptation of Patent
System to Nanotechnology (CAPS-NT) in the discharge of its functions under this Act and
provide the Council with such officers and other employees as it may think fit.
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service
of the officers and other employees of the Council shall be such as may be prescribed by
rules made under this Act.
(3) The officers and other employees of the Council shall discharge their functions
under the general superintendence of the Chairperson of the Council in the manner as may
be prescribed by rules made under this Act.".
Composition
of Select
Committee.
Staff of the
Council for
the
Adaptation
of Patent
System to
Nanotechnology.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Nanotechnology deals with the understanding and control of matter at a dimension of
roughly 100 nanometre (billionth of a metre) and below. It promises to be a revolutionary
technology with applications in a wide range of sectors.
In keeping with the launch of Nano Mission by Government of India, the number of
patents filed in the field of nanotechnology has witnessed an exponential increase between
2001 and 2007. Nanotechnology straddles a vast array of fields like Physics, Chemistry, Bio-
Sciences, material Science and has applications in fields ranging from aerospace to water
purification. This multi-disciplinary nature of nanotechnology makes it a technology of the
future. It is often called the next industrial revolution. Nano robots are already finding
application in the medicine for targeted drug delivery, in oil and natural gas industry, in oil
and natural gas industry for exploration of oil fields and in low cost water purification
systems.
Nanotech innovations, however, create a number of problems for patenting owing to
their multi-disciplinary character, cross-sectoral applications, broad claims as well as difficulties
in fulfilling the patentability criteria of novelty, non-obviousness and industrial application.
This Bill seeks to address this issue by creating a Council for Adaptation of Patent System to
Nanotechnology (CAPS-NT) with the mandate to create a framework that balances test of
novelty, non-obviousness, industrial application and intrinsic nature of nanotechnology.
The Bill further aims to augment the capacity of patent offices in dealing with
nanotechnology claims by mandating appointment of nanotech experts as patent examiners.
This would resolve the problem of mistaken rejection and acceptance of overly broad claims.
By creating an enabling environment for nanotechnology innovation and patenting, we
would not only unlock the potential of nanotechnology but also give impetus to development
of advanced technology solutions to our problems, giving a fillip to the 'Make in India'
campaign.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KESINENI SRINIV AS
November 17, 2015.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for establishment of Council for Adaptation of Patent
System to Nanotechnology (CAPS-NT). It also provides for appointment of eminent
nanotechnologist as a member of the Selection Committee. It further provides for appointment
of staff and officers to assist the Council. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that recurring expenditure of
about rupees fifty lakh per annum would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crores would also be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 3 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to frame rules for the terms and
conditions of service and functions of officers and other employees of the Council for
Adaptation of Patent System to Nanotechnology. As the rules will relate to matters of detail
only, the delegation of legislative powers is of normal character.
6

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE PATENTS ACT, 1970
(NO. 39 OF 1970)
******
73. (1) * * * *
(2) For the purposes of this Act, the Central Government may appoint as many examiners
and other officers and with such designations as it think fit.
******
Controller
and Other
Officers.
7

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Patents Act, 1970
————
(Shri Kesineni Srinivas, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3029LS(S3)—10-12-2015.