1
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 340 of  2019
THE MENTAL HEALTHCARE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
By
SHRI RAJIV PRATAP RUDY, M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the Mental Healthcare Act, 2017.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Mental Healthcare (Amendment) Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 2 of the Mental Healthcare Act, 2017 (hereinafter referred to as the principle
Act),—
(a) after clause (g), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
'(ga) "counselor" means a medical practitioner possessing a post-graduate
degree or diploma in counseling psychology awarded by an university recognised
by the University Grants Commission established under the University Grants
Amendment of
section 2.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Responsibilities
of Schools and
Establishments.
Insertion of
new Chapter
XIIIA.
Amendment
of section
121.
Commission Act, 1956, or awarded or recognised by the National Board of
Examinations and included in the First Schedule to the Indian Medical Council
Act, 1956, or recognised by the Medical Council of India, constituted under the
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956, and includes, in relation to any State, any
medical officer who having regard to his knowledge and experience in Counseling
Psychology, has been declared by the Government of that State to be a
Counseling Psychologist for the purposes of this Act;
(gb) "establishment" means a shop, a commercial establishment, residential
hotel, restaurant, eating-house theatre or other places of public amusement or
entertainment to which the relevant State's Shops and Establishment Act applies
and includes such other establishment as the appropriate Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, declare to be an establishment for the purpose
of this Act;'; and
(b) the existing clause ( zb) shall be remembered as clause ( zc) and before the
clause (zc) as so remembered, the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
'(zb) “school” means any recognised school imparting secondary and
senior secondary education.'.
3. After Chapter XIII of the principal Act, the following Chapter and section thereunder
shall be inserted, namely:—
"CHAPTER XIIIA
R
ESPONSIBILITIES OF SCHOOLS AND ESTABLISHMENTS
105A. (1) Every school or establishment with more than fifty persons either employed
or enrolled shall have at least one empanelled counselor to be appointed by the school or
establishment.
(2) the counselor shall visit the establishment or school for at least thirty-two hours in
fifteen days or at such frequency as may be prescribed.
(3) The remuneration of the counselor shall be as per a formal contract signed between
the counselor and the school or establishment.
(4) the counselor shall not be involved with the school establishment in any other
capacity, including board membership, share holding, administrative or professional
responsibilities or in any other capacity that would constitute a conflict of interest with
respect to his responsibilities as an empanelled counselor at the school or establishment.".
4. In section 121 of the principal Act, in sub-section (4), after clause(s), the following
clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(sa) frequency of visit of counselor to schools and establishments under
sub-section (2) of section 105A;".
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Mental Healthcare Act of 2017 was enacted to recognise, protect and promote the
rights of persons with mental illnesses and promote their access to mental healthcare in the
country. The 2011 Census pointed out that there are 15,05,624 persons with mental illnesses
in the country. Reports by international organizations like WHO and national institutes like
Today, there is a need to recognise the challenges related to mental health at workplace.
NIMHANS highlight the severity of the situation in multiple reports in the recent years.
Today, there is a need to recognise the challenges related to mental health at workplace.
Issues of workplace discrimination, stress, verbal and sexual abuse etc. are being highlighted
every now and then. The National Mental Health Survey points out that there are an estimated
150 million Indians in need of mental healthcare services. While the institutional efforts so far
have been aimed at providing access to mental healthcare to the common man, a preventive
and early identification mechanism would contribute significantly in reducing the institutional
deficiencies in addressing this challenge.
With this background, the Bill aims to—
(1) make it mandatory for establishments, including schools, institutions and
corporate offices, to have an empanelled counselor; and
(2) address a possible conflict of interest for such counselors.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAJIV PRATAP RUDY
November 6, 2019.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides appointment of counselors in schools or establishments.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand crore per
annum is likely to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the State Government to make rules regarding frequency
of visit of counselor to schools or establishments. As the rules will relate to matters of detail
only, the delegation of legislative power is of normal character.

6
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE MENTAL HEALTHCARE ACT, 2017
* * * *
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a)*  *  *
* * *
(g) "clinical psychologist" means a person—
(i) having a recognised qualification in Clinical Psychology from an institution
approved and recognised, by the Rehabilitation Council of India, constituted under
section 3 of the Rehabilitation Council of India Act, 1992; or
(ii) having a Post-Graduate degree in Psychology or Clinical Psychology or
Applied Psychology and a Master of Philosophy in Clinical Psychology or Medical
and Social Psychology obtained after completion of  a full time course of two years
which includes supervised clinical training from any University recognised by the
University Grants Commission established under the University Grants Commission
Act, 1956 and approved and recognised by the Rehabilitation Council of India Act,
1992 or such recognised qualifications as may be prescribed;
* * *
(zb) "State Authority" means the State Mental Health Authority established under
section 45.
* * *
121. (1)*  *  *
(2)*  *  *
(3)*  *  *
(4) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, rules
made under sub-section (2) may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a)*  *  *
* * *
* * *
(s) the standard and procedure to which the Central or State Health Authority shall
confirm under sub-section (6) of section 103;
* * * *
Definitions.
Power of
Central
Government
and State
Governments
to make rules.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Mental Healthcare Act, 2017.
————
(Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—3190LS(S3)—20-11-2019.