1
THE WITNESS PROTECTION BILL, 2015
By
SHRI OM BIRLA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide compulsory protection to all persons coming forth to
provide information as witnesses in a court of law
within the territory of India.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Witness Protection Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 341 of  2015
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "court" includes all courts which are empowered to try offences under any
law for the time being in force in India;
(c) "identity" means the name, reputation, alias, image, and any other portrayal
or characteristics of any kind of the protectee (whether real or virtual and in any format
whether in film, by way of a photograph, virtual, electronic or otherwise) including
Government and private records of the protectee and all other characteristics of the
protectee by which he may be recognized;
(d) "judicial proceedings" include any proceeding in the course of which evidence
is or may be legally taken on oath;
(e) "National Council" means the National Witness Protection Council established
under section 8;
(f) "officers of the court" means any person who has an obligation to promote
justice and effective operation of the judicial system, including judges and attorneys
who appear in court and administrative officers of the courts;
(g) "protectee" means any individual who has been or might be threatened,
coerced, attacked, injured or influenced in any manner whatsoever as may be determined
by the court in which the proceedings involving him as a witness are going on;
(h) "protectee's residence" means any place or institution (not being a police
lock-up or jail), which in the opinion of the competent authority, may be a place of
safety for the witness and/or his relatives;
(i) "State Council" means the State Witness Protection Council established by
the State Government under section 8; and
(j) "witness" means a person who is acquainted with the facts of a crime and who
is able to produce evidence of such fact either by providing oral, written or by any
intelligible gestures in any judicial proceeding.
3. (1) The witness may apply for witness protection at the court in which the proceedings
are being heard at any stage of the proceeding or within the jurisdiction of the police station
that he falls under.
(2) When an application is made at a police station, the station officer shall ensure that
the application is processed and produced before a court within forty-eight hours of receipt.
(3) The Police officer shall investigate the threat to the witness as mentioned in the
application and shall produce the witness before the court, submit a report of his investigation
and recommendations to the court.
(4) The Police officer without unnecessary delay shall bring the person before the
court before which he is required by law to produce such person.
(5) Pursuant to the said application, the judge of the competent court shall with the aid
of the State Council constitute a witness protection cell comprising of the Station House
Officer of the appropriate police station, the Investigating Officer, the Advocate for the
Witness, the judge and such other person that the State Council may appoint.
(6) The witness protection cell shall do all things necessary for the purpose of ensuring
the witnesses' right under section 3.
(7) All aids of law shall be provided to the applicant and he shall have access to
relevant legal aid if necessary.
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Process of
availing
protection.

3
4. (1) The protectee shall be provided protection in maintaining his right to life and it
shall be ensured that there is no harm to body, property, mind or associated people with an
intention to influence the protectee's actions.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this sub-section, "associated people" means any
person who stands in some relation to or has some bearing or connection with or has an
association or connection with the witness.
(2) The appropriate Government shall provide such protection, as may be necessary,
at each of the following stages of the process of law as per the protectee's request and
consent—
(a) during the process of investigation and inquiry;
(b) during the trial; and
(c) after the trial as warranted by the court as per the threat perception against
the individual.
5. (1) It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to ensure that the identity of
the witness enrolled in the witness protection programme is protected.
(2) Such protection to witnesses shall only be provided by the State in matters regarding
criminal offences.
(3) The nature of the protection may be determined by the judge of the competent
court depending upon the gravity of the offence committed and the likelihood of harm to the
witness.
(4) The judge may grant any of the following or a combination thereof of the following
protections to the witness—
(a) the witness or protectee under the witness protection programme shall attend
all trials under in-camera proceedings in the presence of a judicial officer;
(b) the protectee shall have the option to request change in his identity for the
duration of the trial or permanently or of a duration that exceeds the trial but is not
permanent;
(c) the protectee shall have the option to request a change of residence for the
duration of the trial or permanently or of a duration that exceeds the trial but is not
permanent;
(d) the judge shall have the power to maintain the anonymity of the protectee in
such cases;
(e) the protectee shall have the right to request that his or her name or residential
address not be revealed in public and that it be redacted in official records;
(f) The judge may permit the witness or the protectee to provide evidence and
allow the defendant to cross examine the witness by a two-way camera.
(5) It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to ensure that the protectee
enjoys the option to practice an alternate occupation that does not compromise his security
or the integrity of the case:
Provided that if such a mechanism is not possible, the appropriate Government shall
provide an allowance equal to and commensurate to the standard of living of the individual
before his participation in the case:
(6) In case the protectee is a juvenile, it shall be the duty of the appropriate Government
to ensure the continuity of his education until the completion of all levels of the present
education programme:
Instances and
stages of
protection.
Provisions for
safeguarding
witness
identity.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
Provided that if protectee wishes to enroll in further education, the appropriate
Government shall ensure the availability of the same through distance mode of education
and in doing so the security of the individual shall not be compromised in any manner
whatsoever.
6. (1) During the course of the investigation and the trial, the details of the Protectee
shall be under the protection and custody of the National Witness Protection Council and
State Witness Protection Council.
(2) The details may be released to individuals or specified agencies on the receipt of an
order from the High Court with the appropriate jurisdiction or the Supreme Court, as the case
may be.
(3) Any other authority or individual who access such details without an order from a
High Court or the Supreme Court shall be in the contempt of court and be liable to criminal
proceedings.
7.  The High Court or the Supreme Court, as the case may be, presiding over the court
of original jurisdiction shall determine the relevance of transferring the case to a place or
court, in accordance with section 406 and section 407 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973.
8. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Council to be known as the National Witness Protection Council.
(2) The National Council shall consist of,—
(a) a retired Chief Justice of India who shall be the Chairperson of the National
Council to be appointed by the President on recommendation of the Selection
Committee;
(b) such number of members not exceeding six whole time members, as
recommended by the Selection Committee, to be appointed by the Central Government:
Provided that—
(i) not more than two members shall be from a field having proven
experience and expertise in social work;
(ii) not more than one member shall be from legal field not below the
position of a retired judge of the Supreme Court or a High Court; and
(iii) two members from the police not below the position of Director General
of Police or Commissioner of Police.
(c) no social worker shall be appointed as a member of the Board unless such
person has been actively involved in rehabilitation or welfare activities for atleast
seven years.
(d) not more than one member from the National Legal Service Authority, who
shall act as the co-ordinating member of the council where cases of inter-State protection
are involved.
(3) The tenure of the Chairperson and every whole time member of the National Council
shall be three years from the date on which he assumes office as such and shall not be
eligible for re-appointment.
(4) An officer, not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India, shall be
the Member-Secretary of the National Council.
(5) The Central Government shall provide such number of officers and other employees
as may be necessary for efficient discharge of functions by the National Council under this
Act.
Custody of
original details
of the
protectee.
Transfer of
Cases out of
original
jurisdiction.
Constitution
of National
Witness
Protection
Council.
2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
(6) The Selection Committee for selection of the Chairperson and members of the
National Council shall consist of—
(a) Chief Justice of India—Chairperson, ex officio;
(b) Union Law Minister—member, ex officio; and
(c) retired Chief Justice of a High Court, Member.
9. (1) The functions and responsibilities of the National Council shall include—
(a) laying down policies and principles for making the witness protection
programme available under the provisions of this Act;
(b) overseeing implementation of protection to witness after the person has
been granted protectee status by the court of law;
(c) monitoring and evaluating implementation of the witness protection
programme at periodic intervals and provide for independent evaluation of programmes
and schemes implemented in whole or in part by funds provided under this Act;
(d) making special efforts to enlist the support of voluntary social welfare
institutions working at the grass-root level;
(e) allocating funds to the State Witness Protection Councils and the witness
cell;
(f) conducting regular inspection of any facilities provided under this Act to the
witness and take immediate measures for transfer of witness or take necessary action;
(g) coordinating and monitoring the functioning of State Councils, witness
protection cell and voluntary social service institutions and other legal services
organisations and give general directions for the proper implementation of the witness
protection programme; and
(h) admitting any complaints regarding non-implementation of this Act.
(2) The National Council shall work in coordination with other agencies in the discharge
of its functions under this Act.
10. The President, in the case of the Chairperson and the Central Government in
consultation with the Chairperson, in the case of a whole time member, by order, remove from
office, the Chairperson or any such member of the National Council, if he—
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central
Government, involves moral turpitude; or
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as Chairperson or
member; or
(d) has acquired such financial or other interests as is likely to affect prejudicially
his functions; or has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office
prejudicial to the public interest:
Provided that the Chairperson or any member of the National Council shall not be
removed under clause (d) of sub-section (1) unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity
of being heard in the matter.
11. The National Council shall, wherever appropriate, act in coordination with other
Governmental and non-Governmental agencies, to implement the provisions of this Act.
Functions of
the National
Council.
Removal of
Chairperson
and members.
National
Council to
implement
provisions of
this Act.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

6
12. (1) Every State Government shall constitute a Council to be known as State Witness
Protection Council for the State to exercise the powers and perform the functions conferred
on or assigned to, a State Council under this Act.
(2) A State Council shall consist of—
(a) a Chairperson, on whole-time basis, to be appointed by the Chairperson of
the National Council in consultation with the Chief Justice of High Court of the State
who shall be a retired judge of the concerned High Court;
(b) police officer not below the position of Deputy Commissioner of Police as
member;
(c) such number of other members, possessing such experience and qualifications,
as may be prescribed by the Central Government and the National Council, to be
nominated by the Government in consultation with the Chairperson of the State Witness
Protection Council.
(3) The State Government, in consultation with State Council, appoint such number of
officers and other employees for the discharge of functions of the State Council under this
Act.
(4) The terms and other conditions of service of officers and other employees of the
State Council shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
13. (1) The functions and responsibilities of the State Council shall include—
(a) overseeing implementation of protection to witness after the person has
been granted protection by the court of law;
(b) ensuring the informed participation of the witness, in every step of the
process after the person has been granted protection by law;
(c) ensuring that the person's rights are protected throughout the process of
apprehending the inquiry, aftercare and rehabilitation;
(d) ensuring availability of legal aid through the legal services institutions;
(e) wherever necessary, providing an interpreter or translator, having such
qualifications, experience, and on payment of such fees as may be prescribed, to the
witness if he fails to understand the language used in the proceedings;
(f) directing the Police Officer to carry out the responsibilities of protecting the
witness and protectee;
(g) allocating funds received by the State Council to various witness protection
cells in the State;
(h) conducting regular inspection of any facilities or provided under the Act to
the witness and take immediate measures for transfer of witness or take necessary
action to ensure their continued and uncompromised protection; and
(i) admitting any complaints regarding implementation of the witness protection
law.
(2) The Chairperson or any member of the State Council shall not be removed under
clause (d) of sub-section ( 1) unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of being
heard in the matter.
14. The Governor, in the case of the Chairperson, and the Central Government in
consultation with the Chairperson, in the case of other members, by order, remove from
office, the Chairperson or any such member of the State Council, if he—
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or
Constitution
of State
Witness
Protection
Council.
Functions of
the State
Council.
Removal of
Chairperson
and members
of State
Council.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central
Government, involves moral turpitude; or
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as Chairperson or
member; or
(d) has acquired such financial or other interests as is likely to affect prejudicially
his functions; or
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial
to the public interest:
Provided that the Chairperson or any member of the State Council shall not be removed
under clause (d) of sub-section ( 1) unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of
being heard in the matter.
15. The salaries and allowance payable to and other terms and conditions of the
Chairperson and members of the National Council and State Council, shall be such as may
be prescribed:
Provided that neither the salary and allowances nor the other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson and members shall be varied to their disadvantage after their
appointment.
16. (1) The National Council or the State Council, as the case may be, shall regulate its
own procedure for the purposes of holding its meetings (including quorum of such meetings)
and granting permissions under this Act.
(2) All orders and decisions of the National Council or the State Council, as the case
may be, shall be published in such manner as may be prescribed.
17. Whoever contravenes the provisions of this Act shall be liable—
(a) to be punished in accordance with Chapters XVI and XVII of the Indian Penal
Code, 1860 if found guilty in a judicial proceedings of committing an offence in relation
to a victim.
(b) in case of a Police officer and officer of the State and relevant State authorities
who abdicate their responsibilities or do not perform their duties, to a fine which may
extend up to fifty thousand rupees.
18. Whoever, having any confidential information in relation to the protectee or his
whereabouts under this Act, divulges such information to any third party in contravention
of this Act, then such person shall be punished for a term which may extend upto three years
and also a fine of one lakh rupees.
19. (1) The protections under this Act shall be void and terminated if the Court of Law
establishes that the protectee gave false testimonies or deliberately misled the authorities
and the court.
(2) If the protection of a protectee is terminated under sub-section (1), he shall be liable
to be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend up to six months and also
fine which may extend up to two thousand rupees.
20. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to ensure that the witness is
made aware of his rights under this Act and ascertain that he can decide to exercise or not
exercise the provisions and protections available to him under this Act.
21. No suit, or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Central Government, State
Government, National Council or State Council or any officer, employees, agency or person
acting under the direction either of the Central Government, State Government, National
Council or the State Council which is in good faith done or intended to be done in presence
of this Act.
Salary and
allowances.
Regulation of
procedure for
holding
meetings.
Punishments
for
contravention
of the
provisions of
this Act.
Punishment
to person
divulging
information
of protectee.
Termination
of protection
under this
Act.
Duty to
inform the
witness of his
rights.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
45 of 1860.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

8
22. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of his Act, the Central
Government may, by an order published in the Official Gazette, after consultation with the
National Council, make such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as
appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid
before each House of Parliament.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Honourable Supreme Court in the case of Himanshu Singh Sabharwal Vs. State of
Madhya Pradesh and Ors. 2008, observed that "witnesses are the eyes and ears of the justice
system". When a witness to an offence is threatened, killed or harassed, it is not only the
witness who is threatened, but also the fundamental right of a citizen to a free and a fair trial
is vindicated. When we as the State fail to protect a witness, we as a State fail to uphold our
National Motto "Satyameva Jayate".
In Neelam Katara Vs. Union of India case the Supreme Court has observed that the
edifice of administration of justice is based upon witnesses coming forward and deposing
without fear or favour, without intimidation or allurements in court of law. If witnesses are
deposing under fear or intimidation or for favour or allurement, the foundation of administration
of justice not only gets weakened, but it may even get obliterated. Law Commission in its
198th Report 2005 had also addressed the subject of Witness Protection in India at length.
The need is to strengthen the justice delivery system by implementing a robust law
pertaining to witness protection in a manner which ensures a fair trial to both the parties.
The proposed Bill seeks to ensure the protection of witness by—
(i) formulation of witness protection programme to be provided to a witness at all
stages i.e. during the course of an investigation; during the process of trial; and after
the judgment is pronounced;
(ii) constitution of a "witness protection cell" to prepare a report for the judge of
the trial court to examine and grant protection to the witness referred a "protectee"
after being admitted in the programme;
(iii) constitution of National Witness Protection Council and State Witness
Protection Councils to ensure implementation of witness protection programme in its
letter and spirit;
(iv) providing safeguards to ensure protection of Identity of witness;
(v) providing transfer of cases out of original Jurisdiction to ensure that the
witness can depose freely;
(vi) providing stringent punishment to the persons contravening the provisions;
and
(vii) prescribing stringent actions against false testimonies and misleading
statements.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; OM  BIRLA
November 17, 2015.
9

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides that appropriate Government shall provide an allowance
to the protectee during course of investigation. It also provides for providing distance
modes of education to the protectee. Clause 8 seeks to constitute a National Witness
Protection Council. Clause 12 seeks to constitute State Witness Protection Council by State
Government. It also provides for appointment of officers and employees to the Council.
Clause 15 provides for salary and allowances payable to Chairperson and members of National
Council and the State Councils. The expenditure relating to State Governments shall be
borne out of the Consolidated Funds of States concerned. The expenditure in relation to
Union Territories shall be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India. The Bill, therefore,
if enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated
that a recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore per annum would be involved
from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A Non-recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty crore is also likely to be involved.
10

GMGIPMRND—3109LS(S-3)—10.12.2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide compulsory protection to all persons coming forth
to provide information as witnesses in a court
of law within the territory of India.
————
(Shri Om Birla, M.P.)