1
THE  NATIONAL  ASYLUM  BILL, 2015
By
SHRI FEROZE VARUN GANDHI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the citizenship rules of refugees and asylum seekers.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called National Asylum Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, the unless context otherwise requires,—
(a) "asylum seeker" means a foreigner who seeks recognition and protection as
a refugee;
(b) "country of origin" means the refugee's country of nationality, or if he has no
nationality, his country of former habitual residence;
Bill No. 342 of  2015
5
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Definitions.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
10

2
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under his Act;
(d) "refugee" means a person who owing to a well-founded fear of being
persecuted for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social
group or political opinion, is outside the country of his nationality, and is unable to, or
owing to such fear, is unwilling to avail himself of the protection of that country;
(e) 'Refugee Committee' means Appellate Committee on Refugees constituted
under section 4; and
(f) "Refugee Registrar" means Registrar for Refguees appointed under section 4.
3. Where an asylum seeker requests to be recognized as a refugee either at the point of
entry of any legally defined Indian borders or subsequently, the Refugee Registrar shall act
in accordance with the definition of refugee as laid down in clause ( d) of section 2 to
determine whether the asylum seeker may be granted refugee status or not.
4. (1) In order to implement the provision of this Act, the Government shall appoint—
(a) a Registrar of Refugees, having such qualification, as may be prescribed,
who shall receive and consider applications for refugee status and make decisions;
and
(b) a Refugee Committee, consisting of three members, namely, a retired
High Court Judge designated by Government of India in consultation with Chief
Justice of the Supreme Court of India and two independent members who shall have
experience of not less than five years in refugee related matters, which shall be an
appellate authority to receive and consider applications for consideration of citizenship
status if the refugee fulfils the condition as laid down in this Act.
(2) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of
Registrar of Refugees and members of Refugee Committee shall be such as may be
prescribed.
5. The refugee status shall cease to apply to any person if—
(a) he voluntarily re-avails himself of the protection of the country of his
nationality; or
(b) having lost his nationality, he voluntarily re-acquires it; or
(c) he acquires a new nationality and enjoys the protection of the country of his
new nationality; or
(d) he voluntarily re-establishes himself in the country which he left or outside
which he remained owing to fear of persecution; or
(e) he commits a crime against peace; or
(f) he no longer refuses to avail himself of the protection of the country of his
nationality because of the circumstances in connection with which he was recognized
as a refugee have ceased to exist; or
(g) he commits a crime against peace, a war crime or a crime against humanity, as
defined in the international instruments drawn up to make provision in respect to such
crimes.
6. (1) Every refugee shall abide by the laws and regulations and measures taken for the
maintenance of public order.
(2) The Central Government shall apply the provisions of asylum without discrimination
to race, religion or country of origin of the refugee.
(3) The Central Government shall accord to refugees similar treatment and facilities as
are available to citizens of India with respect to freedom to practice their religion and freedom
as regards the religious education of their children.
Registration of
refugees.
Constitution
of Registration
Authorities.
Ceasing of
Refugee Status.
General
obligations.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
7. To handle the situation of mass influx of refugees, the Central Government may
appoint officers under the Refugee Registrar to register the refugees at the entry point of
borders in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
8. (1) A refugee who has been legally provided the status of refugee by Refugee
Registrar and has been domiciled in a region of country for five or more years shall be eligible
to apply to Refugee Committee for grant of Indian citizenship.
(2) The child of a refugee registered under section 3, who has got birth in the territory
of India and has been registered with and verified by the Refugee Committee of his actual
birth place shall be given the rights of citizenship in accordance with the Citizenship Act,
1955.
9. Nothing in this Act shall prevent the Central Government, in time of war or other
grave and exceptional circumstances, from taking such provisional measures as it considers
to be essential to the national security in the case of a particular person, pending determination
of refugee status of that person and continuance of such measures as are necessary in his
case in the interests of national security.
10. (1) The repatriation of refugees shall take place at their free volition expressed in
writing or other appropriate means which shall be clearly expressed.
(2) The voluntary and individual character of repatriation of refugees and the need for
it to be carried out under conditions of safety to the country of origin shall be respected.
11. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament, by
law in this behalf, provide requisite funds to the Refugee Committee for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
12. The provisions of this Act shall have effect, notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
13. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Registration in
case of Mass
influx.
Granting
Citizenship
rights to
Refugees.
Exceptional
circumstances.
Repatriation at
free will.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to make
rules.
57 fo 1955.
5
10
15
20
25
30

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Since independence, over forty million refugees have crossed Indian borders, seeking
refugee status, against a hinterland of political strife, economic inequality and ethnic tensions.
Partition of the country led to over seven million refugees being provided emergency relief
and resettlement by the Ministry of Rehabilitation. While the issues related to their citizenship
rights was, to an extent, dealt of by the Ministry of Rehabilitation, whereas, the issues related
to their citizenship rights was, to an extent, dealt with at the time based on provisions of the
Citizenship Act, 1955 and subsequent amendments. However, the refugees from other
countries were not mainstreamed in the Indian population.
India is a signatory to various human rights conventions on refugees (ICCPR, ICECR,
CRC, ECERD, CEDAW)—all requiring adherence to the principle of refoulement. However,
such international obligations have not translated into legislation at the national level. Refugee
conditions in India's urban clusters remain parlous. Housing insecurity remains a significant
concern, with most refugees in their areas reporting restricted access to accommodation,
discrimination by landlords and eviction due to not having legal documents of citizenship in
the country.
The country is a refugee haven absorbing Tibetans in 1959, Bangladeshis in 1971,
Chakmas in 1963, Sri Lankan Tamils in 1983 onwards and Afghan refugees in 1980. The
largest refugee population in India do not fall under the mandate of UNHCR but are
nonetheless considered refugees by the Government. At present, there are over 1,50,000
Tibetans and 90,000 Sri Lankans who have fled violence and persecution and sought refuge
in India besides 11000 Afghans and 4621 from Myanmar, etc. This provides the country
which maintains the culture of tolerance and forbearance with the grave situation of human
rights violations if these refugees have to stay as refugees all throughout their lives with
generations to follow.
As per UNRWA report, of the 19.5 million people term refugee, just 126,800 returned to
their countries of origin in 2014. In such situation it becomes a responsibility of the country
to provide relief to the refugees in the situation of strife to give them freedom from arbitrary
detention and protection by regularizing them in the citizenry if certain conditions are followed.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; FEROZE V ARUN GANDHI
November 18, 2015.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the appointment of Registrar of Refugee and Refugee
Committee for receiving and considering application of refugee states. Clause 7 provides for
appointment of officers under the Refugee Registrar to register the refugees at the entry
point of border. Clause 11 provides that Central Government shall provide requisite funds to
the Refugee Committee for carrying out the purposes of this Act. The Bill, therefore, if
enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that
a recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred crore per annum would involve from
Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore also likely to be
involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 13 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the citizenship rules of refugees and asylum seekers.
————
(Shri Feroze Varun Gandhi,  M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3028LS(S3)—10-12-2015.