1
THE ESTABLISHMENT OF SPECIAL SCHOOLS FOR MENTALLY
RETARDED CHILDREN BILL, 2019
By
SHRI MANOJ KOTAK, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for establishment of special schools including residential schools  for
mentally retarded children by the Union and the State Governments and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called as the Establishment of Special Schools for Mentally
Retarded Children Act, 2019.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No.  344 of  2019
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "Child" means a boy or a girl who is below the age of twenty years;
(c) "Committee" means the Schools Management Committee constituted by the
appropriate Government under section 4;
(d) "mentally retarded child" means a child with a condition of arrest or incomplete
development of mind which is specially characterized by sub-normality of intelligence;
(e) "residential or non-residential school" means an institution or home which is
run privately or with the Government aid for the education and protection of mentally
retarded children; and
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. The appropriate Government shall,—
(i) establish, residential or non-residential schools for mentally retarded
children in every district;
(ii) prescribe syllabus for mentally retarded children as per their capabilities;
(iii) provide food, adequate care, protection, lodging and boarding, books,
stationery items and uniform free of cost; and
(iv) provide job oriented professional education and training for self employment
to mentally retarded children after they complete their school education according to
their capability.
4. (1) The appropriate Government shall set up a local Committee in every district to
be known as the Schools Management Committee to look into issues relating to admissions
and management of residential or non-residential schools.
(2) The Committee shall consist of—
(a) the District Magistrate who shall be the Chairperson ex-officio; and
(b) not more than five members from amongst the persons living in that district
and have knowledge in the field of child welfare, to be nominated by the Chairperson.
(3) The appropriate Government shall provide to the Committee such number of
officers and staff as may be necessary for the efficient functioning of the Committee.
5. (1) The appropriate Government shall appoint—
(i) well trained teachers who have experience of teaching mentally retarded
children and addressing their special needs; and
(ii) such number of administrative personnel for better management of
residential schools as it may be deem necessary.
(2) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
the teachers and non-teaching staff of residential schools shall be such as may be prescribed.
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament, by law,
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
Definitions.
Setting up of
schools and
providing
education and
employment
to mentally
retarded
children.
Residential
Schools
Management
Committee.
Facilities to be
provided in
residential
schools.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
7. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
8. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2)  Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before the State legislature.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
According to the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, one child out of one
hundred and ten children is a victim of autism and one out of seventy children  is affected by
this disease. Such children are being treated with medicines, symptomatic relief, special
education, occupational speech and behaviourial therapy. In USA, one child out of sixty-
eight children is having the problem of autism. About one million cases of autism are registered
in the country every year.
Presently, about one crore children are affected by this disease in India, who are being
treated with medicines, symptomatic relief, special education, occupational speech and
behavioral therapy. Upbringing of children with autistic symptoms, is a challenge for parents,
specially mothers, because it is a tiresome, time taking treatment involving process like solo
ride of roller coaster.
Autism is a childhood disorder which reflects the difficulty in speaking, over activeness,
aggressive behaviour and problems in social gathering. It is difficult to send an autistic child
to school. It may be a challenge for teachers and also a compromise with other children, to
make adjustments for an autistic child in a regular class. There is a requirement to establish
special schools for these special children. Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a neurological
disorder; which affects the general working of brain. It also affects social interaction and
development in the areas of communication skill and it is difficult to send an autistic child to
school. It may be a challenge for the teachers and to adjust such a child with other children,
to properly make arrangement for an autistic child in a regular class. Establishment of a
special school for these special children requires a lot of effort and responsibility.
Albert Einstein, Issac Newton, Maire Curie and Charls Robert Darwin are some of the
scientists, who were afflicted with autism. Despite this, they proved their mettle to the world.
If, special schools for mentally retarded children are established in India such children
shall not only groom in the mainstream but also take country to a new height. Children with
autism required special attention and various factors must be considered for the atmosphere
provided to such children. The teachers play an important role in the process of teaching the
children with special education. It requires special training and specialisation to teach these
children. They require the help of highly competent professionals in this regard, who can
understand their needs and prepare the curriculum as per the requirement of the child.
To save the mentally retarded children from the difficulties, establishment of special
schools for mentally retarded children in India with the initiative of the greatest temple of
democracy i.e. the Parliament is the need of the hour.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MANOJ KOTAK
November 6, 2019.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for setting up of residential or non-residential schools to
impart education and training to mentally retarded children. Clause 4 provides for setting up
of a School Management Committee in every district. Clause 5 provides for appointment of
teachers and non-teaching staff alongwith all basic facilities in residential schools. Clause 6
provides for payment of adequate funds to the States for carrying out the purposes of the
Act. The expenditure relating to States shall be borne out of the Consolidated Funds of the
respective States. However, the expenditure in respect of Union territories shall be borne out
of the Consolidated Fund of India. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, is likely to involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees one hundred crore
will be involved as recurring expenditure per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for establishment of special schools including residential schools for mentally
retarded children by the Union and the State Governments and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Manoj Kotak, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—3337LS(S3)—20-11-2019.