1
THE PROVISION OF FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE (FOR UPGRADING OF
HOSPITALS) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI M.K. RAGHA V AN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for financial assistance for upgrading of hospitals in all Talukas in the
country and for matters connected therewith.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Provision of Financial Assistance (for Upgrading of
Hospitals) Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 344 of  2015
Short title and
commencement.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, "facilities" means—
(a) fully equipped dispensary including facilities for diagnostics, x-ray, ultra
sound, ECG and ECHO;
(b) medicines;
(c) dialysis centre; and
(d) prevention, detection and treatment facilities for cancer.
3.  (1) The Central Government shall provide adequate financial assistance to every
State Government for the purpose of creating facilities in one selected hospital in every
Taluka.
(2) The annual cost of running the hospital and its maintenance shall be shared by the
Central Government and the State Government in the ratio of 30:70.
4.  (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Definitions.
Financial
Assistance to
hospitals at
Taluka level.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Nowadays, healthcare has become unaffordable for the common man. In Government
hospitals, there are no modern facilities. Poor people have to run from pillar to post to get the
treatment. Therefore, it is suggested that all facilities including dialysis treatment should be
provided in all hospitals at Taluka level. For this purpose, it is proposed that the Central
Government shall provide adequate financial assistance to every State Government. This
would go a long way to reach out to the poor people.
Hence, this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; M. K. RAGHAV AN
November 18, 2015.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall provide adequate
financial assistance to State Governments for creating facilities in one selected hospital in
every taluka in the country. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve recurring expenditure
of about rupees twenty thousand crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees thirty thousand crore is also likely to be
involved.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 4 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

GMGIPMRND—3031LS(S-3)—10.12.2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for financial assistance for upgrading of hospitals in all Talukas in the country
and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri M.K. Raghavan, M.P.)