1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI JAYADEV GALLA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No.  345 of  2015
5
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. For article 21A of the Constitution, the following article shall be substituted, namely:—
"21A.  (1) The State shall provide free and compulsory education to all children
upto the age of sixteen years in such manner as the State may, by law, determine.
(2) For the purposes of implementing the provisions of sub-section (1), the State
shall, till a child gets admission into a school, provide nutrient meal and/or nutrient
supplements to every child in need to ensure proper development of the child's mental
and physical capabilities.
(3) It shall be the responsibility of every school to provide nutritious meal and/
or nutrient supplements to every child in need after he is admitted in school so as to
ensure continued development of the child's mental and physical capabilities.".
3. In article 51A of the Constitution, for clause ( k), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:—
"(k) who is a parent or guardian to provide opportunities for education to his
child or, as the case may be, ward under his care.".
Substitution of
new article for
article 21A.
Right to
Education,
nutrient meal
and/or nutrient
supplements.
5
Amendment
of article 51A.
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Children are the torchbearers of any nation and it is the onerous responsibility of
every country, including India, to protect them from every form of neglect, harm and
exploitation. There is no doubt that early childhood (below six years) is the phase of maximum
vulnerability and such deprivation will seriously impact a child's health, learning process
and potential. The protection of our children becomes more important since India is going to
become the world's youngest country with 64% of its population. So, to reap the benefit of
this demographic dividend which potentially offer growing economy an unprecedented
edge and could add 2% of growth to GDP, there is a need to do something concrete  immediately
with regard to children below six years of age.
As per the 2011 Census, India has 158.7 million children comprising about 16% of its
population who are below the age of six years. In the period 2008—13, 43% of India's children
under five years of age were underweight and 48% had stunted growth. According to World
Bank Report published in 2013, the mortality rate of children under five years of age is 53 per
1000 alive births and according to UNICEF Report in 2013, more than 60 million children
under five years of age are stunted. And, unfortunately, India has ranked at 112th position in
the Child Development Index published in 2012.
There is no doubt that the Government of India has come out with the Nation Early
Childhood Care and Education Policy in 2013 and host several schemes and programmes to
take care of early childhood and need of education to children. But, if one reads the above
statistics, it becomes clear that the policies, programmes and schemes made little impact on
the objective since they only incorporate promises and do not create a justiciable right for
early childhood care, protection and education as they are not legally binding on the States
and the Centre.
Secondly, Article 45 of the Constitution says that the State shall endeavour to provide
early childhood care and education for all children until they complete the age of six years.
Being a part of Directive Principles of State Policy, it does not create any binding commitment
on part of the State.
Thirdly, the National Commission to Review the Working of the Constitution
recommended for making child's right to basic care and assistance an enforceable right.
Fourthly, the world is debating over the Sustainable Development Goals which are
going to become Gita for all countries also speaks about the guarantee of providing early
childhood care, protection, development and education.
Fifthly, the Law Commission has also in its 229th Report submitted recently
recommended for giving constitutional protection to the rights of children below six years of
age.
In view of the above, it is proposed to give a statutory backing to the existing schemes
and policies in order to create legal entitlements to children below the age of six years.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
Hence this Bill.
NEW DELHI; JAYADEV GALLA
November 13, 2015.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for free and compulsory education to all children upto the
age of sixteen years by the State. Clause 3 provides that a parent or guardian shall provide
opportunities for education to his child or ward under his care. The Bill, therefore, if enacted,
will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. A recurring expenditure of
rupees five hundred crores is likely to involve per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees two hundred crores is also likely to be involved.
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * *
21A. The State shall provide free and compulsory education to all children of the age
of six to fourteen years in such manner as the State may, by law determine.
* * * *
51A. It shall be duty of every citizen of India —
* * * *
(k) who is a parent or guardian to provide opportunities for education to his
child or, as the case may be, ward between the age of six and fourteen years.
* * * *
Right to
Education.
Fundamental
Duties.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Jayadev Galla, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3505LS—14-12-2015.