1
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No.  346 of  2019
THE WORKING JOURNALISTS AND OTHER NEWSPAPER
EMPLOYEES (CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) AND
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
By
SHRI K. NA V ASKANI, M.P .
A
BILL
further to amend the Working Journalists and Other Newspaper Employees (Conditions
of Service) and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1955.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Working Journalists and Other Newspaper Employees
(Conditions of Service) and Miscellaneous Provisions (Amendment) Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by  notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Amendment
of section 2.
2. In section 2 of the Working Journalists and Other Newspaper Employees (Conditions
of Service) and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1955,—
(i) after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, namely,—
"(aa) "electronic media" means television network including all channels,
digital media, social media or any form of communication transmitted through
electronics to which the public have access and includes such other form of
electronic media as may, from time to time, be notified in this behalf by the
Central Government in the Official Gazette.".;
(ii) in clause (b), for the words "printed periodical work" the words "printed or
electronic periodical work" shall be substituted;
(iii) in clause (c), the words "or electronic media" shall be inserted at the end;
and
(iv) in clause ( f), after the words "news-photographer and proof-reader," the
words "and also includes television network and channels, digital media, social media
and any other form of communication transmitted through electronics to which public
have access and includes any person like editor, sub-editor, feature writer, cameraman,
assistant cameraman and any person engaged in pre and post production facility and
any person  who work in connection with any studio for the preparation of any film,
serial, news items or any show or commercial advertisement, documentary or any other
form of show," shall be inserted.
5
10
15
20

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
At the time of enactment of the Working Journalists and Other Newspaper Employees
(Conditions of Service) and Miscellaneous Provisions (Amendment) Act, 1955, there were
only newspapers and printing presses. But later with the advent of technology there has
been mushrooming growth of electronic media like television channels, digital media, social
media etc. It is really surprising that electronic television media which came into being in 1992
has not been included in this Act. Thirty years have passed since electronic media has taken
its roots in the country. However, the employees of television industry have not been brought
under the purview of this Act, which is a great injustice to them. At present, the employees
of television industry who are not protected under any law.  In order to protect such employees,
it is proposed to include electronic media also under the Act.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; K. NAV ASKANI
November, 6, 2019.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Working Journalists and Other Newspaper Employees (Conditions
of Service) and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1955.
————
(Shri K. Navaskani, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—3179LS(S3)—20-11-2019.