1
Short title and
commencement.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI A.P. JITHENDER REDDY, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  After article 77 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
“77 A. (1) The Government of India shall operate with limited authority during
the period commencing from the date of dissolution of the House of the People till the
constitution of a new House of the People.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the Government
of India, during the period referred to in clause (1), shall not, except for the purpose of
carrying out administration, possess the authority to—
(i) initiate or announce any new policy;
(ii) initiate or announce any new scheme or project;
Insertion of
new article
77A.
Bill No.  348 of 2015
5
10
Duties of the
Government
of India
during the
period of
dissolution of
the House of
People until
the
constitution
of a new
House of the
People.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(iii) provide grants, allowances, loans and salary increases out of discretionary funds;
and
(iv) hold official functions.”.
3.  After article 166 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
“166A. (1) The Government of a State shall operate with limited authority during the
period commencing from the date of dissolution of the State Legislative Assembly till the
constitution of a new Legislative Assembly.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the Government of
a State, during the period referred to in clause ( 1), shall not, except for the purpose of
carrying out administration, possess the authority to—
(i) initiate or announce any new policy;
(ii) initiate or announce any new scheme or project;
(iii) provide grants, allowances, loans and salary increases out of discretionary funds;
and
(iv) hold official functions.”.
4. After article 327 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
“327A. (1) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, where the House of the
People or Legislative Assembly of a State, as the case may be, is dissolved at any time earlier
than six months prior to the date of expiration of its term, the subsequent newly constituted
House of the People or the Legislative Assembly of a State shall operate only for the period
remaining in the erstwhile House of the People or the Legislative Assembly of a State, as the
case may be, that had been dissolved and the expiration of this remaining period shall
operate as the dissolution of the newly constituted House of the People or Legislative
Assembly of a State.
(2) The provisions of clause (1) shall not apply where the House of the People or the
Legislative Assembly of a State is dissovled  as a result of losing the confidence of the
majority of members of the House of the People or Legislative Assembly of a State, as the
case may be.”.
Insertion of
new article
166A.
Duties of the
Government
of a State
during the
period of
dissolution of
the
Legislative
Assembly
until the
constitution
of a new
Legislative
Assembly.
Insertion of
new article
327A.
Term of the
Government
in certain
circumstances.
5
10
15
20
25

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
An incumbent Government has the power to dissolve the Lok Sabha or the State
Legislative Assembly even before the expiration of the normal five years period. With a view
to maximige Support in an election, the incumbent Government generally recommend the
dissolution of the Lok Sabha or a State Legislative Assembly at such a time that is most
suitable for getting re-elected the party in power.
It has been seen in the past that incumbent Governments have prematurely dissolved
the House, like for instance, the Fourth Lok Sabha which was dissolved one year and
seventy-nine days before its normal term expired. Such premature dissolution has also occurred
with Legislative Assemblies of various States as well.
Without setting stricter conditions, such an unregulated procedure for dissolution
erodes the integrity of the democratic process as it lacks adequate safeguards against the
manipulation of executive power. In a democracy, a direct consequence of this power is the
tactical advantage of the party in Government over opposition parties in an election. Another
indirect consequence is the backlog of Government business which is an incalculable loss to
the nation. The United Kingdom had passed the Fixed-term Parliaments Act, 2011, where
Parliament at the outset will have a fixed five-year  term, and it created conditions for dissolution
if it is carried out before the expiration of normal five-year term.
There is a need to clearly define the role of the Government with respect to its authority
to recommend dissolution of Lok Sabha or a State Legislative Assembly, and simultaneously
create procedural safeguards against the misuse of executive power by the Government
during such period of dissolution of the House, until a new Lok Sabha or State Legislative
Assembly is constituted.
In view of the above, the Bill seeks to amend the Constitution with a view to—
(1) regulate mid-term dissolutions; and
(2) limit the authority of the Government during the period of dissolution of the House
of the People or a State Legislative Assembly.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; A. P.  JITHENDER REDDY
November 13, 2015.
3

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India
————
(Shri A.P. Jithender Reddy, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2820LS(S3)—14-12-2015.