As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
J 
Bill No. 34 of 1964. 
THE INDIAN COINAGE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1964 
A. 
Bn..L 
further to amend the Indian Coinage Act. 1906. 
BE it· enacted by Parliament in the 'Fifteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Coinage (Amendment) Shorttitle 
Act, 1964. and com-
mence_ 
5 (2)' It shall come into force on the 1st day of June, 1964. ment. 
10 
IS 
Z. In section 13 of the Indi.an Coinage Act, 1906 (hereinafter re- Amend.-
ferred to as the principal Act), after sub-sect1lOn (3), the following ment of 
sub-sectioo shall be inserted, namely:- section 13. 
c· (4) All new coins in the naya paisa series, designated as 
such under the notification o.f the Government of India in the 
Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Mairs, No. S.R.O. 
1120, dated 11th May, 1956 which may have been issued under 
this Act prior to the commencement Of the· Indian Coinage 
(Amendment) Act, 1964, shall continue to be a legal tender in 
payment or on accountt,-
(a) in the case of a balf-rupee or fifty naye'pa!se coin, 
for any sum not exceedJng ten rupees; 
(b) in the case of any other co1n, for any sum not ex-
ceeding one rupee.". 
! 

Amend-
mentor 
section 14. 
s 
2 
3. In section 14 of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), the 
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
,e (4) As from the commencemenlt of the Indian Coinage 
(Amendment) Act, 1964, all references in any enactment ~r in 
any notification, rule or order under any enactment or in any 
contract, deed or other instrument to any value in naya paisa 
or naye paise shall :be construed as references to that value 
expressed respectively in paisa or paise, being the new coins 
designated as such from tat day of June, 1964.". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
With the demonetisation of the anna-pie series of coins, it is pro-
posed to drop the prefix 'naya' flrom the decimal coinage system of 
'naya paisa' with effect from 1st June, 1964. The 'naya paisa' coins 
, will continue to be legal tender and will remain in circulation along 
with the new 'paisa' coins until they are called in. This change in 
designation will necessitate consequential amendments in enact-
me;nts and notifications, rules or orders, issued thereUnder or lin con-
tracts, deeds, or other instTuments where references to any value 
may have been expressed in 'naya paisa'. While the change in 
designation of the decimal coins from 'naya paisa' ,to 'paisa' will be 
brought about by means of a notiftcationto ·be issued by the Central 
GovernmenJt under section 14(1) of the Indian Coinage Act, 1906, 
the amendments proposed in the am are required to maintain the 
legal tender oharacter of the 'nay a paisa' coins and to provide for 
the consequential amend.tpents. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 8th April, 1964. 
T. T. KRISHNAMACHARI. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILl!. 
further to amend the Indian Coinage Act, 1906, 
(Shri T. T. KrishnlJrnachari, 
Minister of Fintl1lCe.) 