Bill No. Jot of 1954-
TIm CENTRAL EXCISBS AND SALT (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1954 
(As INTRODUCED IN THE Lox SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
furtheT to amend the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
I. Slim title and commencemenl-(l) This Act may be called 
the Central Excises and Salt (Amendment) Act, 1954. 
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 30th day 
of July, 1954. 
Z. Amendment of the FIrst Schedale, Act I of IN4.-In sub-
item II of Item No.9 in the First Schedule to the Central Excises 
and Salt Act, 1944, the following shall be inserted at the end, 
namely:-
"(3) Biris in the manufacture of which .. Three rupees per 
any process has been conducted with the aid thousand." 
of machines operated with or without the aid 
of power. 
10 
S. kelse duty on machine-made blrls to apply to aIstiIlr stocks 
aIso:-The amendment made by section 2 shall apply to biris manu- 16 
factured as specified therein which are lying in stock on the date of 
commencement of this Act in any premises where biris are manu-
factured Or in any premises appurtenant thereto as it applies to 
biris similarly manufactured on or after the said date. 20 
c. Repeal of Ordinance I of IIM.-The Central Excises and Salt 
(Amendment) Ordinance, 1954 (9 of 1954) is hereby repealed. 

2 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Biri-making is a cottage industry and provides empldyment to 
a large number of people in the urban and rural areas. Early In 
1953 it was brought to the notice of the Government of India that 
machines for the manufacture of biris were being produced and that 
the introduction of machines in the field elf biri-maliing would reduce 
the cost of production to a considerable extent and incidentally 
make it uneconomical to manufacture biris by manual1abour. 
2. With a view tCl obtaining for the State the advantage gained 
in biri manufacture by machines by the considerable lowering of 
the cost of production and at the same time mitigating the effects 
of the unfair competition of machine-made biris, the Government 
of India promulgated an Ordinance called the Central Excises and 
Salt (Amendment) Ordinance, 1954 (9 of 1954), on the 30th July, 1954, 
whereby biris in the manufacture of which any process has been 
conducted with the aid of machines operated with or without the 
aid of power, have been subjected tel an excise duty of Rs. 3/- per 
thousand. 
3. The present Bill seeks to replace the Ordinance by an Act of 
Parliament. 
C. D. DESHMUKH. 
NIW DJ:LIII; 
The 13th August, 1954. 

• 
LOK SABHA 
BILL 
further to amend the Central Excises and Salt 
Act, 1944· 
The President has. in pursuance of clause (I) of article 
117 of the Constitution of India, recommended to the 
Lok Sabha the introduction of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL. 
po 
<,Shri C. D. Deshmukh, 
Minister jor Pinance) 
GJPD-LAD-477 M OflAw-2S-8-S. 
SeCf'etof'1J. 