Bm No. 34 ~11'w I 
THE APPROPRIATION (No.3) BILL, 1961 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
to provide 101' the authorisation of awopriation of monell. out 01 the 
Conrolidated Fund of India to meet the amount, spent on certain 
services during the financial year ended on the 311t dati of Maroh, 
1959, in excess of the amounts gmnted for tho,e service. and /01' 
that J(ear.·.. i 
BE it enacted. by P8I1'liament in the Twelfth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Appropriation (No.3) Act, 1961. Shari: tide. 
Z. From and out of the Consolidated. Fund of India, the sums ~;!,.,~. 
S specified. in column 3 of the Schedule amounting in the aggregate to out d tile 
t~e sum of forty-four Iakhs, eleven thousand, nine hundred. and ~":r 
seventy-seven rupees shall be deemed to have been authorised to be India to meet 
paid and applied to meet the amount spent for defraying the charges =::-
in Irespect of the services specified in .column 2 of the Schedule during for the ,ear 
10 the financial year ended on the 31s~ day of March, 1959, in excess of :~ 
the amounts granted for those servIces and for that year. 1959· 
S. The sums deemed to have been authorised to be paid and ApPI'OPrIa-
applied from and out of the Consolidated Fund of India under this liOD. 
Act shall be deemed to have been appropriated for the services and 
IS purposes expressed in the Schedule in relation to the financial year 
"ended on the 31st day of March, 1959. 

This Bill is introduced in pursuance of article 114 (1) of the Consti-
tution of India read with article 115 thereof, to provide for the appro-
priation out of the Consolidated Fund of India of the moneys required 
to meet the expenditure incurred in excess of the appropriations 
charged on the Fund and the Grants made by the Lok Sabha for 
expenditure of the Central Government, excluding Railways, for the 
financial year en~'"\ on the 31st day of March, 1959. 
MORARJI DESAI. 

A 
BILL 
to provide for the authorisation of appropriation of moneys 
out of the Consolidated Fund of India to meet the amounts 
spent on certain services during the financial year ended on 
the 31st day of March, 1959, in excess of the amounts granted 
for thoSi services and for that year. 
The President has, in pursuance of clauses (I) and (3) of 
article 117 of the Constitution of India, read with clause (2) 
of article liS thereof, recommended to Lok Sabha the 
introduction and consideration of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary 
Shri Morarji Desai, 
Minist. D/ Fintma . 