BiD 50. M of 1918. 
THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR-GENERAL 
(CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) BILL, 1953 
(AB INTRODUOBD IN TBB ;HOUSH 011' TBB PBO~LB) 
A 
BILL 
to regulate certain conditions of service of the Comptroller and Audito1'-
General 0/ India. 
BE it enacted by Parliament as follaws:-
1. Short titl8.-This Act may be called the Comptroller and Auditor-
-General (Conditions of Service) Aet, 1958. 
2. Term of ofllo& of Oomtl1'011er a.nd AWlitor-General.-A Comptroller 
:and Auditor-General of India shall hold office for a tt>rm of six years from 5 
the date on which he enters upon his office: 
Provided that he may at any time by writing under his hand e.ddressed 
-to the President resign his office. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this seotion, the term of six years 
in respect of the Comptroller and Auditor-General holding office iIrune- 10 
,diately before the commencemeut of thia Aot sqaU be computed from the 
15th day of August, 1948. 
3. Pension payable to OomptroUer a.nd Audltor-General.-A Oomptrol-
ler Hnd Auditor-General of India shUllI, on his retirement, be eligible-
(a) (i) in the case of the Comptroller and Auditor-General holding 15 
office immediately before the commenaement of this Act" to such 
pension as may b,e admissible to him under the rules for the time 
being applicable to the servioe to which he belonged at the date on 
which he became the Comptroller and Auditor-General; or 
(ii) in the case of any other Comptroller and Auditor-General 20 
who was in the service of .the Goverrunent at the date of his appoint-
ment, ~ such pension as may be admissible to him under the rules 
for the time being a.pplicable to the service to which he belonged at 
. the date of his appointment; , 
~he service as Comptroller und Auditor-General in either case being 25 
reckuned for the purposes of the releva.nt rules as service for pension; and 

2 
(b) to an additional pension of six bundred rupees per aDDum in 
respect of each completed year of service us Comptroller and Auditor-
General: 
Prbvided that the aggregate of all pensions payable to the Comptroller 
5 and Auditor-General shall, in n6 case, exceed twelve thousand rupees per 
annum. 
,. Other conditions of service of Oomptroller aDd A.uditor-GeDeral.-
Save ss otherwise expressly provided in this Act, the other conditions of 
service of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India shall be 1l8. 
10 specified in the Second. Schedule to the Constitution. -

3 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under article 148(3) of the Constitution, the salary and other conditionff 
of service of the Comptroller a.nd Auditor-General shall be such as may 
be determined by law Ilnd until they are so determined these are regulated 
by the provisions in the Second Schedule to the Consti1ltltion. Under 
the provisions 8S they stand at present, the Comptroller and Auditor-Gene--
ral hilS to vacate otiicc on completing 35 years of service, if a member 
of the Indian Civil Service, or on attaining the age of 55 years if a mem-
ber of any othel' service and in 6ither C8se he is entitled to a minimum 
tellure of five years, Tbe Comptroller and Auditor-General does not 
receive any additional pension for the period of serl/ice in that office. It 
is collsidered desira.ble t,o fix the tenure of this post in the same way as 
fo" other statutory authoritiC8 like the Union or State Public Service 
Commissions aDd, taking into account the importance of the post and 'the 
fact that its holder is constitutionally debarred from holding Ilny oftioo 
tInder the Union or State Governments, after vo.cating office, to allow an 
additional pension for service as Comptroller and Auditor-General. The 
Bm proposes that the tenure should be fixed at six years and thnt an 
additional pension of Rs. 600 a year be given for service in the post of 
Comptroller and Auditor-General subject to the condition that the total 
of all the pensions payable to B retiring Comptroller Bnd Auditor-General 
Mould be limited to Be. 12,000 per annum. It is not proposed to make 
any change in rEl,spect of the other conditions of service of the Comptroller 
ond Auditor-General. • 
C. D. DESHMUKH. 
NBW. DBLm: 
The 6tP., Apn1, ·1~8. 

BOUSE OF THE PEOPLE 
.A. 
BILL 
to regulate certain oonditions of service of the Comptroller and 
AudItor-General of India • 
• 
The President has, in pursuanoe of clauses (1) and (3) of 
article 117 of the Constitution of India, recommended to the 
Houseof the People the introduction and consideration of 
the Bill. 
GIPD-LAD-l209 P. 8.-1J·.·53-1,750 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shr" O. D. Deshm'Ukh, 
M iniBter Jor Finance) 