Ag rvTRoDUCED IN Lox SABE

#6 FEC 1992"

Bill No. 34 of 1992
8324 -20/फ7:*#/

a | DESTRUCTIVE INSECTS AND PESTS (AMENDMENT AND
7 VALIDATION) BILL, 1992

a
BILL

further to amend the Destructive Insects and Pests Act, 1914,

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-third Year of the Republic
ot India as follows:—

1. (0) This Act may be called the Destructive Insects and Pests
(Amendment and Validation) Act, 1992. 1 #!

5 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 27th day of
October, 1989.

2. In section 3 of the Destructive Insects and Pests Act, 1914 (here-
jnafter referred to as the principal Act), after sub-section (2), the
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—

0 “(3) The Central Government may, by notification under this
section, also levy and collect such fees at such rates and in such
manner as may be specified therein for making an application for
a permit to import, or for making inspection, fumigation, disinfec-
tion, disinfestation or supervision of, any article or class of articles or
any insect or class of insects under this section.”.

Short
title
and
com-
mence-
ment.

Amend-
ment of
section 3.
of Act

2 of 194.


Vali-
dation,

Ropeal
and

Saving. ©

3. (1) Notwithstanding any judgement, decree or order of any court,
‘eibunal or other authority, —

(0 the notification No. 8.0, 867 (8), dated the 27th October, 1989
issued under sub-section (1) of section 3 of the principal Act, and

(4) any fees levied or collected or purported to have been levi-
ed or collected for making an application for a permit to import, or
for making inspection, fumigation, disinfection, disinfestation or
Stpervision of any article or class of articles or any insect or clace
ef insects under the principal Act or the said notification,

shall, for all purposes, be deemed to be and to have always been validly
4ssued or, as the case may be, levied or collected in accordance with the
Provisions of section 3 of the principal Act as amended by this Act, and
accordingly. —

(2) no suit or other proceeding shall be maintained or continued
im any court for the refund of any fees so collected;

(७) no court or other authority shal] enforce any decree or
erder directing the refund of any fees so collected;

(©) any fees levied or purported to have been levied but not
collected, may be recovered under the principal Act as amended by
‘this Act, and se

(d) anything done or any action taken or purported to have
been done or taken under or for the purposes of the principal Act
Shalt be deemed to have peen validly done or taken in accordance
with, law as if, the provisions of section 3 of the principal Act as
amended by this Act had been in force at all material times.

(2) For the removai of doubts, it is hereby declared that nothing in
sub-section (I) shall be construed a8 preventing any person—

(2) from questioning in accordance with the provisions of the
printipal Act, as amended by this Act, or the notification issued
under section 3 of the principal Act, the levy or collection of such
fees; or |

(0) from claiming refund of any fees paid by him in excess of the
amount due from him under. the Principal Act, as amended by this
Act, or the said notification,

4. (1) The Destructive Insects and Pests (Amendment and Vali-
ation) Ordinance, 1992 is hereby repealed.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Destructive Insects and Pests Act, 1914 was enacted to prevent
the import and transport of any insect, fungus or other pests which
may be desiructive tc crops, Section 3 of the said Act empowered the Cen-
tral Government to prohibit or regulate the import of any article or
class of articles likely to cause infection to any crop. In exercise of
that power, the Central Government, by Notification dated 27th October,
1989, made an order for matters relating to inspection, fumigation, dis-
jnfaction and supervision of some articles such as plants. fruits and seeds
which were imported into India. Fees were also provided to be levied
and collected for the aforesaid purposes. Under the New Seed Policy,
the import of seeds and plant materials was brought under Open
General Licence resulting in heavy import thereof. The Government
had, therefore, to strengthen the infrastructural facilities and services
ef Plan Quarantine organisations in order to prevent the entry of exotic
diseases through such imported consignments.

2. The Calcutta High Court in a writ petition held that the aforesaid
‘Act did not empower the Government to levy any fees for inspection.
fumigation, ete. The Bombay High Court also in a case struck down
the imposition of fees and directed the refund of money.

3. It was considered necessary to enable the Government to levy and
collect fees for the services rendered and for meeting expenditure on
maintaining Plant Quarantine organisations. It was also necessary to
validate the levy and collection of fees made earlier. In the circum-
stances, suitable provisions in the aforesaid Act empowering the Central
Government to levy fees for inspection, fumigation, etc., on imported
consignments and for validation of the fees already levied or collected
were, therefore, required to be made.

4, The Ordinance, namely, the Destructive Insects and Pests (Amend-
rent and Validation) Ordinance, 1992 was, therefore, promulgated by
the President on 25th January, 1992.

5. The Bill seeks to replace the said Ordinance and to achieve the
aforesaid objects.

BAL RAM JAKHAR.
New Dein;
The 20th February, 1992.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to empower the Cantral Government te
specify the fees for inspection, fumigation, disinfection, ete., and the
manner in which the fees may be ldvied and collected,

2. The matter in respect of which the Central Government is being
empowered relate to matters of proeddure and detail, ‘The delegation of
legislative powers is, therefore, of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Destructive Insects and Pests Act, 1914

(Shri Balram Jakhar, Minister of Agriculture)