LOK SABRA 
CO'-llU GE NDA 
to 
THE CONSTITUTION (TWENTY-SECOND AMEl\TDMENT) BILL, 1969 
(To be/As introduc~d in L~k Sabha) 
1. Page 2, line 33,-
for "he" N~ad "be" 
2. Page 3, against line 4, in thp m~rgln,­
for "provs lon" read "provlsl on" 
3. Page 3, linp 12,-
after r cOInlni ttee. It, insert "." 
4~ Correct line numbers on paq~ 2 and 3. 

To BB lNTItODl,1CBD 1N LoK SABHA 
Bill No. H of 1969 
TIlE CONSTITUTION (TWENTY-SECOND 
AMENDMENT) BILL, 1969 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twentieth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Twenty-second Short tide. 
Amendment) Act, 1969. 
~ Z. In Part X of the Constitution, after article 244. the following 
article shall be inserted, namely:-
"244A. (1) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution. 
Parliament may. by law. form within the State of Assam an 
autonomous State comprising (whether wholly or in part) all or 
any of the tribal areas specifi~ in Part A of the table appended 
to paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule and create therefor--
(a) a body. whether elected or partly nominated and 
partly elected, to function as a Legislature for the auto-
nomous State. or 
(b) a Council of Ministers. 
or both with such constitution. powers and functions. In each 
case, as may be specified in the law. 
Insertioo 
otnew 
article 
244A. 
Fonnation 
olan 
auto-
nomous 
State 
com-
prising 
certain 
tribal 
areuin 
Assam 
and 
creation 
of local 
Le,u-
lature 
or 
CoundJ 
ofM1nt.. 
tenor 
both 
there-
for. 

~ .. 
.. Dtel: 
articl. 
7f •. 
(2) Any such law as is referred to in clause (1) may, in 
particular,-
(a) specify the matters enumerated in the State List or 
the Concurrent List with respect to which the Legislature 
of the autonomous State shall have power to make laws for ~ 
the whole or any part thereof, whether to the exclusion of 
the Legislature of the State of Assam or otherwise; 
(b) define the matters with respect to which the execu-
tive power of the autonomOUii State shall extend; 
(c) provide that any tax levied by the State of Assam let 
shall be assigned to the autonomous State in so far as the 
proceeds thereof are attributable to the autonomous State; 
(d) provide that any reference to a State in any article 
of this Constitution shall be construed as including a refer-
ence to th2 autonomous State; and 
(e) make such supplemental, incident.al and conseq1fen-
tial provisions as may be deemed necessary. 
(3) An amendment of any such law as aforesaid in so far as 
such amendment relates to any of the matters specified in sub-
clause (n) or sub-clause (b) of clause (2) shall have no effect 20 
unless the amendment is passed in each House of Parliament 
by not less than two-thirds of tne members present and voting. 
(4) Any such law as is referred to in this article shall not be 
deemed to be an amendment of this Constitution for the pur-
poses of article 368 notwithstanding that it contains any provision ~5 
which amends or has the effect of amending this Constitution.". 
, ""'" 
3. In article 275 of the Constitution, after clause (1), the following 
clause shall be inserted, namely:-
./ (1A) On and from the fonnation of the autonomous State 
UDder article 244A,- 30 
(i) any sums payable under clause (a) of the second 
proviso to clause (1) shan, jf the autonomous State com-
prises all the tribal areas referred to therein, he paid to the 
autonomous State, and, if the autonomous State comprises 
only some of those tribal areas, be apportioned between the 3~ 
State of Assam and the autonomous State as the President 
may. by order, specify; 
(ii) there shall be paid out of the Consolidated Fund of 
India as grants-in-a'id of the reven:ues of the autonomous 
State sums, capital and recurring, equivalent to the costs of ... 
such schemes of development as may be undertaken by the 
autonomous State with the approval of the Government of 
IDdia for the purpose of raising the level of administration 
of that State to that of the administration of the rest of the 
State of Assam.". 

"., 
3 
.. After article 37lA of the Constitution, 
shall be inserted, namely:-
.. 
11 II 
the following article Ia.Iertf.oD. 
01 new 
article 
37lB. 
"371B. Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the Spec1al 
President may, by order made with respect to the State of Assam, provaion 
provide for the constitution and functions of a committee of the with 
Legislative Assembly of the State consisting of members of that = 
Assembly elected froml the tribal areas specified in Part A of the State 
table appended to paragraph 20 of the Sixth SChedule and such ot 
number of other members of that Assembly as may be specified ~ 
in the order and for the modifications to be made in the rules of 
procedure of that Assembly for the constitution and proper 
functioning of such committee." 

STATEMENTDF OBJECTS AND RbSONS 
On the 11th September, 1968, the Government of India announced 
the broad details of the scheme for constituting within the State of 
Assam an autonomous State comprising certain areas specified in 
Part A of the table appended to paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule 
to the Constitution. Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to insert a new article 
244A in the Constitution to confer the necessary legislative power 
on Parliament to enact a law for constituting the autonomous State 
and also to provide the autonomous State with a Legislature and a 
Council of Ministers with such powers and functions as may be 
defined by that law. 
Clause, 3 of the Bill makes a consequential amendment to arl;cle 
/ 
275 in regard to certain special grants payable to the State of Assam 
in respect of the areas which may form part of the autonomous State. 
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a committee 
of the Assam Legislative Assembly conSisting of members of that 
Assembly from the tribal areas aforesaid and a few other membe1'1l 
of that Assembly, as envisaged in the scheme. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 2nd April, 1969. 
Y. B. CHAV AN. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 11 16 I 69-SR, ~ated the 5th April, 1969 from 
Shri Y. B. Chavan, Minister of Home Mairs to the Secretary, Lok 
Sabha.] 
The President having been informed of the subject matter of the 
Bill further to amend thE' Constitution of India, recommends, under 
clauses (1) and (3) of article 117 of the Constitution, the introduc· 
tion !Ond consideration of the sai~ Bill in the Lok Sabha . 
• +< 
4 

rINANCIAL M~ORANDUM 
Under clause (a) of the second proviso to article 275(1) of. the 
Constitution, a sum of Rs. 40 Jakhs is being paid annually to the 
State of Assam by way of grant-in-aid. Grants-in-aid to that State 
under the first proviso and clause .(b) of the second proviso to that 
article are determined from year to year on the basis of schemes of 
development approved by the Central Government having regard to 
the Plan priorities. For the current year, a consolidated provision 
of Rs. 67 lakhs has been made in the Central Budget for this pur-
pose in respect of Part A tribal areas. 
2. Clause 3 of the Bill which seeks to allocate the grant under 
clause (a) aforesaid to the autonomous State either wholly or in part 
and for the payment of grants to that 5tate in respect of approved 
schemes of development, if enacted and brought into force, will 
entail expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India but to the 
extent of such grants there will be a corresponding reduction in the 
sums payable to the State of Assam. It is not possible to estimate 
the precise quantum of the grants which will have to be given to 
the autonomous State as this would depend on the areas which will 
ultimately form part of the autonomous State and the Icheniel ot 
development that may be approved from time to time. 
S. The Bill, if paased into law, will not involve any non-recurriJll 
expenditure. ... 
.. " .' 

MEMORANDUM BEGARDU~G DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 4 of the Bill inserts a new artiele 371B making a special 
provision with respect to the State of Assam. That article will 
: enable the President to provide for the constitution and functions of 
acommlittee of the Legislative Assembly of Assam, consisting of 
'members of that Assembly elected from Part A tribal areas arid a 
specified number of other members of that Assembly. The intention 
is that the committee should consider Bills (excluding money Bills) 
introduced in the Assembly in respect of subjects which are of com-
mon interest to the State of Assam as a whole, i.e., other than sul>-
jects which are exclusively assigned to the autonomous State. This 
may involve modification of the rules of procedure of the Assembly 
by the President. As these are matters of procedure and detail, the 
delegation of legislative power is of a no~l character. ' 
6 

ANNEXURE 
ExTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
• • • • • 
275. (1) Such sums as Parliament may by law provide shall be 
charged on the Consolidated Fund of india in each year as grants-in-
aid of the revenues of such States as Parliament may determine to be 
in need of assistance, and different sums may be fixed for different 
States: 
Provided that there shall be paid out of the Consolidated Fund 
of India as grants-in-aid of the revenues of a State such capital and 
recurring sums as may be necessary to enable that State to meet the 
costs of such schemes of development as may be undertaken by the 
State with the approval of the Government of India for the purpose 
of promoting the welfare of the Scheduled Tribes in that State or 
raising the level of administration of the Scheduled Areas therein 
to that of the administration of the rest of the areas of that State: 
Provided further that there shall be paid out of the Consolidated 
Fund of India as grants-in-aid of the revenues of the State of Assam 
sums, capital and recurring, equivalent to--
(a) the average excess of expenditure over the revenues 
during the two years immediately preceding the commencement 
of this Constitution in respect of the administration of the tribal 
areas specified in Part A of the table appended to paragraph 20 
of the Sixth Schedule; and 
(b) the costs of such schemes of development as may be 
undertaken by that State with the approval of the Government 
of India for the purpose of raising the level of administration of 
the said areas to that of the administration of the rest of the 
areas of that State. 
(2) Until provision is made by Parliament under clause (1), the 
powers conferred on Parliament under that clause shall be exercis-
able by the President by order and any order made by the President 
under this clause shall have effect subject to any provision so made 
by ParliEllll2nt: ' 
Provided that after a Finance Commission has been constituted 
no order shall be made under this clause by the President except 
after considering the recommendations of the Finance Commission . 
• • • • • 
7 
Gra .. 
from the 
Union to 
certain 
Stat .... 

LOX SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Contritution of Iadi __ . 
f6hr1 Y. B. ChQfJan, 
Minist. of HonI8 Affairs.) 