AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2 JUN j99g

Bill 34 of 1998

| UNIVERSITIES AND COLLEGES (RESERVATION OF
VACANCIES IN POSTS FOR SCHEDULED CASTES AND
SCHEDULED TRIBES), BILL 1998

By
Suri Monan Sincr, M.P.
rN
BILL

le for reservation of vacancies in posts for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
Universities and Colleges.

8 it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as

1. This Act may be called the Universities and Colleges (Reservation of Vacancies in
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes) Act, 1998.

. In this Act, unless the context otherwise, requires, —

(a) ‘college’ includes any college which is owned or funded, either wholly or
ly, by a State Government or a Union territory administration and also a pri-
ly owned college;

Shorttitle,

Definitions.


Reservation of
posts in
Universities
and colleges for
Scheduled
Castes and
Scheduled
Tribes,

Insertion of new
sections 138
and 13B in Act
No. dof 1956.

Setting upofa
Comunittee १७
monitor
reservation for
Scheduled
Castes and
Scheduled
Tribes in
Universities
andcolleges.

Consequences
of failure of
Universities for
not ensuring
reservations for
Scheduled
Castes and
Scheduled
Tribes,

Cancellation of
recognition of
Universities and
colleges

Actto have aver-
riding effect.

Power to make
rules.

(b) ‘post’ means and includes the post of a professer, lecturer or librarian or
other non-teaching and administrative staff in any University or college; and

(०) ‘University’ has the same meaning as is assigned to it in section 20) of the
University Grants Commission Act, 1956

3. Of the total number of posts in all Universities and colleges, there shall be re-
served sixteen per cent. for the Scheduled Castes and eight per cent. for the Scheduled
‘Tribes,

4. After section 13 of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956, the following
sections shall be inserted, namely: —

“13A. (J) The Commission shall set up a Committee, consisting of such number of
members of the Commission as the Chairman of the Commission may deem fit, for the
purpose of monitoring the implementation of the provisions of the Universities and
Colleges (Reservation of Vacancies in Posts for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes)
Act, 1998.

(2) The Committee set up under sub-section (/) shall submit an annual report to the
National Commission for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled ‘Tribes as regards the
implementation of the provisions of the above said Act.

13B. If any University is found guilty of violating the provisions of the Universities.
and Colleges (Reservation of Vacancies in Posts for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes)
Act, 1998, the Commission shall withhold from such University the grants proposed to be
made out of the fund of the Commission”

5. If any University or college violates the provisions of this Act, the recogni-
tion or affiliation of such University or college shall be cancelled by the University
Grants Commission or the State Government or Union territory administration,
the case may be.

6. The provisions of this Act shall apply notwithstanding anything contained to
contrary in any other law for the time being in force.

7. The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rul
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.


| STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

| The Constitution of India provides for reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes in Lok Sabha and in State Legislative Assemblies in proportion to their
द in the country. Like wise, posts in Government services are reserved for them,

Atpresent, the reservation in posts and services for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
‘Tribes in Universities and colleges is not strictly adhered to and there is no proper check in
this regard. Although the Universities and Colleges are autonomous in nature, their
“expenditure is wholly or partly met by the concerned Government.

It is accordingly proposed to make reservation compulsory in all posts in all
‘Universities and Colleges for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and to provide for
cancellation of their recognition or affiliation in the event of violation of this provision, A
provision has also been made for constitution of a Committee to look into the proper
lementation of the provisions of the Bill.

Hence this Bill,

New Devut: MOHAN SINGH
farch 31, 1998.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to frame rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill, Since the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delega-
tion of the legislative powers is of a normal character,


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

in Universities and Colleges.

to provide for reservation of vacancies in posts for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled

(Shri Mohan Singh, M.P})

MGIP(PLU)MRND—87LS—18-5-1998.