a,

duane

Bill No. 34 of 2002
THE RIGHT TO WORK BILL, 2002

By
‘SuriG.M. BanaTwaLta, M. ९
A
BILL

to provide for the right to work and for allowance till such time as appropriate work is
provided to any citizen, for establishment of Right to Work Fund, for creation of Right to
Work Insurance and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (7) This Act may be called the Right to Work Act, 2002.
(2) It shall extend to the whole of India.
5 (3) It shall come into force at once.
2.In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —

(a) “employment exchange” means an employment exchange set up by the
Government of a State or Union territory;

(b) “fund” means the “Right to Work Fund” established under sub-section (1) of

10 section 9;

प्र (०) “Government” means the Central Government;

(d) “notification” means a notification published in the official Gazette by the
Central Government; and
(०) “prescribed” means prescribed by rulés made under this Act.

15 3. Subject to the provisions contained in sections 7 and 13, every citizen who has
attained the age of eighteen years and who, being unemployed, is registered at an
employment exchange shall have the right to appropriate work to be provided by the
Government.

Short title, ex-
tent and com-
mencement.

Definitions.

Right to Work —


Nature of
Work to be
provided.
Grant of
Allowance.

Removal of
name by Em-
ployment Ex-
change.

Act not to
apply to certain
citizens.

Reduction of
allowance un-
der section 5.

Establishment
of ‘Right to
‘Work Fund’,

Right to Work
Insurance
Policy.

Rebate or
deductions
from Income-
T

Contribution
to Fund.

Categorising
of citizens
entitled to
Right to
work.

Annual report
by
Government.

2

4. The work to be provided by the Government under section 3 shall be suited to the
age, qualification and strength of the citizen concerned.

5. Till such time as work is provided to a citizen under section 3, he or she shall be
entitled to an allowance, not being less than rupees two hundred per week, as may be
prescribed.

6 If a citizen secures any work or job subsequent to his registration with the
employment exchange, either on his own or otherwise, he shall inform the employment

exchange immediately and his name shall be removed by the employment exchange with _

effect from the date of his having secured the job or work.
व. The provisions of this Act shall not apply to any citizen —

(a) who has an income, through any source, not being less than the amount of
allowance fixed under section 5;

(b) who is covered under any scheme of unemployment allowance prevalent in
a State or Union territory.

8. Where a citizen, being unemployed, registers himself with an employment exchange
under section 3, but has an income of his own through any source, the amount of allowance
to which he may be entitled under section 5 shall be reduted by the amount of his such

income. .

9, (1) The Government shall establish a Fund to be called “Right to Work Fund”
for the grant of allowance under thisAct.
(2) The Government shall, from time to time, make such grants to the Fund as may
be required for the purpose of this Act.
(3) These shall be credited to the Fund,—
(a) all grants made by the Government under sub-section (2);
(b) all voluntary donations made to the Fund;
(०) all contributions in respect of Right to Work Insurance Policy under section 10;
(9) all sums collected under Section 12;
(०) any interest or dividend or other return on any investment made out of any
part of the Fund.
(4) All amounts due and payable under the Act and all expenditure relating to the
management and administration of the Fund shall be paid out of the Fund.

10. The Government shall endeavour to have a Right to Work Insurance Policy to
cover whole or any part of such grants of allowances as may be payable under this Act.

11, Notwithstanding anything contained in the Income Tax Act, 1961, all voluntary
donations made to the Fund shall qualify for such rebate or deductions from the income-tax
payable by the donee, as may be prescribed.

12. Every citizen who receives work or allowance under this Act shall contribute to
the fund for a prescribed period immediately after his securing any work or job, whether
provided by the Government under thisAct or on his own, at such a rate as may be prescribed.

13. The Government may, in its endeavour to provide work under this Act, categorise
citizens by notification on the basis of their qualification or any other basis as may be
prescribed and make citizens of such categories entitled to right to work under section 3.

Provided that the Government shall provide the right to work to all eligible citizens
within ten years from the commencement of this Act.

14. As soon as may be after the close of a financial year, the Government shall cause
a general annual report on the working and administration of the Fund and the
implementation of this Act during that year to be prepared and laid before each House of
Parliament, and every such report shall be in such form and shall contain such matters as
may be prescribed,

10

20

25

30

35

45


3

15. (7) The Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions
of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such
tules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:;—
5 (a) the rate of allowance referred to in section 5 and different rates may be
prescribed on the basis of qualification and skills;

(b) the necessary details relating to Right to Work Insurance referred to in
section 10;
(०) rebate or deductions from income-tax under section 11;
10 (9) the rate of contribution to the Fund under section 12;
(c) the basis of categorisation of citizens under section 13;
(0 the form and content of the general annual report mentioned in section 14;
(g) the procedure to regulate all payments under this Act; and
(b) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.

15 16. Every rule made under this Act by the Government and every notification issued
under section 13, shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made or issued, before each
House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of
the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both

20 Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or notification or both Houses agree
that the rule or notification should not be made or issued, the rule or notification shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity
of anything previously done under that rule or notification.

Power to
make rules.

Rules and
notifications to
be laid before
Parliament,


STATEMENT OF OBJECTSAND REASONS

Indian Constitution guarantees to every citizen the fundamental right to life. The
Supreme Court has observed that the right to life, in order to be meaningful, assumes the
availability of necessary means to a decent livelihood. On the other hand, the problem of
unemployment has assumed menacing proportions. Even the educated citizens are rendered
indigent. Lack of opportunity of employment in the country is also leading to brain drain
and exodus of a large number of skilled and unskilled persons abroad.

It is time that concerted efforts are made by the State to assure work to citizens. The
Bill grants every citizen the legal right to work. Till such time as work is provided to a
citizen, he or she shall be entitled to an allowance.

The Bill also provides for the establishment by the Government of a 'Right to Work
Fund’. The Fund will receive grants made by the Government, voluntary donations which
shall qualify for rebate or deductions from income-tax payable by the donee, contributions
at prescribed rate and for specified period from citizens who secure work after registration,
etc. There is also a provision to promote Right to Work Insurance to raise finances.

‘The Bill is realistic, in so far as it provides for even a gradual introduction of the right

to work. To begin with, the Government may categorise citizens on the basis of their

. qualification or any other basis and make citizens of such categories entitled to the right to

work; so, however, that gradually all the citizens secure the right to work within a period of
ten years from the commencement of the Act.

Hehce this Bill.
New DELHI, हि G.M. BANATWALLA
February 27, 2002 ,

PRESIDENTS RECOMMENDATION UNDERARTICLES 117AND 274 OFTHE
CONSTITUTION -

[Copy of letter No. DGET-H-11019/2/2002-MP(G), dated 19 April, 2002 from
Shri Sharad Yadav, Minister of Labour to the Secretary-General, Lok Sabha].

‘The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Right to Work
Bill, 2002 by Shri G.M. Banatwalla, Member of Parliament, recommends the introduction
under articles 117(1) and 274(1) and consideration of the Bill under article 117(3) of the
Constitution in Lok Sabha.



FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to provide allowance to a citizen who has attained the age
of eighteen years and who, being unemployed, is registered at an Employment Exchange.
Till such time as work is provided to such a citizen, he or she shall be entitled to an
allowance not being less than two hundred rupees per week, as may be prescribed. It is
difficult to make an exact estimate of the recurring expenditure that may be involved on
this count. Nevertheless, the provisions of the Bill may be expected to involve recurring
expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore per annum from the Consolidated Fund of
India. The recurring expenditure is expected to reduce substantially as employment situation
improves and as voluntary donations, contributions from citizens who secure work and
contributions from the Right to Work Insurance are received.

No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 15 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. These rules will relate to matters of detail only.

‘The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.



LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the right to work and for allowance till such time as appropriate work is
provided to any citizen, for establishment of Right to Work Fund, for creation of
Right to Work Insurance and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.

(Shri 6. M. Banatwalla, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—S460LS—24.04.2002.