1
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
THE COMPULSORY FURNISHING OF BILLS FOR GOODS AND
SERVICES BILL,  2018
By
DR. RAMESH POKHRIY AL 'NISHANK',  M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory furnishing of Bills for goods sold and services provided by
the suppliers for goods or services and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Furnishing of Bills for Goods and
Services Act, 2018.
 (2)  It extends to the whole of India.
(3)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, "prescribed" means prescribed by
rules made under this Act.
Definitions.
Bill  No. 34 of  2018
5
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
3. It shall be mandatory for every supplier of goods and services to furnish to the
person purchasing goods or availing services a bill indicating separately the cost of goods
purchased or charges paid for availing services, various taxes and service charges, if any.
4. (1) Every supplier of goods or services shall maintain a book containing bills in
printed, electronic or such other format, as may be prescribed.
(2) Every bill furnished to person purchasing goods or availing service shall contain
the following information—
(i) serial no.;
(ii) name, address and registration number of the supplier of goods or services;
(iii) name and address of the receiver of goods or services;
(iv)  amount of taxes payable (each tax has to be given separately);
(v) description and cost of goods sold or services provided; and
(vi) such other information, as may prescribed.
5. (1) There shall be constituted an Authority for registration of supplier of goods or
services.
(2) the Authority shall consist of a Chairperson and such number of other members
as may be prescribed.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to, and terms and conditions of services of the
office of Chairperson and members shall be such as may be prescribed.
(4) The Authority shall have its headquarters at Delhi and an office in each district.
(5) The Authority shall have such number of Officers and staff as it may require for
efficient discharge of its functions.
(6) The salary and allowances payable to, and terms and conditions of services of the
Officers and staff of the Authority shall be such as may be prescribed.
6. The provisions of this Act shall not apply to street vendors, rickshaw pullers,
roadside mechanics and such other persons as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, exempt.
7. Any person who violates the provisions of this Act shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend up to six months or with fine which may extend
upto rupees one lakh or with both.
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
Compulsory
issue of bills for
supply of goods
or service by
suppliers of
goods or
services
provider to
purchaser of
goods or
service.
Maintaining
of books
containing
printed books
by suppliers
of goods or
service
provider.
Constitution
of the
Authority for
registration of
suppliers and
service
providers.
Act shall not
apply to street
vendors,
rickshaw
pullers,
roadside
mechanics etc.
Penalty.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

3
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
With the enactment of the Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017, almost all transactions
of supply of goods or services have come within the ambit of indirect taxation. It has
been observed that whenever a product is sold or a service is provided no invoice or
bill or receipt is issued for selling the goods or offering the services by the seller or
service provider. In practice, no record of selling a product or providing service is
maintained by persons who offer such services. Even buyers or persons availing these
services for a price do not insist on any invoice, bill, receipt and as a result they may
get substandard services and also do not have any mechanism to redress their
grievances. Also, in the absence of any record indicating how much earning was made
by the supplier of goods or services like the doctors, C.A., chemists, transporters, etc.,
it becomes difficult to access their income and the extent of tax evaded. The Bill,
therefore, seeks to—
(i) make it compulsory to furnish invoice, bill or receipt by seller or service
provider for supply of goods or providing of service to the purchaser of goods
and services;
(ii) make it compulsory for every supplier of goods or services to maintain
record of bills issued;
(iii) constitute an authority for registration of goods and service providers;
and
(iv) provide for penalty for violation of the provisions of the Act.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAMESH POKHRIYAL 'NISHANK'
January 24, 2018.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for the constitution of an authority for registration of
suppliers of goods and services. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure
of rupees one hundred crore would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees two hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the provisions of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory furnishing of Bills for goods sold and services provided by
the suppliers for goods or services and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal 'Nishank', M.P.)
MGIPMRND—3998LS(S3)—07-02-2018.