1
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO THE STATE OF
RAJASTHAN BILL, 2017
By
DR. MANOJ RAJORIA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Rajasthan for the purpose of
promoting the welfare of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Other
Backward Sections of people and for the development, exploitation and proper
utilisation of its resources.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Y ear of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance to the State of Rajasthan
Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No.  34 of  2017
5

2
2. There shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India,
every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as special financial assistance
to the State of Rajasthan to meet the costs of such schemes of development, as may be
undertaken by the State with the approval of the Government of India for the purpose of
promoting the welfare of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward
Sections of people or for the development, proper utilisation and exploitation of the resources
in the State.
3. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law to be made by Parliament or for the time being in force.
Special
financial
assistance to
the State of
Rajasthan.
Act not in
derogation of
other law.
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The State of Rajasthan is socially and economically backward. Problems of poverty,
unemployment, illiteracy as well as measures for proper utilization of resources, welfare of
weaker sections in the region are required to be addressed urgently by initiating new
development schemes in a time-bound manner. Being a border State, Rajasthan is strategically
located and it is in the nation's interest that its development needs are addressed. It is,
therefore, necessary that the Central Government should provide special financial assistance
to the State of Rajasthan for its all-round development including the welfare of weaker
sections and for the development and exploitation of its vast resources. Such a step of
providing financial assistance to this State would go a long way in building this nation more
and more strong.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MANOJ RAJORIA
February, 9, 2017.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that there shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the
Consolidated Fund of India, every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as
special financial assistance to the State of Rajasthan to meet the costs of such schemes of
development, as may be undertaken by the State with the approval of the Government of
India.
The Bill, therefore, on enactment, will involve expenditure out of the Consolidated
Fund of India for providing special financial assistance to the State of Rajasthan. As the
sums of moneys which will be given to the State of Rajasthan as special financial assistance
by appropriation by law made by Parliament will be known only after the welfare schemes to
be implemented by the State Government with the approval of Government of India are
identified, it is not possible to give the estimates of recurring expenditure, which would be
involved out of the Consolidated Fund of India at this stage.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of
India.
4

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Rajasthan for the purpose of
promoting the welfare of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Other
Backward Sections of people and for the development, exploitation and
proper utilisation of its resources.
————
(Dr. Manoj Rajoria, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4682LS(S3)—22 -02-2017.