1
THE CENTRAL UNIVERSITIES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI ALOK SANJAR, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Central Universities Act, 2009.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called as the Central Universities (Amendment) Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Central Universities Act, 2009 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in
section 3,—
(a) in sub-section (1),—
(i) for the words ‘and Doctor Harisingh Gour Vishwavidyalaya in the
State of Madhya Pradesh’, the words ‘Doctor Harisingh Gour Vishwavidyalaya and
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No.  34 of 2015
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Amendment
of section 3.
25 of 2009.
5
10

2
Amendment
of section 4.
Barkatullah Vishwavidyalaya in the State of Madhya Pradesh’ shall be substituted;
and
(ii) for the words ‘same names of “Guru Ghasidas Vishwavidyalaya”,
“Doctor Harisingh Gour Vishwavidyalaya,” ’, the words ‘same names of “Guru
Ghasidas Vishwavidyalaya”, “Doctor Harisingh Gour Vishwavidyalaya”,
“Barkatullah Vishwavidyalaya” ’ shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (2),—
(i) for the word “and Hemvati,‘‘the words’’, arkatullah Vishwavidyalaya
and Hemvati” shall be substituted; and
(ii) for the words “Sagar”, the words “Sagar, Bhopal” shall be substituted;
(c) in sub-section (3),—
(i) for the words “and Hemvati”, the words “,Barkatullah Vishvwavidyalaya
and Hemvati” shall be substituted; and
(ii) after the words “the State of Madhya Pradesh’’, the words “Bhopal,
Sehore, Raisen and Vidisha districts of the State of Madhya Pradesh” shall be
substituted.
3. In section 4 of the principal Act,—
(i) in clause (a),—
(a) for the words “or Hemvati”, the words, “ Barkatullah Vishwavidyalaya
or Hemvati” shall be substituted; and
(b) for the words “and Hemvati”, the words, “Barkatullah Vishwavidyalaya
and Hemvati” shall be substituted;
(ii) in clause (b),—
(a) for the wrods “and Hemvati”, the words, “Barkatullah Vishwavidyalaya
and Hemvati” shall be substituted; and
(b) for the words “or Hemvati”, the words, “ Barkatullah Vishwavidyalaya
or Hemvati” shall be substituted;
(iii) in clause (c), for the words “and Hemvati”, at both the places where they
occur, the words, “,Barkatullah Vishwavidyalaya and Hemvati” shall be substituted;
(iv) in clause (d),—
(a) for the words “and Hemvati”, at both the places where they occur, the
words, “Barkatullah Vishwavidyalaya and Hemvati” shall be substituted; and
(b) in the third proviso, for the words “or Hemvati”, at both the places
where they occur, the words “, Barkatullah Vishwavidyalaya or Hemvati”, shall
be substituted;
(v) in clause (e), for the words “and Doctor Harisingh Gour Vishwavidyalaya,”,
the words “, Doctor Harisingh Gour Vishwavidyalaya and Barkatullah Vishwavidyalaya”
shall be substituted; and
(vi) in clause ( f), for the words “and Hemvati” he words “,Barkatullah
Vishwavidyalaya and Hemvati” shall be substituted.
4. In section 28 of the principal Act, in the proviso to sub-section ( 2), for the
words “and Hemvati”, the words, “Barkatullah Vishwavidyalaya and Hemvati” shall
be substituted.
5. In section 45 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), for the words “and
Doctor Harisingh Gour Vishwavidyalaya”, the words “,Doctor Harisingh Gour
Vishwavidyalaya and Barkatullah Vishwavidyalaya” shall be substituted.
Amendment
of section 28.
Amendment
of section 45.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Barkatullah University formerly known as Bhopal University was established in 1970.
In 1988, it was rechristened as Barkatullah Vishwavidyalaya in the memory of great freedom
fighter Prof. Barkatullah.
The university covers almost a full spectrum of higher education offering courses in
faculties of Arts, Science, Social Sciences, , Life Science, Home Science, Medicine, Commerce,
Business Management, Law, Engineering and Education.
The people of Bhopal have been demanding that the university may be upgraded as a
Central University.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to achieve the above objective.
N
EW DELHI; ALOK SANJAR
December 23, 2014.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for establishment of Barkatullah University in the State
of Madhya Pradesh as a body corporate by the same name of ‘Barkatullah Vishwavidyalaya’.
The expenditure, both recurring and non-recurring in respect of the University would be
met out of the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of
about rupees one hundred twenty crore will be involved per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred crore  is also likely to be involved.
4

5
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE  CENTRAL UNIVERSITIES ACT, 2009
(ACT  NO. OF 2009)
* * * * * *
3. (1) This Guru Ghasidas Vishwavidyalaya in the State of Chhattisgarh and Doctor
Harisingh Gour Vishwavidyalaya in the State of Madhya Pradesh, established under the
Madhya Pradesh Vishwavidyalaya Adhiniyam, 1973, and Hemvati Nandan Bahuguna Garhwal
University in the State of Uttarakhand, established under the Uttar Pradesh State University
Act, 1973, shall be established as bodies corporate under this Act by the same names of
"Guru Ghasidas Vishwavidyalaya", ‘‘Doctor Harisingh Gour Vishwavidyalaya’’ and "Hemvati
Nandan Bahuguna Garhwal University", respectively.
(2) The headquarters of Guru Ghasidas Vishwavidyala, Doctor Harisingh Gour
Vishwavidyalaya and Hemvati Nandan Bahuguna Garhwal University, shall be at Bilaspur,
Sagar and Srinagar, respectively.
(3) The jurisdiction of Guru Ghasidas Vishwavidyalaya, Doctor Harisingh Gour
Vishwavidyalaya and Hemvati Nandan Bahuguna Garhwal University shall exend to the
Bilaspur, Raigarh and Surguja districts of the State of Chhattisgarh, the Sagar, Tikamgarh,
Chhatarpur, Panna, Chhindwara and Damoh districts of the State of Madhya Pradesh, and
the Chamoli, Dehradun, Garhwal, Hardwar, Rudraprayag, Tehri Garhwal and Uttarkashi districts
of the State of Uttarakhand, respectively.
* * * * * *
4. On and from the date of commencement of this Act,—
(a) any reference to Guru Ghasidas Vishwavidyalaya, Doctor Harisingh Gour
Vishwavidyalaya or Hemvati Nandan Bahuguna Garhwal University in any contract or
other instrument shall be deemed as a reference to Guru Ghasidas Vishwavidyalaya,
Doctor Harisingh Gour Vishwavidyalaya, and Hemvati Nandan Bahuguna Garhwal
University, respectively, established under this Act;
(b) all properties, movable and immovable of or belonging to Guru Ghasidas
Vishwavidyalaya, Doctor Harisingh Gour Vishwavidyalaya and Hemvati Nandan
Bahuguna Garhwal University, shall vest in Guru Ghasidas Vishwavidyalaya, Doctor
Harisingh Gour Vishwavidyalaya or Hemvati Nandan Bahuguna Garhwal University,
as the case may be, established under this Act;
(c) all rights and liabilities of Guru Ghasidas Vishwavidyalaya, Doctor Harising
Gour Vishwavidyalaya and Hemvati Nandan Bahuguna Garhwal University, shall be
transferred to, and be the rights and liabilities of Guru Ghasidas Vishwavidyalaya,
Doctor Harisingh Gour Vishwavidyalaya and Hemvati Nandan Bahuguna Garhwal
University, respectively, established under this Act;
(d) every person employed by Guru Ghasidas Vishwavidyalaya, Doctor Harisingh
Gour Vishwavidyalaya  and Hemvati Nandan Bahuguna Garhwal University, immediately
before the commencement of this Act shall hold his office or service in Guru Ghaidas
Vishwavidyalaya, Doctor Harisingh Gour Vishwavidyalaya and Hemvati Nandan
Bahuguna Garhwal University, respectively, established under this Act by the same
tenure, at the same remuneration and upon the same terms and conditions and with the
same rights and privileges as to pension, leave, gratuity, provident fund and other
matters as he would have held the same if this Act had not been enacted and shall
continue to do so unless and until his employment is terminated or until such tenure,
remuneration and terms and conditions are duly altered by the Statutes:
* * * * *
* * * * *
Establishment
of
Universities.
Effect of
establishment
of
Universities.

6
Provided also that any reference, by whatever form of words, to the Vice-Chancellor
and Pro-Vice-Chancellor of Guru Ghasidas Vishwavidyalaya, Doctor Harisingh Gour
Vishwavidyalaya or Hemvati   Nandan Bahuguna Garhwal University, in any law for the time
being in force, or in any instrument or other document shall be Construed a reference to the
Vice-Chancellor and the Pro-Vice-Chanceller of Guru Ghasidas Vishwavidyalaya, Doctor
Harisingh Gour Vishwavidyalaya or Hemvati Nandan Bahuguna Garhwal University, as the
case may be, established under this Act;
(e) the Vice-Chancellor of Guru Ghasidas Vishwavidyalaya and Doctor Harisingh
Gour Vishwavidyalaya, appointed under the provisions of the Madhya Pradesh
Vishwavidyalaya Adhiniyam, 1973, and the Vice-Chancellor of Hemvati Nandan
Bahuguna Garhwal University, appointed under the provisions of the Uttar Pradesh
State Universities Act, 1973, shall be deemed to have been appointed as the Vice-
Chancellor under this Act and shell hold office for a period of three months or till such
time the first Vice-Chancellor is appointed under section 44 of the Act whichever is
earlier; and
(f) all Colleges, Institutions,  Schools or Facilities and Department affiliated to or
admitted to the privileges of or maintained by,  Guru Ghasidas Vishwavidyalaya, Doctor
Harisingh Gour Vishwavidyalaya and Hemvati Nandan Bahuguna Garhwal University
shall stand affiliated to or admitted to the privileges of,  or maintained by, Guru Ghasidas
Vishwavidyalaya, Doctor Harisingh Gour Vishwavidyalaya and Hemvati Nandan
Bahuguna Garhwal University, respectively, established under this Act.
* * * * * *
28. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the Ordinances may
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
* * * * * *
(2) The first Ordinances shall be made by the Vice -Chancellor with the previous
approval of the Executive Council and the Ordinances so made may also be amended, respealed
or added to at any time by the Executive Council in the manner prescribed by the Statutes:
Provided that in the case of Guru Ghasidas Vishwavidyalaya and Doctor Harisingh
Gour Vishwavidyalaya and Hemvati Nandan Bahuguna Garhwal University, till such time as
the first Ordinances are not so made, in respect of the matters that are to be provided for by
the Ordinances under this Act and the Statutes, the relevant provisions of the Statutes and
the Ordinances made immediately before the commencement of this Act under the provisions
of the Madhya Pradesh Vishwavidyalaya Adhiniyam, 1973, and the Uttar Pradesh State
Universities Act, 1973, respectively shall be applicable in so far as they are not inconsistent
with the provision of this Act and the Statutes.
* * * * * *
45. (1) In the Madhya Pradesh Vishwavidyalaya Adhiniyam, 1973, in the Second
Schedule, the entries relating to Guru Ghasidas Vishwavidyalaya and Doctor Harisingh Gour
Vishwavidyalaya shall be omitted.
* * * * * *
Power to
make
Ordinances.
Amendment
of Madhya
Pradesh Act,
22 of 1973.

GMGIPMRND—4336LS(S3)—23-02-2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Central Universities Act, 2009.
————
(Shri Alok Sanjar, M.P .)