Short title,
extent and
application.
THE CONSUMER GOODS (MANDATORY PRINTING OF COST OF
PRODUCTION AND MAXIMUM RETAIL PRICE) BILL, 2009
BY
SHRI HANSRAJ GANGARAMJI AHIR, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for printing of cost of production and maximum retail price of consumer
goods being sold in the market and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Consumer Goods (Mandatory Printing of Cost of
Production and Maximum Retail Price) Act, 2009.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall apply to all persons involved in marketing or manufacturing of goods based
on either indigenous or imported materials with   intention of offering it for sale in the market.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means the Central Government or a State
Government as the case may be;
(b) "consumer goods" means all goods and items brought in the market for sale
and are meant for the use and consumption of the consumers;
(c) "cost of production" means cost incurred directly or indirectly by the
manufacturer in the production of goods;
Bill No. 34 of 2009
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Definitions.
5
10

2
(d) "maximum retail price" means such price at which the product shall be sold in
retail and such price shall include all taxes levied on the product;
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(f) "printing" means printing of the cost of production and retail price at a visible
place on the product in Hindi and English and the local language of the place it is
sold.
3. No person shall sell or cause to be sold any consumer goods without the cost of
production and maximum retail price of the product printed on such product after the expiry
of six months from the date of coming into force of this Act.
4. (1) Any person may file a complaint with the appropriate Government in case a
consumer goods  is sold at more than the maximum retail price printed on the product or is
sold without the cost of production of the product printed on it.
(2) The appropriate Government, on receipt of the complaint from any individual or on
its own, shall cause an enquiry made into the complaint.
(3) If, after the enquiry made under sub-section (2), it is found that the provisions of
the Act have been violated, the license of the organization responsible for manufacturing the
consumer goods as also of the organization selling the consumer goods shall be cancelled
forthwith and the person-in-charge of the organization shall be punished with simple
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year and with fine which shall not
be less than rupees one lakh.
5. The provision of this Act shall be given wide publicity by the appropriate Government
through such media as it may deem fit.
6. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of any other
law, for the time being in force, relating to matters provided in this Act.
7. (1) The Central Government may make rules for carrying out the purposes of this
Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Mandatory
printing of
cost of
production
and maximum
retail price on
packaging of
consumer
goods.
Provision of
complaint
against selling
of consumer
goods for a
price more
than
maximum
retail price,
etc.
Act to be
given wide
publicity.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
It is generally seen that the prices of consumer goods sold in the markets are determined
arbitrarily by the manufacturers. In this process, the manufacturers gain huge profit as the
actual manufacturing cost is very low. The consumers' interests are compromised and they
are compelled to buy goods at much higher prices in comparison to actual manufacturing
cost of goods. Thus, consumers are subjected to economic exploitation.
For example, potato chips, drinking water, soft drinks, automobiles, medicines, etc. are
being sold at a price much higher than their cost price. The manufacturers arbitrarily fix the
price and the consumers are compelled to purchase goods at higher costs. If it is made
mandatory for the manufacturers to print the actual cost of production of goods alongwith
their maximum retail price it will help to curb the greed of the manufacturers. Such a measure
will also help the consumers in making a decision regarding buying the product.
It is the duty of the Government to bring a legislation for protecting the interests of
consumers. In the wake of economic liberalisation, it has become essential that the consumers
are given the right to know the actual manufacturing cost of the goods they are going to
purchase.
It is also in the public interest to make commodities and goods available at fair prices
to consumers. The interests of consumers can be protected against the vice of profiteering
by making the goods and commodities available to them at a reasonable price.
Hence the Bill.
N
EW DELHI; HANSRAJ  GANGARAMJI  AHIR
June 22, 2009
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides that appropriate Government shall give wide publicity to
the provisions of this Act.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. The State Governments will also incur expenditure from their respective Consolidated
Funds. An annual recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty-five crore is likely to be
incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five crore is also likely to be incurred.
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only and as such the
delegation of  legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for printing of cost of production and maximum retail price of consumer
goods being sold in the market and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Hansraj Gangaramji Ahir, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2387LS(S-5)—02.07.2009.