 Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Bill No. 34 of  2023
THE COMPULSORY TEACHING OF MORAL ETHICS
IN EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS BILL, 2023
By
Sඁඋං Rൺ ඏං Kංඌඁൺඇ, M.P.
ൺ
BILL
to provide for compulsory teaching of  moral ethics in all educational institutions and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
Bൾ  it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as  follows :—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Teaching of Moral Ethics in Educational Institutions Act, 2023.     
     (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
 ( a) “Advisory Council” means the Advisory Council for Teaching Moral Ethics    constituted under section 6;
Short title and 
commencement.
5

(b) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of that State and in all other cases, the Central Government; 
(c) “educational institution” means a primary or a middle or a secondary or a senior secondary level school or an University or College imparting education to children, by whatever name such institution is called but does not include a minority educational institution; 
(d) “moral ethics” means philosophy based on teaching of good principles and values cherished for years including regard and respect for elders, parents, teachers and guardians and setting reasonable standards of virtues and reinforcing discipline among students with a view to enable them to distinguish between right and wrong; and
  ( e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. From such date, as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette specify, moral ethics shall be taught as a compulsory subject in all educational institutions from such class onwards as may be determined by the Central Government on the recommendation of the Advisory Council.
4.  The appropriate Government shall, immediately after issuance of  the notification under section 3, issue directions for compulsory teaching of moral ethics in educational institutions within its jurisdiction.
5.  Subject to such rules, as may be prescribed, the appropriate Government shall ensure appointment of such number of teachers with such qualifications, as may be specified, for teaching moral ethics in all educational institutions.
6. ( 1) The Central Government shall, within six months of the coming into force of the Compulsory Teaching Moral Ethics in Educational Institutions Act, 2023, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute an Advisory Council for Teaching Moral Ethics. 
 ( 2) The Advisory Council shall consist of such number of persons, having special knowledge or experience in the teaching of moral ethics, as the Central Government may deem fit.
7. The Advisory Council shall perform the following functions, namely:— 
  ( a) recommend to the Central Government the class from which moral ethics    shall be taught in educational institutions; 
 ( b) recommend to the appropriate Government the qualifications of teachers to be   appointed in educational institutions for teaching moral ethics; 
(c) recommend to the appropriate Government the institutions which may be given recognition for training teachers in moral ethics for the purpose of their appointment in educational institutions; 
(d) co-ordinate with the appropriate Government and the school authorities with a view to ensuring effective implementation of the provisions of this Act.
8. The appropriate Government shall derecognize educational institutions, which does not comply with the provisions of section 4, after giving such institution a reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
9. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by law by Parliament in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
10. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force. 
2
40

11.  (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
 ( 2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the  rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
5
10
3

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
A child learns from whatever he observes around and, therefore, society, parents and the State owe a duty to create an atmosphere in which children may have all round development. It has been generally believed among different sections of the society that morality and respect to moral values is the fulcrum of any society. 
Morality plays a vital role in our daily life. It is very necessary for every person to have certain basic knowledge of moral values and ethics. 
It has been said that “Knowledge is the Power”, and indeed it is not wrong. It is responsibility of our education system to make a common man morally sound. Current education system in educational institutions lays emphasis on imparting quality education. However, it is missing out on imparting teaching of the moral ethics and values and is, therefore, incomplete without it. 
The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide for teaching moral ethics compulsory in all educational institutions to make every students who are the future of the country  to grow mature and easily distinguish between the right and the wrong.
 Hence this Bill.
           Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;           RA VI KISHAN
January 24, 2023.
 
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for appointment of teachers for teaching moral ethics in all educational institutions. Clause 6 provides for constitution of Advisory Council for Teaching Moral Ethics by the Central Government. Clause 9 provides for payment of adequate funds to the States for carrying out the purposes of the Act.  The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred crore will be involved per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be involved.
 
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the purpose of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 
 
6

                                              
LOK  SABHA
ൺ
BILL
to provide for compulsory teaching of moral ethics in all educational institutions and for 
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
(Shri Ravi Kishan, M.P .)