AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

40 per 700

Bill No. 34 of 2000

THE ALL-INDIA SERVICES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
By
Suri 50800 Monte, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the All-India Services Act, 1951.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the All-India Services (Amendment) Act, 2000.
(2) It shall come into force at once.

Es 2. After section 2A of the All-India Services Act, 1951, the following sections shall
be inserted, namely.—

“2B (1). It shall be the special responsibility and duty of a member of an al

___ Service to ensure that the plans or projects or any development work under his juris

or charge or administrative control or for the execution or completion or carrying out of

10 which he is responsible in any way, are executed or completed or carried out efficiently,
economically and within the scheduled time.

(2) It shall be the responsibility and duty of a member of an all-India service to
ensure that plans and projects recommended by the members of Parliament or of the State
Legislatures under any special scheme are executed within the schedule and the member of

15 all-India service shall take special care to inform the member of Parliament or of the State
Legislature about the progress of the project from time to time.

Short title and
extent.

Insertion of
new section
2B.

Special
responsibili-
ty and duty of
members of
All-India
Services to
execute
projects under
their jurisdic-
tion within
scheduled

time.


Evaluation of

of every
member of
All-India

‘Submission of
report to the
Reporting
Officer.

Assessment of
Reporting
Officer and
submission of
Report to
higher officer.

Explanation in
case of delay or
negligence by
officers con-
cerned.

Annual _ per-
formance to
form the basis
of promotion to
higher post.
Special evalua-
tion of the per-
formance of
members of
All- India Serv-
ices.

Termination of
Service.

2C. Notwithstanding anything in this Act, at the end of every year, the performance
of every member of an all India Service shall be evaluated, with particular reference to the
execution or carrying out of the specific plans or projects or development works under his
jurisdiction or in his charge or administrative control or for the execution or carrying out of
which he is responsible in any way, and a performance report prepared.

2D. For the purpose of evaluating the performance of a member of an all-India
Service under section 2C, the officer to be reported upon shall submit to the reporting
officer, at the end of each year, a brief resume, not exceeding three hundred works, of the
work done by him during the year under review, bringing out his special achievement, if
any, and the resume so submitted shall form part of the confidential record of the officer.

2E. (1) The reporting officer shall take note of the resume while preparing the per-
formance report and shall, after making his own assessment of and comments on the work
of the officer, submit the report along with the entire record to the next higher officer,
namely, the reviewing officer who shall add his own comments, if any. .

(2) The reporting officer shall make a special mention in the performance report of
any delay or set-back in the execution or carrying out of the specific plans, projects or
development works under the charge or administrative control of the officer reported upon
due to the negligence or inefficiency of the officer reported upon.

(3) The annual performance reports shall form part of the confidential record of the
officer.

2F, Where as a result of annual evaluation of the performance of an officer, it is
found that the work under his charge has suffered or has been delayed due to the negligence
or inefficiency of the officer, he shall be called upon to explain such delay and negligence
or inefficiency and suitable action against the officer shall be taken if found guilty.

2G. The annual performance reports shall form the basis while considering a mem-
ber of an all- India Service for promotion to higher post or grade.

2H. (1) A special evaluation of the performance of every member of an all-India
Service shall be made after the completion of every five years of his service and a special
report shall be submitted, within three months thereof, for the purpose of considering his
suitability for retention in the service.

(2) The annual performance reports for the five years under review shall be taken
into consideration for the purpose of special evaluation under sub-section (1).

21. Ifa member of an all-India Service earns an adverse report twice consecutively,
as a result of special evaluation under section 2H, his services shall be terminated.”.

15

20

30


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Removal of poverty and attainment of economic self-reliance are the two major tasks
before the country. After independence, the country embarked upon a programme of
development weighed in favour of basic industries, agriculture and social services. But,
Poverty is still a major problem. Large number of our people are still living below the
poverty level. Our planning, in fact, has failed to make a major dent on poverty. One reason
for this failure has been the inadequate rate of growth. The actual performance of the economy
in the various Five Year Plans shows a substantial shortfall in the achievement of targets
fixed in various sectors of economy. One of the main reasons for shortfall in achieving the
targets has been the faulty and leisurely implementation of the Plans and execution of pro-
grammes and projects. In majority of cases, the execution of projects and development
works and completion of works under public undertakings have taken a much longer pe-
tiod than envisaged. The compulsions of the present situation make it necessary to acceler-
ate the pace of implementation in the current Plan.

To accelerate the pace of progress and to achieve the Plan targets, it is necessary that
administrators or the persons responsible for implementation of projects should be made
accountable for results.

Members of Parliament recommend various plans and projects under MPLAD
Scheme. However, these schemes are also not executed within specified period and prop-
erly. Members of Parliament are not informed about the progress of the plans.

Officers of all-India Services, particularly the officers of the Indian Administrative
Service and the Indian Service of Engineers, have been entrusted, in one way or other, the
task of implementation of our Plans. But, the pace of implementation of plans and manage-
ment of public sector undertakings has shown that much more was expected of these offic-
ers. In fact, they should be made accountable for the results, if at all the implementation of
Plans and rate of growth is to be accelerated. For this purpose, it is necessary that a provi-
sion is made in the All-India Services Act, 1951 for yearly evaluation of performance of
every member of an All-India Service in relation to the execution or carrying out of specific
plans, projects or development works under his charge or with which he is associated in an
executive capacity and for fixing his responsibility for any delay or set-back in the execu-
tion of plans or projects or for any mismanagement, etc. due to his negligence or ineffi-
ciency.

The Administrative Reforms Commission in its Report on Personnel Administration
presented to the Government on the 18th April, 1969 had recommended for evaluation of
the performance of officers and, with that object in view, had suggested for preparation of
annual performance report of every officer after taking due note of the resume to be submit-
ted by the officer whose performance is under review, at the end of each year giving a brief
account of work done by him and bringing out his special achievements, if any, during that
year. It was recommended that the annual performance reports should form part of the
confidential record of the officer.

The annual performance reports should be given due weight while considering a
member of an all-India Service for promotion to a higher post. Special evaluation should be
made after every five years keeping in view the annual performance reports and if an of-
ficer earns an adverse report twice consecutively as a result of such special evaluation, his
services should be terminated. Such a provision would go a long way in accelerating the
implementation of Plans and achieving a higher rate of growth of our economy.

Hence this Bill.

New Deu; SUBODH MOHITE
February, 3, 2000.


LOK SABHA

A
s BILL
further to amend the All-India Services Act, 1951.

(Shri Subodh Mohite, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—3582LS—19.2.2000