5

10

As InTRODUCED tN Lox SABHA

14 auc ४0%

Bill No. 34 of 2006

THE PROMOTION OF SELF-EMPLOYMENT BILL, 2006

By
Suri CHANDRAKANT Kuaire, M.P.
A
BILL

to provide for the promotion of self-employment among educated unemployed youth and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

Bz it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (7) This Act may be called the Promotion of Self-Employment Act, 2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.

2. In this act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;

(b) "educated" means any person who has passed higher secondary
examination from a recognized institution;

Short title,
extent and
‘commencement.

Definitions.


Appropriate
Government
to nominate
Self-
Employment
Officers in
every district.

Youth to
apply to Self-
Employment
Officers for
self-
employment.

Functions of
the Self-
Employment
Officer.

Duty of the
Self-
Employment
Officer to
ensure self-
employment
within 8 time
frame.
Educated
youth to be
paid
compensation
in case of
non-
implementation
of the Act.

Power to
make rules.

2

(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;

(@ "self-employment" means providing the educated unemployed youth their
primary source of income through assistance for setting up manufacturing, trading or
processing units or service centres; and

(९) "youth" means any person who has completed the age of eighteen years but
has not completed the age of thirty-five years.

3. (1) The appropriate Government shall nominate an officer not below the rank of
District Magistrate as Self-Employment Officer in every district.
(2) The appropriate Government shall make available necessary officers and staff
to assist Self-Employment Officer.

4. (1) Any educated youth either individually or ina group, may apply, in a prescribed
application form, to the Self-Employment Officer, for self-employment.

(2) The Self-Employment Officer shall scrutinize the application for self-employment
and advise the youth/group of youth regarding type of units for self-employment, he/they
might set up depending on his/their qualification and other factors.

(3) Once the youth/group of youth have conveyed their decision for setting up the
unit for self-employment, the Self-Employment Officer shall render them full assistance in
setting up unit for self-employment.

5. The Self-Employment Officer shall be responsible for implementing the provisions
of this Act and shall perform the following functions: —

(a) to coordinate with commercial banks for the purpose of providing loans to
the youth/group of youth for self-employment;

(8) to coordinate with local civic agencies for the purpose of providing electricity/
water connection, land acquisition and fulfilling other requirements; and

(c) to provide all other assistance required for setting up self-employment units.
6. It shall be the duty of the Self-Employment Officer to ensure that educated youth are

provided with self-employment within a time frame to be prescribéd by the Central
Government.

7. The appropriate Government shall provide such amount of compensation as may be
prescribed to every eligible educated youth who has applied for but not been provided with
self-employment within the time frame prescribed under the Act.

8. The Central Government may, by notification in the official gazette, make rules for
carrying out the provisions of this Act. :

10


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The country has huge number of unemployed persons. The total number of:
unemployed persons has reached almost thirty million. These youth are educated and
full of energy. If their talent is harnessed properly with some assistance from the
Government, they can be gainful employed and will also contribute to the growth of the
economy of the country. Moreover, with the liberalization policy of the Government,
the job opportunities in the Government sector have come down. Therefore, it is
earnestly required that policy of self-employment be encouraged. If the youth of today
are provided with self-employment, it will not only help to exterminate the frustration
brewing within them but will go a long way in harnessing their energy for the
development of the nation.

Promotion of self-employment among youth will also result in increase in the
production of indigenous goods thus reducing our dependence on imports.

The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.

New एम; CHANDRAKANT KHAIRE
March 6, 2006.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides that suitable number of officers and staff shall be
provided to the Self-Employment Officers to implement the provisions of this Act.
Clause 7 of the Bill provides that prescribed compensation shall be paid to such
uneducated youth as have not been provided with self-employment. The Bill, therefore,
if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated
that an annual recurring expenditure of rupees two thousand crore would be involved
by way of expenditure in respect of Union territories and grants to State Governments.

A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one thousand crore is also likely to be
involved. A है



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the provisions of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only and as such
the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.

w


- LOK SABHA

A
BLL

to provide for the promotion of self-employment among educated unemployed youth and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

(Shri Chandrakant Khaire, M.P)

MGIPMRND—67931.S(S4}—18-04-2006.