     AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 34 of 2021
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN FROM SEXUAL OFFENCES
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2021
By
SHRI ANUBHA V MOHANTY, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences
(Amendment) Act, 2021.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title
and
commencement.
5

  2. In section 11 of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012,
after clause (vi), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:-
“(vii) establishes or builds a relationship with a child, either in person or
through the use of the internet or such other digital technologies, in order to
entice or persuade, either online or offline, that child to engage in sexual
contact with that person.’’
5
2
Amendment of
Section 11.
32 of 2012

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Over the past few years, with the growing prevalence of social media, the internet
has become a breeding ground for activities aimed at sexual harassment of children.
In particular, a new practise, commonly known as “grooming’’ has emerged, whereby
the offender establishes a “friendly’’ relationship with a child, especially (but not
necessarily) over the internet, in order to entice or persuade the child to engage in
sexual acts.
The anonymity provided by the internet, coupled with easy and unregulated access
to social media, has fuelled the rise of child grooming.  This grooming has the potential
to leave a deep impact on child’s physical, emotional and psychological well-being.
The devastating effect of grooming can also be long-term and haunt the victim even in
their adulthood.  Hence, there is a strong need to explicitly criminalise the act of
grooming.
Currently, the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 recognises
six distinct categories of sexual harassment of children under section 11. However,
none of these categories are sufficiently comprehensive to include within its ambit
the act of grooming.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the parent Act with a view to insert grooming
of children as a new category of sexual harassment under section 11, by punishing
any act through which a person establishes or builds a relationship with a child, either
in person or through the internet to facilitate online or offline sexual exploitation of
such child.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
    NEW DELHI;                 ANUBHA V MOHANTY
January 22, 2021
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN FROM SEXUAL OFFENCES ACT, 2012
   * * * * * *
11. A person is said to commit sexual harassment upon a child when such person
with sexual intent,—
(i) utters any word or makes any sound, or makes any gesture or exhibits
any object or part of body with the intention that such word or sound shall be
heard, or such gesture or object or part of body shall be seen by the child; or
(ii) makes a child exhibit his body or any part of his body so as it is seen
by such person or any other person; or
(iii) shows any object to a child in any form or media for pornographic
purposes; or
(iv) repeatedly or constantly follows or watches or contacts a child either
directly or through electronic, digital or any other means; or
(v) threatens to use, in any form of media, a real or fabricated depiction
through electronic, film or digital or any other mode, of any part of the body of
the child or the involvement of the child in a sexual act; or
 (vi) entices a child for pornographic purposes or gives gratification
therefor.
*                 *                *               *               *         *               *
Sexual
harassment
4

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
further to amend the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012
————
(Shri  Anubhav Mohanty, M.P.)