THE INTEGRATED CHILD DEVELOPMENT SERVICES
(REGULARISATION) BILL, 2007
By
SHRI C.K. CHANDRAPPAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for regularisation and universalisation of Integrated Child Development
Services in the country and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Integrated Child Development Services (Regularisation)
Act, 2007.
(2) It shall extend to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “anganwadi centre” means any centre which shall be used for providing
integrated child development services by the appropriate Government and includes
all  the  existing  centres  being  used  for  providing  integrated  child  development
services in the country;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
Bill No. 34 of  2007
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
10

(b) “appropriate Government” means in case of a State, the Government of that
State and in all other cases, the Central Government; and
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. On and from such date as the Central Government may by notification in the
Official Gazette appoint, the existing Integrated Child Development Services for the overall
development of children shall be deemed to be regularized and institutionalized under this
Act in such manner as may be prescribed.
4. (1) The appropriate Government shall establish adequate number of anganwadi
centres in every settlement or village throughout the country.
(2) The appropriate Government shall make available land, building and all basic
facilities including nutritious meal, educational games, toys, stationery items, books,
television sets, computers and all other materials required for the overall development of
children and facility of pre-natal and post-natal care to infants and mothers at every anganwadi
centre.
(3) The appropriate Government shall regulate the functioning of anganwadi centres,
through such bodies of local self-government, as may be prescribed.
5. (1) In every anganwadi centre requisite number of anganwadi teachers and anganwadi
assistants shall be appointed.
(2) The 'Anganwadi workers' and 'helpers' working in the existing anganwadi centres
shall hereafter be known as 'Anganwadi teachers' and 'Anganwadi assistants', respectively.
6. (1) The Central Government shall set up a Committee to be known as the National
Committee for the Welfare of Persons working in anganwadi centres in such manner as
may be prescribed.
(2) The National Committee shall perform the following functions, namely:—
(i) suggest measures to streamline the functioning of anganwadi centres;
(ii) identify and recommend about areas where new anganwadi centres need to
be opened keeping in view the number of incidences of malnutrition reported among
children and women living in that area;
(iii) monitor the functioning of anganwadi centres particularly in the areas where
incidences of malnutrition of children and women are reported;
(iv)  conduct   foundation  training  course  for  anganwadi  teachers  and
assistants;
(v) prescribe the educational qualification and other criteria for appointment as
anganwadi teachers and assistants;
(vi) regulate conditions of service including working hours, salary, allowances,
over-time, honorarium, leave, provident fund and other benefits including maternity
benefits for anganwadi teachers and assistants;
(vii) provide free health care to anganwadi teachers and assistants and their
minor children;
(viii) provide insurance cover to anganwadi teachers and assistants; and
(ix) suggest any other measures for the overall development of children and
women and efficient functioning of anganwadi centres.
Regularisation
and
institutiona-
lization of
integrated
child
development
schemes.
Setting up of
adequate
number of
anganwadi
centres.
Appointment
of ‘anganwadi
teachers and
anganwadi
assistants'.
National
Committee
for the
welfare of
persons
working in
anganwadi
centres.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
2

7. (1) Every anganwadi teacher and assistant shall undergo foundation training course
in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that the foundation training course shall be optional for all anganwadi teachers
and assistants who have attained the age of fifty years:
Provided further that any anganwadi teacher or assistant who has attained the age of
fifty years and who does not opt for foundation training course shall not be entitled for any
benefit under the provisions of this Act.
(2) Within one year from the commencement of this Act, every anganwadi teacher or
assistant below the age of fifty years shall furnish a declaration stating therein his willing-
ness to join the foundation training course as provided under sub-section (1).
(3) Any anganwadi teacher or assistant below the age of fifty years who does not
furnish the declaration and does not opt for foundation training course as provided under
sub-section (1) and (2) shall be compulsorily retired.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation by the Parliament, release
the necessary funds to the National Committee for effective implementation of the Act.
9. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government  may, by  order  published  in the Official Gazette, make such provision, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient
for removing such difficulty.
10. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Release of
funds.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power to
make rules.
Foundation
training
course for
anganwadi
teachers and
assistants.
5
10
15
20
3

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The rights of women and children and their aspirations are of paramount importance in
our march towards an inclusive and equitable society. Keeping in view the constitutional
provisions and for giving greater focus to issues relating to women and children, it is necessary
to invest more in the programmes meant for eradication of malnutrition and expansion of
anganwadi centres. It is a fact that the Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) has
grown by leaps and bounds with the wide range of activities being brought within its ambit
and consequent expansion of the area of work of anganwadi workers and helpers and
increasing their working hours. There is no justification for them being treated as social and
honorary workers with the paltry amount doled out to them as honorarium, especially when
they have put in long years of service. The credit of success of the integrated child
development services scheme goes to the hard work of the anganwadi workers and helpers.
These anganwadi workers are working in close relationship with the people and their services
are being utilized by the respective State Governments for a whole range of activities—be it
survey, promotion of small savings, providing health care, group insurance or non-formal
education. Despite their yeoman's service to the people at the grassroots level, the demand
for seeking regularization and institutionalization of services is not being agreed to by the
Government. Therefore, in recognition of their services, they need improvement in their
service conditions and remunerations. There is also need for an effective system of
supervision of anganwadi centres.
In view of the above, the Bill seeks to provide for universalisation, regularization and
institutionalization of Integrated Child Development Services for the all-round development
of children and expansion of anganwadi centres for effective implementation of the scheme.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; C.K. CHANDRAPPAN
February 19, 2007.
4
SERVER 3 \ BILL 2004 \ LS \850LS.PM65

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for institutionalization of the Integrated Child Development
Services by the Central Government. Clause 4 provides for setting up of adequate number of
anganwadi centres with all basic facilities in every settlement. Clause 5 provides for
appointment of anganwadi teachers and assistants. Clause 6 provides for setting up of a
National Committee for the welfare of persons working in anganwadi centres. Clause 8
provides that the Central Government shall release necessary funds to the National Committee
for effective implementation of this Bill. The State Government shall incur expenditure in
respect of their State out of their respective Consolidated Funds for implementing the
provisions of this Bill. The Bill, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees ten thousand
crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGA TED  LEGISLATION
Clause 10 empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the
provisions of the Bill. Since the rules will relate to matters of detail only,  the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for regularisation and universalisation of Integrated Child Development
Services in the country and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
—————
(Shri C.K. Chandrappan, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—850LS(S-3)—07.03.2007.