Short title and
commencement.
THE  DOUBTFUL VOTERS IN THE STATE OF ASSAM
(SPECIAL PROVISIONS) BILL, 2020
By
SHRI  ABDUL KHALEQUE,  M.P .
A
BILL
to make eligible such doubtful voters in the State of Assam whose names appear
in the Assam National Register of Citizens (NRC) final list to contest any
election and cast vote at such elections and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  ( 1) This Act may be called as the Doubtful V oters in the State of Assam
(Special Provisions) Act, 2020.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires "doubtful voter" means a
voter in Assam who could not provide evidence in favour of his Indian nationality
and was marked with 'D' in the electoral roll to indicate doubtful status of his Indian
nationality.
   Bill No. 34 of  2020
Definition.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
3. Every voter,—
(i) who has been categorised as a doubtful voter in the State of Assam;
and
(ii) whose name appears in the Assam National Register of Citizens (NRC)
final list published on 31 August, 2019,
shall be eligible to contest any election and cast vote at such election,
notwithstanding anything contained to the contrary in any other law, judgment,
decree, rule or order in force in the State of Assam.
4. (1) The Central Government shall establish a Seva Kendra in every district
in the State of Assam to settle cases where the name of a person does not appear in
the Assam NRC final list published on 31st August, 2019 but names of his family
members do appear in such list.
(2) The Seva Kendra shall be presided over the such Officer, not below the
rank of Joint Secretary, as the Central Government may decide.
(3) The Central Government shall appoint such numbers of Officers and Staff
to the Seva Kendra as it deem necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of
service of Officers and Staff of the Seva Kendra shall be such as may be prescribed
by rules made under this Act.
5. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or
the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in
the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Doubtful voters
in the State of
Assam to be
eligible to
contest and cast
vote in
elections.
Establishment of
Seva Kendras.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Government has released the final list of National Register of Citizens
(NRC) in the State of Assam on 31st August, 2019. From the final list, it is observed
that a number of citizens who were included in the doubtful voters section of the
voters list in the State of Assam are appearing in the final NRC. The inclusion of
such voters in the final NRC confirms that such voters are citizens of India and
they are eligible for voting rights at elections. Therefore, it is necessary that such
voters who are disenfranchised in the existing voters list should have their voters'
right. Further, it is also observed that a large number of citizens whose family
members have been included in the final NRC do not find a place in the list. Such
persons whose family members are included in the final NRC should be given a
chance to appeal before a Seva Kendras in the Districts where they can make their
representations rather than referring their cases to the Foreigners Tribunal set up
in the State.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to abolish the doubtful voters list in relation to those
citizens whose names are appearing in the National Register of Citizens final list
issued on 31st August, 2019. Further establishing Seva Kendras for such persons
the names of whose family members are appearing in the NRC will save trouble to
a lot of persons who are genuinely citizens of India but for some reason or other
are left out from the NRC.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW D ELHI; ABDUL KHALEQUE
December 12,  2019.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for establishment of Seva Kendra in every district
of State of Assam to settle cases where the name of a person does not appear in
the Assam NRC final list published on 31 August, 2019 but names of his family
members do appear in such list. It also provides for appointment of Officers and
Staff to the Seva Kendra. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of
about rupees seventy five crore will be involved per annum from the Consolidated
Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only the
delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to make eligible such doubtful voters in the State of Assam whose names appear
in the Assam National Register of Citizens (NRC) final list to contest any
election and cast vote at such elections and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Abdul Khaleque, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—4626LS—(S3)—06.02.2020.