AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

11 MAR 2005

Bill No. 34 of 2005
THE TOBACCO GROWERS (BENEFIT) BILL, 2005
| By
SHRI R. Samaasiva RAO, M.P.
A
BILL

10 provide for the protection and welfare of tobacco growers.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the F ifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:— |

1. (1) This Act may be called the Tobacco Growers (Benefit) Act, 2005. Short title,

: extent and
(2) It extends to the whole of India. commence-_

न | ८ 6 t.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Definitions.
(a) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.

(6) “small and marginal tobacco growers” shall mean tobacco growers who
are declared as such under this Act; and

(c) "tobacco grower" means any person who cultivates tobacco.



Central
Government
to procure
tobacco and
fix remunera-
tive price
thereof.

Export of
excess
tobacco.

Insurance.

Estabhish-
ment of
Tobacco
Growers
Benefit fund.

Power to
make rules.

हे

3. The Central Government shail procure through the Tobacco Board all the :
tobacco produced in the country and shall also fix remunerative price of tobacco every
year after taking into consideration the increase in prices of tobacco seeds, pesticides
and fertilizers, total investment capacity of tobacco growers and such other factors, as
may be prescribed.

4. The Central Government shail endeavour to export all the excess tobacco pro-
duced in the country during a year.

5. The entire Tobacco crop, to the extent of quantity authorised by the Tobacco _
Board and grown by the small and marginal tobacco growers shall be compulsorily
insured free of cost by the Central Government against natural calamities, decline in
yields of tobacco produced, fallin prices of tobacco and such other eventualities, as may
be prescribed.

6. (/) The Central Government shall establish a Fund to be known as the Tobacco

Growers Benefit Fund.

(2) The Central Government, the State Governments and the Indian
Manufacturers of Tobacco Products, who use tobacco as raw material, shall contribute
to the Fund in such ratio, as may be prescribed.

(3) The fund shall be utilized for the following purposes:—

(a) to extend financial help to the small and marginal farmers in such cases, as
may be prescribed.

(b) giving financial assistance to tobacco growers for purchasing tobacco
seeds, pesticides and fertilizers and in cases of low yields or fall in prices of tobacco
or destruction of their crops due to rains, cyclones and floods.

7. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The present trend is to ban tobacco and its use wherever possible and to dissuade

people from using Tobacco products in public. Enactments have been brought about by
the Central and the State Governments.

The Central Government and State Governments do not encourage tobacco
cultivation. In fact, the tobacco growers are advised to explore alternative crops.

However, agriculturists who are growing tobacco for the last many years due to
their traditional attachment to the tobacco crop will not be able to grow other crops and
the new crops are also not likely to give that much of earnings as tobacco despite difficul-
ties involved in growing tobacco.

Tobacco is-one of the commercial crops being produced in Andhra Pradesh and
other States. The estimated area under tobacco cultivation is 6600 hectares and most of
which is under flue-cured virginia (FCV) tobacco.

Due to problems being faced for marketing the produce, the farmers are
discouraged to raise the crop as a result of which the area under tobacco cultivation is
being reduced. The tobacco grower is a victim of fall in the prices and also of other natural
calamities like storms, heavy rains, etc. Therefore, there is an urgent need to bring a law
ensuring the tobacco growers of the Government’s help in the event of excess production
of fall in prices or damage to crops. Therefore, the creation of a fund and provision of
insurance cover for tobacco growers will help them immensely

To impress upon the Government to come to the rescue of the growers, it may be
noted that tobacco crop is also an employment generator at farm level. It also earns huge
amounts of Central Excise and Foreign Exchange to the tune of rupees 8000 crore and 1000
crore, respectively.

Hence this Bill.

New DELHI; R. SAMBASIVA RAO
February 1, 2005.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the purchase of tobacco from tobacco growers by
the Central Government through Tobacco Board of India.

Clause 5 provides that the entire tobacco grown by small and marginal tobacco -
growers shall be compulsorily insured free of cost by the Central Government against
natural calamities, etc.

Clause 6 provides for the establishment of a Tobacco Growers Benefit Fund to
which the Central Government and State Governments shall contribute in such ratio as
may be prescribed. |

The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of rupees three hundred crore
per-annum.

A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees four hundred crore is also likely
to be involved.



| MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out

the purposes of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only. The delegation of
legislative power is of anormal character.



LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the protection and welfare of tobacco growers.

Shri R. Sambasiva Rao, M.P.)

MGIPMRND—4412is—26.2.2005..