1
THE CENTRAL HIMALAY AN STATES DEVELOPMENT
COUNCIL BILL, 2014
By
DR. RAMESH POKHRIYAL ‘NISHANK’, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the setting up of a Council to be called the Central Himalayan States
Development Council to formulate development plans and schemes and also to monitor
their implementation for the balanced and all-round development of the hilly States
comprising the Central Himalayan region and for matters connected therewith.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth  Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Central Himalayan States Development Council Act,
2014.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint :
Provided that such date shall not be later than six months from the date of assent of
this Act.
Bill No. 34 of  2014
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title
and
commencement.
5

2
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Council” means the Central Himalayan States Development Council set up
under section 3;
(b) “Himalayan States” mean the States of Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir
and Uttarakhand; and
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) There shall be set up a Council to be called the Central Himalayan States
Development Council which shall consist of the following members, namely:—
(i) the Chief Minister of each of the Himalayan States:
Provided that if there is no Council of Ministers in any Himalayan State, the President
of India may nominate one person to represent such State in the Council for such period as
there is no Council of Ministers in such State;
(ii) members of the House of the People and Council of States representing the
Himalayan States;
(iii) five persons having special knowledge of and experience in social and
economic planning preferably in the hilly areas to be nominated by the President; and
(iv) the Union Minister holding charge of the Ministry of Planning.
(2) The Chairperson of the Council shall be nominated by the President from amongst
the Chief Ministers of the Himalayan States in such manner as may be prescribed;
(3) The Chairperson of the Council shall be nominated for a period of two years:
Provided that if there is no Council of Ministers in any Himalayan State thereby
causing vacancy in the Office of the Chairperson, the President of India may nominate Chief
Minister of any other Himalayan State as Chairperson of the Council for such period as there
is no Council of Ministers in such State.
4. (1) The Council shall function as a Planning body for the balanced and all-round
social and economic development of the Himalayan States.
(2) It shall be the responsibility of the Council to formulate development plans and
schemes for each of the Himalayan States and also in which Himalayan States have common
interest:
Provided that the Council may, if it considers necessary, having regard to the socio-
economic backwardness of the State of Uttarakhand or any area in the State, formulate
specific and time bound projects and schemes for the whole State or any area in that State
and may review implementation of such projects and schemes.
(3) For securing the balanced development of the Himalayan States, the Council shall
forward proposals for:—
(i) accelerating the industrial growth in one or more Himalayan States;
(ii) inter-linking various places by railways or roads including remote villages
and hilly areas;
(iii) providing communication and telecommunication facilities;
(iv) providing electricity, drinking water and rural housing;
(v) providing health services including family welfare schemes;
(vi) providing educational facilities and gainful employment; and
(vii) taking preventive measures to minimize the effect of natural calamities
particularly the landslides and cloudbursts,
Definitions.
Setting up of
the Central
Himalayan
States
Development
Council.
Functions of
the Council.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
to the Central Government and the Government of the Himalayan State concerned for their
consideration.
(4) For the purposes of clause (i) of sub-section (3), the Council may recommend to the
Central Government such concessions, including waiver of duty of excise, as it deems
necessary, for a specific period for industrial units in any Himalayan State.
(5) The Council shall recommend to the Central Government and the Government of
each of the Himalayan States the action to be taken on any matter referred to in sub-sections
(2) and (3).
5. It shall be the duty of the Central Government and the Government of each of the
Himalayan States to give due consideration to the advice of the Council and apprise the
Council of its views and decisions on such advice.
6. (1) The Council shall meet at least thrice in each year.
(2) The proceedings of every meeting of the Council shall be forwarded to the Central
Government and also to Government of each of the Himalayan States.
7. (1) The Council shall have a secretarial staff consisting of a Secretary, a Planning
Adviser and a Financial Adviser and such other officers and employees as the Central
Government may, by order, determine.
(2) The Secretarial staff of the Council shall function under the direction, supervision
and control of the Chairperson of the Council.
(3) The office of the Council shall be located at such place as may be determined by the
Council.
(4) The administrative expenses of the said office, including the salaries and
allowances payable to, or in respect of, members of the secretarial staff of the Council, shall
be borne by the Central Government out of the moneys provided by Parliament for the
purpose.
8. The Central Government shall provide, from time to time, after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, adequate funds to the Council for the implementation
of the development plans and schemes formulated by the Council.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Central and
State
Government
to consider
the advice of
the Council.
Meeting of
the Council.
Officers and
staff of the
Council.
Provision of
funds to the
Council.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The development process in the Central Himalayan States of Uttarakhand, Himachal
Pradesh and Jammu and Kashmir has been very tardy due to their extreme geographical
location and social background. The people living in these States do not have adequate
educational facilities and consequently, employment opportunities. The people also have to
travel to other States for medical treatment as there are no well equipped hospitals and
qualified doctors. There has also been negligible growth of industries. There is an urgent
need for setting up of environment friendly industries in these States for the development of
the States as a whole and to enable the local youth to get employment opportunities. For
setting up of new industries, special concessions including waiver of excise duty for a
specific period should be given to the industries in the States by the Central Government.
The problems of these Himalayan States are interlinked. All these States experience
natural calamities like recurrent floods, landslides, cloudburst, etc. almost every year, thereby
causing huge loss of life and property. Basic infrastructure facilities like “Pucca Roads”,
electricity, communication, schools, drinking water, bridges connecting remote villages with
Pucca Roads, etc. are still to be made available to all the people of these regions even after
sixty years of independence. As these regions share common problems, the solutions to
their problems are also common. Many of the developmental works in these States can be
carried out only by involvement of all the three States. The State of Uttarakhand, being
created in the year 2000 only, needs special attention for its overall development.
It is, therefore, proposed to establish a Central Himalayan States Development Council
to look into and accelerate the process of development in these States, particularly in
Uttarakhand. A similar Council has been functioning very successfully for the North-Eastern
States. The establishment of such a Council for the States of Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh
and Jammu and Kashmir would not only help in the speedier overall development of the
Himalayan States, but would also take the country high on the growth map by acting as a
coordinating agency amongst the people of the States of the Himalayan region.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAMESH POKHRIYAL ‘NISHANK’
June 12, 2014.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for setting up of the Central Himalayan States Develop-
ment  Council consisting of persons having special knowledge of and experience in social
and economic planning in the hilly areas. Clause 6 provides that the Council shall meet at
least thrice each year. Clause 7 provides that the Central Government shall bear the adminis-
trative expenditure including salaries and allowances of members, officers and staff of the
council. Clause 8 provides that the Central Government shall provide adequate funds to the
Council for implementing the development plans and schemes by way of grants, after due
appropriation made by Parliament. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees four hundred crore
is likely to be involved as a recurring expenditure per annum.
A sum of rupees four hundred crore is also likely to be involved as non-recurring
expenditure.

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules to be made relate to matters of detail only, the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.

GMGIPMRND—687LS(S-3)—27.06.2014.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the setting up of a Council to be called the Central Himalayan States
Development Council to formulate development plans and schemes and also to
monitor their implementation for the balanced and all-round development of
the hilly States comprising the Central Himalayan region and for
matters connected therewith.
————
(Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal ‘Nishank’, M.P.)