THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
DR. BOORA NARSAIAH GOUD, M.P .
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2016.
2. In article 243K of the Constitution,—
(a) for clause (1) the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:—
"(1) Subject to the provisions of clause (1A), the superintendence, direction
and control of the preparation of electoral rolls for, and the conduct of, all elections to
the Panchayats shall be vested in a State Election Commission consisting of a State
Election Commissioner to be appointed by the Governor.
Bill No. 34 of  2016
Short title.
Amendment of
article 243K.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(1A) The Election Commission shall have the power to issue any direction or
instruction to the State Election Commission for the discharge of its functions under
clause (1)."; and
(b) after clause (4), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(5) The State Election Commission shall submit its annual report to the Election
Commission and to the Governor, and it may, at any time, submit special reports on any
matter which in its opinion is of such urgency or importance that it should not be
deferred till the submission of its annual report.".
3. In article 243ZA of the Constitution, for clause (1), the following clauses shall be
substituted, namely:—
"(1) Subject to the provisions of clause  (1A), the Superintendence, direction
and control of the preparation of electoral rolls for, and the conduct of, all elections to
the Municipalities shall be vested in the State Election Commission referred to in
article 243 K.
(1A) The Election Commission shall have the power to issue any direction or
instruction to the State Election Commission for the discharge of its functions under
clause (1).".
Amendment of
article 243ZA.
5
10
15

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The State Governments often delay Panchayat elections on purely political
considerations. They do so, because they retain some powers relating to the conduct of
elections under the State Acts/Rules. The State Election Commission has to depend upon
the State Government for logistic support including staff and finances. Besides, certain
important powers like issuance of election notification, delimitation of constituencies,
earmarking of reserved seats, etc. are retained by the State Governments in many States.
Considering all these, there is strong case for further strengthening the hands of the State
Election Commissions by making specific provisions in the Constitution itself.
Sometimes, the State Election Commission have to fight long battles against the
State Governments in order to fulfil their constitutional duty to hold elections as per the
provisions of law. In order to ensure the accountability of the States in timely conduct of
Panchayat and Municipal elections, it is felt that the State Election Commissions should
function independently and draw expertise and guidance from the Election Commission of
India.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BOORA NARSAIAH GOUD
February 8, 2016.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
*****
243K. (1) The superintendence, direction and control of the preparation of electoral
rolls for, and the conduct of, all elections to the Panchayats shall be vested in a State
Election Commission consisting of a State Election Commissioner to be appointed by the
Governor.
(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made by the Legislature of a State, the
conditions of service and tenure of office of the State Election Commissioner shall be such
as the Governor may by rule determine:
Provided that the State Election Commissioner shall not be removed from his office
except in like manner and on the like grounds as a Judge of a High Court and the conditions
of service of the State Election Commissioner shall not be varied to his disadvantage after
his appointment.
(3) The Governor of a State shall, when so requested by the State Election Commission,
make available to the State Election Commission such staff as may be necessary for the
discharge of the functions conferred on the State Election Commission by clause (1).
(4) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legislature of a State may, by
law, make provision with respect to all matters relating to, or in connection with, elections to
the Panchayats.
*****
243ZA. (1) The superintendence, direction and control of the preparation of electoral
rolls for, and the conduct of, all elections to the Municipalities shall be vested in the State
Election Commission referred to in article 243K.
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legislature of a State may, by
law, make provision with respect to all matters relating to, or in connection with, elections to
the Municipalities.
*****
4
Elections to the
Panchayats.
Elections to the
Municipality.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Dr. Boora Narsaiah Goud, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4231LS(S3)—26.02.2016.