1
 THE NATIONAL PILGRIMAGE FUND BILL, 2019
By
SHRI RAJENDRA AGRAWAL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a National Pilgrimage Fund for the benefits of pilgrims
in the country and for all matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Pilgrimage Fund Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill  No. 350 of  2019
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise, requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "Authority" means National Pilgrimage Fund Authority established under
section 9;
(c) "Fund" means National Pilgrimage Fund constituted under section 3;
(d) "pilgrim" means a person who undertake journeys to some sacred places as
an act of religious devotion; and
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette constitute
a Fund to be known as the National Pilgrimage Fund to harness the deposits from individuals
towards meeting their religious goals and provide such benefits to those individuals as
deemed necessary.
(2) The Fund shall be credited,—
(a) the deposits from the devotees in their pilgrim account as mentioned under
section 6;
(b) contributions from the Central Government and State Governments; and
(c) such other sums as may be received by way of donation, constitution or
assistance or otherwise.
4. The contribution to the Fund constituted under section 3 shall be open to devotees
across all religions who are Indian citizens and who intend to invest periodically in their
pilgrim account as mentioned under section 6 to meet their needs at the time of undertaking
pilgrimages.
5. The Fund constituted under section 3 shall be in the form of time deposits intended
to provide individual multiple options to save money in recurring and fixed deposits in the
pilgrim accounts as mentioned under section 6 with multiple exit options from one to twenty
years having such rate of interests as may be decided by the Authority.
6. Every deposit under the Fund constituted under section  3 shall be made under
pilgrim accounts to be opened at all Public and Private Commercial Banks, Foreign Banks,
Urban and Rural Cooperative Banks, Small Finance Banks and such Non-Banking Financial
Institutions (Deposit Taking) as may decided upon by the Authority.
7. Every pilgrim who invests in the Fund shall be provided the following incentives:—
(a) complete package options for various pilgrimages in India such as
Char Dham Yatras and Jyotirlingas;
(b) discounts in travel tickets, accommodation and lodging facilities;
(c) health insurance of pilgrims going to difficult religious places like Amarnath
Yatra and Vaishno Devi; and
(d) such other incentive as deemed necessary by the Authority.
8. Subject to the provisions of this Act, any pilgrim may withdraw all his savings under
the pilgrimage account before maturity period, but with an exit load as may be decided opon
by the Authority.
9. (1) The Central Government shall establish an Authority to be known as the National
Pilgrimage Fund Authority for the purpose of management, regulation and oversight of the
Fund constituted under section 3.
Definitions.
Constitution
of National
Pilgrimage
Fund.
Contribution
to fund open
to subscribers
of all
religions.
Nature of
Deposits.
Pilgrim
Accounts.
Incentives.
Exit Load.
Establishment
of National
Pilgrimage
Fund
Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(2) The Authority shall consist of,—
(a) Secretary, Union Minister of Tourism, Chairperson, ex-officio;
(b) two Joint-Secretaries to the Central Government to be nominated by the
Central Government, members ex-officio; and
(c) five other members two of whom shall be women having experience of not
less than fifteen years in tourism sector to be  appointed by the Central Government
in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and staff as it
considers necessary for the functioning of the Authority.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to and terms and conditions of services of the
members, officers and staff of the Authority shall be such as may be prescribed.
10. The Authority shall,—
(a) ensure that deposits are collected from pilgrims in an accessible manner;
(b) ensure sound investment of deposits into the Fund;
(c) ensure regular pay-out to the pilgrims at maturity period;
(d) uphold the interests of the pilgrims at all times;
(e) formulate various schemes under the Fund to allow pilgrims to choose options
suitable to them; and
(f) perform all such functions related to management of Fund as may be prescribed.
11. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 10, the Authority may, with the
approval of the Central Government, invest such amount from the Fund across all designated
schemes in creating public infrastructure in such manner as may be prescribed to meet the
national goals for development.
12. The Authority shall develop accountability mechanisms for the proper utilisation
of the fund inter alia including:
(a) re-insurance of all deposits under the Fund at the Deposit Insurance and
Credit Guarantee Corporation of India (DICGCI);
(b) auditing and furnishing of annual returns of the Funds; and
(c) comply with all such accountability norms as may be prescribed.
13. The Central Government, from time to time, after due appropriation made by
Parliament  by law in this behalf, provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
14. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act as may appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the removal of the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after expiry of three years from the date of
commencement of this Act.
15. The provisions of this Act and of any rules and orders made thereunder shall have
effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the
time being in force.
16. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in Official Gazette make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of
Functions of
National
Pilgrimage
Fund
Authority.
Usage of Fund
for public
Infrastructure.
Accountability
Mechanisms.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modificaton or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India has been home to almost all the religions of the world. Its rich culture and vibrant
diverse population has made pilgrimages a destined once-in-a-lifetime opportunity aspired
to be undertaken by all. However, huge expenditure involved in undertaking religious
obligation makes it difficult for them to pursue their pilgrimage options. According to the
statistics of National Sample Survey Organisation, religious travel is estimated at almost four
times the share of business-related travel, and over seven and a half times the share of
education-related travel.
Individuals save over their lifetimes to be able to undertake religious pilgrimages. Yet,
they are constrained by lack of accessible, safe and sustainable savings products targeted
towards helping them save for undertaking such obligations. On a macro-economic level,
such savings represents a pool untapped funds that can be duly tapped to create public
assets. Similar Funds have been established in countries such as Malaysia that have reaped
substantial benefits.
Therefore, it is desirable to nudge individuals towards a sustainable method for actively
building a corpus for undertaking pilgrimages. The need is to promote tourism, prevent
excessive out-of pocket expenditure while undertakings pilgrimages and provide easily
operational liquidity to all such tourists.
The Bill, therefore, seeks, to establish a National Pilgrimage Fund where subscribers
from all religions can save money in different schematic deposits and withdraw them as and
when required with interest as well as incentives on their travel. It also provide for
establishment of a National Pilgrimage Fund Authority that looks after the administration of
the fund and ensures suitable accountability mechanisms to protect the interest of subscribers.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAJENDRA  AGRAWAL
October 25, 2019.
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of a National Pilgrimage Fund to meet the
financial requirement of persons going on pilgrimage. Clause 7 provides for incentives to the
pilgrims to complete package options for various pilgrimages in India such as Char Dham
Yatras and Jyotirlingas and discounts in travel tickets, accommodation and lodging facilities,
etc. Clause 9 provides for establishement of a National Pilgrimage Authority to manage,
regulate and oversight the Fund. It also provides for appointment of experts from tourism
sector as members, officers and staff to the Authority. Clause 14 makes it obligatory for the
Central Government to provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The
Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated
that a sum of rupees hundred crore may involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved.
6

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 16 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. Rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative
power is of a normal character.
7

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a National Pilgrimage Fund for the benefits of pilgrims in
the country and for all matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Rajendra Agrawal, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—3264LS(S3)—20-11-2019.