1
Short title and
commencement.
THE WILD LIFE (PROTECTION) AMENDMENT BILL, 2019
By
SHRI DHAIRYASHEEL SAMBHAJIRAO MANE, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Wild life (Protection) Act, 1972.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Wild life (Protection) Amendment Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 352 of  2019
AS  INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In section 2 of the Wild life (Protection) Act,1972 (hereinafter referred to as  the
principal Act), clause (20A) shall be renumbered as clause (20AA), and before clause (20AA)
as so renumbered, the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(20A) “Nag Panchami” means an event involving worship of snakes with a
view to follow tradition and culture on such days from the months of July to August of
a calendar year and at such places, as may be notified by the Central Government;”.
3.  After section 9 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
“9A. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 9 or any judgement, decree or
order of any court, the capture and exhibition of snakes for the purpose of worship on ‘Nag
Panchami’ shall be permitted under this Act.”.
Amendment
of section 9.
Amendment of
section 2.
53 of 1972.
5
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The V edas contain hymns revering the snake. It forms a strong part of the Hindu
religion — the garland of Shiva, the protector of Balarama, the bed of Vishnu, the girdle of
Ganesh, the sacred thread of the Brahmin, the upholder of the Earth. Lord Krishna’s brother
Balarama is considered a snake chieftain. Manasa, the snake goddess, is one of the main
deities of Bengal. On Nag Panchami , the fifth day of the lunar month of Shravana
(July/August) the snake god is worshipped.
A division bench of Justice A.S. Oka & Justice A.S. Chandurkar of the Bombay High
Court in the case of Ajit Shridhar Patil v. Union of India, (Public Interest Litigation No.75
of 2011) banned the capture and exhibition of snakes on Nag Panchami. In Gram Sabha of
Battis Shirala v. Union of India, (Writ Petition No. 8645 of 2013) citing references to the
Wild life (Protection) Act of 1972, the court rejected the writ petition filed by Battis Shirala to
oppose the ban. It also set aside the town’s contention that the festival was centuries old,
pointing out that the Gazette published in 1858 had no mention of the festival in the town.
The High Level Committee chaired by Mr. TSR Subramanian in 2014 had also supported
cultural traditions and has stated in its report that Schedule of Wild life (Protection) Act, 1972
should provide appropriate provision for taking into account the needs of local festivals,
subject to no harm or injury to animals. India has a varied and glorious cultural tradition;
while there are many national festivals, there are also local festivals which are of great local
importance in different States. Nature and animal worship has been part of the national
culture. Thus, for example Nag Panchami is celebrated in many States and snakes worshipped
during five days in Shravana month, as a thousands years-old tradition. It is to be noted that
the snakes are never harmed — indeed are worshipped during this period.
The town of Battis Shirala in Sangli district of Maharashtra which falls under
Parliamentary constituency of Hatkanangale is well known for celebration of Nag Panchami
where snakes are worshipped and not harmed. The worship of snake during Nag Panchami
is an essential religious practice under articles 25 and 26 and, therefore, in order to conserve
the traditional practices this Bill seeks to amend section 2 and 9 of the Wild life (Protection)
Act, 1972  for creating an exception for snakes which are worshipped in Nag Panchami as
part of Schedule II to the Act.
The ban imposed by Bombay High Court on worshipping snakes during Nag Panchami
has led to a halt on celebrating Nag Panchami across Maharashtra which is an issue of faith
for lakhs of devotees who cause no harm to snakes but just worship them as a matter of
tradition for the past 250 years and records of the same have also been found in historical
documents like Panhala Fort. Therefore, the Bill seeks to protect the tradition from the
judicial restriction imposed by a High Court order and carve an exception to allow devotee to
worship snakes without harming them and also follow the spirit and intent of Wild life
(Protection) Act, 1972.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; DHAIRYASHEEL SAMBHAJIRAO MANE
November 6 , 2019.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE WILD LIFE (PROTECTION) ACT, 1972
* * * *
AMENDMENT OF SECTION 2
* * * *
20. “National Board” means the National Board for Wild Life constituted under section
5A;”
* * * *
4
Definitions

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Wildlife (Protection) Act,1972.
————
(Shri Dhairyasheel Sambhajirao Mane, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—3265LS(S3)—20-11-2019.