1
Bill No. 353 of  2019
THE PREVENTION OF BRIBERY OF FOREIGN PUBLIC OFFICIALS
AND OFFICIALS OF PUBLIC INTERNATIONAL
ORGANISATIONS BILL, 2019
By
SHRI FEROZE VARUN GANDHI, M.P.
A
BILL
 to prevent corruption relating to bribery of foreign public officials and officials of
public international organisations and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto
WHEREAS the United Nations Convention against Corruption annexed to the Resolution
58/4 of 31st October, 2003 was adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations and
opened it for signature at the High-level Political Signing Conference held in Merida, Mexico,
from 9th to 11th December, 2003;
A
ND WHEREAS aforesaid Resolution urges all States and competent regional economic
integration organisations to sign and ratify the United Nations Convention against Corruption
as soon as possible in order to ensure its rapid entry into force;
A
S INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
AND WHEREAS aforesaid Resolution requests the Conference of the State Parties to the
Convention to address the criminalisation of bribery of officials of public international
organisations, including the United Nations, and related issues, taking into account questions
of privileges and immunities, as well as of jurisdiction and the role of international
organisations, by, inter alia, making recommendations regarding appropriate action in that
regard;
A
ND WHEREAS the aforesaid Convention expresses concern about the seriousness of
problems and threats posed by corruption to the stability and security of societies,
undermining the institutions and values of democracy, ethical values and justice and
jeopardising sustainable development and the rule of law; and about cases of corruption
that involve vast quantities of assets, which may constitute a substantial proportion of the
resources of States, and that threaten the political stability and sustainable development of
those States;
A
ND WHEREAS India has signed the United Nations Convention Against Corruption on
the 9th December, 2005;
AND WHEREAS on ratification of the Convention by India it shall be necessary to
implement the aforesaid Convention as a State Party;
AND WHEREAS in terms of Article 16 of the aforesaid Conventions, each State Party is
required to adopt such legislative and other measures, as may be necessary to establish the
bribery of foreign public officials and officials of public international organisations, as a
criminal offence.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Bribery of Foreign Public Officials and
Officials of Public International Organisations Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall apply :—
(a) to citizens of India wherever they may be;
(b) to the persons on, an aircraft or ship registered in India wherever they may
be;
(c) to the person on, an aircraft or ship registered outside India but for the time
being in or over India; and
(d) a person, who:—
(i) is not a citizen of India; and
(ii) has his principal place of business or permanent residence in India.
(4) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification,
appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and any
reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a
reference to the coming into force of that provision.
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "agent" means any authorized representative who acts on behalf of his or her
principal and includes a Director, Officer, employee or other person authorized to act
on behalf of his or her principal.
(b) "contracting State" means any country or place outside India in respect of
such country through a Convention, treaty or otherwise;
Short title,
extent,
application
and
commencement.
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25

3
(c) "Convention" means the United Nations Convention Against Corruption
addopted by the Resolution 58/4 of 31st October, 2003 of the General Assembly of the
United Nations;
(d) "foreign country" means any country other than India and includes:
(a) any foreign territory;
(b) all levels of sub-divisions of government of any such country or
territory; or
(c) any agency of any such country or territory or of a political sub-division
of any such country or territory;
(e) "Foreign public official" means
(a) any person holding a legislative, administrative or judicial office of a
foreign country;
(b) any person performing public function for a foreign state or country,
including any person employed by a Board, Commission, Corporation or other
body or authority that performs a function of a foreign state; or
(c) a official or agent of public international organization;
(f) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette;
(g) "Public Function" means the functions discharged by him/her according to
the law, whether Indian law or the law of his/her Nationality or the law of the country/
state for which he/she is discharging the functions.
(h) "Public International Organisation" means
(a) an organisation—
(i) of which two or more countries are members; or
(ii) that is constituted by persons representing two or more contries;
(b) an organisation established by, or a group of organisations constituted
by—
(i) organisations of which two or more countries are members; or
(ii) organisations that are constituted by the representatives of two
or more countries; or
(c) an organization that is—
(i) an organ of, or office within, an organization described in paragraph
(a) or (b);
(ii) a commission, council or other body established by an
organization or organ referred to in subparagraph (i); or
(iii) a committee or a subcommittee of a committee of an organization
referred to in paragraph (a) or (b) or of an organ, council or body referred
to in subparagraph (i) or (ii).
(i) "special judge" means the Special Judge appointed under section 3 of the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988;
(j) "undue advantage" that is to say bribery means an act of a foreign public
official or official of pu
5101520253035404551015202530354045 blic international
organisations, who—
(i) by corrupt or illegal means, obtains for himself or for any other person,
any valuable thing or pecuniary or non-pecuniary advantage; or
49 of 1988.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
(ii) by abusing his position as such public official obtains for himself or
for any other person, any valuable thing or pecuniary of non-pecuniary
advantage; or
(iii) while holding office as such public officials obtains for himself or for
any otherperson any valuable thing or pecuniary advantage without any public
interest; or
(iv) habitually accepts or obtains or agrees to accept or attempts to obtain
for himself or for any other person, any valuable thing without consideration or
for a consideration which he knows to be inadequate from any person whom he
knows to have been, or to be, or to be likely to be concerned in any proceeding
or business transacted or about to be transacted by him, or having any connection
with the official functions of himself or of any foreign public official to whom he
is subordinate, or from any person whom he knows to be interested in or in or
related to the person so concerned.
(2) The words and expressions used under this Act but not defined and defined under
the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 shall have the meanings respectively assigned to
them under that Act.
CHAPTER II
O
FFENCES AND PENALTIES OF BRIBERY OF FOREIGN PUBLIC OFFICIALS AND OFFICIALS OF PUBLIC
INTERNA TIONAL ORGANISATIONS
3. Whoever, being a foreign public offcial or official of public international organisation,
accepts or obtains or agrees to accept or attempts to obtain from any person, for himself or
for any other person or entity, any undue advantage other than legal remuneration, as a
motive or reward for doing or for bearing to do any official act or for showing or for bearing
to show, in the exercise of his official functions, favour or disfavour to any person or entity
for rendering or attempting to render any service or disservice to any person or entity, shall
be punishable with imprisonment which shall not be less than six months but which may
extend to five years and shall also be liable to fine.
4. Whoever, in relation to the conduct of international business in order to obtain or
retain business, intentionally, offers or promises to offer, gives or promises to give, directly
or indirectly, any undue advantage, to any foreign public official or official of public
international organisation, for himself or herself or for another person or entity, in order that
such official, act or refrain from acting in the exercise of his or her official duties, shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but which
may extend to five years and shall also be liable to fine.
5. Whoever, abets the commission, of an offence punishable under this act or attempts
to commit any such offence and in such attempt does any act towards the commission of
such offence, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
six months but which may extend to five years and shall also be liable to fine.
6. (1) The Central Government may enter into an agreement with the Government of
any country outisde India for—
(a) enforcing the provisions of this Act;
(b) exchange of information for the prevention of any offence under this Act or
under the corresponding law in force in that country or investigation of cases relating
to any offence under this Act, and may, by notification, make such provisions as may
be necessary for implementing the agreement (including mutual assistance).
(2) The Central Government may, by notification, direct that the application of this Act
in relation to a contracting State with which reciprocal arrangements have been made, shall
be subject to such conditions, exceptions or qualifications as are specified in the said
notification.
Prohibition
for accepting
gratification
by foreign
public official
or official of
public
international
organization.
49 of 1988.
Prohibition
for giving
gratification
to foreign
public official
or official of
public
international
organisation.
Abetment and
attempts.
Agreements
with foreign
countries.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

5
7. The offences under this Act shall be deemed to have been included as extraditable
offences and provided for in all the extradition treaties made by India with convention
countries and which extend to, and are binding on, India on the date of commencement of
this Act.
8. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973, if, in the course of an investigation into an offence or other proceedings under this Act,
an application is made to a Special Judge by the Investigating Officer or any officer superior
in rank to the Investigating Officer that any evidence is required in connection with
investigation into an offence or proceedings under this Act and he is of the opinion that
such evidence may be available in any place in a contracting State, and the Special Judge, on
being satisfied that such evidence is required in connection with the investigation into an
offence or proceedings under this Act, may issue a letter of request to a court or an authority
in the contracting State competent to deal with such request to—
(i) examine facts and circumstances of the case,
(ii) take such steps as the Special Judge may specify in such letter of request,
and
(iii) forward all the evidence so taken or collected to the Special Judge issuing
such letter of request.
(2) The letter of request shall be transmitted in such manner as the Central Government
may specify in this behalf.
(3) Every statement recorded or document or thing received under sub-section ( 1)
shall be deemed to be the evidence collected during the course of investigation.
9. Where a letter of request is received by the Central Government from a court or an
authority in a contracting State requesting for investigation into an offence or proceedings
under this act and forwarding to such court or authority any evidence connected therewith,
the Central Government may forward such letter of request to the Special Judge or to any
authority under the Act, as it thinks fit, for execution of such request in accordance with the
provisions of this Act or, as the case may be, any other law for the time being in force.
10. (1) Where a Special Judge, in relation to an offence punishable under section 3 or
section 4, desires—
(a) a summons to an accused person; or
(b) a warrant for the arrest of an accused person; or
(c) a summons to any person requiring him to attend and produce a document or
other thing or to produce it; or
(d) a search warrant, issued by it shall be served or executed at any place in any
contracting State, it shall send such summons or warrant in duplicate in such form, to
such Court, Judge or Magistrate through such authorities, as the Central Government
may, by notification, specify in this behalf and that Court, Judge or Magistrate, as the
case may be, shall cause the same to be executed.
(2) Where a Special Judge, in relation to an offence punishable under section 4 has
received for service or execution—
(a) a summons to an accused person; or
(b) a warrant for the arrest of an accused person; or
(c) a summons to any person requiring him to attend and produce a document or
other thing, or to produce it; or
(d) a search warrant, issued by a court, Judge or Magistrate in a contracting
State, it shall, cause the same to be served or executed as if it were summons or warrant
received by it from another court in the said territories for service or execution within
its local jurisdiction; and where—
(i) a warrant of arrest has been executed, the person arrested shall be dealt
with in accordance with the procedure specified under the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973:
Provision as
to extradition.
2 of 1974.
Letter of
request to a
contradicting
State in
certain cases.
Assistance to
a contracting
State in
certain cases.
Reciprocal
arrangements
for processes
and assistance
for transfer
of accused
persons.
2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

6
(ii) a search warrant has been executed, the things found in this search
shall, so far as possbile, be dealt with in accordance with the procedure specified
under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973:
Provided that in a case where a summon or search warrant received from a contracting
State has been executed, the documents or other things produced or things found in the
search shall be forwarded to the court issuing the summon or search warrant through such
authority as the Central Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf.
(3) Where a person transferred to a contracting State pursuant to sub-section (2) is a
prisoner in India, the Special Judge or the Central Government may impose such conditions
as that court or Government deems fit.
(4) Where the person transferred to India pursuant to sub-section (1) is a prisoner in
a contracting State, the Special Judge in India shall ensure that the conditions subject to
which the prisoner is transferred to India are complied with and such prisoner shall be kept
in such custody subject to such conditions as the Central Government may direct in writing.
11. Every letter of request, summons or warrant, received by the Central Government
from, and every letter of request, summons or warrant, to be transmitted to a contracting
State under this Chapter shall be transmitted to a contracting State or, as the case may be,
sent to the concerned court in India in such form and in such manner as the Central Government
may, by notification, specify in this behalf.
12. (1) Where the property is suspected to be in a contracting State, the Special Judge,
on an application by an officer authorised by the Central Government, may issue a letter of
request to a court or an authority in the contracting State for execution of attachment or
confiscation of the property in the contracting State.
(2) Where a letter of request is received by the Central Government from a court or an
authority in a contracting State requesting attachment or confiscation of the property in
India, derived or obtained, directly or indirectly, by any person from the commission of an
offence under section 3 or section 4 committed in that contracting State, the Central
Government may forward such letter or request to the Special Judge for execution in accordance
with the provisions of this Act.
(3) The Special Judge shall, on receipt of a letter of request under sub-section ( 2),
direct any authority to take all steps necessary for tracing and identifying such property.
(4) The steps referred to in sub-section (3) may include any inquiry, investigation or
survey in respect of any person, place, property, assets, documents, books of account in any
bank or public financial institutions or any other relevant matters.
(5) Any inquiry, investigation or survey referred to in sub-section (4) shall be carried
out by an authority mentioned in sub-section (3) in accordance with such directions issued
in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
13. Save as otherwise provided under this Act, or the Prevention of Money- laundering
Act, 2002 the provisions of the Criminal Law Amendment Ordinance 1944, as amended by
section 29 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988, shall, as far as may be apply to the
attachment, administration of attached property and execution of order of attachment or
confiscation of the property under this Act.
14. The provisions of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 and the rules made there-
under, (including those relating to appointment of Special Judges under Chapter II and
investigation into the cases and inspection of bankers books under Chapter IV of that Act),
shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to the offence under this Act as they apply in relation
to the offence under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.
15. (1) Nothing in this Act shall affect the jurisdiction exercisable by, or the procedure
applicable to, any court or other authority under the army Act, 1950, the Air force Act, 1950,
the Navy Act, 1957, the Border Security Force Act, 1968, the Coast Guard Act, 1978 and the
National Security Guard Act, 1986.
(2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that for the purposes of any such
Procedure in
respect of
letter of
request.
Attachment,
seizure and
confiscation,
etc., of
property in a
contracting
State or India.
Provisions of
Criminal Law
Amendment
Ordinance,
1944 to
apply to
attachment
under this
Act.
Certain
provisions of
Act 49 of
1988 to
apply.
Military,
Naval and Air
Force or
other laws
not to be
affected.
15 of 2003.
49 of 1988.
45 of 1950
46 of 1950.
62 of 1957.
47 of 1968.
30 of 1978.
47 of 1986.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

7
law as is referred to in sub-section (1), the court of a Special Judge shall be deemed to be a
court of ordinary criminal justice.
16. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the High Court may exercise, so far as they
may be applicable, all the powers of appeal and revision conferred by the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 on a High Court as if the court of the Special Judge were a Court of Session
trying cases within the local limits of the High Court.
17. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, any
other law for the time being in force, and nothing contained herein shall exempt any foreign
public official or official of public international organisation from any proceeding which
might, apart from this Act, be instituted against him.
18. In case any foreign public official or official of public international organisation is
alleged to have committed an offence under this Act to whom certain privileges and immunities
applies under the United Nations (Privileges and Immunities) Act, 1947 or the International
Finance Corporation (Status, Immunities and Privileges) Act, 1958, or the International
Development Association (Status, Immunities and Privileges) Act, 1960, or the Diplomatic
Relations (Vienna Convention) Act, 1972, or under any other law for the time being in force or
under any Convention or treaty, the Central Government shall, in consultation with the
contracting State or public international organisation, as the case may be, take adequate
measures for proceeding under this Act against such public official.
19. Save as otherwise provided under this Act, the provisions of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, as amended by section 22 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 shall
have effect in their application in relation to any proceeding in relation to an offence punishable
under this Act.
20. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary for removing the
difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of the period of
four years from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament.
21. The enactments specified in the Schedule in this Act shall be amended in the
manner specified therein and such amendments shall take effect on the date of commencement
of this Act.
22. The courts shall try to investigate and resolve the case and give its decision within
a period of four years which may be extended to the period of six years, upon approval from
the Central Government.
Appeal and
revision.
Act to be in
addition to
any other law.
2 of 1974.
Proceedings
under this Act
to be taken in
consultation
with
contracting
State against
foreign public
official to
whom
privileges and
immunities
under any law
or
Convention
or treaty
apply.
Code of
Criminal
Procedure,
1973 to
apply subject
to certain
modifications.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Amendment
of certain
enactments.
Time-frame
for
adjudication
of cases.
46 of 1947.
42 of 1958.
32 of 1960.
43 of 1972.
2 of 1974.
49 of 1988.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

THE SCHEDULE
(See section 21)
AMENDMENT  OF  CERTAIN  ENACTMENTS  PART-I  THE  PREVENTION  OF
CORRUPTION  ACT,  1988
(49 OF 1988)
In section 3, in sub-section (1), in clause (a), for the words "any offence punishable
under this Act", the words and figures "any offence punishable under this Act or the
Prevention of Bribery of Foreign Public Officials and Officials of Public International
Organisations Act, 2011" shall be substituted.
PART-II  THE  PREVENTION  OF  MONEY-LAUNDERING  ACT,  2002
(15 
OF 2003)
In the Schedule, in Part B, after paragraph 5, the following paragraph shall be inserted,
namely:—
"PARAGRAPH  5A
The Prevention of Bribery of Foregin Public Officials and Officials of Public International
Organisations Act, 2011.
Section Description of offence
3 Prohibition for accepting gratification by foreign
Public Officials or official of public international
organization.
4 Prohibition of giving gratification to foreign public
official or official of public international
organization.
5 Abetment and attempts.
8
Amendment
of Section 3.
Amendment
of Schedule.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Bribery of public officials to obtain advantages in international business raises serious
moral and political concerns, undermines good governance and sustainable economic
development, and distorts competition. Corruption in awarding business contracts has social,
political, environmental and economic costs which no country can afford. Serious
consequences result when public officials take bribes in awarding contracts to foreign
businesses for public services such as roads, water, electricity etc. resulting in inappropriate
decisions and undermining plans for development.
The United Nations Convention against Corruption annexed to the Resolution 58/4 of
31st October, 2003 was adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations and opened
it for signature at the High-level Political Signing Conference held in Merida, Mexico, from
9th to 11th December, 2003. India has signed the Convention on 9th December, 2005. The
ratification of Convention would require criminalising the act of foreign bribery and it would
strengthen India's existing anti-corruption laws that demonstrate India's commitment to
good governance and give more credibility in its fight against bribery and corruption.
India already has in place a framework for combating corruption under certain laws,
namely, the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 and the Prevention of Money-laundering
Act, 2002 which covers a number of areas that need international standards for the
criminalisation of bribery. Article 16 of the Convention requires that each State Party shall
adopt such legislative and other measures as may be necessary to establish  as a criminal
offence, the giving or taking of undue advantage to or by a foreign public official or an
official of a public international organisation, directly or indirectly, for the official himself or
herself or another person or entity when committed intentionally. However, the bribery of
foreign public officials in international business transactions is not covered under the above
said Acts. Therefore, a need has been felt to bring a legislation to give effect to the aforesaid
Convention.
The Prevention of Bribery of Foreign Public Officials and Officials of Public International
Organisations Bill, 2011 was introduced in the Lok Sabha on the 25th March, 2011. It was
referred by the Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha to the Department-Related Parliamentary
standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice on the 1st April, 2011
for examination and report. The Committee invited suggestions and views from various
individuals and organisations. The Committee considered eight memoranda from out of the
ones received from the individuals/organisations to the Department of Personnel and Training
for their comments thereon. The Bill lapsed with the dissolution of 15th Lok Sabha in
May, 2015.
This new Bill "The Prevention of Bribery of Foreign Public Officials and Officials of
Public International Organisations Bill, 2019" has incorporated the changes suggested by
the standing committee and is being introduced in the Parliament. This legislation seeks to
prevent corruption relating to bribery of foreign public officials and officials of public
international organisations and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
The proposed legislation, inter alia,—
(a) prohibits accepting gratification by foreign public official or official of public
international organisation and making such act punishable with imprisonment for a
term which shall not be less than six months but which may extend to five years and
shall also be liable to fine;
(b) prohibits giving gratification to foreign public official or official of public
international organisation and making such act punishable with imprisonment for a
term which shall not be less than six months but which may extend to five years and
shall also be liable to fine;
9

10
(c) makes abetment and attempts of the acts specified at (a) and (b) above also
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but
which may extend to five years and shall also be liable to fine;
(d) confers power upon the Central Government to enter into agreements with
foreign countries enforcing the provisions of proposed legislation;
(e) makes provision declaring the offences under the proposed legislation as
extraditable offences;
(f) makes provision for rendering assistance to a contracting State in certain
cases to give effect to provisions of the proposed legislation;
(g) makes provision for reciprocal arrangements for processes and assistance
for transfer of accused persons;
(h) makes provision for attachment, seizure and confiscation, etc., of property in
a contracting State or India.
It is also proposed that proceedings under the proposed legislation shall be taken in
consultation with the contracting State against foreign public official to whom privileges and
immunities under any law or Convention or treaty are accorded.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; FEROZE  V ARUN  GANDHI
October  24, 2019.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Item (b) of sub-clause (1) of  clause 6 of the Bill provides that the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make such provisions as may be necessary for
implementing the agreement (including mutual legal assistance) in connection with the
agreement entered into with the Government of any country outside India for exchange of
information for the prevention of any offence under this Act or under the corresponding law
in force in that country or investigation of cases relating to any offence under this Act.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 6 enables the Central Government to specify conditions, exceptions
or qualifications subject to which reciprocal arrangments shall be given effect.
2. Sub-clause ( 1) of clause 10 empowers the Central Government to specify, by
notification, the form of summon or warrant and the authority through which such summons
or warrant shall be sent to any contracting State for its service or execution.
3. Clause 11 empowers the Central Government to specify, by notification, the form and
manner in which every letter of request, summons or warrant, received by the Central
Government from, and every letter of request, summons or warrant to be transmitted to, a
Contracting State shall be sent to the concerned court in India.
4. The matters in respect of which notifications may be issued in accordance with the
provisions of the Bill are matters of procedure and administrative detail and it is not practicable
to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a
normal character.
11

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE PREVENTION OF CORRUPTION ACT, 1988
(NO. 49 OF 1988)
* * * * *
CHAPTER II
APPOINTMENT OF SPECIAL JUDGES
3. (1) The Central Government or the State Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint as many special Judges as may be necessary for such area or areas
or for such case or group of cases as may be specified in the notification to try the following
offences, namely:—
(a) any offence punishable under this Act: and
* * * * *
Power to
appoint
special Judges.
12

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to prevent corruption relating to bribery of foreign public officials and officials of public
international organisations and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
————
 (Shri Feroze Varun Gandhi, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—3279LS—21-11-2019.