1
THE COMPULSORY WATER CONSERV ATION AND RECLAMATION
BILL, 2019
By
SHRI RITESH PANDEY, M.P .
A
BILL
to provide for a national legal framework for compulsory conservation and reclamation
of rainwater by every household, business establishment and Government building in
order to ensure access to sufficient water and sustainable development of it for
every human being on this planet and for matters connected therewith.
WHEREAS  the right to healthy environment and sustainable development are
fundamental human rights;
AND WHEREAS water is a basic need for the survival of human beings and is part of the
right to life enshrined in article 21 of the Constitution;
AND W HEREAS all people whatever their social and economic conditions, have the
right to access drinking water in quantum and of a quality equal to their basic needs;
AND WHEREAS today water scarcity affects majority of States in the country and exists
at an alarming level that is projected to rise with global warming and climate change;
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 354 of 2019

2
an increasing  number of countries are also experiencing water stress, water shortages, and
droughts and desertification;
AND W HEREAS  existing legal provisions governing water have aggravated its
unsustainable and iniquitous extraction creating a serious water crisis and denying access
to healthy water for large numbers of people;
A
ND W HEREAS there are many different perceptions of and perspectives on water
among people, States and groups, leading to divergence in approach, policy, doctrine,
principle, law and institutional arrangement;
A
ND WHEREAS the State as trustee is under the legal duty to protect all natural resources
which are by nature meant for public use and enjoyment;
AND WHEREAS article 39(b) of the Constitution mandates the State to direct its policy
towards securing the equal access to the material resources of the community;
AND WHEREAS to achieve sustainable development goal of safe and affordable drinking
water for all by 2030 essentially requires protecting and restoring water-related ecosystems
and promoting technological infrastructure  around conservation;
 B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Water Conservation and Reclamation
Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the Union territories only.
(3) It shall come into force within thirty days of the enactment of this Act.
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ''business establishment'' includes any building which is used as an office or
a factory in connection with any trade or commerce;
(b) ''corporatisation'' means the conversion of a Government body or agency
into a company or corporation;
(c) ''differential pricing'' means different pricing of water for different uses and
different classes of users;
(d) ''groundwater'' means water occurring in its natural state where it exists below
the surface in the zone of saturation whereby it can be extracted through wells or any
other means, or that which emerges as springs and base flows in streams and rivers;
(e) ''Government building''  includes the offices of the Ministries, departments,
public sector enterprises, statutory bodies or bodies owned and administered by the
Government and autonomous bodies, local municipality and Panchayati Government
bodies, and residential areas of Government employees and retired Government
employees provided by Government;
(f) ''household'' means a dwelling unit of any description;
(g) ''livelihood'' means an activity or occupation or employment including
self-employment that provides sustenance at defined minimum levels to an individual;
(h) ''precautionary principle'' means the principle that requires the adoption of a
cautious approach, including anticipatory, preventive, or mitigatory action, towards
any situation that holds the possibility of causing significant harm to human beings
and the environment;
(i) ''prescribed'' means prescribed by rules under this Act;
Short title,
extent and
commen-
cement.
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25

3
(j) ''privatisation'' means the tranfer of a Government body or institution or a
public enterprise to private ownership, or the transfer of a Governmental or public
sector activity to a private body;
(k) ''public trust'' means the doctrine that the State shall at level holds natural
resources in trust for the community;
(l) ''rainwater harvesting''  means capturing and conserving rainwater or retarding
run-off  water through various structures either for direct use or for recharging
groundwater aquifers;
(m) ''reclaimed water'' wastewater discharged from household, business
establishment, Government buildings, and any other such plots/properties on 200 sq.
metre and above that has been treated to meet specific water quality criteria with the
intent of being used for a range of purposes.
(n) ''potable reuse'' means planned augmentation of drinking water supply with
reclaimed water;
Explanation:—For the purpose of this Act, the term recycled water, reclaimed
water and water reuse shall have same meaning;
(o) ''sustainable use'' means the use of water that ensures continued availability
of it  for present and future generations, without depletion or deterioration or
dysfunctionality, and the continued healthy function of related ecological system;
(p) ''treatment technologies'' as deemed fit and notified by the appropriate
Government; and
(q) ''wastewater'' used water discharged from household, business establishment,
Government buildings, and any other such plots/properties on 200 sq. metre and
above.
3. (1) Every existing and planned household, business establishment, Government
buildings and any other plots or properties on two hundred square metres of land and above
shall adopt necessary infrastructure, technology or such measures, as the Central
Government deem fit necessary to undertake rainwater harvesting within such time, as
may be specified in the notification.
(2) The responsibility to ensure compliance of the provisions of sub-section (1) shall
lie, in the case of household, on the head of karta of that household, and in any other case,
on the person, by whatever name called, who  is primarily responsible for the affairs of that
establishment, plots and properties.
(3) The Central Government shall ensure construction and repair of conventional
water bodies such as wells, tanks, ponds, creeks and watersheds to preserve rainwater
either for direct use or to recharge the levels of groundwater.
(4) The Central Government shall ensure construction of any infrastructure,
technology or such measures, as it may deem necessary, for water conservation within
specific time as it may be notified by it for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes,
indigenous and tribal populations and any other vulnerable and marginalized groups.
4. (1) Subject to the provisions of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 and the
Water (Control and Prevention of Pollution) Act 1974, every existing and planned household,
business establishment, government buildings, and any other such plots/properties on two
hundred square metres of land and above shall adopt necessary infrastructure, technology
or such measures, as it may deem necessary, to recycle or reclaim wastewater within such
time, as may be specified in the notification.
(2) The responsibility to ensure compliance of the provisions of sub-section (1) shall
lie, in the case of household, on the head of karta of that household, and in any other case,
on the person, by whatever name called, who is primary responsible for the affairs of that
establishment, plots and properties.
Compulsory
rainwater
harvesting by
households,
business
establishments
and
government
buildings.
Compulsory
Water
Reclamation.
29 of 1986.
5 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

4
(3) The Central Government shall ensure construction and repair of conventional
water bodies such as wells, tanks, ponds, creeks and watersheds to recycle or reclaim
wastewater so as to recharge the levels of groundwater.
(4) The Central Government shall ensure construction of any infrastructure,
technology or such measures, as it may deem necessary for water reclamation within such
time as may be prescribed, for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, indigenous and
tribal populations and any other vulnerable and marginalized groups.
5. (1) The Central Government shall within a selected period not exceeding a year,
prepare and select best practices and scientific technologies available in India and all over
the world, which are sustainable practices for water conservation and reclamation.
(2) Every practice and scientific technology prepared under sub-section ( 1) shall be
duly notified within a period not exceeding ninety days.
(3) Every existing and planned household business establishment, government building
and any other such plots/properties on two hundred square metres of land and above are
mandated to adopt best practices or any scientific technologies for water conservation and
reclamation as notified by the Central Government.
6. (1) Every existing and planned household, business establishment, government
building, and any other such plots/properties on two hundred sq. metres of land and above
have to compulsorily use such conserved water for all viable purposes.
(2) The Central Government shall create necessary infrastructure, technology or
such measures, as it may deem necessary, to use such conserved water for any public
purposes.
(3) The Central Government shall ensure construction of any infrastructure,
technology or such measures, as it may deem necessary, to provide such conserved water to
the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, indigenous and tribal populations and any
other vulnerable and marginalized groups with such time for all viable purposes.
(4) The Central Government shall encourage potable use of conserved water in a
sustainable way as may be prescribed.
7. (1) The Central Government shall, within a selected period not exceeding a year,
prepare an action plan to educate people about the technology and benefits of water reclamation
through all possible means.
(2) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament,
allocate fund, and sponsor programmes from its available means to ensure the proper
implementation of this Act.
(3) For the purpose of sub-section (1) and (2), the Central Government shall also
associate non-Governmental Organizations and such other agencies or institutions, as it
may deem fit, in such manner as  may be prescribed.
8. (1) The Central Government shall make all efforts to enable easy access to all
stakeholders including non-Governmental Organisations, corporate, and private
organizations to create knowledge-related aspects of water conservation, rainwater
harvesting, and water reclamation.
(2) The Central Government shall incentivize society, including individual members
of that society, business establishments, government buildings, households and any other
such plots/properties on two hundred square metres of land and above for water conservation,
rainwater harvesting, and water reclamation through concession in water bill or any other
suitable means.
(3) The Central Government shall promote continuing research and advancement in
technology to address issues related to water conservation and reclamation.
Treatment
Technologies.
Usage of
Conserved
water.
Funding.
Public
Outreach,
Participation
and
Consultation.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
(4) The Central Government shall encourage, recognize, and award innovation in
water conservation, rainwater harvesting and water reclamation.
9. (1) Whoever, including an individual, business establishment, government building,
household or an owner of any plot or properties on two hundred square metres of land and
above violates the provisions of this Act shall be penalized with differential pricing in their
water bills as per the standard rate set by the appropriate Government.
(2) In the case of repeated violation such person shall be punished with simple
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with a fine which may extend to
rupees one lakh or with both.
10. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act, as may appear to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
11. The provisions of this Act or the schemes made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of such law.
12. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
Punishment.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The pace of development should not just better the lives of present generations, but
also be sustainable enough to benefit future generations. Across the country, both the pace
of urbanization and urban migration is far exceeding the level that is sustainable at current
levels of naturally available water. This situation has led to an unchecked level of stress on
naturally available water, thereby resulting in the increasing certainty of a scenario in the
near future where groundwater levels in major cities of India are as low as zero.
Global threats such as climate change are exacerbating existing water stress by in-
creasing the pace of desertification, making it of utmost urgency to tackle the renewal of
water resources through efficient recycling and rainwater harvesting. This situation is alarm-
ing and threatening the future growth and development of our cities and our country. The
gravity of the situation calls for legislation whose jurisdiction encompasses all States and
Union territories of India, and whose mandate stimulates collective action involving all
public and private stakeholders. Furthermore, the State must take reasonable legislative and
other measures, within its available resources, to achieve the progressive realisation of the
Right of Access to Sufficient Water for all including the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled
Tribes, indigenous and tribal populations and any other vulnerable and marginalized groups
within required time.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RITESH  PANDEY
November 1, 2019
6

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall adopt necessary infra-
structure, technology or such measures, as they deem fit necessary for rainwater harvesting.
Clause 4 provides that the Central Government shall adopt necessary infrastructure,
technology or such measures, as they deem fit necessary for recycle or reclaim waste water.
It further provides for construction of any infrastructure, technology or such measures to
water reclamation within such time for the Schedule Castes, the Schedule Tribes, indigenous
and tribal populations and any other vulnerable and marginalized groups. Clause 5 provides
that the Central Government shall, within a period of one year, prepare and select best
practices and scientific technologies available in India and all over the world, which are
sustainable practices for water conservation and reclamation. Clause 6 provides that the
Central Government shall create necessary infrastructure, technology or such measures, as
it may deem necessary, to use such conserved water for any public purposes. Clause 7
provides that the Central Government shall, within a selected period not exceeding a year,
prepare an action plan to educate people about the technology and benefits of water recla-
mation through all  possible means. Clause 8 provides that the Central Government shall
make all efforts to enable easy access to all stakeholders including Non-governmental,
corporate and private organizations to create knowledge-related aspects of water conserva-
tion, rainwater harvesting, and water reclamation. The Bill, therefore, if enacted,  is likely to
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual
recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore would be involved from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
7

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
8

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for a national legal framework for compulsory conservation and reclamation of
rainwater by every household, business establishment and Government building in
order to ensure access to sufficient water and sustainable development of it for
every human being on this planet and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Ritesh Pandey, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—3310LS(S3)—20-11-2019.