1
THE HOLY CITY OF DEOGHAR (PRESERV ATION OF CULTURAL
HERITAGE) BILL, 2019
By
DR. NISHIKANT DUBEY, M.P.
A
BILL
for the declaration of the city of Deoghar as the oldest living city of utmost national
importance and to provide for the conservation, preservation and maintenance
of culutral and natural heritage, heritage of Deoghar and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
WHEREAS the ancient city of Deoghar is one of the oldest living cities in the world and
the cradle of Indian civilisation.
AND W HEREAS the ancient city of Deoghar is abounded by thousands of ancient
temples and other places of worship which play an important role in the social and cultural
fabric of the city.
A
ND WHEREAS it is considered necessary to take appropriate legal, scientific, technical,
Bill No. 356 of 2019
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
administrative and financial measures necessary for the identification, protection,
conservation, preservation and rehabilitation of cultural and natural heritage of the ancient
city of Deoghar.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Holy City of Deoghar (Preservation of Cultural
Heritage) Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appointed date" means such date, as may be notified by the State
Government;
(b) "construction" means any erection of a structure or a building, including
any addition or extension thereto either vertically or horizontally including any
reconstruction, repair and renovation of an existing structure or building, or,
construction of roadways or waterways, or, construction, maintenance and cleansing
of drains and drainage works and of public latrines, urinals and similar conveniences,
or, the construction and maintenance of works meant for providing supply of water for
public, or the construction or maintenance, extension, management for supply and
distribution of electricity to the public or provision for other similar facilities for public;
(c) "heritage site" means a cultural heritage site, a natural heritage site, a mixed
cultural and natural heritage site or a cultural landscape of outstanding value;
(d) "Deoghar" means the area of Deoghar district in the State of Jharkhand;
(e) "large scale project" means an activity, which concerns construction or
reconstruction estimated to cost not less than rupees twenty crores;
(f) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the
word "notify" shall be construed accordingly; and
(g) "State Government" means the Government of the State of Jharkhand.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause,—
(h) "cultural heritage site" shall include,—
(a) monuments, that is to say, architectural works, works of monumental
sculpture and painting, elements or structures of an archaeological nature,
inscriptions, cave dwellings and combinations of features which are of
outstanding value from the point of view of history, art or science;
(b) buildings, that is to say, separate or connected buildings which, because
of their architecture, homogeneity or place in the landscape, are of outstanding
value from the historical, aesthetic, ethnological or anthropological point of
view;
(c) sites, that is to say, works of man including industrial or railway heritage
or the combined works of nature and man and areas including archaeological
sites which are of outstanding value from the historical, aesthetic, ethnological
or anthropological point of view; and
(d) places of religious worship, that is to say, structures more than hundred
years old or more, where devotees offer prayers;
Short title and
commencement.
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(ii) "natural heritage site" shall include,—
(a) natural sites or precisely delineated natural areas which are of
outstanding value from the point of view of science, conservation or natural
beauty;
(b) geological and physiographical formations and precisely delineated
areas which constitute the habitat of threatened species of animals and plants
and are of outstanding value from the point of view of science or conservation;
(c) natural features consisting of physical and biological formations or
groups of such formations, which are of outstanding value from the aesthetic or
scientific point of view;
(iii) "mixed cultural and natural heritage site" shall include properties which
satisfy a part of the attributes of both cultural heritage site and natural heritage site;
(iv) "cultural landscape" includes cultural properties representing the combined
works of man and the nature and illustrative of the evolution of human society and
settlement over a time, under the influence of the physical constraints and opportunities
presented by their natural environment and of successive social, economic and cultural
forces, both external and internal;
(v) "outstanding value", in relation to a heritage site, means its cultural or natural
significance which is so exceptional as to transcend the boundaries of the place in
which it is located and is of great importance for the present and future generations of
the country;
3. The Central Government shall, by notification, Deoghar declare Deoghar as the
'oldest living city of utmost national importance', keeping in view the unique stature and
importance of Deoghar.
4. The Central Government shall Institute a Committee inter alia comprising of
archaeological experts and scholars for the purpose of identification, conservation and
preservation of heritage sites, natural heritage sites, mixed cultural and natural heritage
sites and cultural landscapes of outstanding value in Deoghar, in such manner as may be
prescribed.
5. (1) The Central Government shall maintain a heritage sites roster for Deoghar and
make it available on its website for public viewing in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Central Government may, keeping in view the national importance of any of the
heritage sties, notify such heritage sites and enter the description of such sites in the
heritage sites roster in such manner as may be prescribed.
6. (1) All large scale projects and construction, started after the notification of this Act
or ongoing at the time of its enactment, shall be stopped with immediate effect pending an
evaluation published at an appointed date of their impact on heritage sites, natural heritage
sites, mixed cultural and natural heritage sites and cultural landscapes by the Committee
constituted under section 4.
(2) The State Government shall take all measures, including but not limited to shutting
down of polluting industries, revocation of government licenses and stoppage of large scale
projects detrimental to conservation, preservation and upkeep of heritage sites, natural
heritage sites, mixed cultural and natural heritage sites and cultural landscapes.
7. The local authority shall make all efforts to identify, rebuild and rehabilitate heritage
sites, natural heritage sites, mixed cultural and natural heritage sites and cultural landscapes
that have been harmed due to large scale projects and construction works undertaken
before enactment of this Act.
Declaration of
Deoghar as
the oldest
living city of
national
importance.
Constitution
of Committee
for
preservation
of heritage
sites.
Maintenance
of a roster of
heritage sites.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Measures to
prevent
damage to
heritage sites.
Rebuilding and
rehabilitation
of heritage
sites.
45

4
8. The Central Government shall,  after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
9. (1) The Central Government may,  by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament or the Legislative Assembly and the Legislative Council, as
the case may be, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of
the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both
House agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Central Govt.
to provide
funds.
Power to
make rules.
5
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Deoghar, which falls under Santhal Pargana region, is an unique and extremely revered
site of one of the fifty-one Shaktipeeths and also of the Dwadash Jyotirlinga in the country.
This is a religious and cultural capital of Eastern India which catapults the holy place to an
International acclaim and is visited by over five crore pilgrims every year.
The proposed Bill puts forward the demand of lakhs of people of Deoghar as well as
crores of other who stand for conservation of our cultural heritage and see Deoghar as the
holiest of the earth's cities. Hence, this Bill proposes the proclamation of Deoghar as the
'oldest living city of utmost national importance', the conservation and preservation of a
wide array of tangible and intangible heritage and the stopping of haphazard development
projects. The Bill provides that the Central Government shall constitute a Committee, without
any delay, to identify, enumerate and preserve Deoghar's shared cultural heritage.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; NISHIKANT DUBEY
October  25, 2019.
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for constitution of a committee of archaeological experts
and scholars for the purpose identification, conservation and preservation of heritage sites,
natural sites, etc. Clause 8 of the Bill makes it obligatory for the Central Government to
provide requisite fund for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  The expenditure to be
incurred depends upon number of heritage sites to be identified for the purpose of
conservation and maintenance. Therefore, the Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India. However, it is not possible at this stage to estimate the
actual financial expenditure that is likely to be incurred.
6

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matter of detail only, the delegation of
legislative powers is of a normal character.
7

8
LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
for the declaration of the city of Deoghar as the oldest living city of utmost national
importance and to provide for the conservation, preservation and maintenance
of culutral and natural heritage, heritage of Deoghar and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
—————
(Dr. Nishikant Dubey, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—3046LS(S3)—20-11-2019.