1
Bill No. 359 of  2019
THE  COTTON  GROWERS  (WELFARE)  BILL,  2019
By
SHRI DHAIRY ASHEEL SAMBHAJIRAO MANE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for measures to ensure welfare of cotton growers and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Cotton Growers (Welfare) Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "cotton grower" means any person who cultivates cotton;
Short title and
commencement.
Definitions.5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(c) "Committee" means the National Cotton Development Committee constituted
under section 4;
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(e) "Scheme" means the Cotton Growers Welfare Scheme formulated under section 3.
3. The Central Government shall formulate a Scheme for the welfare of Cotton
Growers to be known as the Cotton Growers Welfare Scheme.
4. (1) The Scheme shall be administered by a Committee to be known as the National
Cotton Development Committee to be constituted by the Central Government in such manner
as may be prescribed.
(2) The Committee shall consist of—
(i) Union Minister of Agriculture and Farmer's Welfare—Chairperson,
ex-officio;
(ii) Union Minister of State for Agriculture and Farmer's Welfare—Vice-
Chairperson, ex-officio;
(iii) two members, representing the Governments of Cotton growing States, to
be nominated by the respective State Government in such manner as may be prescribed;
(iv) two members representing Cotton Association of India; and
(v) three Members of Parliament each from Cotton growing States.
(3) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and staff to the
Committee as it deemed necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to, and other conditions of service of the officers
and staff of the Committee, shall be such as may be prescribed.
5.  (1) The Central Government shall set up a Fund to be known as the Cotton Growers
Welfare Fund for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute to the Cotton
Growers Welfare Scheme Fund in such ratio as may be prescribed.
6. The Fund shall be utilised for the following purposes, namely:—
(a) to provide financial assistance to cotton farmers and growers for purchasing
cotton seeds, pesticides and fertilizers, and in case of low yields of cotton or loss of
their crops due to rains, storms, floods, hailstorms and drought;
(b) to provide free health facilities for cotton farmers and growers and their
families;
(c) the provide assistance to the cotton farmers and growers in the event of any
disability;
(d) to compensate the farmer(s) and grower(s) suitably in case as yield being
less than estimated;
(e) to provide technical and other kinds of specialized assistance to cotton
farmers and growers;
(f) to create adequate procurement and storage facility for cotton and assistance
for export of cotton and its products;
(g) to encourage research in cotton related fields;
Cotton
Growers
Welfare
Scheme.
Cotton
Growers
Welfare Fund
Cotton
Farmers and
Growers
Welfare Fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(h) to provide electricity and water facilities to cotton farmers and growers at
subsidized rate; and
(i) for such other purposes as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making an modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to
make rules.
5
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Cotton is one of the most important fibre and cash crop of India and plays adominant
role in the industrial and agricultural economy of the country. It provides the basic raw
material (cotton fibre) to cotton textile industry. The textiles and apparels industry in India is
valued at around $127 billion in size. Textile units in Ichalkaranji produce cloth for both
domestic and overseas markets. Ichalkaranji has a rich legacy in the field of textile industry in
the State of  Maharashtra.  Cotton in India provides direct livelihood to six million farmers
and about 40-50 million people are employed in cotton trade and its processing.
In India, there are ten major cotton growing States which are divided into three zones,
viz. northern zone, central zone and south zone. North zone consists of the State of Punjab,
Haryana and Rajasthan. Central zone includes the State of Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra
and Gujarat Southern zone comprises the State of Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Karnataka
and Tamil Nadu. The latest United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) estimate for the
marketing year 2019-20 has projected India's cotton crop at 305 lakh US bales (each of 217.7
kg), which works out to 390 lakh India bales (each of 170 kg). Last season in 2018-19, India's
cotton crop was reported decade-low at 312 lakh bales by the apex cotton trade body, Cotton
Association of India (CIA).
Cotton output in India was impacted last year due to drought in many cotton growing
States including the States of Maharashtra, Telangana and Andhra Pradesh. The Government
increased a mere two per cent in cotton minimum support price (MSP) for 2019-20 compared
to five per cent and nine per cent in groundnut and soyabean respectively.
The monsoons and unseasonal rains in 2019 have led to huge crop losses and damages
to the farmers. The Bill is aimed at creating a targeted scheme for welfare of cotton growers
and farmers which will be administered by a committee to be headed by Minister of Agriculture
and comprising members from varied fields relating to cotton production and supply.
The Bill also makes a provision to create a Fund to be managed jointly through funds
of Central and State Governments to be used for a wide range of activities including insurance,
electricity, technical assistance, research and health facilities which will aid in providing
relief to the cotton farmers not only in the State of Maharashtra but across the country.
The Bill, if enacted, will protect the interests and promote the welfare of the cotton
growers in the country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; DHAIRYASHEEL SAMBHAJIRAO MANE
November 6, 2019.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for formulation of Cotton Growers Welfare Scheme.
Clause 4 provides for the Constitution of National Cotton Development Committee. Clause 5
provides for setting up of a Cotton Farmers and Growers Welfare Fund to which the Central
Government and the State Governments shall contribute in such ratio, as may be prescribed.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. However, at this stage, it is not possible to quantify the actual expenditure at this
juncture, it is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees seven thousand crore
may be incurred per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring annual expenditure of about rupees two thousand crore is also likely
to be incurred.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of
legislative power is of normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for measures to ensure welfare of cotton growers and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto
————
(Shri Dhairyasheel Sambhajirao Mane, M.P . )
MGIPMRND—3493LS(S3)—21-11-2019.