HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE. 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE RESERVE· AND AUXILIARY .AlB. FORCES , BILL, 1952. 
1 • In page .2·, line 9 J fnr "has" read Ithad" .. 
2. In page 3, line 7':', omit "naviga-". 
J. In page 3, line .31, f()r "{)r"~·4tand". 
New Delhi, 
The 24th May, 1952. 
, i ~::.l. 6.,0": ! 
, M.N. KAUL, 
SEC RET A R'Y. 

HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE 
• 

_111 .0. 86 01 1962. 
THE RESERVE' AND AUXILIARY AIR FORCES BILL, 
1952 
(As IN'TRODt'CED IN THE HOUSB 0.' THB PEOPLE) 
A 
BILL 
to provide JOT the con.titution 4nd regulation 0/ cert4in Ai, 1I'0,c. R.81r",' 
and alao 4n AuziZia,oy Air Force tlnd Jor mtltt.,. conn.cted th',.witJ&. 
BB it enaoted by Parliament 6S 10110".:-
CHAPTER I 
~ABt" 
1. Shoft title, extent ADd. COID.DleacemeJ;lt.-(l) Thi. Act may be called 
the Reserve and Auxiliary Air Forces Act, 1952. 6 
(9) It tlxtends to the whole of India. 
(3) This Chapter shall come into force at once, and the remaining pro-
. vision!! shall (lome into force on such date as the Central Government 
~" mR.V. hoY notifica.tion in the Olioi_l Gazette, appoint, and diRerent date. 
mny bi~ rlppointed for different provisions: 10 
2. De1lnltlon8.-In this Aot, unless the context otherwi'ie requires,-
(a) "Air Foroe ResHrv&" meaDS any of the Air Force Reserve. 
rr.iRl'II lind maintained under this Aot; 
(b) "competent authority" means any air officer appointed und~r us section 3; . . '. . . 
(r) "prescribe~" means prescribed by rules made under thi. Act; . 
(rl) all othel' words and expressions used herein and defined in 
tb·.~ Air Foroe Act, 1950 (XLV of 1050). and not hereinbefore defined 
sha.1I have the meanings respeotively assigned to them by tha.t A~t. :&0 
3. A.ppointment of com~tent authority.-The Central Government 
rna:v. by nc/t,ification in the . Offioial. Ga?ette, a.ppoint one or more air 
officC')'r> to perfonn all or any of the funotionl of the competent authority 
und~r thitl Act. 
:C~7'E~ . .tI 
. RBOULAA AlB FOROB RBSDVB 
21 
4. Oon8tftut.1on o! ~ Air J"orce B8IeIVe.-The Central Govern-
mOllt, may faise nnd mniutlUB in the manner hereafter in this Ohapter 
prO\'ided an Air Force Reserve to be designated the R~gular Air Forc~ 
He8erv~1 which shall consist 9ole1y, 'Of persons transferred to it under 30 
!lection 5. 
6. Transfer of certain pellODl to the Beplar Air J'orce BeIerve.--(l) 
Tht! con~p(:tent authority may. ':by general or special order, transfer to the 
He;gulllr All' Force ,Resetve--
":." (tl) J1n.v olllcer or airman of the Air Force who under the terms 36 
and (londitions of his .servioe is liable to lerve in any Air Foroe nele", "!II" 
jf amI when constituted; " 
(1/) any officer or runnan of the All' Force whose oomttUs8idn or 
('I'~8ge1tlent in the Air F:orce. )"~1I1 Qepn ~Ina.ted befor~ the com-
mencement of· this .Ac.t ancbwbo ~pel'tJbe term, of hi. oommie.ion.o 

~ 
or eongagement was liable to sen'e in any Air Force Reserve if and 
when constituted; 
(c) any officer or ainnan who haa served in the Air Force and has 
retired therefrom, 
5 and any officer or airman 80 transferred shaU be deemed to be a member 
of the said Reserve. 
(2) 'rh~ competent authority may, for realOns which in hie opiniou 
IlI'a ~ufficitmt, (:ancel any" order made under sub·section (1) and on the 
cancellation of such order the pel"llOn in respeCt of whom the order has 
10 been mnde shall ceoase to be a member of the R88Ular Air Force Reserve. 
6. OIUl8' of pelllODl In tbI ....... AIr I'orce -..erv •. -Members of 
the Htgulur Air }<'orce Reserve shall be divided into the foUowing olasses, 
nmN:ly:-
(a) general duties omeen, 
15 (II) ~round duties officers, and 
(c) airmen, 
and every officer shall be entitled on transfer to the Reserve to hold tb~ 
same rank as that which he last held in the Air }'orce before his transfer. 
7. Period of • .mo.. (l) Every member of the Regular Air Foree 
20 Re8erve shllll be liable to Berve in the Reserve for the period of his ltcserve 
liability: 
Provided tbat the competent ""tbority may require any sucb member 
to serve ill the Reserve for BliOh further period or periods as he may think 
fit,. 
25 Ezplana.fion I.-For the purposes of this sub·section, "period of 
Hm,el've lillbility" in relation to any member of the Regular Air Force 
Reserve means the period for which under the terID8 and c:cnditions of 
his service in the Air Force he wal liable to serve in any Air Force Ueserve 
if and when collstitut.ed. 
30 Ezplanation 11.-ln computing the period of Bes8rVe liability in rela· 
tio!. to !lny member of the Regular Air Force Reserve whose commission 
or engogement in the Air Force was terminated before the commencement 
of this Act, the period which has elapsed between Buch tenhination and 
the date of coming into foroe of this Chapter shalt be included. 
35 (2) Nctwithstanding anything contained in lub-section (1). no person 
shal! bt· litlble to serve in the Reserve after attaining the prescribed age. 
40 
S. TermlD&UOD of "",ce In tbe BeIern.-Every member of thd 
Regula!" Air Force Reserve shall, on completion of the, period of his servioe 
t,hereiil, CI"8Se to be a member of the Reserve. 
CHAPTER III 
Am nBnwoB R •• BRVB 
9. OODititUttcm of AIr Defael .... rn.-The Central Government may 
rais(! and maintain" in the manner hereafter in this Ohapter provided A.n 
A~r :Force Heserve to be designg,ted the Air Defence Reserve which shall 
.5 cnnsi.;t of persons deemed under the provisions of section 15 to be enrolled 
therein. ' 
10. ObU,a'lon to r ..... -(l) E'gery citizen of India who-
(a) holds or haa held a. public transport pilot's licence (" B " 
Licence) issued under the Indian Aircraft ltules, 1987, or 

I 
(b) has had not leIS than two hundred houtB' experierice of snlo 
flying (including not leas than thirty landings), or 
(c:) holds or has held a first clasl navigator's licence iS8uE'd under 
the Iud ian Aircra.ft Rules, 1987. or 
(d) has had at least four years' aviation experience ciuring which 5 
at least six hundred ho\11'8 shall have been spent in the air, not Jess 
than one hundred hours of such experien('e being experience of naviga. 
navigation in the air, or 
(.) holda or has held a fint elau radio telegraph operator's licence 
issued under the Indian Ail'Cl'&ft Itules, 1937, or ]0 
(f) holds or bas held a radio telephone operator's licence issued 
under the Indian Aircraft Rules, 1987, or 
(g) holds or has held a licence as ground engineer in any of the 
categories ,A, B, C, D or X issued under the Indian Aircraft Rules, 
1987, 15 
shall within the prescribed period cprrectly fill up, or cause to be filled up, 
Lo the best of his knowledge and belief the prescribed form, and sign and 
lodgt> it with the competent authorit.v neare.t to hia usual place of 
reE'idence or business: 
Provided that nothill, contained ill this lub·seotion shall apply- 20 
(i) to any person beloD,in, to anT of the classes specified iu 
clauses (a) to (f), if he haa a"-ined the age of tbirtY-Icven years; or 
(ii) to any person belonging to the cl&8s specified in clause (g~, if 
he haa attained the age of fifty yean. . 
(2) Without prejudioe to the provision. contained in BUb·section (1), 25 
th13 competent authority may. if he is sati.Bed th&t 'he provisions of that 
sub·section apply to &I1y person, by order in writing, require that person 
to furnish within such time .\lOh particulars as may be specified 111 the 
order and such person shall wi\hin the specified time furnish correctly to 
the best of his knowledge and belief the said particulars to the suid 30 
authoritJ in such form or manner as may be prescribed. 
11. Ll&bility to be c&Ued up far mquirJ,-Every person to whollJ t,ht~ 
provisions of foection 10 are applicable shaJl be liable to be ealled up for 
inquiry under seetion 12-
(a) if he belongs to any of the classes specified in clauses (a) to 35 
(fl of sub·section (1) of seotian 10 until he has completed his thirty-
seventh yeal', and 
(h) if he belongs to the elas. specified in clause (g) of the l4aid 
sub-section, until he haa completed his fiftieth year. 
12. OaUiq-up for lDqUIrJ.-(lJ 'The competent authority may cuuse 40 
to be served on any person for the time being liable to be called up for 
inquiry under section 11 a writ~n notice stating that he is called up for 
inquiry regarding his fitneea for service in the Air Defence Reserve anel 
requiring him to present himself to such person and Ill; such place :lud 
at such time (not earlier than the aeventh day after the date of the service 45 
of the notice) as may be specified in the notice and to submit himself to 
inquiry by the competent authority. 
(2) Where a notice under sub-section (1) has been duly served on IIny 
person, the competent authority may, at any time. while the person' 
remains liable under this Chapter to be called up for inC)uiry, cancel tho 50 

, 
noti..,., and cause to be served ort ',him a further notice varying the original 
Dotfae. 
13 •• ed1cal eZlmlnatloD.-Every person called up for inquiry under 
section 12 shall, if and when required by the competent authority, p"pst'nt 
5 himself for exan::ination before such medical ofijoer IlS may oe directecl 
by thnt authority, and. for the pl,U'pOses of such ()xRmination, shill! comply 
with the directions of the medical officer. 
U. ltegtstnttoa. of pel'lQDl coutclINd llt fOr enrolment-.-If afkr f.;lIch 
inquiry and medical examina.tion as aforesaid, the competent Quthoriy 
10 consid3rs ~L l'erson fit. for eI\1'\llment in the Air Defence Reserve, he shall 
inform him Rceoroingly and enter his name and other prescribed particulars 
in a register maintained in such form and manner as may be prescribed. 
15. Oallillg up for ae1'Yice.~The competent authority may ('ause to t,e 
served on any person whose name is entered in the register maintained 
15 in pursuanee of Bection 14 a written notice stating that he is called up for 
service in the Air Defence Reserve and requiring him to present himsdf 
at such plnce and time (not earlicit than the seventh day after the date of 
the service of the notice) and to suclJ authority as may be specified in the 
notice; nnd the person upon whom the notice is served shall be dMmerl 
20 to b~ enrolled in the Reserve I\F.! from the" day so spee-oitied . 
• 18. Penod ot, .. mce.~E~ery person deeme'd. to be enrolled in the 
Air Defence Reserve shall be, hable fQr s~rvice-., , 
(a) if be beloJlgsto 8.f1J" ,of" ,tlie', :claSsl!8 sPQcified ,in dauaes 
(a) to (j) of sub·section (I)-of, section 10. until he has, completed bis 
26 forty·second year; , ' ' 
'(b)' if he belopgs to tIi~ "class ap80tfiedin clause (g) of' the said 
lub-section, until he haa, qomplet.ea,Na 6fty~ft~h year. ' 
'CHAPTER IV 
A"CX~~ •.. Anl Fo,aoa' 
30 17. OoaltttUucm or A1DfI1arJ D 'J'arce.~1) The Central Government 
may raise and maintain in the manner hereafter in this Chapter provided 
an Air Force to be designated, the Auxiliary Air 'Force. 
(2) The Central G~vernment may constitute Injch number of squadron" 
and units of the Auxiliary Air Force as it thinks fit and ltlay disband or 
36 recclIlstitute Bny squadron or .unit., ' 
18. ClaIIeaOf perIoD.'~ .. ~e·'''~ Au' 'i'~~.-Member~, of the 
, ,A.UXi(1i.~ ffiA. ,j~ ,.~~~oed ~~~l~.!.~ I~. ~lV. l~;? ~~t~ .. ~~}~!~~~~g ,~l~II~,~~', namely:-
I, ',~. ~ll~ .'ce~8 ... ,an.' ",_, f:' J. " ",,:',~ ~, Il,," '1- I ,;, '" ", _J 
I;;' I (.b) ... aJ~en~., 1.:1, o:I,,: .. .u1fj" .4_'.J ., .• ,.".', IJ: . "",", 
.0 19. 'OSciri'ot-' dut . .&~ Air-' ""1~b8"Pl'eIIjjentlimay ,~t ~ 
" ' ~\lcb ~er8bn''''as he·tlfln~k''ftt' .. 'eOh1ntiJaibtr-'&i'·all".,er in tM .. AUllC,i~Al1 Ai .. 
j'oree 'wit1J (te'aiglfs;1!idIi of Wrt1k;:~mr'1lo I~MJ'-'Ofl.IiTi1"o0tDinIKIOiled 
o~r in tne"Air Fbrce. ", ,,' .1/ ~"I:I:' .. " ...... ,.j 'J ,.. i;;<> .',' ','1.. ,I, 
·\ .. s" ., ... J ;,;.. .~;.' ~ ;',:, , " .,.. r',',·',. I , 
10. PersoDi .elllD* _. nrol"t.-A~eJ1 of Indi" Jriay' offer 
,,' hi' 'settlor ,e~luiifi_' it1'jth~IK~Ifitit1"!!rr ' :MJd:'IUlIay~'j'l.fI'rhe iia.tisfies 
~,;. ~.~ llti~~~~~a'i~"rlat~i~';~ :b .... ~~?~w..~,:d:~, ~~;:~~,''* ,11\.,. bt> 
preacr u.N •. 

S 
~1. Period or aentce.- Every officer And every enl"911ed person ahatl. 
Rubject to any rilles thRt may ue made in this behalf under this Act, b,) 
required tl) serve in the A uxiliary Air Force for a period of five years from 
the dati! of his appointment or enrolment but may, after the completioD 
of hi~ period of sf!rvice, volunteer to serve therdn for further periods eaoh 6 
of not morn thUD five years' duration. 
22. Ter:m.iDatlon of 8ervice.-The service of any officer or enrolled 
persor in the A uxiliary Air J<'orce may, at any time before tae completion 
of his period of service, be terminated by such authority and under such 
conrlitions as may be prescribed. 10 ' 
23. Advtsory Oommmeea.-(1) The Central Government shall, at; soon 
as mfl~' be nfter thtl commeDlJement of this Act, constitlltA-
(a) for the wholf> of India, I.L Central Advisory Committee; 
(b) for ench State ill which there is a squadron or unit of the 
Auxiliary .\ir Force, n State Advisory Committee; and- JI 
(c) for every unit of the Auxiliary Air Force, a Unit Advisory 
Committee. . 
(2) It shall be the duty of the Central Advisory Committee to advise 
the C'entral Government on matters connected with the Auxiliary Air 
Force gc·nerally, of the State Advisory Committee to advise the Centrol 10 
Government ou matters connected with the squadrons or units sta.tioned 
in the State, and of the Unit Advisory Committee to advise the Central Gov-
en.ment 011 matters connected with the unit for which it is constituted. 
(3) The duties, powers and procedure of Advisory Committees and in 
particular the matters in respect of which the Advisory Committeesma.\' • 
be called upon to give advice shall be such as may be prescribed. 
CHAPTER V 
LUBILITY AND DISCIPLINB OF MEMBERS OF RBSERVE AND AUXILIARY Ala FORcB3 
24. LlabWty to be c&llad up for 1II'9IC8.-Every member of an
w 
Air 
Foroe Reserve o. the Auxiliary Air Force shall, during the period of hi~ 10 
st'rvice, be liable to be called up-
(a) for periodical training and medical examination, 
(b) for service in aid oftha oivil power, 
(r.) for Air Force service in India or abroad iu an emergency. 
25. DtlclpUne.-Every membo" of an Air Force Reserve or the Auxiliary 33 
Air Forcn shall, when called up for training, medical examination or for 
service under this Act, be subject to the Air Foroe Act, 1950 (XL V of 
1950) , and ,the rules made thereunder in the same manner as a person 
belonging to the Air Force and holding the same rank is subject to the 
said Act and rules aud shall continue to be so subject until c!uly releaseel 40' 
from such training, medical examination or service, as the OBse may be. 
CHAPTER VI 
MISOBLLAlTlI017S 
, 2&. Re~lDt In c1vtt employ ot ~,required 'to pe" 
88'VIce under thJI .lct.-( 1) It shall be the duty of every employer .. ~l' M 
whom a person called up under section 24 is employed to grant him auah 
!~av2 aa may be necessary and to rei,nstate him ,in his employmen, t on the 
·~#r\inatio.llofthe period d.u;.ing, whi~h he'· h~B b~n 90 c~ll~~ upbf. ~ 't. 
do(!upatiQI1 and undet oondltions not le88 favourable to him 'tHan tlio •• 
wp.ioh \would have been applicable to hUn'ha4h~ nof: been 10 O&U~ up:' GO 

• 
Provided that if the employer refuses to reinstate such person or deniei 
his liability to reinstate such person, 01' if for uny reason the reinstatement 
of. such person il:i represented by thtl employer to be imprl~cticQ.ble, either 
~~y may refer the matter to the prescribed authority and that au~ority 
r; ~all, after considering all matters which wuy be put before him and 
.Hcr nillking !:iuch furtrher inquiry into the math-'r u.s may be prescribed, 
pass Ull order-
(a) exempting the employer from the provisions of this section, or 
(b) requiring him to re-employ such person on such terms I:l8 that 
10 authority thirlkr. suitable, or 
(c) requiring him to pay to !:iuch person by way of compensation 
for failure or inability to re-employ a. sum not exceeding an amount 
equal to six months' remuneration at the rr.te at which his last re-
muueration was payable to him by ~be employer, 
:1. (B) If any employer fails. to obey the order of any such authority as i. 
referred to m the proviso to sub-scction (1), he shall be punishable with 
fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, und the court by which an 
employer is convicted under this section shall order him tif he has not 
all'86l1J been so required by the said authority) to pay to the peraou whom 
10 he has failerl to re-employ .. sum equal to six months' remuneration at the 
rate at which hill last remuneration was payable to him by the employer, 
and any amount 110 required. to be paid either by the said authority or by 
the court shall be recoverable as if it were .. fine imposed by such court. 
(3) In any proceeding under t,bis section it shall be u, defence for an 
. .21 employer to prove tha. the person formerly employed did 1I.ot apply to the 
, employer for reillstlltement within Ii: period of two months from the ter" 
mination of the period during which he was called up under section 
24, 
(4) The duty imposed by sub-section (1) upon un employer to grant 
ao leave to 11 persoll such as is described in that sub-scction or to reinstate 
him ill his employment shall attach to an employer who, before such person 
t is actually called up under section 24, terminates his employment in cir-
eunJstances such as to indicate an" intention to evade t.he duty imposed 
by that sub-section and such intention shall be pl"t:sumed until the 
35 contra.:-y is proved if the termination takes place after the issue Qf an 
order rel~ting to that person under section 24. 
27. PreservatiOn of certabl rights of perlODl called up for lervice.-
When any persoll called up under section 24 hu,s any rights under any 
provident fund or superannuation fund or other scheme for the benefifl 
40 of emploStles maintained in connection with the employment he 
relinqUishes, he shall continue, during the period for which he has been 
so called up and if he is reinstated, until such reinstatement under the 
provisioclJ of this Act, to have in respect of such fund or scheme such 
rights as may be prescribed. 
41 21. Pay and allowanc".- Eve? member of an Air Force lleserve or 
the Auxiliary Air F'orce shall, durmg the pet:iod of training or active 
l81'Vice. receive suoh pay Iald allowJ.mces us are admissible to Bn officer 
or airman, as the oase may be, in the corresponding rank, branch or trade 
, of the .Air For.'le. 
10 29. Penalttel.-(l) If any person refuses or without lawful excuse (the 
burden of proving which shall lie upon such person) neglects to ('ompI, 
~ with the requirements of sub-section (1) of scction 10 or ot any order 
e under Bub-section (9) of that section or with the requiremeuts of 

section 13 he shall be punishable with fine whioh may extend to five 
hundred rupees. 
(2) If any person wilfully foils to comply with hDy notice isstied under 
lection 12 or sec~iol1 15 he shall he punishable with imprisonment whioh 
may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand 
rupees, or with both. • 
30. Service of notice.--Any notice or order to be served on any person 
for the purposP.'; of t;,u, Act lna.y be sent by post to that person st his IOlt 
known addl'eflE; or may be sArved upon him in such other manner as ml\Y 
be prescribed. 
31. COmpetent authority to be public '~lDt.-For the purposes of 
this Aot every competent authority shall be deemed to be fa public servant 
... ithin the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (Act XLV of 
1860). 
81. Power of Oentral Government to lI'aDt ezemptlone.- The emusl 
Government may, for special reasons and subject to such conditions as may 
bE! prescribed, by order exempt any person from any obligation or liability 
under th:.s Act or r..ny particular provision thereof. 
83. Power to make rules.-(l) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Ga.zette, make rules for oarrying out the pur-· 
poses of this Act. 
I 
]0 
lIS 
(2) In parti'Jular, and without prejudice to the generality of t,he fore-
going power, ,,,,('h rules IIlny provide for all or any of the following lJIattere, 
narr:ely:-
(a) the romposition Bnd strength of any Air Force Reserve; 2lS 
(b) the circumstances in which and the conditions subject to 
which any officer or airman may be transferred to the Regular Air 
Force Reserve under seotion 5; . 
(c) tho age beyond which retired officers or airmen shall not blS 
liable t) eer\'e in the Regular Air Force Reserve; 30 
(d) the form and manner' in which the particulars required by 
sub· section (~) of section .10 shall be furnished; 
(e) tho form and manlier in which registers shall be maintained 
ill pursuanep. of section 14, the particulars to be entered therein, and 
the correction or revision of such particulars from time to time. 31 
(f) the payor allowances payable to pereons called up for inquiry, 
training, medical examination or service under this Act; 
(g) th<l terms and condition!! subject to whioh a person may be 
enrolled as n member of tho Auxiliary Air Force; 
(h) tht1 Bllthl)rit,v by which and the conditions subject t,o whioh ~ 
the servine of nr>.y otlicef or enrolled person in the Auxiliary Air Force 
tnll.Y be teJ'mil1ated; 
(i) the (,(lr.st.itution and the duties, powers and procedure of 
Advisory Committees to be constituted under section 28; 
(j) the rnli".Jlne~ in which find the conditione subject to which thP ~ 
rank of any member of an Air Force Reserve may be uatermined; 
(k) tbe ccnstitution of the authority for the purpose of section 26 
and the m!lrlller in which such authority may conduct any inquiry 
lInder this Act; 
(l) the marme)' in whiClh any noHcc or order issued or made under 50 
this Act muy be served; 

10 
15 
8 
"" (m) the cunditions subject to which any peraon may be exempted 
tram any cbJigation o~ liability under this Act or any particulbX pro-
.. ilion thereof: 
(n) any otl,t!r matter whioh under this Act is to be, or lilay be, 
pre&Cri~ed_ -
(.:1) Any rule made under this section may provide that s. contravention 
thereof shall be pUllifhable with fine which may extend to fifty rupe'~s_ 
M. Amendment of lection 2, , and 81, Act XLV of 1950.-1u the 
Air Foroe Aot. 1960.-
(,) ill sectioI.l 2, for olause (c) the following dause shall be sub-
8tituted, namely ,-
"(c) persons belonging to the Regul&r Air F'orce Ueserve or 
the Air DE-fence Reserve or the Auxiliary Air Force, in tho cir· 
cumstaut'es speoified in section 25 of tho Ueserve and Auxiliary 
Air "Forcer. Act, 1952; 
(i.) in sectio'l 4, for the words "the Indhm Air Force Volunteer 
Reserve", wherever thf'y occur, the words "any Air Force Reserve or 
the Auxiliary Air Force" shRll be substituted; " 
(iii) in section 31, for the worps "the Air Force Reserv!;" the 
JO words "auy Air :Force Reserve or the Auxiliary Air Force" shall be 
substitut·ed. 
85. Kepeal of Act XXXVI 01 1989.-The Indian Air Foroe Volunteer 
RcSt.lne (Discipline) Act. 1039, is hereby repealed. 
-

9 
~TA'I'EMENT OF OBJECTS A.ND REASONS 
It is necessary to constitut.e certain Heservl'ls for the Air F.orce in order 
to enable quick expansion in an emergency. The Reserves proposed wUI 
he constituted from outgoing loA.F. personnel, civilian pilots and 
technicians, aud by raising an Auxiliary Force of volunteers from the 
public 
2. Be~ 4U' J'9rCe BeIerve.-The Regular Air Force Beserve will 
consist of Indian Air Force officers and airmen transferred after 
completion on termination of the period of their regular s8"ice to this 
Reserve subject to the existenoe of vacancies. Tho il1itial period of 
Reserve service will normally be IS years for officers and t\ years for 
airmen subject also to their reaching such age limit as may be prescribed 
by the Government. 
ThoRe extended Service Commissioned Officers whose term of employ-
ment expires prior to the formation of this Reserve will also be liable to 
serve in the Heserve. 
8. Air Defence ... erve.-The constitution of the Air Defence Reserve 
requir39 that 8 census should be taken of the civilian technical manpower 
aVBil&bLJ iu thE.' country which could be utilised if occaBion arises. All 
persons within certain age limits possessing certain ftying or other teohnical 
qualificatio.!ls would be required to furnish certain particulars to ihe 
appl'Opriate l\\Ithority and submit themselves for medica}. examination. 
A register of persons who are fit for service would be maintained, and if 
and when oocaslon arises persons whoso names are entered in the re¢ster 
will be called out for service. It is necessary to have legislation for thie 
purpose on Rccount of the shortage of trained personnel which obtains 
at present. Bnd which is likely to persist for some time; and also to safe-
guard tht' interests of those who are called out from their jobs for training 
-or required tot) scrve in an emergency. 
Provision ilJ n.&de requiring civil employers to grant any enrolled 
person such leave as may be necessary and to have him reinstated into 
-civil employment after the tennination of the period during which he baa 
been called out . 
•. ADIU&rJ Air I'orce.--.The Auxiliary Air Force allows the enrolment 
-of civilian volunteers (including Government servants) to give them 
part-timl, Air l~orce training. This provides for the fighter defenoe of the 
locality, in which its self-contained units aDd squadrons are raised. n 
mlly be! looked at R8 the Territorial Army's air counterpart. 
Advisory Committees will be set up in big towns, where it is intended 
to locate the Auxiliary Air Foroe Squadronl to maintain close liaison with 
the civil side. These Committees will lerve also 8S 8 link between the 
Auxilillry Air ForcE.' and the Ind!an Territorial Arm"y, and ass,ist the 
Commanding Office.rs of the Units concerned to recruit civilian personnel. 
The period of service in ~he Auxilia.ry Air Force will normally be five 
years in the first instance. 
5. -Th~ period of training will be prescribed in the rules made by the 
Cantrlll GovE.'rnment. from time to time and oare will be taken to see tha* 
the trBinill~ is 80 arranged that minimum dislocation of nonnal oivil duties 
is caused. . 

10 
6. 'rho composition of the Reserves, tho ranks of the persons enrolled 
and othor allied matters will be regulated by rules mude by the Central 
Govt:mment nnd i.t is intended to build these R-eserves gradually. 
N. GOPALASWAMl. 
NBW DBLIII; 
The 14th May, 1952. 

11 
.FINANCIAL MEMOHANDUM 
The Bill is in the nature of a preUussive piece of legislation only, and 
40es not involve immediately any apRl'~ciable extra expeaditure. The 
.creu.tion of thd Auxiliary Air Force and the two Reserves will be taken 
in hU.Ild gradually depending upon the amount that is made available in 
the budget of the Defelice tiervices from year to year. A brief description 
of the nature of extra expenditure is given below:-
REGULAR AIR FORCE RESERVE 
The final strength of this Heserve is still to be determined although thb 
.Heserve will come into being soon after the passing of the Bill because all 
Buituble officers lind airmen who have retired from the Indian Air Force 
will be placed on .the Reserve. The extra expenditure to the State 011 
.QCcoun' of this Heserve will be the cost of annual training, medical examinl\-
tiJns, transport and pay and allowallces of the personnel when they are 
-called out for Air Force reserve. There will also be expenditure on clothing, 
rations during the period of duty and a possible retention fee, t.he grant of 
which is still separately under consideration. 
AIR DEFENCE RESERVE 
The size of this Reserve has also to be determined keeping in view the 
<lll[rcity of the Indian Air For~e to -provide training and the amount of 
money available in the Defence budget. Since the civilian personnel will 
have to be trained in the use of operational aillcraft, the build-up of this 
l{eserve will also be graduHI. The extra expenditure to the State 011 
IICCOlJnt of this Reserve will be in the shupe of travelling allowances, train-
lDg' expenseR, medical examinations, uniform and phy and aHowances 
-durill~ the period of training. Expenditure mBy also be' nec.ess&ryon air-
'~rlltt equipment and stores. 
Apurt from the various items of expenditure generally indicated above, 
it mny be found necessary to build additional f"ccommodation to house the 
aircraft and equipment re'quired for the above Forces sud also to house the 
n·~ttJnr· Air Force personnel which will be attached to these Forces for 
T)J'()vidin~ them nflceRsary training and administration. Expenditure under 
thi!< ht·od will, however, depend wholly on the rate at which the Reserves 
~rl:' nctllally built up. . 
AUXILIARY Am FORCE 
'rhi .. Force will ultimately con~ist of 7 Squndrons, each Squudron 
roughly consisting of 12 aircraft and necessary oflicel'tl, airmen and 
followers. Expenditure will be incurred on the provision of aircraft, unit 
equipment and storcR Hnd nlFlO recruitment (md training of volunteers both 
for flying as well as grouml dutieR. A8 fAr OR PPRRible, aircraft will be 
fOl1nd from those discarded from the regular IndiRn Air For~e SquRdrons 
on their re-equipment with more modern types' of aircraft. During the 
~riod of training or actusl employment on active duty, the members of 
thiq Forcf' will draw pr.y (lnd "l1owances as. for regular officers Rnd Ilirmt'n 
of the lndian Air Force. There will be extra expenditure on their trRvelling 
allowaDoes, uniform. ratioDs, transport and training exer~ise8. The 8ctul\l 
building-up of this Force will have to he plRnned lind camed out VE"ry csrE"-
tulJ~ in AccordancE" with the hudgetnry po~ition PIi'ch yf'ar. 

HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the constitution and regulation of oertain Air 
Force Reserves and also an Auxiliary Air Foroe andJfor-
matters co~ected therewith. 
The President has, in pursuance of cla·use (3) of 
article 117 of the Constitution of India, !leoo'mmended to the 
House of the People the oonsideration of the Bill. 
. 
(Shri N. GopaUuwami, 
M iniater lor Defence., 
< JPD--]J.~-·1179Mof'L.w-]7-li-r;2-1400 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 