Bill No. 35 of 1956 
THE CONSTITUTION (TENTH 
AMENDMENT) BILL, 1956 
(As INTBODUOBD IN Lox S.A:BHA) 

10 
IS 
20 
ISUI .1'10. 33 01 IVII6 
THE CONSTITUTION (TENTH AMENDMENT) BILL, 
1956 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BIIJ.. 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the RepubUc 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Tenth Amendment) Short dtle. 
Act, 1956. 
2. In the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution,- Amendment 
of the 
Seventh 
(a) in the Union List, after entry 92, the following entry Schedule. 
shall be inserted, namely:-
"92A. Taxes on the sale or purchase of goods other than 
newspapers, where such sale or purchase takes place in the 
course of inter-State trade or commerce."; and 
(b) in the State List, for entry 54, the following entry shall 
be substituted, nam!=!ly:-
"54 Taxes on the sale or purchase of goods other taan 
newspapers, subject to the provisions of entry 92A of List I.". 
3. In article 269 of th~onstitution,- ~drtimelDt 
0.- • c. 
(a) in clause (1), after sub-clause (f), the followinglub-clause a69. 
shall be inserted, namely:-
"(g) taxes on the sale or purchase of goods other than 
newspapers, where such sale or purchase takes place in the 
course of inter-State trade or commerce."; and 

Amendment 
of article 
386. 
• 
2 
(b) after clause (2), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(3) Parliament may by law formulate principles for 
determining when a sale or purchase of goods takes place 
in the course of inter-State trade or commerce.". S 
4. In article 286 of the Constitution,-
(a) in clause (1), the Explanation shall be omitted; and 
(b) for clauses (2) and (3), the following clauses shtll be 
substituted, namely:-
"(2) Perliament may by law formulate principles for 10 
determining when a sale or purchase of goods takes place in 
any of the ways mentioned in clause. (1). 
(3) Any law of a State shall, in so far as it imposes, or 
authorises the i~position of, a' tax on the sale or purchase 
of goods declared by Parliament by law to be of special IS 
importance in inter-State trade or commerce, be subject to 
such restrictions and conditions in regard to the system of 
levy, rates and other incidents of the tax as Parliament may 
by law specify." . 

a 
'STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
While "taxes on the sale or purchase of goods other than news-
papers" is an entry in the State List, article 286 of the Constitution 
subjects the States' power to impose such taxes to four restrictions, 
of which two are total and two are par~al. Under clause (1) of the 
article, a State is debarred from imposing such a tax when the sale 
or purchase takes place outside the State or in the course of import 
into, or export from, the country. With regard to the first restriction, 
namely, the non-taxability of sales outside the State, an explanation 
is given in the clause that "a sale or purchase shall be deemed to 
have taken place in the State in which goods have actually been 
delivered as a direct result of such sale or purchas~ for the purpose 
cf consumption in that State". Then, under clause (2), a State is 
debarred from imposing the tax on inter-State sales except in so far 
as Parliament may otherwise provide. Lastly, under clause (3), 
Parliament is authorised to declare the goods which are essential to 
the life of the cqmmunity, a.!ld when such a declaration has been 
made, any law made by a State Legislature imposing a tax on the 
sale or purchase of those goods has to receive the President's assent 
in order to be effective. 
JVgh judicial authorities have found the interpretation of the 
article a difficult task and expressed divergent views as to th~ scope 
and effect, in particular, of the explanation in clause (1) and of 
clause (2). The majority view of the Supreme Court in the State of 
Bombay v. the United MOtOTS (India) Ltd., (1953) S.C.R. 1069, was 
that sub-clause (a) and the explanation in clause (1) prohibited the 
taxation of a sale involving inter-State elements by all State" except 
the State in which the goods are delivered for the purpose of 
consumption therein, and furthermore, that clause (2) did not . affect 
the power of that State to tax the inter-State sale even though Parlia-
.ment had not made a law removing the ban imposed by that clause. 
This resulted in dealers resident in one State being subjected to 
the sales tax jurisdiction and procedure of several other Sti1tes with 
which they had dealings in the normal course of their bUsiness. 
Two-and-a-half years later, the second part of this decision was 
reversed by the Supreme Court in the Bengal Immunity Company 
Ltd. v. the State of Bihar. (1955) S.C.A. 1140 but here too the Court 
was not unanimous. 
In pursuance of clause (3) of the article, Parliament passed" an 
Act in 1952 declaring a number of goods like foodstuffs of various 
kinds, cloth, raw cotton, cattle feeds, iron and steel, coal, etc. to be 
e~ntial to the life of the community. Since this declaration could 
not affect pre-existing State laws imposing sales tax on these ~oods, 

" the result was a wide disparity from State to States, not'only in the 
range of exempted goods, but also in the rates applicable to them. 
The Taxation Enquiry Commission, after examining the problem 
with great care and thoroughness, have made certain recommenda-
tions which may be summarised as follows. In essence, sales tax 
must continue to be a Sta~ source of revenue and its levy and 
administration must substantially pertain to the State Govel'nment.s. 
The sphere of power and responsibility of the State may, however, 
be said to end, and that of the Union to begin, when the sales tax of 
one State impinges, administratively on the dealers, and fiscally on 
the consumers, of another Stat~. Broadly, therefore, inter-State sales 
should be the concern of the Union, but the responsi'bilities pertaining 
to the Union could be exercised through the State Govemnlents, and 
in any case, the revenue should appropriately devolve on them. 
Intra-State sales, on the oth~r hand, should be left to the States, 
but with one important exception. Where, for instance, raw material 
produced in a State is important from the point of view of tb8 
consumer or the industry of another State, certain restriction.; have 
to be placed on the taxing poV{er of the State Government. as oth~ 
wise it can effect an increase in the cost of the manufactured article; 
whether lSuch manufacture ta~es place in the State which produces 
the raw material, or in another StatEl which imports the material 
from that State. In either ca~e, to the extent that the finished 8bods 
are consumed in a State other than the one which taxes the raw 
material, the increase in cost on account of the tax is a matter of 
direct concern to the consumer of another State. Such cases of 
intra-State sales should appropriately be brought under the full 
control of the Union. These recommendations of the Commission 
have been generally accepted by all the State Governments. 
The object of this Bill is to give effect to the recommendations of 
the Commission as regards the amendment of the constitutional pro-
visions relating to sales tax. • 
In clause 2, it is proposed to add a new entry 92A in the Union' 
List placing taxes on inter-State sales and purchases within the 
exclusive legislative and executive power of the Union, and to make 
entry 54 of the State List "subject to the provisions" of this new 
entry. 
In clause 3, it is propose~ to add these taxes to the list given' 
in cl,lluse (1) of article 269, so that, although they will be levied and 
collected· in accordance with an Act of Parliament, they will net, 
form part of the Consolidated Fund of India, but will accrue to the 
States themselves in accordance with such principles of distribution 
as may be fOl'mulated by Parliament by law. A further provIsion iJ 

5 
proposed in article 269 expressly empowering Parliament to formulate 
by law principles for determining when a sale or purchase of goods 
takes pla{'e in the course of inter-State trade or commerce. 
It is proposed in clause 4 to omit from caluse (1) of artiCle 286 
the explanation which has given risc to a great deal of legal contro-
versy and practical difficulty. In view of the centralisation of inter-
State sales tax proposed in clause 2 of this Bill, clause (2) of article 
286 in its present form vtill cease. to be appropriate. In its place it 
is proposed to iDsert a provision empowering Parliament to fonllulate 
principles for determining when a sale or purchase of g'Jocts takes 
place (a) outside a State, or (b) in the course of import of the goods • 
into'the territory of fmdia or (c) in the course of export of the goods 
out of thtJ territory of India. 
It is fUI ther proposed to replace clause (3) of article 286 by a new 
clause on the lines recommended by the Taxation Enquiry Commis-
sion. Under this revised clause Parliament will have th~ power to 
cieolaNby . law the goods which are of special importance in inter-
State trade or commerce and also to specify the restricUons and con-
di·tiona to which aziy State law (whether made before or after the 
Parliamentary law) will be subject in reglU'd to the system of levy, 
ratep and {lther incidents of the tax on the·sale or purchase of those 
goods! 
MANILAL SHAH. 
KEW DEuaj 
The 30th AJ?ril. 1956. 

• 
• 
6 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION 01' INDIA 
* • • 
PART XU 
• 
FINANCE. PROPERTY. CONTRACTS AND SUITS 
CHAPTER I.-FINANcE 
• • • • • • • 
Distribution of Revenues between the Union and the States 
• * • • • 
Tues levied 269. (1) The following duties and taxes shall be levied and collect-
and collected ed by the Government of India but shall be assigned to the States 
ITnion ~:t in the manner provided in clause (2), namely:-
ili!il~~8. to (a) duties in respect of succession to property other than 
agricultural land; 
(b) estate duty in respect of property other than agricultural 
land; 
(c) terminal taxes on goods or passengers carried by railway, 
sea or air; • 
(d) taxes on railway fares and freights; 
(e) taxes other than stamp duties on transactions in stock-
exchanges and futures markets; 
(f) taxes on the sale or purchase of newspapers and on adver-
tisements published therein. 
(2) The net proceeds in any fim:ncial year of any such duty or 
tax, except in so far as those proceeds r~present proceeds attributable 
to States specified in Part C of the First Schedule. shall not form 
part of the Consolidated Fund of India, but shall 'he assigned to the 
Sta,tes within which that duty or tal' is leviable in that year, and 
shall be distributed among those States in accordance with such 
principles of distribution as may be formulated by Parliament by 
law. 
• * • • • 
Miscellaneous Financial Provisions 
• • • • • 
Restrictions 286. (1) No law of a State shall impose, or authorise the imposl-
as to impo- tion of, a tax on the sale or purchase of goods where such sale or 
sition of tax purchase takes place-on the ISle 
or purchase (a) outside the State; or of goods. , 
• (b) in the course of the import of the goods into, or export of 
the goods out of, the territory of India_ 

7 
Explanation.-For the purposes of sub-clause (a), a sale or 
purchase shall be deemed to have taken place in the State in which 
the goods have actually been delivered as a direct result of such sale 
or purchase for the purpose of consumption in that state notwith-
standing the fact that under the general law relating to sale of 
goods the property in the goods has by reason of. such salE! or 
purchase passed in another State. 
(2) Except in so far as Parliament may by law otherwise provide, 
no law of a State shall impose, or authorise the imposition of, a tax 
on the sale or purchase of any goods where such sale or purchase 
takes place in the course of inter-State trade or commerce: 
Provided that the President may by order direct that any tax on 
the sale or purchase of goods which was being lawfully levied by 
the Government of any State immediately before the commencement 
of this Constitution shall, notwithstanding that the imposition of 
such tax is contrary to the provisions of this clause, continue to be 
levied until the thirty-first day of March, 1951. 
(3) No law made by the Legislature of a State imposing, or autho-
rising the imposition of, a' tax on the sale or purchase of any such 
goods as have been declared by Parliament by law to be essential 
for the life of the community shall have effect unless it has been 
reserved for the consideration of the President and has received his 
assent. 
• * • • 

Tax, 
and 
trni 
aSlij 
the ' 
Re 
as 
sit 
on 
or 
of 
• * 
8 
SEVENTH SCHEDULE 
[Article 246] 
• 
List D-State List 
• .. 
54. Taxes on the sale or purchase of goods other than newspapers . 
• * • • • 

Tax 
and 
by 
Unf 
ani, 
the 
':1 
Re 
al 
sit 
OD 
or 
of 
LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
(Shri M. C. Shah, 
Minister of R8fJf1IUe and 
CifJil &potditure.) 
, 