Bill No. U of 1962 
THE FINANCE (No.2) BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
ON 23RD APRIL, 1962) 

Uofl"l. 
Bill No. 35 of 1962 
THE FINANCE (No.2) BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to give effect to the financial proposals of the Central Government 
for the financial year 1962-63. 
BB it enacted. by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
Short title 
and com-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Finance (No.2) Act, 1962. menea-
men .. 
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, sections 3 to 14 inclu-
5 live ahall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of April, 
1962 and sub-section (1) of section 16 and section 18 shall be deemed 
to have come into force on the 23rd day of April, 1962. 
z. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (2), (3), (4) and Income-tax 
(5), for the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, and IUper-
10. 1862,- tax. 
15 
20 
(4) income-tax shall be charged at the rates specified. in 
Part I of the First Schedule, and, in the cases to which Para-
graphs A, B and C of that Part apply, shall be increased by a 
.urcharge for purposes of the Union and a special surcharge, 
calculated in either case in the manner provided therein; and 
(b) lUper-tax shall, for the purposes of section 95 of the 
Income-tax Act, 1961 (hereinafter l'eferreel to as the Income-tax 
Act), be charged at the rates specified in Part II of the First 
Schedule, and, in the cases to which Paragraphs A, B and C of 
that Part apply, shall be increased by a surcharge for purpole8 
of the Union and a special surcharge, calculated in either case 
in the manner provided therein. 

2 
(2) In making any assessment for the assessment year com-
mencing on the 1st day.·of April, 1962,-
(a) where the total income of an assessee, not being a 
company, includes any income chargeable under the head 
"Salaries", the income-tax payable by the assessee on that part S 
'of his total jacome which consists of such inclusion shall be an 
amount bearing to the total amount of income-tax payable 
according to the rates applicable under the operation of the 
Finance Act, 1961. on his total income the same proportion as the 
amount of such inclusion bears to his total income; 10 If of 1811. 
(b) where the total income of an assessee, not being a com-
pany, includes any income chargeable under the head "Salaries" 
011 which tluper-tax has been or might have been deducted under 
the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 18 of the Indian 
Income-tax Act, 1922, the super-tax payable by the assessee on IS 11 of 1922. 
that portion of his total income which consists of such inclusion 
shall be an amount bearing to the total amount of super-tax 
payable according to the rates applicable under the operation 
of the Finance Act, 1961, or. his total income the same propor- 1f of 1961. 
tion as the amount of such inclusion bears to his total income. 20 
(3) In making any assessment. for the assessment year com-
mencing on the 1st day of April, 1962, where the total income of a 
company, other than the Life Insurance Corporation of India estab-
lished under the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956, includes any 31 of 1956. 
profits and gains from life insurance business, the super-tax payable 25 
by it shall be the aggregate of the tax calculated-
(i) on the amount of profits and gains from life insurance 
business so included, at the rate applicable to the Life Insurance 
Corporation of India in accordance with Paragraph E of Part II 
of the First Schedule; and 30 
(ii) on the remaining part of its total income, at the rate 
applicable to the company on itl total income. 
(4) In cases to which Chapter XII of the Income-tax Act applies, 
the tax chargeable shall be determined as provided in that Chapter, 
and with reference to the rates imposed by sub-section (1) or the 35 
rates specified in that Chapter, as the case may be. ' 
(5) (i) An assessee being an Indian company or any other 
company which has made the prescribed arrangements for the 
declaration and payment of dividends within India or an assessee 
other than a company, whose total income includes any profits and 40 
gains derived from the export of any goods or merchandise out of 
India, shall be entitled to a deduction, from the amount of income-
tax and super-tax with which he is chargeable for the assessment 
year c~mmencing on the 1st day of April, 1962, of an amount equal 
to the mcome-tax and super-tax calculated respectively at one-tenth 45 
of the average rate of income-tax and of the average rate of super-
tax on the amount of such profits and gains included in the total 
income; 
(ii) The CentrE'l Board of Revenue may make rules for com-
puting the amount of such profits and gains. 

,~, , , . 
" 
~3 of 1961. 
11 of 1922. 
,,43 of 1981. 
3 
(6) In cases in which tax has to be deducted under sub-section 
(2) of section 192 and sections 193 to 195 of the Income-tax Act at 
the rates in force, the deduction shall be made at the rates specified 
in Part In of the First Schedule. 
S (7) For the purposes of this section, and of the. rates of tax 
10 
IS 
20 
30 
35 
imposed thereby-
(i) the expressions "assessmeI;lt year", "average rate of 
income-tax", "average rate of super-tax" and "partner" have 
the meanings respectively assigned to them in clauses (9). (10), 
(11) and (23) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act; 
(ii) tile. expression "total income" means total income as 
determined for the purposes of income-tax or super-tax, as the 
case may be, in accordance with the provisions of the said Act; 
and 
(iii) the expression "earned income" means any income of 
an assessee who is an individual, Hindu undivided family, 
unregistered firm or other association of persons or body of indi-
viduals, whether incorporated or not, not being a company, a 
local authority, a registered firm or a firm assessed under clause 
(b) of section 183 of the said Act-
(a) which is chargeable under the head "Salaries"; or 
(b) which is chargeable under the head "Profits and 
gains of business or profession" where the business or pro-
fession is carried on by the assessee or, in the case of a 
firm, where the assessee is a partner actively engaged in the 
conduct of the business or profession; or 
(c) which is chargeable under the head "Income from 
other seurces" if it is immediately derived from personal 
exertion or represents a pension or super-annuation or other 
allowance given to the assessee in respect of the past services 
of any deceased person; and 
includes any such income which, though it is the income of 
another person, is included in the assessee's income under the 
provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961, but does not include 
any such income on which tax is not payable under clause (iii) or 
clause (iv) or clause (v) of section 86 or clause (i) or clause 
(ii) of sub-section (1) of section 99 of that Act or which is 
exempted from tax under a notification ilsued under section 60 
of the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922, as continued in force by 
clause (l) of sub-section (2) of section' 297 of the Income-tax 
Act, 1961. 

Amend-
ment of section 2. 
.Amend-
mentof 
section 37. 
Substitu-
tion of 
new sec-
tions tor 
sections 
'10 and '11. 
Set off of 
loss from 
one source 
against in-
eomefrom 
another 
source 
under the 
same head 
of income. 
4 
3. In section 2 of the Income-tax Act, after clause (42). the 
following clause shan be inserted, namely:-
"(42A) 'short-term capital asset' means a capital asset held 
by an assessee for not more than twelve months immedt~tely 
preceding. the date of its transfer. s 
Explanation.-(i) In determining the period for which any 
capital asset is held by the assessee-
(a) in the case of a share held in a company in liquida-
tion, there shall be excluded the period subsequent to the 
date on which the company goes into liquidation; 10 
(b) in the case of a capital asset which becomes the 
property of the assessee in the circumstances mentioned in 
clauses (i) to (iv) of section 49, there shall be included the 
period for which the asset was held by the previous owner 
referred to in the said section. J 5 
(ii) In respect of capital assets other than those mentioned 
in clause (i), the period for which any capita.l asset is held by 
the assessee shall be determined subject to any rules which the 
Board may make in this behalf." . 
4. In section 37 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (2). for the 2.0 
figures and notations "1%" and "i%", the figures and notations 
"i%" and "1%" shall, respectively, be substituted. 
5. For sections 70 and 71 of the Income-tax Act, the following 
sections shall be substituted, namely:-
"70. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, where the 2S 
net result for any assessment year in respect of any source falling 
under any head of income other than 'Capital gains' is a loss, the 
assessee shall be entitled to have the amount of such loss set off 
against his income from any other source under the same head. 
(2) (i) Where the result of the computation made for any 30 
assessment year under sections 48 to 55 in respect of any abort-
term capital asset is a loss, the assessee shall be entitled to have 
the amount of such loss set oft against the income, if any, as 
arrived at under a similar computation made for the asselSment 
year in respect of any other capital asset. 35 
(ii) Where ~e result of the computation made for any 
assessment year under sections 48 to 55 in respect of any capital 
asset other than a ahort-term capital asset is a loss, the assessee 
shall be entitled to have the amount of such lOBS set off against 
the income. if any. as arrived at under a similar computation 40 

made for the assessment year in respect of any other capital 
asset not being a short-term capital asset. 
71. (1) Where in respect of any assessment year the net Set of! of 
result of the computation under any head of incortle other than ~~ l:a'3 
5 'Capital gains' is a loss and the assessee has no income under the alainst in-
head 'Capital gains', he shall, subject to the provisions of this ::t1er~m 
Chapter, be entitled to have the amount of such loss set off 
against his income, if any, assessable for that assessment year 
under any other head. 
10 (2) Where in respect of any assessment year the net result 
of the computation under any head of income other than 'Capital 
gains' is a loss and the assessee has income assessable under the 
bead 'Capital gains', such loss may, subject to the provisions of 
this Chapter, be set off against the income, if any. of the assessee 
15 assessable for that assessment year under any other head includ-
ing income from capital gains relating to short-term capital 
assets as well as other capital assets or, if the assessee so desires, 
shall be set off only against his income, if any, assessable under 
any head of income other than 'Capital gains'.". 
20 8. In section 72 of the Income-tax Act, for sub-section (1), the Amend-
following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:- ~ti~~2. 
U (1) Where for any assessment year, the net result of the 
computation under the head 'Profits and gains of business or 
profession' is a loss to the assessee, not being a loss sustained 
25 in a speculation business, and such loss cannot be wholly set off 
against income under any head of income other than 'Capital 
gains' or, in accordance with the option exercised by the assessee 
under sub-section (2) of section 71, is not set off against income 
under the head 'Capital gains', so much of the loss as has not 
30 been so set off shall, subject to the other provisions of this 
Chapter, be carried forward to the following assessment year, 
and-
(i) it shall be set off against the profits and gains, if 
any, of any business or profession carried on by him and 
35 assessable for that assessment year: 
Provided that the business or profession for which the 
loss was originally computed continued to be carried on by 
him in the previous year relevant for that assessment year; 
and 
(ii) if the loss cannot be wholly so set off, the amount 
of loss not so set off shall be carried forward to the following 
assessment year and so on.". 

Subatiba-
tion of 
new Iee-
tionfor seetion .,4.-
LoIaI 
under til. 
head 
''Capital 
plDI"'. 
Amencl-ment of 
ACtion 87. 
8 
7 •. For section '74 of the Income-tax Act, the following section maD 
be substituted, namely:-
"74. (1) Where in respect of any assessment year, the net 
result of the computation under the head 'Capital gains' is • 10 •. 
such loss shall, subject to the other provisions of this Chapter, be 5 
dealt with as follows:-
(i) such portion of the net loss as relates to capital 
assets other than short-tenn capital assets shall not be carried 
forward to any subsequent assessment year; 
(ti) such portion of the net loss as relates to short-tenn 10 
capital assets shall be carried forward to the following 
assessment year and set off R~ainst the capital gains, if any, 
relating to short-term capital assets assessable for that 
assessment year and, if it cannot be so set off, the amount 
thereof not so set off shall be carried forward to the following IS 
assessment year and so on. 
(2) No loss shall be carried forward under this section for 
more than eight assessment years immediately succeeding the 
assessment year for whioh the loss was first computed. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian 20 
Income-tax Act, 1922, any loss computed under the head 'Capital 11 of 1922. 
gains' in respect of the assessment year commencing on the 1st 
day of April, 1961 or any earlier assessment year which was 
carried forward under sub-section (2B) of section 24 of the 
said Act, shall be dealt with in the assessment year commencing 25 
on the 1st day of April, 1962 or any subsequent assessment year, 
as follow:-
(I) in 80 far as it relates to capital assets other than 
short-tenn capital assets, it shall be ignored and shall not 
be allowed to be carried forward; and 30 
. (ii) in 80 far as it relates to short-tenn capital aBsets, 
it shall be camed forward and set off in accordance with the 
provisions of clause (ii) of sub-section (1) and sub-section 
(2).". 
8. In section 87 of the Income-tax Aet,- 35 
(i) in sub-section (1), after clause (e), the following clause 
shall be Inserted, namely:-
II (f) where the assessee is an individual, any sums 
. deposited, in the previous year by the assessee out of his 
incoml'! ohargeable to tax, in a ten-year account or a fifteen- 40 
year account under the Post Oftlce SavinI(! Bank (Cumula-
tive Time Deposits) Rules, 1959, as amended from time to 
time."; 

s 
(ii) in sub-section (3).--
(a) in clause (ii), for the words "eight thousand rupees;;. 
the words "ten thousand rupees" shall be substituted; 
(b) in clause (iii), for the words "siXteen thousand 
rupees", the words "twenty thousand rupees" shall be subs-
tituted. 
9. In section 88 of the Income-tax Act, to sub-section (3), the Amen.-ment of following proviso shall be added, namely:- seetion II. 
"Provided that in respect of any such sums paid during any 
10 previous year relevant to the aSBessment year commencing on 
the 1st day of April, 1963 or any subsequent assessment year, 
this sub-section shall have effect as if for the words 'seven and 
a half per cent.' and the words 'one hundred and fifty thousand 
rupees', the words 'ten .per cent.' and 'two hundred thousand 
IS rupees' had been, respectively, substituted.". 
10. In section 109 of the Income-tax Act, in clause (iii), for the !::'!t 
figures and notations "50%" and "65%", wherever they occur. the section 108. 
figures and notations "45%" and "60%" shall, respectively. be subs-
tituted. 
20 11. For sections 114 and 115 of the Income-tax Act, the following StiUbsoftitu-on new sections &hall be substituted, namely:- " sections 
2S 
30 
3S 
for sections 
114 and 111. 
"114. Where the total inconie of an assessee, not being a Tax on 
company, includes any income chargeable under the head 'Capital ~:f:\n 
gains', the tax payable by him on his total income shall be-- ::e~ 
. other than (a) the amour.t of mcome-tax and super-tax payable on companlei. 
the total income as reduced by the amount of such inclusion 
and by the amount of compensation or other payment. if any. 
referred to in clause (ii) of section 28, had the total income 
10 reduced been his total income; plus 
(b) (i) the amount of income-tax and super-tax calculat-
ed on the amount of the net capital gains relating to short-
term capital assets, if any, included in the total income at the 
average rate of income-tax and the aver,age rate of super-tax 
respectively, which would have been applicable to the total 
income if the amount of the net capital gains, if any. relating 
to capital assets other than short-term capital assets and the 
amount of compensation or other payment aforesaid. if any, 
had not formed part of it; plus 

Amend-
mental 
Act 2'1 at In'1. 
(ii) the amount of income-tax and super-tax calculated 
on the ameunt of the net capital gains, if any, relating to 
capital assets other than short-term capital assets, at~e 
averag,e rate of income-tax and the average rate of super-tax 
respectively, which would have been applicable to the total S 
income, if the net capital gains, if any, relating to short-term 
. capital assets and the amount of compensation or other 
payment aforesaid, if any, had not formed part of it; or 
the amount of income-tax calculated at the rate of 25 per 
cent. on the amount of the net capital gains relating to 10 
capital assets other than short-term capital assets included 
in the total income, whichever is less: 
Provided that-
! 
! 
(i) where the total income does not exceed the 
sum of ten thousand rupees, the amount payable under 15 
sub-clause (ii) of clause (0) shall be nil; and 
(ii) in no case shall the amount payable under 
sub-clause (ii) of clause (b) exceed one-half of the 
amount, if any, by which the amount of capital gains 
relating to capital assets other than short-term capital:ao 
assets exceeds the sum of five thousands rupees; 
plus 
(c) the tax on such compensation or other payment 
aforesaid, if any, computed in accordance with the provisions 
of clause (i\i) of section 112. 25 
115. Where the total income of a company includes any in-
come chargeable. under the head 'Capital gains' (whether such 
gains relate to short-term capital assets or to other capital assets), 
the tax payable by it shall be-- ~ 
(a) the amount of income-tax with which it is charge- 30 
able on its total income; 
(b) the alllOunt of super-tax equal to the aggregate of 
the amount of super-tax calculated at the rate of five per 
cent. on the amount of the capital gains relating to capital 
assets other than short-term capital assets included in the 35 
total income and the amount of super-tax with which It 
would be chargeable· had its total income been reduced by 
the amount of such aforesaid capital gains.". 
12. In the Wealth-tax Act, 1957,-
(1) clause (xx) of sub-aection (1) of section 5 shall be 40 
omitted; 

29 of 19157. 
(2) in the Schedule, for Part I, the following Part shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"PART I 
Rate of tax 
5 (a) In the case of every individual:-
(i) on the first rupees two lakhs of net wealth .. Nil 
(ii) on the next rupees eight lakhs of net wealth .. 1% 
(iii) on the next rupees ten lakhs of net wealth . . 1·75% 
(iv) on the balance of net wealth 2·5% 
10 (b) In the case of every Hindu undivided family:-
(i) on the first rupees four lakhs of net wealth .. Nil 
(ii) on the next rupees seven lakhs of net wealth 1% 
(iii) on the next rupees ten lakhs of net wealth .. 1·75% 
(iv) on the balance of net wealth 2·5%". 
IS 13. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Expenditure-tax ~~-
Act, 1957, expenditure-tax shall not be charged for any financial year not to be 
commencing on or after the first day of April, 1962, in resPect of the l~ri~p~m 
expenditure incurred by any individual or Hindu undivided family. 1982. 
14. In the Finance Act, 1961, in the First Schedule, in Part n, in ~er~i 
20 Paragraph D, in clause (ii) of the flrst proviso, for the words u any the First 
Indian company which satisfies", the words "any company which ~~:~~ 
satisfies" shall be substituted and shall be deemed always to have of 1961. 
been substituted. 
15. The Indian Tariff Act, 1934 (hereinafter referred to as the Amend-. ment of 25 Tarit! Act), shall be amended 10 the manner specified in the Second Act 32 of 
Schedule. 19M. 
18. In the Central Excises and SnIt Act, 1944- AmeDd-ment of 
(1) in section 2, in clause (f), in sub-clause (i), the word Act I of 
"and" shall be omitted and after sub-clause (ii) , the following 1M&. 
30 sub-clause shall be inserted, name1y:-
u(iii) in relation to patent or proprietary medicines as 
defined in Item No. 14E of the First Schedule and in relation 
to cosmetics and toilet preparations as defined in Item No. 
14F of that Schedule, includes the conversion of powder into 
35 tablets or capsules, tile labelling or re-Iabelling of containers 
intended for consumers and re-packing from bulk packs to 
retail packs or the adoption of any other treatment to render 
the product marketable to the consumers."; 

10 
. (2) in the First SChedule,-
(a) in Item No. 4,-
(1) under "1. Unmanufactured tobacco-'Io:-
. (i) for the entries in the third column apiDat 
sub-items (I), (2), (3), (4), (5) and (6), the entries S 
"Two rupees and sixty naye paise", IISixteen rupees 
. and ninety naye paise", IITwo rupees and twenty-
five naye paise", IITwo rupees and five naye paise", 
IIOne rupee and twenty naye paise" and ''Two rupees 
and twenty-five naye paise" shall, respectively, be 10 
substituted; 
(ii) sub-item (5) (iii) shall be omitted; 
(2) under 1111. Manufactured tobacco-"-
for sub-item (2), the following sub-item shall 
be substituted, namely:- IS 
Per thousand 
"(a) Cigarettes of which the value--
(a) exceeds Rs. 3S a thousand. Twenty-five rupees 
(ia) exceeds Rs. 2S a thou-
sand, but does not exceed 
Rs. 3S a thousand. 
(ii.) exceeds Rs. IS a thou-
sand, but does_not· exceed 
Rs. 25 a thousand. 
(ifJ) exceeds Rs. 7' 50 a thou-
sand, but does not_exceed 
Rs. Is.a thousand. 
(fJ) does not exceed Rs. 7'50 
a thousand. 
and thiny naye paise. 
Twelve rupees and 20 
ninety-five naye paise. 
Six rupees and .my 
five naye paise. 
25 
Two rupees and ninety 
naye.paise. 
One rupee and thirty 
naye paise."; 30 
(b) for Item No. 11, the following Item shall be s.ubsti-
tuted, namely:-
"11. ASPHALT, BITUMEN AND TAR-
(1) Asphalt and Bitumen • 
(including cut-back bitu -
men and asphalt) natural 
ori produced from petro-
leum or shale. 
(.2) Tar distilled from coal or 
lignite, and other mineral' 
tars, including partially 
distilled tars and blends 
of pitch with creosote oils 
orlwith ot.hcr ~a1 tar dis-
tillatiolf productl. 
Twenty-seven per 
cent. ad fJaiorem. 35 
Twenty-seven per 
cent. ad fJalorem."; 40 
45 

2 
9. P.e:lh !ioe·,U.-
oller • 25 I' il" m ':'. 
10. P~e;C). line 2&-
for -"'P'lIlIed' read jmpreeaecr. 
II. PII«8" st-
• tbe end. omit'M. ~. KAUL.Secret.".· 
12- I (j)rrect:iia e numb .. on PlI«es 2. ,10 11'1 d 
16. 
NEW;OELW. ' 
'Apllil 21, 1962 
V • .-Ao 1. 1884 (SMO) 

fLOK 'SABBA 
. co RRIGEN DA 
to 
THE nIUHCE·'*'-. 2). BmL. 1962. 
'.f.liarJOtliIeedijn Lo'" SabIa) 
~rtDt with Une aDIIlII .. ) 
.)1, p.tp u..liae. ZI.-, 
for ~ reall'M'. 
:~ Pll(lle lL·IiDetE.-
a.p.r 'tre ..... t or,; ... el1-.".' • 
.a. PaRe 13. JiDe 9,-
for g' reall~;: . 
~ . Pille l&·.Jiae 17.-
/or !FOLLQU' NIII1l !FQIJI.O.NC1 • 
. So p.. 16. line 140-
lor 'eyS', r.aJ 'SeYea'. 
6. P._17, Ua.:86.-
lor fCABLE' 'ru4 taABLES'. 
• Pll(ile W, UBe&-
jor ' at' neaJ ~IA'. 
So P lI(IIe 19, liD e 14-
for IR. :1' '.-l"'~·. 
e.! x.o. 

11 
(c) after Item No. 11, under the heading "Mineral fuell, 
lubricants and related materials", the following Item shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"I IA. ALL PRODUCTS DERIV- Five per cent. ad 
S ED FROM REFINING OF CRUDE fJaIorem."; 
PETROLEUM OR SHALE (WHE-
THER GASEOUS, LIQUID, SEMI-
SOLID OR SOLID IN FORM), NOT 
OTHERWISE SPECIFIED IN-
10 CLUDING ,'I! REFINERY GASES, 
LUBRICATING OIL AND~ GREA-
SES, WAXES AND COKE--
IS 
20 
(d) in Item No. 14, for sub-item In, the following sub-
item shall be substituted, namely:-
"III. Cellulose lacquers-' 
(,) Nitrocellulose lacquers, One rupee and fony 
clear and pigmented and~' naye paise per litre. 
nitrocellulose ancillaries 
in liquid form. 
(i;) Nitrocellulose ancillaries Fifty naye paise per 
in semi-solid and pasty ~ ! kilogram. 
forms. 
(ii,) Cellulose lacquers, not One rupee and forty 
otherwise specified. naye paise per litre. ,. ; 
2S (e) for Item No. 14D, the following Item shall be substi-
30 
3S 
45 
tuted, namely:-
'''I4 D. SYNTHETIC ORGANIC1 Fifteen per cent. a.i 
DYESTUFFS (INCLUDING:PIG- fJalorem.", 
MENTfDYESTUFFS). 
(1) for Item No. 14E, the following Item shall be substi· 
tuted, namely:-
'"I4E. PATENT OR PROPRIE- Ten per cent. ad 
TARY MEDICINES !NOT CON- fJa1orem."; 
TAINING ALCOHOL, OPIUM, IN-
DIAN HEMP OR OTHER NARCO-
TIC DRUGS OR OTHER NARCO-
TICS OTHER THAN THOSE ME-
DICINES WHICH ARE EXCLU-
SIVELY A YURVEDIC, UNANI, 
SIDHA OR HOMOEOPATHIC. 
&planat;on.-'Patent or pro-
prietary medicines' means. any drug or 
medicinal preparation, m whatever 
form for use in the internal or external 
trea~ent of, or for the prevention of, 

1~ 
s 
allments in, human beings or animals, 
which bears either on itself or on its 
container or both, a name which it 
DOt specified in a monograph in a 
Pharmacopoeia, Formulary or other 
publications notified in this behalf 
by the Central Government in the 
Official Gazette, or which is a 
brand name, that is, a name or a regis-
tered trade mark under the Trade and 
Merchandise Marks Act, 1953 (43 of 
1958), or any other mark such as a sym-
bol, monogram, label, si~ature or 
invented words or any writing which 
is used in relation to that medicine 
for the purpose of indicating or so as 
to indicate a connection in the course 
of trade between the medicine 
and some person having the right either 
as proprietor or otherwise to use the 
name or mark with or without any in-
dication of the identity of that person. 
10 
(g) after Item No. 14F, the following Items shall be 
inserted, namely:-
IS 
20 
"J4G. NITRIC, HYDRO- Ten per cent. ad 25 
CHLORIC AND SULPHURIC 'Valorem. 
ACIDS (INCLUDING FUMING 
ACIDS AND ANHYDRIDES 
THEREOF), ALL SORTS. 
14H. COMPRESSED, LIQllE-
FlED OR SOLIDIFIED GASES, 
TIlE FOLLOWING, NAMELY:-
(i) Oxygen 
(i,) Chlorine 
(m) Ammonia 
(ill) Carbonic acid 
(Carbon dioxide). 
(tJ) Refrigerant gases, not 
otherwise specified, such 
as sulphur dioxide and 
freon. 
Ten per cent. till 
'Valorem. 
Ten per cent. ad 3S 
'Valorem. 
Ten per cent. ad 
'Valorem. 
Fifty per cent. ad 
'Valorem. 
Twenty per cent. ad 
'Valorem. " ; 
40 

s 
10 
18 
(h) for Item No. 15A, the following Item shall be 
substituted, namely;-
"ISA. PLASTICS, ALL SORTS- Twenty per cent. ad 
fJalorem."; 
(,) Moulding powders, gra-
nules and flakes (thermo-
. setting and thermoplas-
tic). 
(.,) Polyethylene films, lay-
fiat tubings and P. V. C. 
sheets (that is to say, 
Polyvinyl Chloride sheets). 
(ii.) Not otherwise specified; 
(i) after Item No. 16, the following Items shall be 
IS inserted, namely:-
20 
30 
35 
40 
"I6A. RUBBER PRODUCTS, 
THE FOLLOWIN'T. NAMELY:-
(,) Latex foam sponge • Twenty per cent. ad 
fJalorem. 
(il) Plates, sheets and strips Twenty per cent. 
unhardened, whether vul- ad fJQ/ornn. 
canized or not, and 
whether combined with 
any textile material or 
otherwise. 
16B. PLYWOOD, BLOCK-
BOARD,LAMINBOARD,BATTEN 
BOARD. HARD OR SOFT WALL 
BOARDS OR INSULATING 
BOARD AND VENEERED PANELS, 
WHETHER OR NOT CONTAIN-
ING ANY MATERIAL OTHER 
THAN WOOD; CELLULAR 
WOOD PANELS; BUILDING 
BOARDS OF WOOD PULP OR OF 
VEGETABLE FIBRE, WHETHER 
OR NOT BONDED WITH NA-
TURAL OR ARTIFICIAL RE-
SINS OR WITH SIMILAR BIN-
DERSj AND ARTIFICIAL OR 
RECONSTITUTED WOOD BE-
ING WOOD SHAVINGS, WOOD 
CHIPS. SAW DUST, WOOD 
FLOUR OR OTHER LIGNEOUS 
WASTE AGGLOMERATED WITH 

14 
NATURAL ORj'-ARTIFICIAL RE-
SINS OR OTHER, ORGANIC BIN-
DING SUBSTANCES, IN SHEETS, 
BLOCKS, BOARDS OR THE LIKE-
(i) Plywood for Tea-chests 
when cut to size in pa-
nels or shooks and packed 
in sets. 
Ten per cent. 
valor"". 
ad 5 
(ii) AlI.others Fifteen per cent. 
ad valor""."; 10 
(j) in Item No. 18-
(i) for the entry in the third column, the entry 
"Four rupees and fifty naye paise per kilogram" shall 
be substituted; 
(ii) the following Ezplanation shall be added, IS 
namely:-
"Ezplanation.-'Rayon and synthetic fibres and 
yam~ shall be deemed to include man-made fibres 
and yarn made out of man-made fibres."; 
(k) in Item No. 18A, for the entries in the third column 20 
against sub-items (1) and (2), the entries "Thirty naye paise 
per kilogram" and "Fifteen naye paise per kilogram" shall, 
respectively, be substituted; 
(1) in Item No. 18B, for the entries in the third column 
against sub-items (1) and (2), the entries "Fifteen per cent. 25 
ad valorem" and "Seven and a half per cent. ad valorem" 
shall, respectively, be substituted; 
(m) in Item No. 19,-
(i) in the second column,-
(a) in clause (b), the word "or" shall be 30 
inserted at the end; and 
(b) in clause (c), the word "or" and clause 
(d) shall be omitted; 
(ii) for the entries in the third column against 
sub-items (1), (2), (3), (4) and (5),the entries "Sixty 35 
naye paise per square metre", "Sixty naye paise per 
square metre", "Forty naye paise per square metre", 
"Forty naye paise per square metre" and "Sixty naye 
paise per square metre" shall, respectively, be substituted; 

5 
15 
(ta) in Item No. 21, in the second colunm, the word. 
"but do not include any such fabric it manufactured on 8 
handloom" shall be omitted; 
(0) in Item No. 22,-
(i) in the second column, in clause (iii), the word 
tlor" shall be inserted at the end; and 
(ii) in clause (iv), the word "or" and clause (v) 
shall be omitted; , 
(p) after Item No. 22, the following Item shall be 
10 inserted, namely:--
IS 
20 
25 
"22A. JUTE MANUFACTURES 
(INCLUDING MANUFACTURES 
OF BIMLIPATAM JUTE OR OF 
MESTA FIBRE), ALL SORTS--
(i) Hessians Two hundred and 
fifty rupees per me-
tric tonne. 
(i.) All other descriptions of One hundred and 
jute manufactures not twenty-five rupees 
.otherwise specified (in- per metric tonne.";' 
c1uding cloth, bags, twist, 
yam, rope and twine). 
(q) after Item No. 23B, the following Item shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"23C. ASBESTOS-CEMENT Ten per cent. 
PRODUCTS, ALL' SORTS, IN- ad 'fJalor~", "; 
eLUDING FLAT AND CORRU-
GATED SHEETS, PIPES AND 
TUBES AND TILES. 
30 . (r) in Item No. 26A, for sub-items (1) and (2), the 
35 
40 
following sub-items shall be substituted, namely:--
"(1) In any crude form including 
ingots, bars, blocks, sJabs, 
billets, shots and pellets. 
(.2) Manufactures, the following, 
namely, plates, sheets, circles, 
strips and foils in a,ny form or 
size. 
(J) Pipes and tubes 
One hundred rupees 
per metric tonne. 
Three hundred 
rupees per metric 
tonne. 
Ten per cent, 
ad 7.'a/ort'111."; 
, 

18 
(.) after Item No. 26A. the following Item shaD be 
inserted, namely:-
"26M. IRON OR STEEL PRO-
DUCTS, THE FOI~t.OWING, 
NAMEl..V:-
(.) Bars, rod!!, coils, wires, 
Joints, girders, angles, 
channels, tees, flats, beams, 
zeds, trough piling, and 
all other roned, forged or 
extruded shapes Bnd sec-
tions, not otherwise specl-~ 
fled. 
(i.) Plates and sheet~, other 
than plates and sheet!! in-
tended for tinning, and 
hoops and strips, all sorts, 
including galvanised or 
corrugated plates and'! 
sheets. 
(iii) Uncoated plates and 
sheets intended for tin-
ning. 
(ill) Pipes and tubes (includ-
ing blanks therefor) all 
sorts, whether rolled, 
forged, spun, cast, drawn, 
antl.ealed, welded or ex-
truded. 
(II) All other steel castings, 
not otherwise"'speciflt>d. 
(t) in Item No. 27,-
5 
Five per-cent. ad 
lIalorim plus the ex-
cise duty for the time 
being leviable on pig 
iron or steel ingots, 10 
as the case m~y be-. 
'" even and I half per 
cent. adllolortm plus IS 
the- excise dutv for 
the time bein"g'levi-
able on pig Iron or 
steel ingots, as the 
case may be. 20 
Seven and I half per 
cent. ad lIa/ornn plull 
the excise duty for 
the time being levi-
able on- pig iron" or 25 
steel ingots, 11!! the 
case may he. 
Five per cent. ad 
val.rtm plus the ex-
dae duty for the time 30 
beIDJ leviable on pig 
Iron or steel ingot!!, • 
as the case may be. 
Five per cent. ad 
valornn plus"'P the 35 
excise duty for the 
time being leviable 
on steel ingots."; 
(1) for sub-item (b), the following sub-items shall 40 
be substituted, namely:-
CI (b) Manuractures, the following, Five hundred rupees 
namely, plates, sheets, cir- per metric tonne. 
c1cs and ~trips in any form or . . 
sf1.e. p" It , 45 
(bb) Poils, that 1s a product of She hundred rupee!! 
thlckneRs (excluding any per metric tonne."; 
backing) not exceedin~ o· t S 
miJIlmetres. 

S 
10 
IS 
20 
25 
30 
3S 
40 
4S 
17 
(1£) for Item No. 29A, the followlnl Item shall be subltl. 
hlted, namely:-
"29A. REFRIGERATING· AND 
AIR-CONDITIONING'" APPLI-
ANCES AND~t MACHINERY, ALL 
SORTS, AND1 PARTS THERE-OF- . 
(1) Refrigerators and other Twenty per cent. 
refrigerating appliances, ad ",alortm. 
which are ordinarily sold 
or offered for sale as ready 
assembled units, such 
as ice makers, bottle 
coolers, display cabinets 
and water coolers." 
(z) Air-conditioners and other Twenty per cent. 
air-conditioning applian- ad flalorf'm. 
ces, which are ordinarily 
sold or offered for 'sale 
as ready assembled units, 
including package"~ type 
air-conditioners and 
evaporative type' of cClolen:. 
(3) Parts of refrigerating lind Thirty per cent. ad 
air-conditioning sppli-< f)Q/{lr(m." ; 
ances and" mo('hinery, all 
sortll. 
(v) to Item No. 30, the following Explanation shall be 
added, namely:-
"Explanation.-This Item doeR not Include motors 
specially designed for use In gramophones or record 
players and all parts of such motel's."; 
(w) after Item No. :i8A. the following Item shall be 
fnserted, namely:-
cc 33B. El.ECTRIC WIRES 
AND (,.ABLE.~ J ALL SORTS. 
NOT OTHERWISF. S.PECIFJED-
(i) Insulated wires and cables,Fifteen per cent. 
whether sheathed or ad f.·a/ortm. 
unsheathed, when designed 
for use in circuits of less 
than 10 amperes and at a 
pressure not exceedinll 
250 volt!!. 
(m All others Five per cent. 
ad Mlorrm." ; 

Amend-
meni of 
Act 58 of 
IS"'. 
18 
(~) in Item No. 34, for the entries under the third 
column against sub-items (1) and (2), the entries IIOne 
hundred and seventy-five rupees each or seven and a haH per 
cent. ad valorem, whichever is higher" and "One thousand 
rupees each or ten per cent. ad valorem, whichever is higher" 5 
shall, respeetively. be substituted; 
(y) after Item No. 37, the following Item &hall be 
inserted, namely:-
cc 37A. GRAMOPHONES, P IN-
CLUDING RECORD PLAYERS, 
WHETHER MECHANICALLY 
OR ELECTRICALLY'" DRIVBN, 
AND WITH ACOUSTIC, ELEC-
TRONIC, OR TRANSISTORISED 
SYSTEMS OF REPRODUCTION 
OR AMPLIFICATION, AND 
PARTS AND ACCESSORIES 
THEREOF, AND GRAMOPHONE 
RECORDS, ALL SORTS-
10 
(i) Gramophones or record Twenty per cent. 20 
players, including radio- ad valorem. 
gram.'!. 
(ii) Parts and accessories of Thirty per cent. 
gramophones or record ad valorem. 
players, all sorts: 25 
(iit) Gramophone records, all Fifteen per cent. 
sorts, other than mat- ad valorem. 
rices. 
(iv) Matrices for records, Thirty per cent. 
impressed. ad valorent. 30 
(II) Gramophone needles or 
styli-
(a) wholly made (If steel Twenty per cent. 
ad valorem. 
(b) otheN! .. Twenty-five per 35 
cent. ad valorem. " ; 
(z) Item No. 40 shall 'be omitted. 
17. In the First Schedule to the Additional Duties of Excise 
(Goods of Special Importance) Act, 1957, in Item No. 4-
(a) under "I. Unmanufactured tobacco-" sub-item (5) (iii) 40 
shall be omitted; 

5 
10 
IS 
19 
(b) under "II. Manufactured tobGcco-" for sub.item (2), 
the following sub-item shall be substituted, namely:-
.. (2) Cigarettes of which the value-
(.) exceeds Rs. 35 a thousand 
Per thousand 
Seven rupees and 
seveflty naye paise. 
(ii) exceeds Rs. 25 a thousand, Four rupees. 
lut does not exceed Rs. 35 
a thousand. 
(iii) exceeds Rs. IS a thousand, 
but does not exceed Rs. 25 
a thousand. 
(ill) exceeds Rs. 7''s0 a thousand, 
but docs not exceed Rs. I" 
a thousand. 
Two rupees and 
twenty naye paise. 
Seventy naye paise. 
(v) does not exceed Rs. 7'50 a Forty naye paise.". 
thousand. 
18. In the Schedule to the Medicinal and Toilet Preparations Amend-
(Excise Duties) Act, 1955, for Explanation 1, the following ExpZaM- !e:\80~t 
20 tion shan be substituted, namely: - 1955. 
"Explanation 1.-'Patent or proprietary medicines' means 
any medicinal preparation which bears either on itself or on its 
container or both a name which is not specified in a mono-
graph in a Pharmacopoeia, Formulary or other publications 
2S notified in this behalf by the Central Government in the Official 
Gazette, or which is a brand name, that is, a name or a registered 
trade mark under the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 
(43 of 1958), or any other mark such as a symbol, monogram, 
label, signature or invented wor.ds or any writing which is used in • 
. 30 relation to that medicinal preparation for the purpose of indi-
cating or so as to indicate a connection in the course of trade 
between the preparation and some person having the right either 
as proprietor or otherwise to use the name or mark with or with-
out any indication of the identity of that person.". 
3's 19. Section 2 of the Finance Act, 1962 is hereby repealed and shall Repeal. 
be deemed never to have been enacted. 
Declaration under the Provisional Collection of Taxes Act, 1931 
It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the public interest that 
the provisions of clauses 15, 16 (2) and 17 of this Bill shall have imme-
40 diate effect under the Provisional Collection of Taxes Act, 1931. 

20 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
(See section 2) 
PART! 
Income-tax and .urcharge. on income-tax 
Paragraph A 
(i) In the case ef every individual who is married and every 
Hindu t:ndivided family whose total income does not exceed Rs. 20,000 
in either case-
Rate. oj Income-tax 
S 
Where the individual b.is ao 
child wholly or mainly de-
pendent on him or wheTe 
the Hindu undivided 
family hi. no mlaor 
coparcener. 
Where the Individual bas Where the individual hal 10 
one chlld wholly or mainly more than one child wholly 
dependent on him or where or mainly dependent on 
the Hindu undivided famr- him or where the Hindu 
ly ha. one minor c:oparce- undivided family has more 
nero than one minor coparcener. IS 
R •• RI. RI. 
(I) On rhe fint 3,008 .f totll 3,~00 of total 3,6on of total Nil 
income. IDcome. income. 
(3) On tbe next 3,000 " 1,700 " 1.400 " 3% 
(3) On the next 3.500 .. 3,500 
" 
2.500 
" 7% 20 
(4) On tbe next 3.500 " 2.500 
" 
2 • .500 .. 10% 
(.5) On the next 2,.500 , 2,.500 .. 2,.500 
" 
12% 
(6) On the next 2,.500 
" 3 • .500 " 
2,.500 
" 15% 
(7) On the next :& • .500 " :& • .500 .. :& • .500 " 200,4 
(8) On tbe next 2 • .500 '. 
:&,500 " 3,.500 .. 23%; 2S 
(ii) In the case of every individual who is not mamed and every 
inrlividual or Hindu undivided family whose total income in either 
case exceeds Rs. 20.000 and in the case of every unregistered firm 
or other association of persons or body of individuals. whether in-
corpurated or not, or every artificial juridical person referred to in 30 
sub-clause (vii) of clause (31) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act, 
not being a case to which any other Paragraph of this Part applies:-
Rio 
(I) OD the first 1,000 of total Income Nil 
(2) On the neat . 4,000 " .. 3% 3S (3) On the Dat . :&,500 t. " 7% 
(4) Oa the next 2,.500 II 
" Id',{, 
(5) On the next 3,.500 " .. Ia% 
(6) On the next 3,.500 II 
" 1.5% 
(7) 00 the Dut . :&,.500 
" 
II 30% 40 
(8) On the DCat 2 • .500 t. t. :&3% 
(9) On the balance of totallnc:ome :&s% 

s 
10 
• 
IS 
:~o 
2! 
Provided that for the pUrposes of this Paragraph-
(i) no income-tax shall be payable on a total income which 
does not exceed the limit specified below; 
(ii) the income-tax payable shall in no case exceed half the 
amoWlt by which the total income exceeds the said limit; 
(iii) the income-tax payable by an individual who is married 
or a Hindu undivided family whose total income exceeds in 
either case Rs. 20,000 shall not exceed the aggregate of-
(a) the income-tax which would have been payable if 
the total income had been Rs. 20,000; 
(b) half the amoWlt by which the total income exceeds 
RB. 20,000; 
The limit aforesaid shall be---
(i) Rs. 6,000 in the case of every Hindu undivided famlly 
which as at t.he end of the previous year satisfies either of the 
following cunditions, namely:-
(a) that it has at least two members entitled to claim 
partition who are not less than eighteen years of age; or 
(b) that it has at least two members entitled to claim 
partition who are not lineally descended one from the other 
and who are not lineally descended from any other living 
member o~ the family; 
(ii) Rs. 3,000 in every other case. 
Surcharges on income-taz 
2S The amoWlt of income-tax computed at the rates hereinbefore 
specified shall be increased by the aggregate of the surcharges 
calculated as under:-
35 
(a) A surcharge for purposes of the Union equal to the 
sum of-
(t) two and a half per cent. of the amount of income-tax 
calculated at the average rate of income-tax on the income 
under the head "Salaries" included in the total income; 
(ii) five per cent. of the amount of income-tax calculated 
at the average rate of income-tax on the total income as 
reduced by the income under the head "Salaries" included 
therein; and 
(iii) where the earned income included in the total 
income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000, ten per cent. of the difference 
betvleen the amount of income-tax which would have been 
payable on the whole of the earned income included in the 
total income if such earned income had been the total income 

and the amount of income-tax payable on a total income 
of Rs. 1,00,000; 
(b) A special surcharge at fifteen per cent. of the difference 
between the amount of income-tax on the total income and the 
amount of income-tax on the whole of the earned income, if any, 5 
included in the total income if such earned income had been the 
total income: 
Provided that-
(i) no surcharge for purposes of the Union shall be payable 
where the total income does not exceed the limit specified below; 10 
(ii) no speci!!l surcharge shall be payable in the case of an 
assessee whose total income does not include any income from 
dividend on ordinary shares if his total income does not exceed 
the limit specified below, and where the total income includeS 
any dividends on ordinarJ shares, such limit shall be increased 15 
by Rs. 1,500 or the amount of the said dividends, whichever is 
less: 
Provided further that-
(a) where the total income includes any dividends on 
ordinary shares, the surcharge for purposes of the Union and 20 
the special surcharge shall not in each case exceed half the 
amount by which the total income exceeds the respective limits 
applicable in either case; 
(b) the surcharge for purposes of the Union and the special 
.urcharge, both together, shall not exceed half the amount by 25 
which the total income exceeds the limit specified below; 
The limit aforesaid shall be-
(i) Rs. 15,000 in the case of every Hindu undivided family 
which satisfies as at the end of the previous year either of the 
following conditions, namely: - 30 
(a) that it has at least two members entitled to claim 
partition who are not less than. eighteen years of age; or 
(b) that it has at least two members entitled to claim 
partition who are not lineally descended one from the other 
and who are not lineally descended from any other living 35 
member of the family; 
(ii) Rs. 7,500 in every other case. 
Ezplanation.-For the purposes of this Paragraph, in the case of 
every Hindu undivided family governed by. the Mitakshara law, 
a son shall be deemed to be entitled to claim partition of the 40 
coparcenary property against his father, or grand-father notwith-
Btanding any custom to the contrary. 

23 
Paragraph B 
[n the case of every local 8uthority,-
Rate of income-tax 
On the whole of the total income 
5 Surcharge on income-tax 
.. 30% 
The amount of income-tax computed at the rate hereinbefore 
specified shall be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union 
of 5 per cent. of the amount of income-tax. 
Paragraph C 
10 In every case in which under the provisions of the Income-tax 
Act, income-tax is to be charged at the maximum rate,-
Rate of income-tax 
On the whole of the total income 
Surcharges on income-tax 
15 The amount of income-tax computed at the rate hereinbefore 
specified shall be increased by the aggregate of the surcharges 
calculated as under:-
(a) a surcharge for purposes of the Union of five per cent. 
of the amount of income-tax; and 
20 (b) a special surcharge of fifteen per cent. of the amount 
of income-tax. 
Paragraph D 
In the case of every company,-
Rate of income-tax 
25 On the whole of the total income 
Paragraph E 
In the case of every registered firm,-
Rates of income-tax 
Where the firm Where the firm 
(I) On the first Rs. 25,000 of total income 
(2) On the next Rs. 15,000 of total income 
(3) On the next Rs. 20,000 of total income 
35 (4) On the next Rs. 40,000 of total income 
(5) On the next Rs. 50,000 of total income 
(6) On the balancelof total income 
has four or has five or 
less partners more partners 
Nil 
5% 
6% 
7% 
8% 
10% 
Nil 
7% 
8% 
9% 
10% 
12% 

24 
PARTU 
Super-tax and surcharges on super-tax 
Paragraph A 
In the case of every individual, Hindu undivided family, 
unregistered firm or other association of persons or body of in- S 
dividuals, whether incorporated or not, or every artificial juridical 
person re.ferred to in sub-clause (vii) of clause (31) of section 2 of 
the Income-tax Act, not being a case to which any other Paragraph 
of this Part applies,-
Rates of super-tax 10 
(I) On the first Rs. 20,000 of total income Nil 
(2) On the next Rs. S,ooo of total income' 8% 
(3) On the next -Rs. s,ooo of total income 18% 
(4) On the next Rs. 10,000 of total income 22% 
(5) On the next Rs. 10,000 of total income 32% IS 
(6) On the next Rs. 10,000 of total income . 40010 
(7) On the next Rs. 10,000 of total income . 4S% 
(8) On the balance of total income i 47'5% 
Surcharges on super-tax 
The amount of super-tax computed at the rates hereinbefore 20 
specified shall be increased by the aggregate of the surcharges 
calculated as under:-
(a) A surcharge for purposes of the Union equal to the sum 
of-
(i) two and a half per cent. of the amount of super-tax 2S 
calculated at the average rat~ of super-tax on the income 
under the head "Salaries" included in the total income; 
(ii) five per cent. of the amount of super-tax calculated 
at the average rate of super-tax on the total income as 
;::~:~ ::d the income under the head "Salaries" incl.uded ~Q 

5 
10 
15 
25 
(iii) where the earned income included in the total 
income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000, ten per cent. of the difference 
between the amount of super-tax which would have been 
payable on the whole of the earned income included in the 
total income, if such earned income had l1een the total 
income and the amount of super-tax payable on a total 
income of Rs. 1,00,000; 
(b) A special surcharge at fifteen per cent. of the difference 
between the amount of super-tax on the total income and the 
amount of super-tax on the whole of the earned income, if any, 
included in the total income, if such earned income had been 
the total income. 
Paragraph B 
In the case of every local authority,-
Rate of super-tax 
On the whole of the total income 
Surcharge on super-tax 
16% 
The amount of super-tax computed at the rate hereinbefore 
specified shall be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union 
20 of 121 per. cent. of the amount of super-tax. 
25 
Paragraph C 
In the case of every association of persons being a co-operative 
society as defined in clause (19) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act,-
Rates of super-tax 
(I) On the first Rs. 25,000 of total income • 
(2) On the balance of total income 
Surcharge on super-tax 
Nil 
11:% 
The amount of super-tax computed at the rates hereinbefore 
specified shall be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union 
30 of 121 per cent. of the amount of super-tax. 

Paragraph D 
In the case of every company, other than the Life Insurance Cor-
poration of India established under the Life Insurance Corporation 
Act, 1956,- 31 of 18H. 
Rates of super-tax 5 
On the whole of the total income .. 55%: 
Provided that-
(i) a rebate at the rate of 50 per cent. on so much of the total 
income as consists of dividends from any Indian company; and 
at the rate of 35 per cent. on the balance of the total income 10 
shall he allowed in the case of any company which-
(a) in respect ot: its profits liable to tax under the 
Income-tax Act for the assessment year commencing on the 
1st day of April, 1962, has made the prescribed arrangements 
·for the declaration and payment within India of the divi- 15 
dends payable out of such profits in accordance with the 
provisions of section 194 of that Act; and 
(b) is such & company as is referred to in section 108 
of the Income-tax Act with a total income not exceeding 
Rs. 25,000; 
(ii) a rebate at the rate of 50 per cent. on so much of the 
total income as consists of dividends from a subsidiary Indian 
company fonned and registered before the 1st day of April, 1961; 
20 
at the rate of 45 per cent. on so much of the total income as 
consists of dividends from any other Indian company; and at the 25 
rate of 30 per cent. on the balance of the total income shall be 
allowed in the case of any company which satisfies condition (a) 
but not condition (b) of the preceding clause; 
(iii) a rebate at the rate of 50 per cent. on so much of the 
total income as consists of dividends from a subsidiary Indian 30 
company fonned and registered before the 1st day of April, 1961; 
at the rate of 30 per cent. on so much of the total income as 
consists of dividends from an Indian company, not being a subsi-
diary company, fonned and registered before the 1st day of 
April, 1959; at the rate of 45 per cent. on so much of the total 35 
Sncome as consists of dividends from any other Indian company 
formed and registered on or ~fter the 1st day of April, 1959; at 

the rate of 30 per cent. on so much of the total income as consists 
of royalties received from an Indian concern in pursuance of an 
agreement made by it with the Indian concern on or after the 
1st day of April, 1961 and which has been approved by the • 5 Central Government; and at the rate of 17 per cent. on the 
balance of the total income shall be allowed in the case of any 
company not entitled to a rebate under either of the preceding 
clauses: 
Provided further that-
10 (i) the amount of the rebate under clause (i) or clause (ii) 
IS 
20 
of the preceding proviso shall be reduced by the sum, if any, 
equal to the amount or the aggregate of the amounts, as the case 
may be, computed as hereunder:-
(a) on the aggregate of the sums computed in the manner at the rate of 100%. 
provided in clause (a) of the second proviso to 
Paragraph D of Part n of the First Schedule to the 
Finance Act. 1961 as reduced by the amount. if an)'. 
which is deemed to have been taken into account. In 
accordance with clause (ia) of the said proviso. for the 
purpose of reducing the rebate mentioned in clause (i) 
of the said proviso to "il. and 
(b) on the amount representing the face value of any at the rate of 1210%. 
bonus shares or the amount of any bonus issued to 
its shareholders during the previous year with a yiew to 
increasing the paid-up capital. 
(ii) where the sum arrived at in accordance with clause (i) 
of this proviso exceeds the amount of the rebate arrived at in 
accordance with clause (i) or clause (ii), as the case may be, of 
thE' preceding proviso, only so much of the amounts of reduction 
30 mentioned in sub-clauses (a) and (b) of clause (i) of this proviso 
as is sufficient, in that order, to reduce the rebate to nil shall 
. be deemed to have been taken into account for the purpose: 
Provided further that the super-tax payable by a company, the 
total income of which exceeds rupees twenty-five thousand, shall not 
35 exceed the aggregate of-
(a) the super-tax which would have been payable by the 
company if its total income had been rupees twenty-five 
thousand; and 
(b) half the amount by which its total income exceeds 
40 rupees twenty-five thousand. 
Explanation I.-For the purposes of this Paragraph, where any 
portion of the profits and gains of a company is not included in its 
total income by reason of such portion being agricultural income, the 
amount representing the face value of any bonus shares and the 
45 amount of any bonus issued to its shareholders shall each be deemed 
to be such proportion thereof as the average of the total iDcome of 

the con1pany in the five, previous years in which the company has 
been in receipt of taxable income immediately preceding the relevant 
previous year bears to the average of its total profits and gains 
(excluding capital l'cceipts) for the preceding five years aforesaid, 
reduced by such allowances as may be admissible under the Income- 5 
tax Act which have not been taken into account by the company in 
its profit and loss accounts for the preceding five years aforesaid 
Explanation H.-For the purposes of this Paragraph, a company 
shall be deemed to be a subsidiary of another company if that other 
company holds more than half in nominal value of the equity share 10 
capital of the first mentioned company. 
Paragraph E 
In the case of the Life Insurance Corporation of India established 
under the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956,-
Rate of super-tax 
On the whole of its profits and gains from life 
insurance business 
PART III 
22·5% 
Rates for deduction of tax at SOUTce in certain easel 
31 of 19M. 
15 
In every case in which under the provisions of sub-section (2) of 20 
section 192 and sections 193 to 195 of the Income-tax Act, tax is to 
be deducted at the rates in force, deduction shall be made from the 
income subject to deduction at the following rates:-
- ---------- -IiiCOme-tax 
Rate of 
income-
I. In the cale of a person other 
than a company-
(ill) in every caae, on the 
whole income (excluding 
interest payable on any 
security of the Central 
Government issued or 
declared to be income-
tax free, and interest pay-
able on any security of 
a State Government 
limed income-tax free. 
the income-tax ' whereon 
i. payable by the State 
GO'f1mlmCDt). and 
to 
Rates of 
surchargei 
Surcharge 
for 
Special 
surchar,e 
purposes 
of the 
Union 
Super-ta 
Rate of R.atee of luper-tax aurchupa 25 
30 
-
35 
45 

• 29 
InalIIIle-tu Super-tu 
Ratot of Rate of Ratelof 
s 
Rate of 
IUrcbaqel • lUper-tilt lurch-
income- Surcharae Special araa 
tax for IUrcbarae 
p~es 
o the 
Union 
10 (II) In addition, where the Super-tax and sur-
charges on super-
tax in accordance 
with the providonl 
of clause (II) of aub-
ICCtion (z) of ICCdon 
113 of the Income-
tilt Act. 
IS 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
55 
penon is non-resident in 
India, on· the whole in-CODle. . 
2. In the case of a company-
(a) in every Clse-
(I') on the whole income (excluding interest payable on any 
lecuritf of the Central Government issued or declared 
to be Income-tax free and interest payable on any 
security of a State Government issued Income-tax 
free, the income-tax whereon is payable by the State 
Government); and . • • • • • 2S% 
(ii) on the whole income (excluding dividends payable by 
an Indian company referred to in clause (;0) of 
sub-section (r) of section 99 of the Income-tax Act) 
and 
(b) in addition, where the company is neither an'Indian com-
pany nor a company which has made t'he prescribed 
arrangements for the declaration and payment of divi-
dends within India,-
(I) on the income from dividends (excluding dividends 
llar_ble by an In,dian company referred to in clause 
(io) of sub-section (r) of lection 99 of the Income-
tax Act)-
(I) on dividends payable by any of its subsidiary 
Indian companies formed and registered before 
the ISt day of April, 1961 
(2) on dividends payable by an Indian company, not 
being a subsidiary company, formed and regis-
tered before the 1st day of April, 1959 • 
(3) on dividends payable by any other Indian com-
pany formed and registered on or after the ut 
day of April, 1959 
(il) on the income from royalties payable by. an. Indian 
concern in pursuance oi an agreement Which II made 
by it with the Indian concern on or after the 1st day of 
Apri', 1961 and which has been approved by the 
Central Government. • 
(iii) on any other income, not bemi income from dividends 
Rate of 
IUpero-
-
s% 
NQ 
5% 
20% 
33%. 

THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(See section 15) 
PART I 
In the First Schedule to the Tarift Act,-
(i) in Item No. 22(4) (b),-
(1) for the entry in the fourth column against sub-item 
(i), the following entry shall be substituted, namely:-
"Ra. 60·00 per litre or 170 per cent. ad valorem, which-
ever is higher, plus Rs. 5·00 per litre."; 
s 
(2) in the entry in the fourth column against sub-item. 10 
(ii), for the figures "44·00", the figures "45'00" shall be 
substituted; 
(ii) in Item No. 28A,-
(I) in the entry in the second column, for the word, 
brackets and letter "clause (d) ", the word, brackets and IS 
letter "clause (h)", shall be substituted; 
(2) in each of the entries in the fourth, fifth and sixth 
columns, the words "plus the excise duty for the time being 
leviable on like articles if produced or manufactured in India, 
and where such duty is leviable at different rates, the 20 
highest duty" shall be omitted; . 
(iii) in Item No. 47 (2), in the entry in the fourth column, 
for the words and figures "Rs. 6·60 per kilogram or 50 per cent. 
ad vaI01'em". the words and figures "Rs. 7·50 per kilogram or 55 25 
per cent. ad valorem" shall be substituted; . 
(iv) in Items Nos. 63, 63(1), 63(4), 63(5), 63(11), 63(13), 
63 (23), 63 (26) and 63 (35), for the figures and words "20 per cent. 
ad valorem" in the entry against each of them in the fourth 
column, the figures and words "25 per cent. ad valorem" sha1l 30 
be substituted; 
(v) in Item No. 63(6),-
(1) for the entry in the fourth column against sub-item 
(i), the following entry shall be substituted, namely:-
"15 per cent. ad valorem."; 
(2) for the entry in the fourth column against sub-item 35 
(ii), the following entry shall be substituted, namely:-
IIRs. 74·00 per tonne plus 5 per cent. ad valorem."; 
(vi) in Item No. 63 (8), for the entry in the fourth column, 
the entry "RI. 5·00 per tonne or 20 per cent. ad valorem, which-
ever is hieher, plus 5 per cent. ad valorem" Ihalf be lubltttuted; 40 

31 
(vii) in Item No. 63 (9), for the entry in the fourth column, 
the entry "Rs. 60·00 per tonne plua IS per cent. ad valorem" shall 
be substituted; 
(viii) in Item No. 63 (10),-
S (1) for the words and figures "Rs. C59·10 per tonne" in 
the fourth column against sub-item (i), the words and figures 
"Rs. 80·00 per tonne" shall be substituted; 
(2) for the words and figures "Rs. 79-70 per tonne" in 
the fourth column against sub-item (ii), the 'words and 
10 fliUres "Rs. 100·00 per tonne" shall be substituted; 
(ix) in Items Nos. 63 (12), 63 (15), 63 (28), 63 (29) (a), 
63 (29) (b) and 63 (33) (b), for the entry against each of them in 
the fourth column, the entry "55 per cent. ad valorem" shall be 
substituted; 
15 (x) in Item No. 63 (17),-
(1) for the entry in the fourth column against sub-item 
(i), the following entry shall be substituted, namely:-
"Rs. 32·00 per tonne or 10 per cent. ad valorem, 
whichever is higher, plUl IS per cent. ad valorem."; 
20 (2) for the entry in the fourth column against sub-item 
(ii), the following entry shall be substituted, namely:-
"Rs. 55·00 per tonne plus IS per cent. ad valorem.."; 
(xi) in Items Nos. 63 (18) (b) and 83 (33) (a), for the entry 
against each of them in the fourth column, the entry "40 per cent. 
25 ad valorem" shall be substituted; 
(xii) in Item No. 63 (19), in the entry in the second column, 
after the words "cast iron plates", the words "and stainless steel 
plates" shall be added; 
(xiii) in Item No. 63 (20), in the entry in the second column, 
30 after the words "high silicon electrical steel sheets", the words 
"and stainless steel sheets" shall be added: 
(xiv) in Item No. 63 (24), for the entries in the fourth and 
fifth columns, the entries "55 per cent. ad valorem" and "48 per 
cent. ad valorem". shall, respectively, be substituted; 
35 (xv) in Item No. 63 (25), in the entry in the second column, 
the words "and iton or steel wire nails" shall be omitted; 

32 
(%Vi) in Item No. 63(27),-
(1) for the entry in the fourth column against sub-item 
(i), the entry "Rs. 15·00 per tonne or 15 per cent. ad valo-
Tem, wllichever is higher, plus 5 per cent .. ad valorem". shall 
be substituted;' 5 
(2) for the entry in the fourth column against sub-item 
(ii), the entry "Rs. 42·00 per tonne or 25 per cent. ad valo-
Tem; whichever is higher, plus 5 per cent. ad valorem" shall 
be substituted; 
(X'Vii) in Item No. 71 (a), for the entry "35 per cent. ad IO 
valorem" in the fourth column, the entry U50 per cent. ad 
t7alorem" shall be substituted; and 
• (X'Viii) in Item No. 75 (1), for the entry in the fourth column, 
the entry u150 per cent. ad valorem~' shall be substituted. 

PART II 
Preferential rate of duty if the article 
is the produce or manufacture 
of 
S Item Name of Article Nature of Standard rate of duty 
No. duty The United A British CoJoay 
Kingdom 
I :2 3 4 S 6 
10 In the lTlt'St Schedule to the Tariff Act,-
(i) for Item No. 22(S)(b). the following Item shall be substituted, namely :-
IS 
20 
2S 
30 
-Z2(s)(b) Drugs and medicines con-
taining spirit-
(I) entered in such a mlnner Preferential 
as to indicate that the Revenue. 
strength is not to. be 
tested. 
(ia') not 10 entered. Preferential 
Revenue. 
Rs. I2' 00 per litre or 50 per 
cent. ad valorem, whichever 
is higher, plus Rs. 5'00 per 
litre. 
Rs. 9'00 per litre ofthe strength 
of London proof or so per 
cent. ad valorem, whichever 
is higher, plw the excise duty 
for the time being leviable on 
like articles if produced or 
manufactured in India, and 
where such duty is leviable at 
different rates, the highest 
duty. 
Rs. II' 10 per litre or 
40 per cent. ad 
valorem, whichever 
is higher, pIas Rs. 
S'oo per litre. 
Rs. 8'35 per litre of 
the strength of 
London proof or 40 
per cent. ad valorem, 
whichever is high-
er, plul the excise 
duty for the time 
being leviable on 
like articles if pro-
duced or manufac:-
tured in India, and 
where such duty is 
leviable at dift"erent 
rates, the higheat 
duty. 
Rs. 11'10 per litre or 
40 per cent. ad 
wUorem, whichever 
is higher, f>!us Rs. 
S'oo per litre. 
Rs. 8' 35 per litre of 
the strength of 
London proof or 40 
per cent. ad flalormt. 
whichever is high-
er, plus the excise 
duty for the time 
being leviable on 
lite articles if pr0-
duced or manufac- • 
tured in India, and 
where such duty is 
leviable at dilferent 
rates, the higheat 
duty. 
Duration of 
l>rottctite 
rateI of dDtJ 
7 
... .. . 
t: 

J 2 3 4 5 
(ii) in Section V, after Item No. 27(9), the following Item shall be ~erted, namely :-
"27(10) AU prodUdl derived from re-; ReftDUe The excise duty for the time 
fining of crude petroleum or beinlleviable OIl 1ike articles 
shale (whether pseous, if produced or manufactured 
liquid, lCIIli«llid or solid in in India, and wbere such duty 
form), including refinery is leviable at different rates, 
gases, lubricating oil and the higbest duty; and the duty 
greases, waxes and coke, but 80 leviable sball be in addi-
excluding articles falliag don to the duty whicb wODld 
under Items Nos. 21(3), have been levied if tbis entl'J 
:a'1C4Xa), 27(s), 21(6) sud bad not been iosertcd. 
21(7Xb). 
(ii,) after Item No. 28(34), the following Items shan be inserted, namely :-
"28(3s) Nitric. Hydrocbloric and Sui- Rerenue The exdse duty for the time 
phuric Acids (including fu- being leviable on like articles 
ming acids and anhydrides if produced or manufactured 
thereof), all lOfts. in India, and where such duty 
is leviable at clilrerent rates, 
the highest duty; and the duty 
10 leviable sball be in addi-
tion to the duty wbicll would 
have been levied if this entI'J 
bad not been inlerted. 
21(36) Compressed,1iqudied or soli - Reftaue 
di6ed (I8IIea, the foUowiug, 
namely:-
(O~· 
(it") Cdorine. 
(lit) AmmoniL 
(iv) Carbonic Icid -(Cuboa 
dialdde). -
(v) ltefri&eDnt ..... all 
atbers, such • sulpbur 
.... anctf'reoD. 
• The exciae duty for the time 
being leviable on like utic:Ies 
ifproduced or manufactured in 
India, and where such duty 
is leviable at dift'erent rata, 
tbe highest duty; and the 
dutY so leviable sball be in 
IIddition to the duty which 
would. have been leriecl if 
this entry bad not beea ia-
setted • 
6 f 
... o. , 
". , 
s 
10 
IS Col 
.. 
20 
. 25 
30 
3S 

5 
10 
15 
20 
2S 
30 
35 
aI(J1) Patent or proprietarY medicines Revenue 
not containing alcohol, opium, 
J ndian hemp or other nar-
colic drugs or other narco-
ties other than those medi-
cines which are exclusively 
Ayurvedic, Unani, Sidba 
or Homoeopathic. 
• The excise duty for the time 
being leviable on like articles 
if produced or manufa.c:tured 
in India, and where such duty 
is leviable at different rates, 
the highest duty; and the duty 
so leviable shall be in addition 
to the duty which would 
have been levied if this 
entry had not been inserted. 
B%planation.-For the purposes of this item, «patent or proprietary medicines" 
means any drug or medicinal preparation, in whatever form, for use in the 
internal or external treatment of, or for the prevention of, ailments in, human 
beings or animals, which bears either on itself or on its container or both, a 
name which is not specified in a monograph in a Pharmacopoeia, Formulary 
or other publications notified in this behalf by the Central Government in the 
Official Gazette, or which is a brand name, that is, a name or a registered trade 
mark under the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 (43 of 1958) or any 
other mart, such as a symbol, monogram, label, signature or invented words 
or any writing which is wed in relation to that medicine Cd 
for the purpose of indicating or so as to indicate a connection 01 
in the course of trade between the medicine and some person having 
the right either as proprietor or otherwise to use the name or mark with or 
without any indication of the identity of that person. 
(iv) in Section VIII, after Item No. 39 (3), the following Item shall be inserted, namely :-
"39( .. ) Rubber products, the fo11ow- Revenue 
ing, namely:-
(.) Latex foam sponge 
(it) Plates, sheets and strips 
unbardened, whether vul-
caoized or not, and whe-
tiler combined with any 
teJtiJe D' ateri.1 or other-
wise. 
The excise duty for the time 
being leviable on like articles 
if produced or manufactured 
in India, and where such duty 
is leviable at different rates, 
the hiJhest duty j and the duty 
10 leviable shall be in addition 
to the duty which would have 
been levied if this entry had 
not been inserted. 
" . .. . 
. --... -.------

I 2 3 4 , 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------. (17) in Section IX, after Item No. 42, the following Item shaH be inserted; name1y:-
"42(1) Plywood, blocltboard, lamin- Revenue The adse duty for the time 
board, batten board, bard being leviable on like articles 
or 10ft wall boards or insu- if produced or manufactured 
lating board and veneered in India, and where such duty 
panels, whether or not cxm- is leviable at di1ferent rates, 
taining any material other the ~est duty; and the duty 
than wood; cellular wood 10 leVlable shaU be in addition 
panels; building boards of to the duty which would baove 
wood pulp or of vegetable been levied if this entry had 
Ibre, whether or not bon- not been inserted. 
ded with natural or artificial 
resins or with similar bin-
ders; and artificial or re-
constituted wood being 
wood shavings, wood chips, 
saw dust, wood flour or 
other ligneous waste agglo-
. merated with natural or 
artificial resins or other or-
pnic binding substances, 
In sheets, blocb, boards or 
the like-
(.) Plywood for tea-chests 
when cut to size in panels 
or shooks and packed in 
sets. 
(q) All others. 
(WI after Item No. 50(1), the following Item shal1 be inserted, namelYI-
",o(IA) Jute manufactures (includingJ Revenue • The exise duty for the time 
manufactures of Bimli~ ~ being leviable on like articlea 
jute or of Mesta fibre), Ii all if produced or manufactured in 
sorts- India, and where such duty 
is leviable at different rates, 
(I') Heuians. the highest duty; and the duty 
6 7 
•• t. 
.. . 
" . •• t 
S 
10 
IS 
8: 
20 
2S 
30 
3S 

s 10 15 20 
(it) 
AIl.acbcr 
•• 
i Ii 
of;' 
i 
f 
_ 
tIIJl 
faIlioc 
_in 
IUb-ltem 
(a) 
aboge 
(jodndiq 
cloth. 
bIp, 
twist, 
yam. 
rope 
and 
twine). 
so 
leviable 
sball 
be 
in 
addi-
tion 
to 
the 
duty 
which 
woalcl 
have 
been 
lnied 
if 
this 
entry 
had 
not 
been 
inserted. 
(mi) 
after 
Item 
No. 
58(1), 
the 
following 
Item 
shall 
be 
iPserted, 
namely:-
·'S8( 
1 A) 
Asbestos-cemcnt 
products, 
all 
Reoreoue 
The 
uc:Ue 
duty 
for 
the 
time 
sorts; 
including 
flat 
and 
beiDa 
leviable 
on 
lite 
articles 
corrugated 
sheets, 
pipes 
and 
if 
produced 
or 
man~ 
tubes 
and 
tiles. 
in 
India, 
and 
where 
inIch 
duty 
is 
leviable 
at 
different 
rates, 
the 
highest 
duty; 
and 
the 
duty 
10 
leviable 
shall 
be 
in 
addition 
to 
the 
duty 
which would 
have 
been 
levied 
if 
this 
entry 
bad 
not 
been 
inserted. 
(viis) 
for 
Item 
No. 
63(16), 
the 
following 
Item 
shall 
be 
substituted, 
namely 
:-
"63(16) 
Iron 
or 
Ileel 
washers. 
all 
Revenue 
• 
55 
per 
cent. 
ad 
fHJlqr-. 
SOI'tl, 
and 
iron 
or 
steel 
nails, 
all 
sorts, 
including 
wire 
nails 
and 
panel 
pins. 
(ix) 
after 
Item 
No. 
63(20), 
the 
following 
Item 
shall 
be 
inserted, 
namely 
:-
'"63(3OA) 
Stainless 
steel 
plates 
and 
Revenue 
. 
25 
per 
cent. 
ad 
t1Glomn. 
-25 
abeets. 
(x) 
after 
Item 
No. 
63(5), 
the 
following 
Item 
shall 
be 
inserted, 
namely 
:-
"63(36) 
Iron 
or 
Itecl 
products, 
the 
Revenue 
• 
The 
aciIe 
duty 
for 
the 
time 
foUowiDs. 
JIllIDely:-
being 
leviable 
on 
like 
articles 
if 
r== 
or 
manufactured 
30 
(i) 
Ben, 
rods, 
coils, 
wires, 
in 
. 
and 
where 
such 
duty 
joints, 
&irden. 
angles, 
is 
lerillble 
at 
different 
rates. 
channele,. 
&eel, 
lata, 
the 
biaheat 
::tr 
jand 
the 
duty 
beams, 
zeds, 
~: 
so 
Iev1iab1e 
be 
in 
addition 
mg, 
and 
all 
other 
to 
the 
duty 
which 
would 
have 
3S 
forged 
or 
extruded 
been 
lev1ed 
If 
thi. 
entry 
bad 
shaPeS 
and 
IeCtioas. 
DOl 
been 
inIerted. 
.. 
--..:! 
CIO---a-. 

S 10 IS 2C 2S 30 
1 
2 
(ia) 
Plates 
and 
sheets, 
other 
than 
plates 
and 
sheets 
iDtCDded 
for 
tin-
Dins. 
and 
hoopa 
and 
strips. 
all 
IOtts. 
ioclud-
ina 
plnnised 
or 
corru-
pted 
plates 
and 
sheets. 
(ia) 
U~ted 
plates 
and 
sheets 
intended 
for 
tin-
ning. 
(ifJ) 
Pipes 
and 
tubes 
(in-
cludiDg 
blanks 
therefor). 
all 
IOtts. 
whether 
rolled. 
forged. 
span. 
cast. 
drawn. 
annealed. 
welded 
or 
extruded. 
(II) 
All 
other 
steel 
castin!tS. 
3 
.. 
(%1) 
for 
item 
No. 
64(6). 
the 
following 
Item 
shan 
be 
substituted, 
namely 
:-
~6) 
Coper 
and 
copper 
alloyt 
con-
taining 
not 
1~ 
than 
fifty 
per 
cent. 
by 
weight 
of 
copper--
(I) 
In 
any 
crude 
form 
in 
-
eluding 
ingots, 
ban. 
blodts, 
slabs. 
billets, 
shots 
and 
pellets. 
(2) 
Manufactures, 
the 
fol-
16wilJ8, 
nanaely. 
plates, 
sheets, 
circles, 
strips 
and 
foils 
in 
any 
form 
or 
abe. 
(3) 
Pipes 
and 
tubes. 
Revenue 
• 
The 
exa.e 
duty 
for 
the 
liDle 
being 
leviable 
on 
like 
articles 
if 
produced 
or 
mamd"actured 
in 
India, 
and 
where 
such 
duty 
is 
leviable 
at 
di1ferent 
rates, 
the 
~est 
duty; 
and 
the 
duty 
10 
leYJable 
shall 
be 
in 
addition 
to 
the 
duty 
which 
would 
have 
been 
leYied 
if 
this 
entry 
had 
DOt 
been 
in..erted. 
------------_._-
.. ---
s 
6 
7 
&r 

(sri) for Item No. T~(4I), the following Item shall be substituted, namely :-
s 
10 
IS 
20 
2S 
"72C,p) Refrigerating and air-condi- Reveuue The exciae duty for the time 
tioo.ing appliances and ma - being leviable on like artid~ 
chinery, all sorts, and parts if produced or manu&ctured 
thereof- in India, and where such duty 
(1) Refrigerators and other 
refrigerating appliances, 
which are ordinarily 
sold or o1I'ered for sale 
u ready assembled 
units, such as ice mak-
ers, bottle coolers, dis-
plaJ cabinets and water 
coolers. 
(3) Air-conditioners and 
other air-conditioning 
appliances, which are 
ordinarily sold or offered 
for sale u ready assem-
Wed units, including 
pec:bge type air-condi-
tioners and evaporative 
type of coolers. 
(3) Parts of refrigerating 
and air-conditioning ap-
pliances and machinery, 
all sorts. 
is leviable at di1ferent rates, 
the high~t duty; and the duty 
80 leviable shall be in addition 
to the duty which would have 
been levied if this entry bad 
not been Inserted. 
(xiii) in Section XVI, after Item No. 73(23), the following Item shall be insened, namely 1-
10 '"73(304) mectric wires and cables, aD Revenue The excise duty for the time 
IOrta, not falling under being leviable on like articles 
35 
Item 63(36). if produced or manufac:tured 
in lndia, and where such duty 
is leviable at different rates, 
the hiJl?est ,:rr; and the duty 
so leVllble be in addition 
to the duty which would have 
been levied if this entry had 
not been inserted. 
------------------_. _._-.-
~ 
• 
_J 
.. 

5 
10 
IS 
20 
25 
I 2 3 4 5 
(=) in Sec:tion XVIII. after Item No. 79, the fonowing lila sbalt.e inserted, namely :-
"19(1) GramophoDea, i......... re- Rennuc 
ccm1 Iayen. ~aech-
::!:so~17I £ .. -
trODic or . "5 
aysu:ms of reproduC:IiIja « 
Implification, and", .-
8CCCIIOrica thezd. .-
gramophone recorda. .u 
IOrts-
(I) GramophonCi or re-
cord players, includiDI 
mdiognma. 
(ia1 Parts IUd ac:ces.Jriee 
of gramophones or re-
c:erd playen, all 1Orts. 
(iil1 Gramophooe records, 
aU sons, other thaa 
matrices. 
(.,) Matrices for records, 
mprssed. 
(v) Gramophone aeedIea 
or styU-
(a) whoUymade of 
steeL 
(6) others. 
The ~dIIly for the time 
beio8 leriabJe OIl like ardcIee 
if produced or manufactured 
In lDdia, and wbcre IUCh duty 
is leviable at diiferent rates, 
the hfahest duty; Bod the duty 
10 leviable shaI1 be in addi-
tion to the duty which would 
haft been levied if this entry 
had not been ioscrted. 
6 7 
... , 
~ 

s 10 
(zv) 
for 
Item 
No. 
82{6XA), 
the 
following 
Item 
shall 
be 
substituted, 
namely 
,-
"'82(6)(A) 
PJastka, 
aU 
IOrta-
Rnaue 
The 
esc:ise 
duty 
for 
the 
time 
being 
leviable 
on 
like 
articles 
if 
produced 
or 
manufactured 
in 
India, 
and 
where 
such 
duty 
is 
leviable 
It 
diJl'erent 
rates, 
the 
hiohest 
duty; 
and 
the 
duty 
10 
l~le 
aha11 
be 
in 
addition 
10 
the 
duty 
whlch 
would 
have 
bees 
levied 
if 
this 
entry 
bad 
not 
been 
inserted. 
(i) 
Moulding 
powders, 
graoules 
and 
flakes 
(tbermose 
. 
IUd 
thermoplas~. 
<it) 
Polyethylene 
films, 
lay-fiat 
tubings 
and 
P.V.C. 
sheets 
(that 
is 
to 
say, 
Polyvinyl 
Chloride 
sheets). 
(iii) 
All 
others. 
"'" -

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The object of this Bill i. to give effect to the financial proposall 
of the Central Government for the financial year 1962-63 and to 
provide for certain connected matters. The Notes on Clauses explain 
the various provisions contained in the Bill. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 23rd April, 1961. 
it '-' '. 
MORARJI DESAI. 
, , 

Notes on Ciause; 
Clause 2 prescribes the rates of income-tax and super-tax for the 
assessment year 1962-63 and for deduction of tax at source from 
salaries, interest on securities, dividends, etc. during the same year. 
In the cases of individuals, Hindu undivided families, unregistered 
firms, etc. the existing slab of Rs. 15,001-20,000 has been substituted 
by two slabs of Rs. 15,001-17,500 and RI. 17,501-20,000 and the rates 
for the various slabs above Rs. 5,000 have been slightly increased as 
compared to the existing rates. The basic surcharge for purposes of 
the Union has been fixed at 21% in the case of incomes from salaries 
in place of the existing rate of 5%. 
In the case of registered firms, the rate schedule has been recast. 
The slabs of income have been revised and the rates of tax have been 
slightly increased, different rates being prescribed for firms with 4 
or less partners and for firms with 5 or more partners. 
In the case of companies-
(i) the rate of income-tax has been fixed at 25% as compared 
to the existing rate of 20%; 
(ii) the effective rate of super-tax applicable to incomes, 
other than dividends received from Indian companies and certain 
royalties, of companies which have made the prescribed 
arrangements for the declaration and payment of dividends 
within India, is fixed at 20% if their income does not exceed 
Rs. 25,000 and the public are substantially interested therein; and 
at 25% in other cases; 
(iii) the effective rate of super-tax applicable to incomes, 
other than dividends received from Indian companies and certain 
royalties, of foreign companies which have not made the pres-
cribed arrangements for the declaration and payment of divi-
dends within India has been fixed at 38% so that the effective 
rate of income-tax and super-tax on such income continues in 
their case at 63%; 
(iv) the effective rate of super-tax on dividends received 
from an Indian company by a company which has made the pres-
cribed arrangements for the declaration and payment of divi-
dends within India is fixed at 5% if Its total income does not 
exceed Rs. 25,000 and the public are substantially interested 
43 

, I 
44 
therein. In the case of other companies which have made the 
prescribed arrangements aforesaid, the super-tax rate has been 
fixed at 5% for dividends received from an Indian subsidiary 
company' formed and registered before 1st April, 1961 and at 
10% for dividends received from any other Indian company. 
In the case of foreign companies which have not made the 
prescribed arrangements aforesaid, the effective rate of super-tax 
has been fixed at 5% for dividends received from an Indian 
subsidiary company formed and registered before 1st April, 1961; 
at 25% for dividends received from an Indian company, not being 
a ~ubsidiary company, formed and registered before 1st April, 
1959; and at 10% for dividends received from any other Indian 
company formed and registered on or after 1st April, 1959. 
The effective rates for deduction of tax at source have been 
sliihtly adjusted as a sequel to the changes in the rates of i~come-tax 
and super-tax mentioned in the preceding paragraph. It is also 
provided that no income-tax shall be deducted at source from interest 
on any income-tax free securities of the Central or a State Govern-
ment. 
A rebate of one-tenth of the income-tax and super-tax attributable 
to income from exports out of India is proposed to be allowed in the 
case of all assessees other than foreign companies which have not 
made the prescribed arrangements for the declaration and payment 
of dividends within India. 
Clause 3 defines 'short-term capital asset'. 
Clause 4 amends sub-section (2) of section 37 of the Income-tax 
Act. The rates at which the entertainment expenses are deductible 
in computing total income of companies have slightly been reduced. 
The total amount admissible has been reduced from Rs. 1,00,000 to 
RB.60,OOO. 
Clause 5 substitutes new sections for sections 70 and 71 of the 
Income-tax Act. The main changes resulting from the substitution 
are as follows:-
(i) losses arising on transfer of any short-term capital asset 
can be set off against income arising froJ11.. the transfer of any 
other capital asset, short-term or otherwise; and 
(ii) losses arising on transfer of a capital asset other than a 
short-term capital asset can be set off against income arising on 
transfer of a similar capital asset. 
Clause 6. substi~.utes a new s~b-Bection for, sub-sectlon (1) of lec-
tion 72 of the Income-tax Act. This is consequential to the recasting 
Qf sections 70 and 71 of that Act. 

CLause 7 substitutes a new section for the existing section 74 of 
the Income-tax Act. The main changes resulting from the substitu-
tion are as follows:-
(i) the net loss arising on transfer of capital asBt:ts other 
than short-term capital assets will not be carried forward to any 
subsequent assessment year; 
(ii) the net loss arising on transfer of short-term capital 
assets can be carried forward and set oft against income arising 
on transfer of short-term capital assets in subsequent assessment 
years, the period of carry forward being restricted to 8 assess-
ment years; and 
(iii) losses under the head "Capital gains" pertaining to the 
assessment year 1961-62 and earlier assessment years will b. 
carried forward only to the extent that they relate to short-term 
capital assets. 
Clause 8.-Sub-clause (i) introduces a new clause (f) in sub-
section (1) of section 87 of the Income-tax Act. This will enable the 
deposits made in IO-year or I5-year accounts under the Post O.ftlce 
Savings Bank (Cumulative Time Deposits) Rules, 1959, to be treated 
for the purpose of rebate of income-tax in the same manner as c9ntri-
butions to recognised provident funds, etc. Sub-clause (ii) amends 
sub-section (3) of section 87 of that Act with a view to enhancing the 
maximum limit for which income-tax rebate will be available on con-
tributions to provident fund, etc. to Rs. 10,000 in the case of indivi-
duals and Rs. 20,000 in the case of Hilldu undivided families. 
Clause 9 amends sub-section (3) of section 88 of the Income-tax 
Act so as to enhance the maximum limits upto which exemption in 
respect of donations for charitable purposes will be available to 10% 
of the total income (as reduced by any portion thereof which is 
exempt from tax) or Rs. 2,00,000 whichever is less. The amendment 
is to apply to donations made during the previous years relevant to 
the assessment year 1963-64 and subsequent assessment years. 
Clause 10 reduces the statutory percentages fixing the minimum 
amounts to be distributed as dividends by companies in which the 
public are not 5ubstantlally interested to 45 and 60 in place of the 
existing percentages of 50 and 65 respectively. 
Clause 11 substitutes two new sections for the existing sections 114 
and 115 of the Income-tax Act. The main changes resulting from 
the substitution are as follows:-
(i) capital gains arising on transfer of short-term capital 
assets will be taxed in the same manner as income other than 
capital ,alD1; 

(ii) capital gains arising on transfer of capital assets other 
than short-term capital assets will be taxed at a fiat rate of 25% 
or as if they were gains arising on transfer of short-term capital 
assets, 1¥hichever is more favourable to the assessee. The basic 
tax free limit of Rs. 5,000 will continue only in the case of capital 
gains arising on transfer of capital assets other than short-term 
capital assets; and 
(iii) in the case of companies, capital gains arising on 
transfer of capital assets other than short-term capital aaseta will 
be subjected to a super-tax of 5% and on capital gains arising on 
transfer of short-term capital assets super-tax will be calculated 
as if they were an income other than capital gains. 
Clause 12.-Sub-c1ause (i) deletes section 5 (1) (xx) of the Wealth-
tax Act relating to exemption of shares in new industrial companies. 
Sub-clause (ii) amends Part I of the Schedule to the Wealth-tax Act 
slightly revising the slabs and enhancing the rate of tax on the two 
highest slabs to 1·75% and 2·5% respectively. 
Clause 13 suspends the operation of the Expenditure-tax Act for 
the assessment year 1962-63 onwards. 
cZm£ae 14 makes a clariftcatory amendment in clause (ii) of the 
first proviso to Paragraph D of Part II of the First Schedule to the 
Finance Act, 1961. 
Clause 15, read with the Second Schedule, seeks to increase the 
import duties on certain items. The changes are:-
(i) on a number of articles on which Central Excise duties 
have. been imposed, including various articles of iron and steel, 
provision is being made for the levy of a countervailing import 
duty. This is necessary in order that the indigenous producer or 
manufacturer of these articles is not placed at a disadvantage in 
comparison with the importer; 
(ii) there are some articles of iron and steel on which 
countervailing duty will not be leviable in the absence of exclse 
duty thereon. In order that these may not get an undue advant-
age over other articles on which countervailing duties will now 
be attracted. the duties on these articles are being increased by 
5%. The main items thus aftected are structures. fittings for 
pipes and tubes, steel ingots and iron and steel manufactures not 
otherwise speclfted. The duty on tinplates, which are already 
subject to countervailing duty I is also being increased by about 
2%. In addition, a new item is being created for Itainless steel 
• plates and sheets, with a duty of 25%; 
(iit) the duty on certain types of tools excluc:linl machine 
tools and agricultural implements is proposed to be raised. from 
." to 10,,; 

4'1 
(tv) the duty on motor ears including tuieabt is at PreHDt 
100% or Ra. 6,000 per car or cab, whichever fa hiper, plu 
countervailing duty. It II proposed to raise t8a ael valorem rate 
to 110% but to do away with the alternative apeal6c rate of duty. 
The countervailing duty will continue to be applicable; 
(v) the statutory rate ot duty on artlftclal silk yarn and 
thread is being Increased by 5%; and 
(vi) a few other minor changes have been proposed w!th 
the object of removing certain anomalies In the tariff. 
ClGuse 16.-Sub-clause (1) seeks to amend the deftn1tion of 
'manufacture'. 
Sub-clause (2) (a) (1) seeks to Increase the rates of duty on un-
manufactured tob~cco, other than stalks and also proposes to delete 
sub-Item (5) (iii) relating to granule of tobacco ('rawa'). 
Sub-clause (2) (a) (2) proposes to re-classify the existing eight 
groups of clgarette tariff Into five and also to revise the rates of duty. 
Sub-clause (2) (b) seeks to Introduce a new sub-Item, namely, 
'Tar' under the existing item relating to 'Asphalt and Bitumen'. 
Sub-claWle (2) (e) proposes to levy an excise duty on "all products 
derived from refining of crude petroleum or shale" which are not 
being taxed at present. 
Sub-clause (2) (d) seeks to introduce for purposes of clarlftcation 
a sub-clause (iii) under sub-item m of Item No. 14 relating to 'Paints 
and Varnishes'. 
Sub-clause (2) (e) seeks to redeftne the 'coal tar dyes'. 
Sub-clause (2) (f) seeks to redefine the scope ot the existing Item 
relating to 'Patent or proprietary medicines.'. 
Sub-clause (2) (g) proposes to levy an exclse duty on certaJn 
'Acids' and 'Gases'. 
Sub-clause (2) (h) seeks to insert a new sub-item (Ui) under the 
existing Item 15A relating to 'Plastic-'ll' to make it more comprehen-
sive. " . -,'" .... ~ ""~ 
Sub-clause (2) (i) proposes to levy an excise duty on certain 
'Rubber products' and 'Plywood'. 
Sub-clause (2) U) proposes an increase in the rate of duty OIl 
'Rayon and Synthetic fibres and Yam', and adds a olarfftcatory 
Explanation thereto. 
Sub-clause (2) (k) seeks to raise the rate. of exclse duty on 
ICotton Yam'. -, 
Sub-clause (2) (I) propo5c<; to increase the rates of exclse duty on 
'Woollen Yam'. 

48 
Sub-cl.auee (2) (m) seeks to delete the provision relatin. to 
Cotton Fabrics manufactured on handlooms and proposes to fncreue 
the rates of excise duty on 'Cotton Fabrics'. . 
8ulH!lause (2) (ft) seeks to delete the provision relating to Wool-
len Fabrics manufactured on handlooms. 
SulH!lause (2) (0) seeks to delete the provision relating to Art 
Silk Fabrics manufactured on handlooms. 
Sub-clause (2) (p) proposes to levy an excise duty on 'Jute 
Manufactures'. 
Sub-clause (2) (q) proposes to levy an excise duty on 'Asbestos-
Cement Products'. 
Sub-clause (2) (r) proposes to levy an excise duty on 'Copper 
in any crude form.'. 
Sub-clause (2) (8) seeks to levy an excise duty on certain 'Iron or 
Steel Products'. 
Sub-clause (2) (t) seeks to raise the existing rate of duty on 
'Aluminium Poils'. 
Sub-clause (2) (u) proposes to combine into one item the present 
tarifP items 29A and 40 relating to 'Air-conditioning Machinery' and 
'Refrigerators' respectively as well 8S to make It more comprehensive. 
Sub-clause (2) (v) seeks to excluGle 'Electric Motors' specially 
designed for use in Gramophones from the scope of Item No. 30. 
Sub-clause (2) (to) proposes to levy an excise duty on 'Electric 
Wires and Cables'. 
Sub-clause (2) (x) seeks to revise the present specific rates on 
'Auto-Cycles, Three-Wheelers and Medium-sized Cars' into speciftc-
cum-4d vator.em. rates. 
Sub-clause (2) (y) proposes to levy an excise duty on 'Gramo-
phones and parts and accessories of gramophones, and gramophone 
records'. 
Sub-clause (2) (z) which is consequential to sub-clause (2) (u) 
seeks to delete the existing Item No. 40 relating to 'Refrigerators and 
parts thereof'. 
Clause 17.-Sub-clause (a) seeks to delete sub-item 1(3) (m) of 
item 4 relating to granule of tobacco ('rawa'). 
Sub-clause (b) seeks to make certain changes in the rates of 
additional excise duty on 'Cigarettes'. 
Clause 18 seeks to amend the Schedule to the Medicinal and Toilet 
Preparations (Excise Duties) Act with a view to bring the definition 
of Patent or proprietary medicines in that Act into line with the 
revised deftnition of the same expression in the Central Excises and 
Salt Act, 1944 ft,M4I ,.lnUJllII 18(2) (f)]. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM • 
CENTRAL EXCISB 
The Bill seeks to levy new excise duties on-
1. All petroleum Refinery products other than those wh.f.ch are 
already under excise. 
2. Acids (Nitric, Hydrochloric and Sulphuric). 
3. Gases (Oxygen, chlorine, ammonia, carbon diozid. and 
refrigerant gases). 
4. Certain rubber products. 
5. Plywood and allied products. 
8. Jute manufactures. 
7. Asbestos cement products. 
8. Certain iron and steel product •. 
9. Electric wires and cables. 
10. Gramophones including parts and aeceuoriee, ~nd araJDOoo 
phone records. 
Coal Tar is also proposed to be brought under excise lIy altering 
the present Item of Asphalt and ~itumen. 
These levies will necessitate the employment of some additional 
staff. The increase in staff together with incidental expenset of 
administration is estimated to cost Rs. 24·43 lakh. per annum. 
I. Volume of work: 
There are about 600 units which are now to be broueht under 
excise control. 
n. ltequirement of personnel and ftnance: 
For the fteld organisation , 
Annual 
No. emolumen.ta Cost 
A.OjJiarl-
Deputy c.uecton 
Aulatant CoUectctn . 
Superintendenta-
CIa .. I . 
CIua II . 
Auistant ChIef Accounts Ollicen 
'9 
2 2X IS,ooo 
8 8xl,ISo 
8 8XI,880 
12 12X7,os' 
2 2X7.os6 
50,000 

B. S"J/-
Deputy SuperinteMents (&ecutift) 
InspectOR/Sub-InspectoR 
Superintencienta eM) 
D~puty Superintendents (M) 
HeadClerb . 
Upper Division Clerb 
Lower Dfvtalon Clew 
SteDoIRphera . 
Steuotypiltl 
C. IJttidMIIIl ~u IrteIu4Itv Cltul IV, COIIIiItrMdu, •• . . . 
50 
Annaal No. emolumentl eo.t 
RI. Re. 
100 100X ',775 ',77,,00 
u, {I'OX 3,746 ,,61>900 
7SX 1,832 1,370400 
2 2 x 6,000 12,000 
I, I,X407 IO 70,6,0 
I, ISX3,74 6 ~,I90 
70 70X2,S48 1,78,360 
" 
7S~ 1,.804 I,3!1.300 
2 2X2,WI ,,096 
ao aoX2,0.t4 40,880 
TOTAL • 23>46.140 
or RI. 23' 46 11th •• 
FM Statistics and Intelligence Branch (Central ExciH) 
A.0f/DrJ-
Statistician IX 8,000 1,000 
B.S'I4J!-
Statistical Inveatiptor I IX ,,000 ,.000 
Head C1ezk I IX 3,746 ',746 
Upper Divitlon C1erb 2 2X2,S4B 5,096 
Lower DiviaJon ClCJD 3 IX 1,804 50412 
C. lrtdd",r.al ...... 3.000 
T01'AL 30.2S4 
or _. R,. 30,000 
For the OtJlce of the Cmtral Board of Revenue 
A. 011*-.-
Deputy Secretaf7 
Section OfIic:er! 
B. St4J!-
Aleiatant. 
StenOSt1lpher 
Upper Diviaion Clerk 
Lower DtriaIon Clerb 
C. I~ .."... _1uM,., 0Iau IY 
'r.ajf, CMflirttMdu, lie. 
TOTAL . 
I 
S 
I 
4 
U(21,ooo 
IX 7,800 
SX 3,1164 
IX 3,864 
IX 2,'48 
o4X 1,104 
66,748 
or RI.67.ooo 
RI. 24'43 lakhs. 

a1 
CusToMS 
The Bill also seeks to levy countervailing duties on all the article. 
on which Central Excise duties are newly imposed. These duties will 
have to be assessed and collected in addition to the basic duties levied 
at present. In addition, in view of the adjustments in tea export 
duties, some extra work will be thrown on the Custom Housel in 
granting refunds to exporters and making book adjustments with the 
Central Excise Department. 
These changes will necessitate the employment of some additional 
staff on the Customs side as well. The increase in &taft together with 
incidental expenses of administration, is estimated to cost RI. 2·71 
lakha per annum. 
Requirement of personn.el and jiMn.ce: 
For the field orgClniBCltion 
A. OJ/i&"'-
Aaaiatant Collector 
Principal Appraiaera 
Appraben 
B.SIIJ/f-
Euminera . . 
Upper Diviaion Clerb 
Lower Diviaion Clerks 
Stenotypist 
C. Irrt:UImtal .~ inc""" Claa 
"'fiI. ctmti"' .... , 'Ie. . . 
TOTAL • 
IV 
Annual 
No. eaoJumcata 
.. 
I l·x8,880 
2 2X9,648 
13 13X 70284 
6 6X3,s4° 
10 IOX2,S4!I 
10 lOX 1,1104 
I I-X 2,044 
Co.t 
R •• 
8,880 
19,296 
94,692 
23.040 
2!1"fBO 
_11I,Q40 
2,Q44 
130,000 
3,210472 
or Ra. 2' 20 1aItba. 
For the Office of the Central Board of Revenue 
A.Ojfiur,-
Under Secretary 
Section Oftlcer 
B. S14-
Auiatanta . 
StenOirapher. . 
Upper Division Clem 
Lower Division Clerb 
C. InciMftltIl •• ,.,., .. incW", Cltus IV 
"alf, cOlfll",Ir'II:N', lie. . 
TOTAL 
I 
I 
IX IJ.!40 
IX 7,800 
TOTAL 110. CUITOMI . 
,",,000 
!I!IP24J 
III 0ll ... 
t.!I!I,ooo.: 
2'75 Iatba. 
II. N. RAm.. 
Sacretar7. 

tOKSABHA 
BILL 
to give effect to the financial proposals of the Central 
Government for the financial year 1962-63. 
The President has, in pursuance of clauses (1) and (3) of 
article 117 and clause (1) of article 274 of the Constitution of 
India, recommended to Lok Sabha, the introduction and 
consideration of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. , 
(Skri Morar;i Desai, 
Minister of Finance.) 