am No. 35 01 lHt 1 
THE ROAD TRANSPORT CORPORATIONS 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1959 
(As INTlOJ)UCBD IN Lo~ SABHA 
ON 27TI1 APRIL, 1959) 

of 1950. 
Bill No. 35 of 1'5' 
TIlE ROAD TRANSPORT CORPORATIONS 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1959 
"(As. INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Road Transport Corporations Act, 1950. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Tenth Year of the Republic 
of Indis as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Road Transport Corporations Short title, 
(Amendment) Act, 1959. 
5 2. Section 6 of the Road Transport Corporations Act, 1950 (herein- Amen~llt 
after referred to as the principal Act) shall be re-numbered as sub- of sectlOll 6. 
section (1) thereof and after the sub-section as so re-numbered, the 
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(2) Nothing in clause (d) of sub-section (1) shall be deemed 
10 to disqualify the Chief Executive Officer or General Manager of 
a Corporation for being chosen as, or for being, a member there-
of.". 
3. In clause (c) of section 12 of the principal Act, after the words Amendment 
"General Manager", the words "or any other officer of the Corpora- of section 12. 
15 tion" shall be inserted. 
4. In sub-section (1) of section 19 of the principal Act, after Amendment 
clause (c), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:- ofsectiOll 19· 
"(d) to authorise the issue of passes to its employees and 
other persons either free of cost or at concessional rates and on 
20 such conditions as it may deem fit to impose; 

2. 
(e) to authorise the grant of refund in respect of unused 
tickets and concessional passes.". 
AaeD4ment 5. Section 26 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered as sub-
.flectlon 26. section (1) thereof and after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the 
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely: - 5 
"(2) With the previous approval of the State Government 
and the Central Government, a corporation may also borrow 
money in the open market for the purpose of meeting any 
expenditure of a capital nature.". 
~~ent 6. In section 30 of the principal Act, for the words "and the Ie 
VI lIICuon 30. balance shall be made over to the State Government for the purpose 
of road development", the following shall be substituted, namely:-
"and out of the balance such amount as may, with the 
previous approw.l of the State Government and the Central 
Government, be specified in this behalf by the Corporation, may !.5 
be utilised for financing the expansion progranunes of the Corpo-
ration and the remainder, if any, shall be made over to the 
State Government for the purpose of road development". 
:rm~~;. 7. In sub-section (3) of section 32 of the principal Act, for the 
words "A Corporation may sanction", the words "Subject to such 2.0 
conditions and restrictions as may be specified in this behalf by the 
State Government, a Corporation may sanction" shall be substituted. 
~!::~:,i:. 8. For section 33 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be Bubstituted, namely:-
Account. 
aDd AacHt. 
1C33. (1) The Corporation shall maintain proper accounts 25 
and other records IQJld prepare an annual statement of accounts 
including the profit and loss account and the balance sheet in 
such form as may be prescribed by the State Government in 
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of 
India. 
(2) The accounts of a Corporation shall be audited annually 
by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or his nominee 
and any expenditure incurred by him in connection with such 
audit shall be payable by the Corporation to the Comptroller 
30 
and Auditor-General of India. 35 
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any 
person appointed by him in connection with the audit of the 
accounts of a Corporation shall have the same rights, privileges 
and authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller 

5 
10 
3 
and Auditor-General of India has in connection with the audit of 
the Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the 
right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected 
vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any 
of the offices of the Corporation. 
(4) The accounts of the Corporation as certified by the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any person 
appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report 
thereon shall be forwarded annually to the State Government; 
and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before 
the Legislature of the State.". 
9. In section 35 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the Am~nL of IleCtlon 35 . following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(3) The State Government shall cause the annual report 
IS referred to in sub-section (2) to be laid before the Legislature 
of the State.". 
10. In section 37 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the :t::=~. 
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(3) Every notification issued under this section together 
20 with a report on the circumstances leading to its issue shall be 
laid before the Legislature of the Stete, as soon as may be, 
after it is issued.". 
11. Section 41 of the principal Act shall be omitted. 
12. In sub-section (2) of section 44 of the principal Act,- Amendment 
(a) for clause (j), the following clause shall be substituted, ofaectlOD44. 
2S namely:-
"(j) the form in which the annual statement of BCCOunts 
shall be prepared;"; and 
(b) clause (k) shall be omitted. 
iO 1. In sub-section (2) of section 45 of the principal Act, after "pwn4mmt 
clause ( c), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely: _ of lOotIoa 45. 
"(d) the issue of passes to the employees of the CorporaUu 
and other persons under section 19; 
(e) the grant of refund in respect of unused tickets and 
35 concessional passes under section 19.". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Road Transport Corporations Act, 1950 (64 of 1950) was 
enacted to enable the State Governments to set up road transport 
corporations with the object of providing an efficient, adequate, 
economical and co-ordinated system of road transport services. 
Certain difficulties bave been experienced by the Corporations set 
up under this Act in the efficient discharge of their functions. The 
Bill aims at removing these difficulties. 
2. Some of the important amendments proposed in the Bill are 
as follows:-
(i) In view of the all round expanding economy of the 
country, Road Transport Corporations like other organisations 
require additional capital for their development projects. 
Since the State and Central Governments are not always in a 
position to meet the increased financial requirements of these 
Corporations, section 26 of the Act is being amended so as to 
authorise the Corporations to borrow money in open market 
for meeting expenditure of a capital nature also. 
(ii) Section 30 of the Act is being amended to enable the 
Corporations to utilize their profits also for financing their 
expansion programmes with the approval of the Central and 
State Governments. 
, (iii) Under section 33, the accounts of a Corporation are to 
be audited by an auditor appointed by the State Government. 
There is no obligation on the part of the State Governments 
to get their accounts audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India. Since the Central Government has financial 
interest in the Corporations set up under the Act, it is consi-
dered qesirable that the accounts of the Corporations are 
Qudited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General. Section 33 
is being suitably amended to achieve this object. 
RAJ BAHADUR. 
Nzw Da.mj 
The 22nd April, 1959. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE ROAD TRANSPORT CORPORATIONS ACT, 1950 
(No. 64 OF 1950) 
'" '" '" '" '" '" 
CHAPTER II 
ROAD TRANSPORT CORPORATIONS 
'" '" '" '" '" '" 
12. A Corporation may, from time to time, by resolution passed Po~r to lip-
t ti ~~ 
a a mee ng- mitteea anel 
delegate 
(a) appoint committees of its members for performing functions. 
such functions as may be specified in the resolution; 
(b) delegate to any such committee or to the Chairman or 
Vice-Chairman, subject to such conditions and limitations, if any, 
as may be specified in the resolution, such of its powers and 
duties as it may think fit; 
(c) authorise the Chief Executive Officer or General 
Manager, subject to such conditions and limitations, if any, as 
may be specified in the resolution to exercise such powers and 
perform such duties as it may deem necessary for the efficient 
day to day administration of its business. 
'" '" '" '" '" 
CHAPTER IV 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
'" '" '" '" '" 
30. After making provision for payment of interest and dividend Disposal of 
under section 28 and for depreciation, reserve and other funds under net profits. 
section 29, a Corporation may utilize such percentage of its net 
annual profits as may be specified in this behalf by the State Gov-
enunent for the provision of amenities to the passengers using the 
road transport services, welfare of labour employed by the Corpora-
tion and for such other purposes as may be prescribed with the 
5 

o 
previous approval of the Central Government, and the balance shall 
be made over to the State Government for the purpose of road 
development. 
* * * * * 
Bwlget. 32. 
Accounts 
and audit. 
* * * * * 
(3) A Corporation may sanction any re-appropriation within 
the grant from one head of the expenditure to another or from a 
provision made for one scheme to that in respect of another. sub-
ject to the condition that the aggregate budget grant is not exceed-
ed. 
* * * * 
33. (1) Eevery Corporation shall cause to be maintained such 
books of account and other books in relation to its accounts in such 
form and in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(2) The accounts of a Corporation shall be audited by the audi-
tor appointed by the State Government at such times and in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 
(3) As soon as the accounts of a Corporation have been audited, 
the Corporation shall send a copy thereof together with a copy of 
the report of the auditor thereon to the Central Government and 
the State Government. 
• • * * 
CHAPTER V 
MISCELLANEOUS 
• • • • 
~&::'d 41. (1) A Corporation shall be deemed to be a local authority 
to be a local within the meaning of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939. " of 1939· 
authority 
:;;,ct provi- (2) The State Government may, by notification in the Official 
thI:"~:, Gazette, exempt the motor vehicles of a Corporation from the opera-
dllks. tion of the provisions of Chapter VIII of the Motor Vehicles Act, 
1939: "of 1939. 
Provided that no such notification shall be issued unless a fund 
has been established and is maintained by the Corporation in 
accordance with the rules made in that behalf under this Act for 
meeting any liability arising out of the use of any vehicle of the 
Corporation which the Corporation or any person in the employ-
ment of the Corporation may 'incur to third parties . 
• • • * 

7 
"- (1) 
• • • • 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of tluI 
following matters, namely:-
• • • • • • 
(j) the forms and the manner in which the account. of the 
Corporation shall be maintained; 
(k) the time at which, and the manner in which, the 
accounts of the Corporation shall be audited; 
• • • • 
Power to 
make rules • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
" 
further to amend the Road Transport Corporations Act, 1950. 
(Shri Raj Bahadur, 
Minister oj State in the Ministry of 
Transport and Communications.) 