TltE STATE BANK OF INDIA 
(AMENDMENT) BILL~ 1955 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABBA) 

!lUi_No:.. 35 of 1'55. 
THE STATE BANK OF INDIA (AMENDMENT) BILL, 
195j 
[As INTRODUCED IN Lox SABHA] 
It 
BILL , ~! , 
to amend the State Bank of India Act, 1955. 
BE it enac~d by Parliament in the Sixth Year Qf .~ Republic 
of India as follows: - . 
" 
'.J!. ,'- 7-,.. I 
r . 
1. This Act may be called the State Bank of India (Amendment) Short title. 
Act, 1955. 
, 2. In sub-section (1) of section 5 of the State Bank of India Act, Amen~nt 
1955 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for the words and ~~ A:~lo; 
figure "transferred to it by paragraph 2 of the First Schedule". the 195'· 
worns and figure "transferred to and vested in it under section 6" 
shall be substituted. 
10 3. In section 6 of the principal Act, for sub-section (3), the fonow- Amen~ment 
ing sub-section shall be substituted, namely: """7 ~C:e:;~f 6, 
IS 
"(3) Unless otherwise expressly provided by or under this I9SS· 
Act, all contracts, deeds, bonds, agreements, powers of 
attorney, grants of legal representation and other instru-
ments of whatever nature subsisting or having effect 
immediately before the appointed day and to which the 
Imperial Bank is a party or which are in favour of the 
Imperial Bank shall be of as full force and effect against 
or in favour of the State Bank, as the case may be. and 
may be enforced as fully and effectually as if instead of 
the Imperial Bank the State Bank had been a party thereto 
or as if they had been issued in favour of the State Bank.". 

2 
Amcndme.nt 4. In sub-section (3) of section 16 of the principal Act, after the 
~~. A:~~oof words "in existence". the words "in India" shall ·be inserted. 
1955· 
Substitution 5. For section 51 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
of neW ~OD be substituted namely:-for secbon 51 • 
in Act 23 of 
1955· 
Requirements 
of fOICign 1a." 
to be com-
~Ued with 
10 certain 
c:aael. 
"51. If, according to the la~s of any country outside India. 3 
the provisions of this Act by themselves are not etJective 
to transfer to and vest in the State Bank any asset or 
liability which forms part of the undertaking of the 
Imperial Bank and which is situate in that country, the 
. Imperial Bank shall take all such steps as may be requir- 10 
ed. by the law~ of tha~ country for the purpose of etJect~~ 
ot 'perfeCting such trartsfer and' vesting, and in connection 
therewith the Imperial Bank may realise any asset and 
discharge any liability and transfer the net proceeds thE're-
of to the State Bank.". l' 
Insertion of 6. After section 53 of the prinCipal Act, the following sections 
new seCtiODi shall be inserted, namely:-
54.55.5 6 ....... 8n4 57 In no.i'o 
XLVII 
of 1920• 
Amendment 
o fAct 
XLVII of 
1920: 
No proc:ee-
~ t~ 
lie Ul India 
apiDlt 
Imperial 
Bank after 
appointed. 
day. 
References 
to the Impe-
rial 
" Or" ..' 
''54. The' Imperial Bank of India Act, 1920, shall be amended 
in the manner directed in the Fifth Schedule. . 
55. On and from the appointed day, no person shall make any 20 
claim or demand or take any proceeding in India against 
the Imperial Bfank or a director, officer or otber employ~ 
thereof in his capacity as such direc~or, officer or employee 
except i~ so far as may be necessary for enforcing! ~e 
provisions of this Act or except in so far as it relates to 2S 
any offence committed by any such director, officer or 
. employee. 
XLVII 
1920. 
Bank. the 
Bank of 
Bc:Dp. etc •• 
in Other 
lawi. 
56. On and from the appointed day, any reference to the 
Imperial Bank or to the Bank of Bengal, the Bank of 
Madras or the Bank of Bombay in any law (other than 30 
this Act or the Imperial Bank of India Act, ·1920) or in XLVII of 
Dinolution 
of Imperial 
Bank. etc. 
any contract or other instrument shall, except as other- 1920. 
wise provided in any general or special order made by the .. 
, Central Government, be deemed to be a reference to the 
State Bank. 35 
57. (1) On such day as,the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, 
the Imperial Bank shall stand dissolved, and the Imperial 
Bank of India Act, 1920, shall stand repealed. XLVII of 1920. 

3 
(2) On the day specified in the notification under sub-section 
(1), the State Bank shall pay to the Reserve Bank a sum 
of ten lakhs of rupees." 
(3) If, on the day specified in the notification under su1rsection 
, (1). the Imperilll Bank has in its possession or custody any 
assets created on or after the appointed day, such assets 
shall be' diSposed of in accordimce with the directions 
issued by the' Central Government in this behalf.". 
7. After the Fourth Schedule to the principal Act" the following Insertion of 
lei) Schedule shall be added: - r:A~C:;~t 
15 
20 
"THE FIFTH SCHEDULE 
[See section 54] 
AMENDMENT TO THE IMPERIAL BANK OF INDIA ACT, 1920. 
Sectio7t 2.-(a) Omit clauses (c). (d), (1), (g) and (ii). 
(b) For clauses W. (k), (1) and (m), substitute-
"(j) 'State Bank' means the State Bank of India con-
stituted under the State Bank of India Act, 1955.". 
Section 3.-(a) In sub·section (2), for the words "Every 
persdn who, immediately before the appointed day, was 
registered as a shareholder or as a holder of stock in any 
of the Presidency Banks, together with such other persons 
as may from time to time become shareholders in the 
Bank in accordance with the provisions of this Act. 
shall, as long as they are shareholders in the Bank,", 
substitute the following, namely: -"The persons who for 
the time being are holding office as chairman, vice-chair--
man and managing director of the State Bank shall". 
(I» For sulHJection (3), substitute-
"(3) The capital, of the Bank shall consist of ten lakhs 
of rupees which shall be paid to the Bank by the 
Reserve Bank of India on the 1st day of July, 
1955/'. 
(c) Omit sub-section (4). 
Omit sections 4, 5, 6, 7, 13, 13A, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19 and 20. 
19.5.5. 
3' For section 23 substitute the following:-
"23., The Bank shall have its Head Office in Bombay.". Head Office 
of the Bank. 

General 
superinten-
dence of 
affairs and 
business of 
Bank. 
Persons 
authorised 
to act on 
behaJfof 
Bank. 
4-
I'orsection 24, substitute-... 
"24. (1) The general superintendence of the affairs and. 
business 'of the Bank shall be entrusted to the chair-
man for the time being of the State Bank who may 
exercise all powers and do all such acts and things 5 
as may be exercised or done by the Bank or which, 
immediately before the 1st day of July, 1955, were 
required or permitted to be exercised or done by the 
Central Board or by any Local Board of the Bank, and 
accordingly references to the Central Board, if any, 10 
in this Act or in any Regulations made thereunder 
shall be construed as references to the chairman for 
the time being of the State Bank. 
(2) Any of the powers or functions conferred on the chair-
man of the State Bank by sub-section (1) may be IS 
exercised or performed by any such officer or other 
employee of the State Bank as may be authorised by 
the chairman by general or special order.". 
Omit sections 25, 26, 27, 28 and 29. 
Section 31.-In sub-section (2), omit clauses (a) to (j). 20 
Section 32.-0mit sub-section (2). 
After section 32, insert the following:-
"32A. (1) .Every person (other than the Managing Director 
and J)eputy Managing Director) who, immediately 
before the 1st day of July, 1955. had authority confer- zs 
red by any notification issued under Regulation 51 of 
Schedule II or under bye-law 26 made under section 
31 or under any power of attorney granted by the 
Bank to sign any instrument or perform or do any 
act or thing for and on behalf of the Bank, shall, on So 
and from the aforesaid date, continue to have the 
same authority, and shall not, by reason of anything 
contained in the State Bank of India Act, 1955, 23 of 1955 
be deemed to have vacated any office or employment 
held by him ,in the Bank immediately before the 3S 
aforesaid date in connection with which such authority, 
had been conferred on him, but the Bank may at any 
time revoke any such authority. 

... of 19S5. 
10 
I, 
.5 
S 
(2) Without prejudice to any other provision contained in 
this Act, the Bank may, by power of attorney, em-
power any person for and on behalf of the Bank to 
execute any instrument or to exercise any right or to 
perform or do any act or thing which may be 
executed, exercised, performed or done by the Bank.". 
In Schedule 11,-
(a) omit Regulations 1 to 48; 
(b) for Regulation 49, substitute-
"49. The common seal of the Bank shall not be affixed CommOD 
to any instrument except in the presence of the seal. 
chairman or the vice-chairman or a managing 
director of the State Bank, who shall sign his name 
to the instrument in token of his presence, and 
such signing shall be independent of the !.igning 
of any person who may sign the instrument as a 
witness, and unless so signed, suah instrument 
shall be of no validity."; 
(c) in Regulation 51, for the words "The Managing 
Director and Deputy Managing Director, the secre-
taries and such other employees", substitute the 
words "Such employees", and omit the words "and to 
execute proxies to vote at· meetings on behalf of 
shareholders from whom the Bank holds general 
powers-of-attorney" occurring at the end; 
(d) to Regulation 52. add the following:-
"Provided that nothing conta:ned in this Regulation 
shall have effect in relation to the holding of any 
dIice by, or the employment of any such person 
m. the State Bank.": 
(e) in Regulation 54(2). om:t "signed by a majority of the 
Directors"; 
(f) omit Regulations 55. 56. 57. 58. 60(2). 60A. 61. 62. 63 
and 64; 
{g) for Regulation 65. substitute the following :--
"65. A notice may be served on the Bank by leaving it Seryice of 
at. or sending it by post to. the Head Office of the ~~~~~ on 
Bank.". 
8. The amendments made by sections 2 to 7 shall be 
40 always to have been made in the principal Act. 
deemed Amendmenr. 
detm'!d al-
ways to have 
been made 
in the pdQ. 
9. The State Bank of India (Amendment) Ordinance. 1955, 
hereby repealed. 
dpal Act .. 
is Repeal of 
Ordinance 
" or T9SS. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The scheme of the State Bank of India A~t, 1955 (23 of 1955). 
envisaged the State Bank of India coming into existence and the 
Imperial Bank of India going out of existence simultaneously on the 
"appointed day" (being the day notified in this behalf by the Central 
Government) and provided for the automate transfer of all the 
assets and liabilities of the undertaking of the Imperial Bank of 
India from that institution to the State Bank of India. While there 
was no difficulty about such transfer so far as the assets and liabili-
ties of the Imperial Bank situated in India were concerned, Govern-
ment were advised that it was doubtful whether such an automatic 
transfer of assets and liabilities made by ~virtue of an Indian law 
from one corporate body to another would be recognised and given 
effect to in foreign countries in respect of the assets and liabilities 
of the foreign branches of the Imperial Bank of India. In the light 
of the advice obtained O!l. this legal issue from counsel in the 
different. foreign countries concerned, it was decided that it would 
be advisable to amend the scheme of the Act and to provide for the 
continued existence of the knperial Bank of India as a corporate 
entity b~y::>nd the "appointed d3.y" to enable it to make over its busi-
nes§ in its foreign bran~h~s by execution of documentary transfers, if 
necessary, to the corresponding branches of the State Bank of India 
t·') be opened there. It was therefore necessary to amend the State 
Bank of India Act, 1955, alld as this had to be done prior to the 1st 
of J~ly, 1955, which had been notified as the "appointed day" under 
the State Bank of India Act, the State Bank of India (Amendment) 
Ordinance, 1955 (4 of 1955)·was promulgated on the 23rd June, 1955. 
The present Bill seeks to convert that Ordinance into an Act. 
A. C. GUHA. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 231'd July, 1955. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE STATE BANK OF !Noh. ACT, 1955 
(No. 23 OF 1955) 
* • • • 
5. (1) The issued .capital of the State Bank shall, on the appointed ~~~~J. 
dey, be five crores, sixty two lakhs and fifty thousand rupees divided 
into five lakhs, sixty two thousand and five hundred shares, all of 
which shall, on th~ appointed day, stand allotted to the Reserve 
Bank in lieu of the shares of the Imperial Bank transferred to it 
by paragraph 2 of the First SchedJ.lle. 
* • • • 
CHAPTER III 
TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKING OF THE IMPERIAL BANK TO STATE BANK 
6. ( 1) . Transfer 
of assets and 
* • • • liabilities of 
the Imperial 
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in section 7, ~=~ 
all contracts and other instruments of whatever nature, subsisting 
or having efect immedia'tely before the appointed day and to 
which the Imperial Bank is a party, shall be of as full force and 
effect against or in favour of the State Bank, as the case may be, 
and may be enforced as fully and effectually as if instead of the 
Imperial Bank the State Bank had been a party thereto. 
* • • • 
CHAPTER V 
MANAGEMEN'r 
16. (1). 
* • • • 
(3) The State Bank shall m~intain as its branches or agencies 
all branclles or agencies of the Imperial Bank which were in exist-
ence immediately before the appointed day, and no such branch 
may be closed without the previous approval of the Reserve Bank. 
* • • • 
Offices, 
branchealand 
agencies. 
: 51. {l) On the appointed day, the Imperial Bank shall be dis- Dilaolution 
$olved and thereafter no person shall make any claim or demand ~ ~~. 
7 

end repeal 
of Act 
XLVII of 
1920. 
8 
or take any proceeding against that Bank or a director, officer or 
employee thereof in hi$ capacity as such director, officer or employee 
except in so far as may be necessary for enforcing the provisions 
of this Act or except in so far as it relates to any offence committed 
by any such director, officer or other empl()yee. 
(2) On the appointed day, the Imperial Bank of India Act, 1920, XLVII of 
shall stand repealed. ' 1920. 
(3) Without prejudice to the other provisions contained in this' 
Act and notwithstanding the repeal of the Imperial Bank of India ~~I1 vC 
Act, 1920, any reference to the Imperial Bank or to the Bank of 
Bengal; the Bank of Madras or the 'Bank of Bombay in any law, 
notification or in any contract or other instrument shall, on and from 
the appointed day, be deemed to be a reference to the State Bank . 
• • • • 
EXTRACTS FROM THE IMPERIAL BANK OF INDIA ACT, 1920 
(XLVII OF 1920) 
• • * • • • 
CHAPTER I 
&tabH·1"".,t 
oftbe lmpe-
rial Bank. 
Establishment and Incorporation of the Imperial Bank of India. 
3. (1). 
• • • • 
(2) Every person who, immediately before the ap60inted day, 
was registered as a shareholder or as a holder of stock in any of 
the Presidency Banks, together with such other persons as may 
from time to time become shareholders in the Bank in accordance 
with the provisions of this Act, shall, as long as they are share-
holders in the Bank, constitute a body corporate with perpetual 
succession and a common seal under the name of the Imperial 
Bank of India and shall sue and be sued in that name. 
(3) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the capital of the Bank 
shall consist of one hundred and twelve millions and five hundred 
thousand rupees divided into shares of five hundred rupees each. 
(4) The liability of the shareholders of the Bank sha. be limited 
to the amount Dot fully paid up on their shares. 
• • • • 
CHAPTER V 
Management 
• • 
tI. The- Bank shall have local head oftlces in Calcutta, Madras 
aBd Bombl'Y, and at such other places. in lDdia or. Pakistan' or iD 
Burma as the Bank may determine. 

• 
14. The lenerai superintendence of the aftairs and business: of Central 
the Bank shall be entrusted to a Central Board of Directors herein- Bos!'d. 
after in this Act referred to as the "Central Board", who may exer-
cise all powers and do all such acts and things as may be exercised 
or done by the Bank and are not by this Act expressly directed or 
required to be done by the Bank in general meeting . 
• 
• • 
• • • 
SCHEDULE II 
REGULATIONS OF THE BANK , 
(See sections 22) 
• • 
The Seals 
• 
• • 
41. (1) The common seal of the Bank shall be affixed to any Clmmon 
instrument except in the presence of at least three Directors includ- scal. 
ing the Managing Director or Deputy Managing Director, who 
shall sign their names to the instrument in token of their presence, 
and such signing shall be independent of the signing of any person 
who may sign the instrument as a witness. Unless so signed as 
aforesaid such instrument shall be of no validity. ' 
(2) The Bank shall have for use by the Local Boards at Cal-
cutta, Madras· and aombay, and may have for the use of other 
Local Boards established under this Act, official seals which shall be 
facsimiles of the common seal of the Bank with the addition of the 
name of the local head office where it is to be used. 
(3) The official seal shall be affixed to the certificates issued in 
respect of any shares entered in the branch registers kept at those 
places and may be used for such other purposes as may be pres-
cribed. 
(4) An instrument to which an official seal is duly affixed shall 
bind the bank as if it had been sealed with the common seal of 
the Bank. 
(5) An official seal shall not be affixed to any instrument except 
in the presence of at least two members of the Local Board and 
the secretary or deputy secretary who shall sign their names to 
the instrument in token of their presence and such signing shall 
be independent of the signing of any person who may sign the 
instrument as a witness. Unless so signed as aforesaid such instru-
ment shall be of no validity. 
* • • • • 
51. The Managing Director and Deputy Managing Director, the Account •• 
secretaries and such other employees of the Bank as the Central C:n-:d 
Board may authorise in this behalf by notification in the official of Bank by 
Gazette are hereby severally empowered, for and on behalf of the b:°~igne~ 

16 • 
Dank, te endorse aad transfer pl"OlDissory notes, stock-receipts, 
sJDck..debmrt~ shares, securities and doeuments of title to goods, 
standing in -the name of or held by the Bank, and to draw, accept 
and endorse bills of exchange, bank-post..bills. and. letters of credit, 
in the current and authorised 'business of the Bank, to sign all 
other accounts, receipts and documents connected with such busi-
ness and to execute proxies to vote at meetings on behalf of share-
holders from whom the Bank holds general powers of attorney. 
OtBcen for- 52. No Managing Director, secretary, inspector, manager, or 
= i': accountant in the service of the Bank, and, without the previous 
other sanction of the Board, no khazanchi. cashier or shroff in the service 
~=:~ of the Bank and no agent, at any branch or agency of the Bank, 
Books to 
be balanc-
ed twice a 
year. 
shall engage in any other banking or commercial business, either 
, em his own account or as agent for any other pe1"8On 01" persons, or 
siren act as broker or agent tor the sale or purchase of GovernmeDt 
or other securities. 
* • • • • 
Accou.nU and Dividends' 
Sf. (1) 
* • • • • 
. (2) A statement 6f the balance at eVf!rY sueh period signed 
. by a rIlAjority' ot the Directors shall be forthwith sent to the Central 
Government. 
* • • • • 
~~~ , 65. A notice may be served on the Bank by leaving it at, or 
.....,OD....... Ba k senqing' it by post to, any local head omce of the n. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to amend the State Bank of India Act, 19$5, 
GIPD-LAD-SIS LS-29-7-S.5-IOOO 
(Shri Arun Chandra GuM, 
Minister oj Reoenue and 
Defence Expenditure.) 