I .... , As INTRODUCED IN LOB: SAIBA ON 
ilia •• "1171 
"1. .... 4 "... e 
THE LABOUR PROVIDENT FUND LAWS (AMENDMENT) 
BltLL, -I en,I 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Coal Mines Provident Fund cll~d Bonus Schemel 
Aot, lt48, And the Employees'Provideut F"nds Act, 1952 . 
... ;it ·erw:~ by Pallliament in the Twenty.,a,ecou~ ~ear <1f the 
a.u~lU:,of llHlia .. fQUows:-
J. This Act tpay be c~Ued th,e LaboW' Provident F.und ,Laws (Amend. Short 
tnent) Act, 1971. title. 
S ,Z •• In ·i;Qe longtiUe to the .CoalMilles P.fo.vi~nt Eun4 aJ1d Bonus Amend. 
f6 of 19f8. Schemes Act, 1948 (hereinafter referred to as the Coal !4in~s Ac:U ,. titer ment of 
the words "Provident Fund Scheme", the words ", a Family Pension Jon,tltle. 
Sche~' shall be inserted. 
3. In the preamble to th..! Coal Mines Act, the first paragraptl s~~ be Amend. 
10 omitted. ment of 
preal1JbJl. . 
•. In sue...ectlcm (l) of Eeetion 1 ofthc Coal Mines Act, ,.tter the 
WOI'ds '~ProyideDt ·j"und", the words ", Family ·PeMien" shall be ~ted. 
S . .In .section 2 of the Coal Mines ~ct, after clause (e), the following 
clause shall be inserte~, namely:-
IS C (ee) "Family Pension Fund" means the Family Pension Fund 
estabUshed under the Coal Miaes Family Perwion Seheme kamed 
under 8ub-section (1) of section 3E;'. 
Amend· . 
ment ·of . 
section 1. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 2. 

Amend-
m@!lt of 
.ection 3A. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 3C. 
Insertion 
ot new 
aectionl 
3E and 
3F. 
Coal 
Mines 
Family 
Pension 
Scheme. 
Speelal 
l1'ant by 
Central 
Govern-
ment. 
Amend-
ment of 
lection I 
.' ,'1""' . " 
2 
•. In section 3A of the Coal Mines Act,-
(a) in sub-section (3), after the words "The Board shall", the 
words, figure and letter ", subject to the provisions of section 3E," 
shall be inserted; 
(b) in sub-section (4). for the words "the Scheme aforesaid", the S 
words "the Coal Mines Provident Fund Scheme and the Coal Mines 
Family Pension Scheme" shall be substituted. 
T. In sub-section (3) of section 3C of the Coal Mines Act, after the 
words "Coal Mines Provident Fund Scheme", the wordll "and the Coal 
Mines Family Pension Scheme" shall be inserted. 10 
8. After section 3D of the Coal Mines Act, the following sections shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"3E. (1) The Central Government may. by notification in the 
Official Gazette, frame a scheme to be called the Coal Mines Family 
Pension Scheme for the purpose of providing family pension and life IS 
assurance benefits to such employees as are covered by the Coal 
Mines Provident Fund Scheme. 
(2) There shall be established, as soon as may be after the fram-
o , lng of the aforesaid Scheme, a Family Pension Fund into which shall 
·'be paid from time to time in respect of every such employee-
(a) such portion, not exceeding one-fourth, of the amount 
payable under sub-section (1) of section lOD as the employer's 
contribution as well as the employee's contribution, as may be 
specified in the said Scheme, and 
20 
(b) such sums, being not less than the aggregate of the amount 25 
payable in pursuance of clause (a) out of the employer's ~ontribu­
tion under sub-section (1) of section 10D and an amount equivalent 
to one-sixteenth of the employer's contribution under that sub-
, section in respect of sueh employee, as the Central Govemment 
may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this 30 
behalf, s~ify. 
, (3) The Family Pension Fund shall vest in and be administered 
by the Board. 
(4) Any scheme framed under the provisions of sub-section (1) 
may provide for all or any of the matters speCified in the Second 35 
Schedule. 
SF. The Central Govemment shall, after due appropriation made 
by Parliament by law in this behalf, pay such further SUJIMI as may be 
detennined by it into the Family Pension Fund to meet all the expenses 
In ,connection with the administration of the Coal Mines Family 40 
Pension Scheme other than the expenses towards the cost of any 
beneftts provided by or under the said Scheme.". 
t. In sub-section (2) of section 5 of the Coal Mines Act, for the words 
"Second Schedule", the words ClThird Sched,ule',' shall be substituted. 
~ 

· § ., .. 
10. in section 6 of the Coal Mines Act, after sub-section (2), the fol- Amend. 
lowing sub-section shall be inserted, nameIY: _ ment of 
section 8. 
5 
to 
IC (3) The provisions of sub-section (1) and sub-section (2) shall. 
so far as may be, apply in relation to the family pension or any other 
amount payable under the Coal Mint:s F'amBy Pension Scheme as 
they apply in relation to any amount payable out of the Fund.". 
11. The Second Schedule to the Coal Mines Act shall be re-numbered 
as the Third Schedule and before the Third Schedule as so re-numbered , , 
the following Schedule shall be inserted, namely: - ' 
"THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(See section ag) 
MAT'rERS TO BE PROVIDEb FOR IN 'tHE COAL MINES F' AMIty PENSION SCHEM! 
1. The employees or class of employees to whom the Coal Mines 
Family Pension Scheme shall apply and the time within which option 
15 to join that Scheme shall be exercised by those employees to whom 
the said Scheme does not apply. 
2. Subject to the provisions of, scetion 3E(2), the portion of em-
ployer's and employee's contribution which may be credited to the 
Family Pension Fund and the manner in which it may be credited. 
20 3. The contribution by the Central Government to the Family 
Pension Fund and the manner in which such contribution is to be 
made. ' 
4. The manner in which the accounts of the Family Pension Fund 
shalJ be kept and the investmi2nt of moneys belonging to the Family 
25 Pension Fund with the Central Government at a rate of interest 
which shall not be less than five and a half per centum per annum. 
5. The form in which an employee shan furnish particulars about 
himself and his family whenever required. 
6. The nomination of a person to receive the assurance amount 
30 due to the employee after his death and the cancellation or variation 
of such nomination. 
7. The registers and records to he maintained in respect of em-
ployees, the form or design of any identity card, token or disc for 
the purpose of identifying any employee, or his nominee or a member 
3'5 of 'his family entitled. to receive the pel\Sion. 
8. The scales of family pension and the assurance amount. 
9. The mode of disbursement of family penSion and the arrange-
ments to be entered into with such disbursing agencies as may be 
specified for the purpose. 
40 10. The manner in which the expenNeS incurred in connection with 
the administration of the Coal MInes Family Pension Scheme may b. 
paid by the Central Government to the Board. 
Inlertion 
of new 
Second 
SchedUle. 

Amend-
ment of 
Ibnt 
tUll!. 
Amend-
ment .«11 
iectitsn 10 
Amend-
ment ot 
section 2. 
Amend-
ment ot 
aection 
5A. 
Amend-
ment or 
section 
5D. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
5E. 
Insertion 
of new 
sections 
6A and 
&B. 
Em-
ploFees' 
Family 
Pension 
Scheme. 
II 
oj 
~ 
H. Any othet matter wlu~k is to be provided' 'for in. ~ Coai 
Mines Family Pension seh~e or Which may be neeenaty or ·p1"'<*er 
for the purpose of implementing the Coal Mines Family Pension 
SChem~.". 
it. hi the lijhg title to the Eniploy~s' Provident Flinds Act, 1952 
(hereb1after referred to as the Provident Funds Act), after the words 
"l>roVident funds", the wordi "and family pension fund" shall be inserted. 
5 19 of ]952. 
ft. In seetion ldf the Pi'dviderit Funds ~ti-
(a) in sub-section (1), after the words "Provident Funds", the 
words uand rarrtily Pension Fund" shall be inserted; 
(b) the proviso to sub-section (5) shall be omitted. 
It. In lection 2 of the Provident Funds Act,-
(a) after clause (g), the follOWing clauses shall be inserted, 
Ilamely:-
10 
• (gg) "Family Pension Fund" means the Family PehSion Fund IS 
established under the ramily Pen~ion SCheme; 
(ggg) "Family Pension Scheme" means the Employees' Family 
Paion 8eh4!'Me ftamed under section SAj'; 
(b) for clause (1), the following clause shall be substituted, 
nalrlely: - 20 
'(1) "SchAm\'e" means the Empoloyees' Provident Fund Scheme "-
framed under seetion 5.'. 
15. In section 5A of the Provident Funds Act,-
(a) in sub-section (3), after the words "The Central Board shall", 
the words, figure and letter ", subject to the provisions of sectkm 6A," 25 
ehall be inserted; 
(b) in sub-section (4), after the words "of the Scheme", the words 
"and the Family Pension Scheme" shall be inserted. 
H. Ia IMlb~section (.I) of section 5D of the .Provident Fliftds Act, after 
the words "the ~heme"J the words "aud the Famlly Pension Seheme" 30 
shall be inserted. 
, 'l.!J. In section DE of the Provident Funds Act, after the words "the 
ScJtetne", the worcis "and the Family Pension Scheme" shall be inserted. 
18. After section 6 of tile ·.Provident }o'unds Act, the· folloWing 'leCtiorw 
shall be inserted, namely:,- 35 
. "6A. (1) The Cehtral Government may, by notification I in .the 
Oftlcial Gazette, frame a scheme to be called the l!:znployeelf Family 
Pension Scheme for the purpose of providIng family pension ond life 
&SIurance benefits to the employees of any establishment or class of 
establishments to which this Ad appli~8. 40 

,'-
. (2) There shall be established, as soon as may be after the fram-
~ of the Family Pension Scheme, a Family Pension FuDd into which 
. ~al1 be paid from time to time in 1'espect of every such employee-
(a) such portion, not exceedjng one-fourth, of the amou~t pay. 
5 able under section 6 as contribution by the employer as well sa 
the employee, as may be specified in the Family Pension Scheme, 
(b) such sums as are payable by the employer of an exempted 
establishment under sub-section (6) of section 17, and 
(c) such sums, beiJIg not less thn the amount payable in 
rO puHIIIIDGe ., clause (a) OIIt of tbe employers eoatribution under 
1lMi0D 6, lIS ·dIe Centra. Govemment may. after due appropria. 
don made Ity Parliament by law in this behalf, specify. 
(3) The Family Pension Fund shall vest in and be administered 
by the Central Board. 
IS (4) The FaMily Pension SCheme may provide for all or any of the 
2S 
matters specified in Schedule In. 
(5) The Family Pension Scheme may provide that any of its pro-
visions shall take effect either prospectively or retrospectively on such 
date as may be specified in this behalf in that Scheme. 
6B. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made 
by Parliament by law in this beha", pay such further stUDS as may 
be determined by it into the Family PensioD Fund to meet all the 
expenses in ceanet!tioa with tile .dmiBistration of the Family PeDsion 
Sdhmte other tlnm the expenses tow.nls the cost ef any 'onuftts pro-
vided by or under the said Scheme.". 
Special 
,rant by 
Central 
Govern-
ment. 
19. In sub-section (1) of section 7 of the Provident Funds Act, for the Amend-
words "any Scheme framed under this Act", the words "the Scheme ment of 
or the Family Pension Scheme, as the case may be" shall be substituted. section 7. 
20. In sub-section (1) of section 7A of the Provident Funds Act, for the 
30 words "or of the Scheme", the words ", the Scheme or the Family Pension 
Scheme, as the case may be," shall be SUbstituted. 
21. In clause (b) of section 8 of the Provident Funds Act, for the words 
and figures "under section 17", the wordfl and figures "under section 17 
or in respect of the contribution payable by him towards the Family 
35 Pension Scheme under the said section 17" shall be substituted. 
22. In section 10 of the Provident Funds Act, after sub-section (2), the 
follOWing sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(3) The provisions of sub-section (1) and sub-section (2) shall, 
so far as may be, apply in relation to the family pension or any other 
40 amount payable under the Family Pension Scheme as they apply in 
relation to any amount payable out of the Fund.". 
23. In clause (b) of section 11 of the Pl·ovident Funds Act, after the 
words "under the rules of the provident fund,", the words, brackets and 
figures "any contribution payable by him towi.trds the Family Pension 
45 Fund under SUb-section (6) of section 17," shall be inserted. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
7A. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 8. 
Amend-
ment ot 
section 
10. 
Amend· 
ment of 
Metlon 11. 

Amend-
ment of 
section 
13. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
14. 
Amend-
mentor 
section 
14A. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
1'1. .. 
6 
24. in section 13 of the Provident Funds Act,"-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "or of any Scheme". the 
words Ie, the Scheme or the Family Pension Scheme" shall be substi-
tuted; 
(b) sUD-section (2A) shall be re-numbered as sub-section (2B) S 
and before sub-section (2B) as so re-numbered, the following sub-
section shall be inserted, namely:-
U(2A) Any Inspect·or appointed under sub"section (1) may, 
for the purpose of inquiring into the COrI'ectness of any informa-
tion furnished in connection with the Family Pension Scheme or 10 
for the purpose of ascertaining whether any of the provisions of 
this Act ~r of the Family Pension Scheme have been complied 
with in respect of an e3tabllshment to whith the Family Pension 
Scheme applies, exercise all or any cf the powers conferred on 
him under clause (a), clause (b), clause (e) or clause (d) of sub- IS 
section (2) ."; 
(c) in sub-section (2B) as so re-numbered, after the words, 
brackets and figure "under sub-section (2) ", the words, brackets, 
figure and letter "or under sub-section (2A), as the case may be," 
shall be inserted. 20 
25. In section 14 of the Provident Funds Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "or under any Scheme", 
the words It, the Scheme or the Family Pension Scheme" shall be sub-
stituted; 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words "A Scheme framed under 25 
this Act", the words "The Scheme or the Family Pension Scheme" 
Shall be substituted; 
(c) in sub-section (3), for the words "or under any Scheme", the 
words ", the Scheme or the Family Pension Scheme" shall be substi-
tuted. 30 
26. In section 14A of the Provident Funds Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "or the Scheme made there-
under", the words, "the Scheme or the Family Pension Scheme" shall 
be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words "or the Scheme thereunder", 3S 
the words ", the Scheme or the Family Pension Scheme" shall be sub-
stituted 
27. In section 17 of the Provident Funds Act.-
(a) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be insert-
ed, namely: - 40 
II (lA) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, and subject to such conditions as may be speci-
fied in the notification, exempt from the operation of all or any of 
the provisions of the Family Pension Scheme, Rnyestablishment 
if the employees of such establishment are in enjoyment of bene- 45 
fits in the nature of family pension, and the Central Government 

7 
1s of opinion that such benefits are on the whole not less favour-
able to such employees than the benefits provided under this Act 
or the Family Pension Scheme in relation to employees in any 
other establishment of a similar character."; 
S (b) in sub-section (4) ,-
10 
IS 
ao 
(i) in clause (a), the word "and" occurring at the end shall 
be omitted; 
(it) after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(aa) in the case of an exemption granted under sub-
section (1A), with any of the conditions imposed under that 
sub-section; and"; 
(c) for sub-section (5), the following sub-sections shall be substi-
tuted, namely:-
"(5) Where any exemption granted under sub-section (1), 
sub-section (IA) or sub-section (2) is cancelled, the amount of 
accumulations to the credit of every employee to whom such 
exemption applied, in the provident fund or the family pension 
fund of the establishment in which he is employed shall be trans-
ferred within such time and in such manner as may be specified 
in the Scheme or the Family Pension Scheme to the credit of bts 
account in the Fund or the Family Pension Fund, as the case may 
be. 
(6) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (IA), the em-
ployer of an exempted establishment or of an exempted employee 
of an establishment to which the provisions of the Family Pension 
Scheme apply, shall, notwithstanding any exemption granted 
under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), pay to the Family Pen-
sionFund such portion of the employer's contribution as well as 
the employee's contribution to its provident fund within such 
time and in such manner as may be specified in the Family Pen-
sion Scheme.". 
28. In section 18 of the Provident Funds Act. for the words "or under 
any Scheme", the words ", the Scheme or the Family Pension Scheme" 
3' shall be substituted. 
29. In section 19 of the Provident Funds Act, for the words "or any 
Scheme", the. words ", the Scheme or the Family Pension Scheme" shall 
be substituted. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
18. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
19. 
30. After Schedule II to the Provident Funds Act, the following Sche- benion 
40 dule shall be inserted, namely:- of new Schedule 
"SCHEDULE III 
[See section 6A(4)] 
MATTERS FOR WHICH PROVISION MAY BE MADE IN THE FAMILY PENSION ScHDU: 
1. The employees or class of employees to whom the Family 
45 Pension Scheme shall apply and the time within which option to join 
that Scheme shall be exercised by those employees to whom the said 
Scheme does not apply. 
In. 

Conse-
quential 
amend-
mentof 
ActS1 at' 
1956. 
Repeal 
and 
Savin ... 
8 
2. Subject to the provisions of s~ction 6A(2) , the portipn of em-
ployer's and employee's cOlltDibution which may be cfedited to the 
Family Pension Fund and the manner in which it may be .credited. 
3. The contribution by the Central Government to the Family 
Pension Fund and the manner in whichsuoh contribution' is to be 5 
made. 
4. The manner in which the..accounts of the Family Pension Fund 
shall be kept and the investment of moneys belonging to the Family 
Pension Fund with the Central Government at a rate of interest which 
shall not be less than five and a half per centum per annum. 10 
5. The form in which an employee shall fUl'nish particulars about 
himself and his family whenever required. 
6. The nomination of a person to receive the Qsurance amount 
due to the employee after his death and the cancellation orvatiation 
of such nomination. 
7. The 'registers and records to be maintained in r,e.spl:ct of 
employees, the form or design of any identity card, token or disc for 
the purpose of identifying any employ.ee" or his nominee :or a member 
of his 'family entitled to receive the pension. 
1$ 
8. The scales of family pension and the assurance amount. 20 
9. The manner in which the exempted establishments have to 
pay the contributions (both employer's and employee's ahares) 
towards the Family Pension Fund and the submission of returns 
relating thereto. 
10. The mode of disbursement of family pension' and the arrange- 25 
ments to be entered into with such disbursing agencies as may be 
specified for the purpose. 
11. The manner in which the .expenses incurred in connection 
with the administration of ,the Family Pension ' Scheme may be ,paid by 
the Central Government to the Central Board. 
12. Any other matter which is to be provided for ,in tbeFamily 
Pension Scheme or which may be necessary or:proper for the purpose 
of implementing the Family Pension Scheme.". 
31. In section 44 of the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1966, after 
clause (/), the following c1QuEe shall be inserted, namely:-
(g) any Family Pension Scheme framed under the Coal Mines 
Provident Fund, Family Pension and Bonus Schemes Act, 1948 0,1' tae 
Employees' Provident Funds and Family Pension Fund Act, 1952 for 
the purpose of providing family pension and life assurance bene'fitsto 
~e employees covered by the said Scheme.". 
32. (1) The Labour Provident Fund Laws (Amendment) Ordinance, 
1971, is hereby repealed. 
-30 
35 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken 
under the. Coal Mines Act or the Provident 'Funds Act, as aJlleruledby'the 
said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the 45 
Coal Mines Act or the Provident Funds Act as amended by this Act. as 
the case may be, as if this Act had come into force on the 13th clay of 
February, 1971. 
.. 
, , 
46 of 1948. 
19 of 1952. 
3 of 1971. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Coal Mines Provident Fund and Bonus Schemes Act, 1948 and 
the Employees' Provident Funds Act, 1952 provide for the institution of 
provident funds for employees in coal mines, factories and other estab-
lishments. Provident Fund is an effective old-age and survivo1'Ship 
benefit, but when the employee happens to die prematurely, the accumu-
lations in the Provident Fund are too small to render adequate and 
long-term protection to his family. With a view to providing long-term 
financial security to the families of industrial employees in the event of 
their premature death, it is proposed to introduce a Family Pension 
Scheme for the employees covered under the two Acts, and 110 create a 
Family Pension Fund for this purpose by diverting a portion of the 
employer's and the employees' contributions to the Provident Fund, to 
which will be added a contribution by the Central Government. Out of 
the Fund so set up, it is proposed to pay Family Pension at prescribed 
scales to the survivors of employees who die while in service before 
reaching the age of superannuation. Besides Family Pension, a com-
pulsory life insurance benefit up to Rs. 1,000 will also be payable to the 
survivors of the employees in the event of death in service. ~ In the case 
of retirement, a lumpsum payment up to a maximum of Rs. 4.000 will 
be made to the employee depending upon the length of his service. The 
terms aDd conditions for the grant of family pension will ~era11y be 
the same as those applicable to the Central Government employees. The 
benefits payable under the Family Pension Scheme will be in addition 
to the payments due to the employees from the Provident Fund. 
2. The proposed Scheme of Family Pension will be administered by 
the Board of Trustee!'!. Coal Mines Provident Fund in r~pect of members 
of the Coal Mines Provident Fund, and by the Centra~ BO'ird of Trustees, 
Employees' Provident Fund, in respect of the employees of E!I'ItRhlmh-
ments covered by the Emplovees' Provident Funds Act. 1952. The etest 
of administration of the Family Pension Scheme in each ease wil1 be 
borne by the Central Government. 
3. A Bill seekin~ to amend suitably the Coal Mines Provident Fund and 
Bonus Schemes Act. 1948 and the Employees' Provident Funcl!ll Ar.t. 1952 
in order to achieve these obiectives was introduced In the Lok ~abha on 
t.he 7th December, 1970 but the Bill lapsed with the dissolution of)f thl" then 
Lok Sabha. To enah1e intl'oduction of the Family Pensinn S("h~me tiurinll 
thp financiAl vear 1970.71. the President. however. nrnmulaated the T,~bnur 
Provident Fund Laws (Amendment) Ordinance, 1971 on the 13th F'ebru-
!lTV. 1!l71. amending the ai'ore!,:r>:rl Acts on the lines of the Bm whil'h ""d 
lansed. Famnv Pension Schemes for workers COVE!red bv th~ ,twn Act<l 
hAve been frRmed under the Ordinance Ifnn t~v have bf>Pn h,.nllrrht intn 
force with effect from the first March. 1971. The preRellt Em sE'lPks to 
renlAce the Labour Provident Fund Laws (Amendmpnt\ O"ciin"lnrF!. H171. 
N'EW DELHI; 
ThO! 22nd March, 1971. 
R. K. KHADTLKAR. 
, . . 
-; 4 Co·,..:, •• 
-.. ~ 
~~j, • 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM ' 
Clauses 8 and 18 of the Bill envisage constitution of Family Pension 
Funds for the workers covered under the Coal Mines Provident Fund and 
Bonus Schemes Act, 1948 and the Employees' Provident Funds Act, 1952 
by diversion of a portion of the employer's and ihe employees' contribu-
tions to the Provident Funds, to which will be added a contribution by 
the Central Government. It has been proposed that the contributions 
of the employer. employees and the Central Government to the Family 
Pension Funds may be as shown below:-
(1) Coal Mines Provident Fund : 
(II) Employer. 
(b) Employees 
(e) Central Government . 
TOTAL 
(2) Employees' Provident Fund: 
(II) Employer. 
(6) Employees 
(e) Central Government . 
TOTAL 
11% of pay. 
11% of pay. 
11% of pay. 
4% of pay. 
11% of pay. 
11% of pay. 
11% of pay. 
2. Clauses 8 and 18 of the Bill also envisage. that the cost of adminis-
tration of the Family Pension Fund Scheme will be paid by the Central 
Government. .. 
3. The Coal Mines Provident Fund and Bonus Schemes Act, 1948 is 
applicable"to about 4 lakhs of employees in coal mines. The Employees' 
Provident Funds Act, 1952 is at present applicable to about 55 lakhs of 
employees. Existing members of the Coal Mines Provident Fund and 
the employees of establishments already covered by the Employees' 
Provident Funds Act will be given option to come over to the Family 
Pension Scheme or to continue under the Provident Fund Scheme. itself. 
It is expected that 75 per cent. of the employees already covered under 
the two Acts will opt for the Family Pension Scheme. But the possibility 
of 100 per cent. employees opting for the Family Pension Scheme cannot 
be ruled out. 
4. Assuming that 75 per cent. of the employees covered under the 
Coal Mines Provident Fund and Bonus Schemes Act and the Employees' 
Provident Funds Act opt for the Family Pension Scheme, the annual 
flnancialliability of the Central Government and consequent expenditure 
from the Consolidated Fund of India has been estimated as under:-
(I) Employees covered under ~e Coal Mines 
Provident Fund and Bonus Schemes Act: 
(II) Contral Government contribution to 
the Pension Fund at the rate of 1 f% of pay. 
(b) eost of administration 
10 
TOTAL 
Rs. I' 09 Clores 
"'Rs. 0-06 crore 
Rs.I'15crores 

(~) Employees covered under the Employees' 
Provident Funds Act: 
(Q) Central Government contribution to the Pension 
Fund at the late of 11% of pay Rs. 10'2 crorel 
(b) Cost of administration -Rs. 0'76 crores 
TOAL RI.IO·96oores. 
If, however, 100 per cent. employees covered under the Coal Mines 
Provident Fund and Bonus Schemes Act and the Employees' Provident 
Funds Act opt for the Family Pension Scheme, the. annual financial 
liability of the Central Government and consequent expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India will be as under:-
(I) Employees c.overed under the Coal Mines Provident Fund and 
Bonul Schemes Act : 
(Q) Central Government ontribution to the Pension Fund at 
1,% of pay 
(b) Costofadminislration. 
(2) Employees covered under the Employees' Provident Funds 
Act: 
(Q) Central Government contribution to the Pension Fund at 
Il%ofpa,. ~ 
(b) eolt of administration. 
RI. I '45 crores. 
.RI. 0'08 crorcs. 
-. 
TOTAL RI. 1 "3 crorel 
-------'---
RI. 13. 6 crores. 
.Rs. 1.01 crorea. 
TOTAL Rs. 14·61 crorea. 
The liability of the Central Government in respect of employees 
covered under the Employees' Provident Funds Act will increase propor-
tionately with the expansion of coverage of the Act. 
·Note.-About 4 per cent of the cost of administration representa non-.... 
curling expenditure. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATI6N 
The new section 3E of the Coal Mines Provident Fund and Bonus 
ScheBles Aet, 1948, proposed to be inserted undeJ' clause 8 of the 001, 
seeks to empower the Central Government to frame the Coal Mines 
Family, Pension Scheme for the purpose of providing family pension and 
life assurance benefits to the employees covered by the Coal Mines 
Provident Fund Scheme. Under clause 18 of the. Bill, a corresponding 
provision is being made in the new section 6A of the Employees' Pr0-
vident Funds Act, 1952 for providing similar family pension and life 
8SSqra,nce benefits to the employees of establishments or class of estab-
lishments to which the said Act applies. Under the Family Pension 
Schemes which will be framed by the Central Government, the various 
matters which are. to be provided therein, are enumerated in the new 
Second Schedule proposed to be inserted in the 1948-Act under clause 
11 of the Bill and in new Schedule III proposed to be inserted in the 
1952-Act under clause 30 of the Bill. It is clear that the provisions to 
be made in the Family Pension Scheme under both the Statutes, referred 
to above, will cantain matters of detail and day-to-day working, e.g., the 
emPlo.yees or class of employees to which ihe Schemes shall apply, the 
portion of employer's and employee's contribution to be credited to the 
Family Pension Funds, the contribution to be made by the Central Gov-
ernment towards the Fund, the scales of family pension and the assurance 
amowrt to be paid to the employees and the mode of disbursement thereof. 
and other like matters . 
.z. The delegation of1egislative powers is, thus, of a normal character. 
12 

ANNEXURE 
ExmAcors mOM THE COAL MINES PROVIDENT FUND AND BONUS SCHEMES 
ACT, 1948 
(46 OF 1948) 
An Act to make pTovision fOT the framing of a PTovident Fund Scheme 
and' a Bonus Scheme fOT persons employed in coal mines. 
• • • • • 
WHEREAS it is expedient to make provision for the framing of a Provi-
dent Fund Scheme and a Bonus Scheme for persons employed in coal 
mines; 
• • • • • 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Coal Mines Provilient Fund and 
BOllus Schemes Act, 1948. 
• • • • • 
Z. In this Act, unless there is anything repugJ1ant in the subject or 
context,- ... 
• • • • • 
3A. (J) • • • • • 
(3) The Board shall administer the Fund vested in it in such rruumer 
as may be specified in the Scheme aforesaid. 
(4) The Board shall perform such other functions as it may be re-
quired to perform by or under any provisions of the Scheme aforesaid. 
• • • • • 
3C. (1) • • • • • 
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2). the Board 
may appoint such other officers and employees as it may consider neces-
sary for the efficient administration of the Coal Mines Provident Fund 
Scheme. 
• 
5. (1) • 
• • 
• • • • • • 
. (2) A scheme framed under the provisions of sub-section (1) may 
provide for all or any of the matters specified in the Second Schedule. 
•• • • • 
EX'l'RACTS FROM THE EMPLOYEm' PROVIDENT FUNDS ACT, 1952 
(19 OF 1952) 
An Act to provide fOT the institution of provident funds for employees in 
factories and other establishments 
• • • • • 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Employees' ProYident Funds Act, 
1962. 
• • • • • 
(5) An establishment to which this Act applies shan continue to be 
gowrned by thie Act notwithstandiBg. ~t the number of· perIODS em-. 
ployed therein at any time falls belowtwentJ: 
Short title 
and extent. 
Interpre-
tation. 
Constitu-
tion of 
Board of 
Trustees. 
Appoint-
ment of 
officers. 
Coal 
minea 
BoIIUI 
Scheme. 
Shorttit~. 
extent and 
applica-
tion. 

Defini-
tions. 
Central 
Board. 
Appoint-
ment of 
officers. 
Delega-
tion. 
Modifica-
tion of 
Scheme. 
Determi-
nation of 
moneys 
due from 
emPloy-
en. 
Mode of 
recovery 
Of money I 
dUe from 
employ-
en. 
14 
Provided that where for a continuous period of not less than one year 
the number of persons employed therein has been less than fifteen, the 
emplo~r in relation to such establishment may cease to give effect to 
the provisions of this Act alid any Scheme framed thereunder, with effect 
from the beginning of the month following the expiry of the said period 
of one year, but he shall, within one month of the date of such cessation, 
i,ntimate, by registered post, the tact thereof to such authority as may be 
specified by the appropriate Government in this behalf. 
Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
• • • • • 
(1) "Scheme" means a Scheme framed under this Act. 
• 
SA. (1) • 
• • • • • • • 
(3) The Central Board shall administer the Fund vested in it in 
manner as may be specified in the Scheme. 
(4) The Central Board shall perform such other functions as it 
be required to perform by or under any ~ovisi'Ons of the Scheme. 
• 
SD. (1) • 
• • • • • • • • 
such 
may 
(3) The Central Board may appoint such other officers and employees 
as it may consider necessary for the efficient administration of thr 
Scheme. 
• • • • • 
SE. The Central Board may, with the prior p.;)p:oval of the Central 
Government and a State Board may, with the prior approval of the State 
Government concerned, delegate to its chai'rman or to any of its officers, 
subject to such conditions and limitations, if any, as it may specify, such 
of its powers and functions under this Act as it may deem necessary for 
the efficient administration of the Scheme. 
• • • • • 
'l. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, and to, amend or vary any Scheme framed under this Act. 
'lAo (1) The Central Provident Fund CommiSSioner, any Deputy Provi-
dent Fund Commissioner or any Regional Provident Fund Commissioner 
may, by OTder, determine the amount due from any employer under any 
provision of this Act or of the Scheme and for this purpose may conduct 
such inquiry as he may deem necessary. . 
• • • • • 
8. Any amount due-
• · ,., • • • 
(b) from the employer in relation to an exempted establish-
ment in respect of any damages recoverable under section 14B on 
any charges payable by him to the appropriate Government under 
any provision of this Act or under any of the conditions specified 
under section 17, 
may. if the amount is in arrear, be recovered by the appropriate Govern-
ment in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue. 
• • • • • 1 

3 of 1909. 
5 ot 1920. 
7 of 1913. 
5 of 1898. 
11. Where any employer is adjudicated insolvent or, being a company, 
an order for winding up is made, the amount due-
• • • • • 
(b) from the employer in relation to an exempted establishment 
in respect of any contribution to the provident fund (in so far as 
it relates to exempted employees), under the rules of the provident 
fund, damages recoverable under section 14B or any charges pay-
able by him to the appropriate Government under any provision of 
this Act or under any of the conditions specified under section 17, 
shall, where the liability therefor has accrued before the order of adjudi-
cation or winding up is made, be deemed to be included among the debts 
which under section 49 of the Presidency-towns Insolvency Act, 1909, or 
under section 61 of the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920, or under section 
230 of the Indian Companies Act, 1913 are to be paid in priority to all 
other debts in the distribution of the property of the insolvent or the 
assets of the company being wound up, as the case may be. 
• • • • • 
Priority 
of pa,. 
ment of 
contribu 
tions 
over 
other 
debts. 
13. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Inspectors. 
Gazette, appoint such persons as it thinks fit to be Inspectors for the 
purposes of this Act or of any Scheme, and may define their jurisdiction. 
• • • • • 
(2A) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 shall, 
so far as may be, apply to any' search or seizure under ub-section (2) 
as they apply to any search or seizure made under the autliority of a 
warrant issued under section 98 of the said Code. 
• • • • • 
14. (1) Whoever, for the purpose of avoiding any payment to be made Penalties. 
by himself under this Act or under any Scheme or of enabling any other 
person to avoid such payment, knowingly makes or causes to be made 
any false statement or false representation shall be punishable with im-
prisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine 
which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
(2) A Scheme framed under this Act may provide that any person 
who contravenes, or makes default in complying with, any of the pro-
visions thereof shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to six months, or with flop. which may extend to one thousand 
rupees, or with both. ~ 
• • • • • 
(3) No Court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under 
this Act or under any Scheme except on a report in writing of tne facts 
constituting such offence made with the previous sanction of such autho-
rity as may be specified in this behalf bv the apprOpriatp Government, 
by an Inspector appointed under section 13. .. 
!fA. (1) If the person committing an offence under this Act or the 
Scheme made thereunder is a company, every person, who at the time 
the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, the 
company for the conduct of thp. business of the company, as well as thp. 
company, shall be deemed to be quilty of the offence and shall be liable 
~ be OToceeded against and punished accordingly: 
Offences 
by com_ 
paniea. 

Power to 
exempt. 
Protection 
for acta 
done in 
good faith. 
Delega-
tion of 
. powel'l. 
16 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any 
such person liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence was 
committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence 
to prevent the commission of such offence. 
{2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an 
offence under this Act or the Sche··,le thcl'i.:under has been committed by 
a company ad it is proved that the offence has been committed with 
the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the 
part of, any director or manager, secretary or other oftlcer of the com-
pany, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to 
be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly. 
• • • • • 
17. (1) • • • • • 
(4) Any exemption granted under this section may be cancelled by the 
authority which granted it, by order in writing, if an employer fails to 
comply,-
(a) in the case of an exemption granted under sub-section (1). 
with any of the conditions imposed under that sub-section or with 
any of the provisions of sub-section (3); and 
• • • • • 
(5) Where any exemption granted under sub-section (1) or sub-section 
(2) is cancelled, the amount of accumulations to the credit of every em- .. 
ployee to whom such exemption applied, in the provident fund of the 
establishment in which he is employed shall be tranSferred, within such 
time as may be specified in the scheme, to the credit of his account in 
the Fund. 
• • • • 
18. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against an Inspector or 
any other person in respect of anything which is in good faith done or 
intended to be done under this Act or under any Scheme. 
19. The appropriate Government may direct that any powet' or autho-
rity or jurisdiction exercisable by it under this Act or any Scheme shall, 
in relation to such matters and subject to such conditions, if any, as may 
be specified in the directiO'n, be exercisable also-
(<<) where the appropriate Government is the Central G<>vern-
ment, by such officer or authority subordinate to the Central Govern-
ment or by the State Government or by such officer or authority 
subordinate to the State Government, as may be specified in the 
notification; and 
(b) where the app"opriate Government is a State Government. 
by such ofticer or authority subordinate to the State Government as 
may be specified in the notification. 
• • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Coal Mines Provident Fund and Bonus Schemes Act, 19.~8 
and the Employees' Provident Funds Act, 1952. 
(Shri R. K. Khtldilk.r, 
Minister of Labour, 
Employment and 
Relia/JilittltWn. ) 