THE CENTRAL EXCISES AND SALT (AMENDMENT' 
BILL, 1953 
(As INTRODUCED IN THE HOUSE OF THE PmoPLE) 
A 
Bn..L 
further to amend the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944. 
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows:-
1. Short title.-This Act may be called the Central Excises and 
Salt (Amendment) Act, 1953. 
2. Amendment of First Schedule, Act I of 1944.-(1) In the First 
Schedule to the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944, for Item 14, the 
following Item shall be substituted, namely:-
"14. TEA-
-- :~ 
''Tea'' includes all varieties of the product known l commer-
cially as tea, and also includes green tea. 
(J) Package tea, that is to say, tea packed in 
any kind of container containing not 
more than 00 lbs. net of tea-
('> if, befo~ being so packed, duty has Three amlas 
been paid thereon under sub-item (2) per lb. net 
of this Item. 
(ii) if, before being so packed, duty has Four IiDDIiS rer 
not been paid thereon under sub- lb. net 
item (2) of thiE Item. 
(2) Tea not otherwise specified. One anna per 
lb. net". 
(2) The amendment made by sub-section (1) shall apply to tea as 
defined therein which is lying in stock on the 15th day of April, 1953, 
in any premises where tea is produ,ced or manufactured or in any 
preuuses appurtenant thereto as it applies to tea produced or manu-
factured on or after the said date. 
Declaration under the Provisional Collection of Taxes Act, 1931 
(XVI of 1931). 
It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the public interest 
that the provisions of clause 2 of this Bill shall have immediate effect 
under the Provisional Collection of Taxes Act, 1931. 

,f' Il '" G 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Tea manufactured in India is at present subject to Central Excise 
Duty at a flat rate of 0-3-0 per lb. payable at the time of issue from 
the producing gardens. The proposals in the Bill are designed to 
redu,ce this duty to 0-1-0 per lb., at this stage. A further excise duty 
of 0-3-0 per lb. will be levied on Package Tea and collected from 
blenders and packers at the time of clearance. It is expected that 
this readjustment of the duty will afford direct relief to the tea 
gardens and consumers of unpacked tea, without affecting signifi-
cantly the present yield of the revenue from the excise duty on Tea. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 1st April, 1953. c. D. DESHMUKH. 

HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE 
A 
BILL 
further to amend tl:e Central Excises and Salt }.ct, 1944. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (I) of article II7 or 
, the Constitution of India, recommended to the House of the' 
People the introduction of the Bill. 
GlPD-SB-Jl )fofL.,,-lO-j-lIl1-2,OOO 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary· 
(Sh~i C. D. Deshmukh, 
Mi'IKstlf' for F,7w/ft,Ce.)" 