As inTRODUCED In LOK SABHA ON

26 FEB i992

| Bill No. 35 of 1992
THE COPYRIGHT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1992
A
BILL
further to amend the Copyright Act, 1957.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-third Year of the Republic
of India as follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Copyright (Amendment) Act, 1992.

(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 28th day of

Short

title

and com-
mence-
ment.

Amend-
ment of
Chapter
v.


Copyright 3. For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that copyright
not to

at ee Shall not subsist by virtue of this Act in any work in which copyright

it term did not subsist immediately before the commencement of this Act.
has ex-

pired.

अल, 4. (1) The Copyright (Amendment) Ordinance, 1991 is hereby
and repealed.

saving.

(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken
under the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be

deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act, as amended
by this Act. oo


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The term of copyright under the Copyright Act, 1957 is up to the end
of the calendar year in which fifty years are completed. This term starts
from the year in which the author dies in the case of literary, dramatic,
musical and artistic works (other than photographs) published within
‘the life-time of the author, but starts from the year of publication in
most other cases. | | 4 i

2. Gurudev Rabindranath Tagore died in the year 1941 and copy-
right in his published works, which stood vested in Visva Bharati,
was to expire on 31st December, 1991. There had heen numerous demands
for according extended protection to his works in view of their national
importance. While it was not considered feasible and appropriate to
extend the term of copyright in respect of one author alone, the Govern-
ment reviewed the whole question of what should be the appropriate
term of copyright and decided to extend the term of copyright generally
in all works protected by the Copyright Act, 1957 from fifty to sixty
years. This was, however, not to apply to works which had already en-
tered the public domain before 31st December, 1991.

8. The Copyright (Amendment) Ordinance, 1991 was, therefore,
promulgated by the President on 28th December, 1991.

4. The Bill seeks to replace the said Ordinance and to achieve the
aforesaid objects. + |

New Detar; ARJUN SINGH.
"The शक्कर February, 1992. !


Term of
copyright
in publi-
shed liter-
ary, dra-
matic,
musical
and
artistic
works.

Term of

copyright
in anony-
mous

and pseu-
donymous
works,

ANNEXURE

Extracts From ‘Tap Coryricur Act, 1957

(14 or 1957)

* * * a ®

CHAPTER V

TERM oF CopyRiGHT

22. Except as otherwise hereinafter provided, copyright shall sub-
sist in any literary, dramatic, musical or artistie work (other than a
Photograph) published within the lifetime of the author until fifty years
from the beginning of the calendar year next following the year in
Which the author dies.

Explanation—In this section the reference to the author shall, in
the case of a work of joint authorship, be construed as a reference 10 ihe
author who dies last. :

23. (1) In the case of a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work
(other than a photograph), which: is publisheq anonymously or pseudo-
Bymously, copyright shall subsist until fifty years from the beginning of
the calendar year next following the year in which the work is first
published:

Provided that where the identity of the author is disclosed before the

iry of the said period, copyright shall subsist until fifty years from
the beginning of the calendar year next following the year in which
the author dies,

(2) In sub-section (1), references to the author shall, in the case of
an anonymous work of joint authorship, be construed,—

(8) where the identity of one of the authors is disclosed, as
references to that author;

(0) where the identity of more authors than one is disclosed,
as references to the author who dies last from amongst such authors.

(3) In sub-section (1), references to the author shall, in the case of
@ Pseudonymous work of joint authorship, be construed,—

(4) where the names of one or more (but not all) of the authors
are pseudonymous and his or their identity is not disclosed, as re.
ferences to the author whose name is not a pseudonym, or, if the
names of two or more of the authors are not pseudonyms, as refer-
ences to such of those authors who dies last;

(0) where the names of one or more (but not all) of the authors
are pseudonyms and the identity of one or more of them is dis-

4


। as references to the author who dies last from amongst the
authors whose names are not pseudonyms and the authors whose
names are pseudonyms and are disclosed; and

(c) where the names of all the authors are pseudonyms and the
identity of one of them is disclosed, as references to the aulhor
whose identity is disclosed or if the identity of two or more of such
authors is disclosed, as references to such of those authors who die
jast.

Explanation—For the purposes of this section, the identity of an
author shall be deemed to have been disclosed, if either the identity of
the author is disclosed publicly by both the author and the publisher
or is otherwise established to the satisfaction of the Copyright Board
by that author,

24, (1) In the case of a literary, dramatic or musical work or an en-
graving, in which copyright subsists at the date of the death of the
author or, in the case of any such work of joint authorship, at or imme-
diately before the date of the death of the author who dies last, but
which, or any adaptation of which, has not been published before the
date, copyright shall subsist until fifty years from the beginning of the
calendar year next following the year in which the work is first publish-
ed or, where an adaptation of the work is published in any earlier year,
from the beginning of the calendar year next following that year.

(2) For the purposes of this section a literary, dramatic or musical
work or an adaptation of any such work shal) be deemed to have been
published, if it has been performed in public or if any records made in
respect of the work have been sold to the public or have been offered
for sale to the public.

25. In the case of a photograph, copyright shall subsist until fifty years
trom the beginning of the calendar year next following the year in which
the photograph is published.

26. In the case of a cinematograph film, copyright shall subsist until
fifty years from the beginning of the calendar year next following the
year in which the film is published. . {

27. In the case of a record, copyright shall subsist until fifty years
from the beginning of the calendar year next following the year in
which the record is published. है

28. In the case of Government work, where Government is the first
owner of the copyright therein, copyright shall subsist until fifty years
from the beginning of the calendar year next following the year in which
‘the work is first published. =

‘Term of
copyright
in posthu-
ous
work.

Term of
copyright

Term of
copyright

matograph

Term of
copyright
in records.

Term of
copyright
in Gov-
ernment


Term of
copyright
in works
ef public

6.

284. In the case of a work, where a public undertaking is the first
Owner of the copyright copyright shall subsist unti) fifty years
from the beginning of the calendar year next following the year in which
the work is first Published.}

the provisions of Section 41 apply, copyright shall subsist unti] fifty years
trom the beginning of the calendar year next following the year in which
the work is first published.

* * . * *


LOK SABHA

a
BILL
furthet to amend the Copyright Act, 1957.

(Shri Arjun Singh, Minister of Human Resource Development)