Bill No. 35 of 1954. 
THE MADHYA BHARAT TAXES ON INCOME 
(VALIDATION) BILL, 1954 . 
(As INTRODUCED IN THE LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to validate the levy, as~ssment and colliection in the State of 
Madhya Bharat of certain taxes on income and on profits of 
business due in respect of the periods referred to in sub-section 
(1) of section 13 of the Finance Act, 1950. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:-
1. Short tltle.-This Act may be called the Madhya Bharat Taxes 
on Income (Validation) Act, 1954. 
2. DeflnltloDS.-In this Act, unless the context otherwise 5 
requires,-
(a) 'Finance Act' means the Finance Act, 1950 (XXV of 1950); 
(b) 'relevant Madhya Bharat law' means any of the follow-
ing laws which may be applicable in the circumstances of a 
particular case, that is to say,- 10 
(i) The Indore Industrial Tax Rules, 1927; 
(ii) The Indore Excess Profits Duty Order, 1944; 
(iii) The Gwalior War Profits Ordinance, Samvat 2001; 
and 
(iv) any law in force immediately before the commence-
ment of the Finance Act in that part of the State of Madhya IS 
Bharat which corresponds to the territory comprised in the 
former Indian State of Ratlam, in so far as such law relates 
to a tax on profits of business; 
(c) 'relevant period' means either of the periods referred to 20 
in sub-section (1) of section 13 of the Finance Act, according as 
the tax is a tax on income or a tax on profits. of business. 

3. Validation of action taken in connection with the levy, 81leu· 
ment and collection of certain taxes on ineome.-Notwithstanding 
anything contained in the first proviso to sub-section (1) of section 
13 of the Finance Act, all proceedings taken, assessments made and 
S other acts and things done (including orders made) by or before any 
officer, authority, tribunal or court acting or purporting to act under 
the relevant Madhya Bharat law in connection with the levy, assess-
ment and collection of any tax due under any such law in respect 
of the relevant period shall be valid and shall be deemed always 
10 to have been valid, and shall not be called in question on the ground 
only that such proceedings were not taken, assessments were not 
made or acts or things were not done by or before the corresponding 
officer, authority, tribunal or court referred to in the said proviso. 
4. Contin1Ulllee of pending proceedings.-U immediately before 
IS the commencement of this Act any proceedings of the nature refer-
red to in section 3 are pending before any officer, authority, tribunal 
or court acting or purporting to act under the relevant Madhya 
Bharat law, such proceedings may, notwithstanding anything con-
tained in the first proviso to sub-section (1) of section 13 of the 
ao Finance Act, be continued and completed in accordance with the 
provisions of the relevant Madhya Bharat law, and the provisions of 
the said proviso shall not apply and shall be deemed never to have 
applied in relation to any such proceedings. 

3 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Seetion 13 of the Finance Act, 1950, while providing for the repeal 
in Part B States of laws relating to income-tax, super-tax and tax on 
profits of business saved the operation of the local laws in so far as 
· they related to the levy, assessment and collection of such taxes for 
any period prior to the 31st day of March. 1949. The seetion, how-
-ever, provided that the levy and collection of any such arrears should 
be made by the corresponding authorities under the Indian Income-
· tax Act, 1922. This latter provision was overlooked by the Madhya 
Bharat Government which continued to recover the arrears with the 
aid of their own officer. The present Bill seeks to validate such levy 
· and collection and also provides for the continuance and completion 
of pending prooeedings by State authorities in accordanee with the 
provisions of the relevant State laws, 
C. D. DESHMUKH. 
NEW DELHI; 
'The 26th August, 1954. 

4 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE FINANCE ACT, 1950 (XXV OF 1950) 
• • • • • • 
13. Repeal and savlngs.-(l) If immediately before the 1st day of" 
April, 1950, there is in force in any Part B Sta~ other than Jammu 
and Kashmir or in Manipur, Tripura or Vindhya Pradesh or in the 
merged territory of Cooch-Behar any law relating to income-tax or 
super-tax or tax on profits of business, that law shall cease to have 
effect except for the purposes of the levy, assessment and collection 
of income-tax and super-tax in respect of any period not included in 
the previous year for the purposes of assessment under the Indian 
Income-tax Act, 1922, for the year ending on the 31st day of March, 
1951, or for any subsequent year,· or, as the case may be, the levy, 
assessment and collection of the tax on profits of business for any 
chargeable accounting period ending on or before the .31st day of 
March, 1949: 
Provided that any reference in any such law to an officer, authority, 
tribunal or court shall be construed as a reference to the correspond-
ing officer, authority, tribunal or court appointed or constituted under 
the said Act, .and if any question arises as to who such corresponding 
officer, authority, tribunal or court is, the decision of the Central 
Government thereon shall be final. 
• • • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to validate the levy, assessment and collection in the Stat~ of 
Madhya Bharat of certain taxes on income and on profi1 s 
of business due in respect of periods referred to in sub-
section (1) of section 13 of rhe Finance Act, 1950. 
The President has, in pursua.nce of clause (1) of article 117 
and clause (1) of artiole 274 of the Constitution of India. 
recommended to the Lok Sabha the introduction of 
the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
( Shri C. D. Deshmukh, 
Minister for Financ~ ) 