THE BAN ON WITCHCRAFT BILL, 2010
BY
SHRI OM PRAKASH YADA V, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for ban on witchcraft in any form in the country.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Ban on Witchcraft Act, 2010.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) 'advertisement' means any notice, circular, label, wrapper or other document
relating to witchcraft and includes any visible representation of witchcraft by means of
any video or audio medium but does not include any publication which is of any
interest in the field of science, literature, art or learning or of general concern;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No.  35  of  2010
Definitions.
5
10

(b) 'prescribed' means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(c) 'witchcraft' means any act of magic, casting spells or sorcery or voodoo or
black magic which is practiced with a view to help or harm other persons.
3. Notwithstanding  anything  to the contrary contained in any custom of any
community, tribe or religion, the practice of witchcraft in any form is hereby banned.
4. No person shall practise or cause to be practised, promote or cause to be promoted,
advertise or cause to be advertised any act of witchcraft in any form.
5. Any person who contravenes the provisions of this Act shall be punished with
rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall be not less than five years.
6. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law for the time
being in force, any offence punishable under this Act shall be deemed to be a cognizable and
non-bailable offence.
7. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
contained therein to any other law for the time being in force.
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, makes rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Banning of
witchcraft.
Ban on
advertisement
of witchcraft
in any form.
Punishment.
Offences
committed
under this Act
are cognizable
and non-
bailable.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
2

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The United Nations Organisation has released a comprehensive report in which it has
expressed its concern at the number of murders ascribed to witch-hunting. India has been
named alongwith other underdeveloped countries as a high incidence zone for witchcraft
related killings. Generally, women are branded as 'witch' and they are harassed, tortured,
insulted and even murdered in the name of witchcraft by their relatives or so called witch
hunters in cold blood. These victims undergo a traumatic experience and suffer a lot throughout
their lives. Such incidents are occurring throughout the country particularly in the tribal
areas. Due to the absence of any specific legislation to deal with the crimes of witchcraft, the
assailants are booked under existing ordinary laws. All this result in easy acquittal of guilty
persons.
It is, therefore, necessary to enact a law to put a blanket ban on the practice of witchcraft
and to provide for stringent punishment for practising or promoting or advertising witchcraft
in any form. It will also help to prevent the atrocities committed on women in the name of
witchcraft.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; OM  PRAKASH  YADA V
Februa0ry 18, 2010.

4
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. Since the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for ban on witchcraft in any form in the country.
————
(Shri Om Prakash Yadav, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—903LS(S5)—12.03.2010.