AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
                                                                                          Bill No. 35 of  2023
THE HINDU SUCCESSION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023
By
 SHRI V .K. SREEKANDAN, MP.
A
BILL
     further to amend the Hindu Succession Act, 1956.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India
as follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called Hindu Succession (Amendment)  Act, 2023.
(2)  It shall come into force on such date, as the  Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 15 of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act),–
  ( a) for sub-section ( 1), the following sub-section shall be
substituted, namely:–
5
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment of
section 15.
30 of 1956

5
10
15
2
Amendment of
section 16.
“(1) The property of a female Hindu dying intestate shall devolve
according to the rules set out in section 16,—
(a) firstly, upon the sons and daughters (including the children of
any predeceased sons or daughters or non-remarried daughters-in-law)
and the husband;
 (b) secondly, upon the mother and father;
 (c) thirdly, upon the heirs of the mother;
 (d) fourthly, upon the heirs of the father; and
 (e) lastly, upon the heirs of the husband.”.
   (b) “in sub-section (2),–
 (i)  in clause (a), for the words “including the children of any predeceased
son or daughter”, the words “including the children of any predeceased sons
or daughters or non-remarried daughters-in-law or the husband” shall be
substituted; and
(ii)  in clause (b), for the words “including the children of any predeceased
son or daughter”, the words “including the children of any predeceased sons
or daughters or non-remarried daughters-in-law” shall be substituted.”
3.  In section 16 of the principal Act, Rule 3 shall be omitted.

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
As on date many litigations pertaining to successions are pending in various
courts in the country for many decades. In many cases, it has come to the notice
that mothers are being neglected and even are not taken care of by their own sons
and daughters.  A considerable number of such mothers are on the roads or housed
in old age homes due to no means for their livelihood. These non-remarried
daughters-in-law after the demise of their husbands are deprived of their rights on
the moveable and immovable properties left by their mothers-in-law.
 According to section 15 of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 only sons and
daughters (including the children of any predeceased sons or daughters) are
eligible for the succession of the property of a female Hindu dying intestate.
However non-remarried daughters-in-law are deprived of such rights. In many
cases, these non-remarried mothers after the death of their husbands were required
to clear off the liabilities created by their husbands during their lift time for many
reasons whatsoever. The question arises how they will do it, if they are not earning
and their hope is on whatever the share they get from the said movable and
immovable properties left by their mothers-in-law which is being deprived.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend section 15 of the Hindu Succession Act,
1956 with a view to provide rights to daughters-in-law at par with sons and
daughters (including the children of any predeceased sons or daughters) and the
husband and reorder the succession rights on the property of a female Hindu dying
intestate.
Hence this Bill.
     NEW DELHI;                                                                          V .K. SREEKANDAN
 February  6,  2023.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE HINDU SUCCESSION ACT, 1956
(ACT NO. 30 OF 1956)
*                 *                  *                *                *
 15. (1) The property of a female Hindu dying intestate shall devolve
according to the rules set out in section 16,—
 (a) firstly, upon the sons and daughters (including the children of any
predeceased son or daughter) and the husband;
 (b) secondly, upon the heirs of the husband;
 (c) thirdly, upon the mother and father;
 (d) fourthly, upon the heirs of the father; and
 (e) lastly, upon the heirs of the mother.
(2)  Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),—
(a) any property inherited by a female Hindu from her father or mother
shall devolve, in the absence of any son or daughter of the deceased (including
the children of any pre-deceased son or daughter) not upon the other heirs
referred to in sub-section (1) in the order specified therein, but upon the heirs of
the fathers; and
(b) any property inherited by a female Hindu from her husband or from
her father-in-law shall devolve, in the absence of any son or daughter of the
deceased (including the children of any predeceased son or daughter) not upon
the other heirs referred to in sub-section (1) in the order specified therein, but
upon the heirs of the husband.
          16. The order of succession among the heirs referred to in section 15 shall be,
and the distribution of the intestate’s property among those heirs shall take place
according to the following rules, namely: —
*                 *                  *                *                *
Rule 3.– The devolution of the property of the intestate on the heirs referred to in
clauses (b), (d) and (c) of sub-section (1) and in sub-section (2) of section 15 shall be
in the same order and according to the same rules as would have applied if the property
had been the father’s or the mother’s or the husband’s as the case may be, and such
person had died intestate in respect thereof immediately after the intestate’s death.
*                 *                  *                *                *
4
General rules of
succession in
the case of
female Hindus.

LOK SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Hindu Succession Act, 1956.
(Shri V.K. Sreekandan, M.P .)