(i)
THE INDIAN INSTITUTE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY,
DESIGN AND MANUFACTURING , KANCHEEPURAM
BILL, 2011
——————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
——————
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title and commencement.
2 . Declaration of Indian Institute of Information Technology, Design and
Manufacturing, Kancheepuram, as an institution of national importance.
3. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
THE INSTITUTE
4. Incorporation of Institute.
5. Effect of incorporation of Institute.
6. Powers and functions of Institute.
7. Institute to be open to all races, creeds and classes.
8. Teaching at Institute.
9. Visitor.
10. Authorities of Institute.
11. Board of Governors.
12. Terms of office of, vacancies among and allowances payable to, members of Board.
13. Powers and functions of Board.
14. Senate.
15. Functions of Senate.
16. Powers and functions of Chairperson.
17. Director.
18. Registrar.
19. Other authorities and officers.
20. Grants by Central Government.
21. Funds of Institute.
22. Accounts and audit.
23. Pension and provident fund.
24. Appointments.
AS PASSED BY LOK SABHA
ON 25 AUGUST, 2011
Bill No. 35-C of  2011

(ii)
CLAUSES
25.  Statutes.
26. Statutes, how made.
27. Ordinances.
28. Ordinances, how made.
29. Tribunal of Arbitration.
CHAPTER III
M
ISCELLANEOUS
30. Control by Central Government.
31. Acts and proceedings not to be invalidated by vacancies, etc.
32. Power to remove difficulties.
33. Transitional provisions.
34. Repeal and saving.

THE INDIAN INSTITUTE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY , DESIGN
AND MANUFACTURING, KANCHEEPURAM BILL, 2011
A
BILL
to declare the Indian Institute of Information Technology, Design and Manufacturing,
Kancheepuram, in the State of Tamil Nadu, to be an institution of national importance
and to provide for its incorporation and for matters connected therewith.
B
E it enacted by  Parliament in the Sixty-second Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Institute of   Information Technology, Design
and Manufacturing, Kancheepuram Act, 2011.
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 20th day of June, 2011.
2. Whereas the objects of the institution known as the Indian Institute of Information
Technology, Design and Manufacturing, Kancheepuram, in the State of Tamil Nadu are
such as to make the institution one of national importance, it is hereby declared that the
Indian Institute of Information Technology, Design and Manufacturing, Kancheepuram is
an institution of national importance.
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Declaration of
Indian
Institute of
Information
Technology,
Design and
Manufacturing,
Kancheepuram,
as an
institution of
national
importance.
Bill No. 35-C of  2011
5
10

2
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Board” means the Board of Governors of the Institute;
(b) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Board;
(c) “Director” means the Director of the Institute;
(d) “Institute” means the institution known as the Indian Institute of Information
Technology, Design and Manufacturing, Kancheepuram incorporated under this Act;
(e) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;
(f) “prescribed” means prescribed by Statutes made under this Act;
(g) “Registrar” means the Registrar of the Institute;
(h) “Senate” means the Senate of the Institute;
(i) “Society” means the society known as the Indian Institute of Information
Technology, Design and Manufacturing, Kancheepuram, registered under the
Tamil Nadu Societies Registration Act, 1975;
(j) “Statutes” and “Ordinances” means the Statutes and Ordinances of the
Institute made under this Act; and
(k) “Visitor” means the President of India.
CHAPTER II
T
HE INSTITUTE
4. (1) The Indian Institute of Information Technology, Design and Manufacturing,
Kancheepuram which is a society registered under the Tamil Nadu Societies Registration
Act, 1975 is hereby constituted as a body corporate by the name aforesaid and as such
body corporate, it shall have perpetual succession and a common seal with power, subject
to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property and to contract and
shall, by that name, sue and be sued.
(2) The Institute shall consist of a Chairperson, a Director and other members of the
Board.
5. (1) On and from the commencement of this Act,—
(a) any reference to the Society in any law, other than this Act, or in any
contract or other instrument, shall be deemed as a reference to the Institute;
(b) all property, movable and immovable, of or belonging to the Society shall
vest in the Institute;
(c) all the rights and liabilities of the Society shall be transferred to, and be the
rights and liabilities of the Institute; and
(d) every person employed by the Society, immediately before such
commencement shall hold his office or service in the Institute for the same tenure, at
the same remuneration and upon the same terms and conditions and with the same
rights and privileges as to pension, leave, gratuity, provident fund and other matters
as he would have held if this Act had not been passed, and shall continue to do so
unless and until his employment is terminated or until such tenure, remuneration
and terms and conditions are duly altered by the Statutes:
Provided that if the alteration so made is not acceptable to such employee, his
employment may be terminated by the Institute in accordance with the terms of
contract with the employee or, if no provision is made therein in this behalf, on
Definitions.
Incorporation
of Institute.
Tamil Nadu
Act 27 of
1975.
Tamil Nadu
Act 27 of
1975.
Effect of
incorporation
of Institute.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
payment to him by the Institute of compensation equivalent to three months’
remuneration in the case of permanent employees and one month’s remuneration in
the case of other employees.
(2) Any person pursuing any academic or research course, at any time before the
commencement of this Act, in the Society for award of any degree or diploma and registered
for the said purpose with it shall be deemed to have migrated after such commencement to
the Institute incorporated under this Act and be registered with the said Institute for grant
of the same degree or diploma by the Institute and such person shall be deemed to have
migrated and registered with the Institute incorporated under this Act at the same level of
study in the Society from which such person is deemed to have migrated.
6. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Institute shall exercise the following
powers and perform the following functions, namely:—
(a) to provide for instruction and research in such branches of engineering
and technology, management, education, sciences and arts, as the Institute may think
fit, and for the advancement of learning and dissemination of knowledge in such
branches;
(b) to hold examinations and grant degrees, diplomas and other academic
distinctions or titles;
(c) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions;
(d) to fix, demand and receive fees and other charges;
(e) to establish, maintain and manage halls and hostels for the residence of
students;
(f) to supervise and control the residence and regulate the discipline of students
of the Institute and to make arrangements for promoting their health, general welfare
and cultural and corporate life;
(g) to provide for the maintenance of units of the National Cadet Corps for the
students of the Institute;
(h) to create administrative, technical, ministerial, academic and other posts
with the prior approval of the Central Government, and to make appointments thereto
(except in the case of the Director);
(i) to frame Statutes and Ordinances and to alter, modify or rescind the same;
(j) to deal with any property belonging to or vested in the Institute in such
manner as the Institute may deem fit for advancing the objects of the Institute;
(k) to receive gifts, grants, donations or benefactions from the Government
and to receive bequests, donations and transfers of movable or immovable properties
from testators, donors or transferors, as the case may be;
(l) to co-operate with educational or other institutions in any part of the world
having objects wholly or partly similar to those of the Institute by exchange of
teachers and scholars and generally in such manner as may be conducive to their
common objects;
(m) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions, prizes and medals;
(n) to undertake consultancy in the areas or disciplines relating to the Institute;
and
(o) to do all such things as may be necessary, incidental or conducive to the
attainment of all or any of the objects of the Institute.
Powers and
functions of
Institute.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), the Institute shall not
dispose of in any manner any immovable property without the prior approval of the Central
Government.
7. (1) The Institute shall be open to persons of either sex and of whatever race,
creed, caste or class, and no test or condition shall be imposed as to religious belief or
profession in admitting or appointing members, students, teachers or workers or in any
other connection whatsoever.
(2) No bequest, donation or transfer of any property shall be accepted by the Institute
which, in the opinion of the Board, involves conditions or obligations opposed to the
spirit and object of this section.
8. All teaching at the Institute shall be conducted by or in the name of the Institute
in accordance with the Statutes and Ordinances made in this behalf.
9. (1) The President of India shall be the Visitor of the Institute.
(2) The Visitor may appoint one or more persons to review the work and progress of
the Institute and to hold inquiries into the affairs thereof and to report thereon in such
manner as the Visitor may direct.
(3) Upon receipt of any such report, the Visitor may take such action and issue such
directions as the Visitor considers necessary in respect of any of the matters dealt with in
the report and the Institute shall be bound to comply with such directions.
10. The following shall be the authorities of the Institute, namely:—
(a) Board of Governors;
(b) Senate; and
(c) such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be the
authorities of the Institute.
11. The Board of Governors of the Institute shall consist of the following members,
namely:—
(a) the Chairperson, to be nominated by the Visitor;
(b) the Director, ex officio;
(c) one person to be nominated by the Government of Tamil Nadu;
(d) four persons to be nominated by the Central Government having special
knowledge or practical experience in respect of engineering education, industry,
information technology, design and manufacturing industries;
(e) one professor to be nominated by the Senate;
(f) one nominee of the Ministry in the Central Government dealing with
Technical Education; and
(g) one nominee of the Ministry in the Central Government dealing with
Information Technology.
12. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this section, the term of office of the
Chairperson or other members of the Board shall be three years from the date of his
nomination.
(2) The term of office of an ex officio member shall continue so long as he holds the
office by virtue of which he is a member.
Institute to be
open to all
races, creeds
and classes.
Teaching at
Institute.
Visitor.
Authorities of
Institute.
Board of
Governors.
Terms of
office of,
vacancies
among and
allowances
payable to,
members of
Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

5
(3) The term of office of a member nominated under clause (e) of section 11 shall be
two years from the 1st day of January of the year in which he is nominated.
(4) The term of office of a member nominated to fill a casual vacancy shall continue
for the remainder of the term of the member in whose place he has been nominated.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, an outgoing member shall,
unless the Board otherwise directs, continue in office until another person is nominated as
a member in his place.
(6) The members of the Board shall be entitled to such allowances, if any, from the
Institute as may be provided for in the Statutes but no member other than the members
referred to in clauses (b) and (e) of section 11 shall be entitled to any salary by reason of
this sub-section.
(7) A member may resign his office by writing under his hand addressed to the Central
Government but he shall continue in office until his resignation is accepted by that
Government.
13. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board shall be responsible for the
general superintendence, direction and control of the affairs of the Institute and shall exercise
all the powers of the Institute not otherwise provided for by this Act, the Statutes and the
Ordinances and shall have the power to review the acts of the Senate.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), the Board shall,—
(a) take decisions on questions of policy relating to the administration and
working of the Institute;
(b) institute courses of study at the Institute;
(c) make Statutes;
(d) institute and appoint persons to academic as well as other posts in the
Institute;
(e) consider and modify or cancel Ordinances;
(f) consider and pass resolutions on the annual report, the annual accounts
and the budget estimates of the Institute;
(g) exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be
conferred or imposed upon it by this Act or the Statutes.
(3) The Board shall have the power to appoint such committees, as it considers
necessary for the exercise of its powers and the performance of its duties under this Act.
14. The Senate of the Institute shall consist of the following persons, namely:—
(a) the Director, ex officio, who shall be the Chairman of the Senate;
(b) the Professors appointed or recognised as such by the Institute for the
purpose of imparting instructions in the Institute;
(c) three persons, not being employees of the Institute, to be nominated by
the Board from among educationists of repute, one each from the fields of science,
engineering and humanities; and
(d) such other members of the staff as may be laid down in the Statutes.
15. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, the Senate
shall be the principal academic body of the Institute and shall have control over and be
responsible for maintenance of standards of education, teaching and training, inter-
departmental coordination, research, examinations and tests within the Institute and shall
Powers and
functions of
Board.
Senate.
Functions of
Senate.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

6
exercise such other powers and discharge such other duties and functions as may be
prescribed or conferred upon it by the Statutes.
16. (1) The Chairperson shall preside at the meetings of the Board and at convocations
of the Institute.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Chairperson to ensure that decisions taken by the
Board are implemented.
(3) The Chairperson shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be
assigned to him by or under this Act, Statutes or by resolution of the Board.
17. (1) The Director of the Institute shall be appointed by the Visitor, on whose
directions the Board shall issue an order of appointment.
(2) The Director shall be the principal academic and executive officer of the Institute
and shall be responsible for proper administration of the Institute and for imparting of
instruction and maintenance of discipline therein.
(3) The Director shall submit annual reports and accounts to the Board.
(4) The Director shall exercise such powers and perform such other duties as may be
assigned to him by this Act, the Statutes or Ordinances or by resolution of the Board.
18. (1) The appointment of the Registrar of the Institute shall be on such terms and
conditions as laid down by the Statutes.
(2) The Registrar shall be the custodian of records, the common seal, the funds of
the Institute and the property of the Institute, as the Board shall commit to his charge.
(3) The Registrar shall act as the Secretary of the Board and such committees, as
may be prescribed by the Statutes.
(4) The Registrar shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as
may be assigned to him by this Act or the Statutes or the Board or the Director and in
exercising such powers and in performing such duties, he shall be responsible to the Director
for the proper discharge of his functions.
19. The powers and duties of officers other than those mentioned in this Chapter
shall be determined by the Statutes.
20. For the purpose of enabling the Institute to discharge its functions efficiently
under this Act, the Central Government may after due appropriation made by Parliament
by law in this behalf, pay to the Institute in each financial year such sums of money and
in such manner as it may think fit.
21. (1) The Institute shall maintain a fund to which the following shall be credited,
namely:—
(a) all moneys provided by the Central Government or any State Government;
(b) all fees and other charges received by the Institute;
(c) all moneys received by the Institute by way of grants, gifts, donations,
benefactions, bequests or transfers; and
(d) all moneys received by the Institute in any other manner or from any other
source.
(2) All moneys credited to the Fund of the Institute shall be deposited in such banks
or invested in such manner as the Institute may, with the approval of the Central
Government, decide.
Powers and
functions of
Chairperson.
Director.
Registrar.
Other
authorities and
officers.
Grants by
Central
Government.
Funds of
Institute.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

7
(3) The Fund of the Institute shall be applied towards meeting the expenses of the
Institute, including expenses incurred in the exercise of its powers and discharge of its
duties under this Act.
22. (1) The Institute shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and
prepare an annual statement of accounts, including the balance sheet, in such form as may
be specified, by notification, by the Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller
and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The accounts of the Institute shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India and any expenditure incurred by him in connection with such audit shall
be payable by the Institute to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any person appointed by him
in connection with the audit of the accounts of the Institute shall have the same rights,
privileges and authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India has in connection with the audit of the Government accounts, and, in
particular, shall have the rights to demand the production of books, accounts, connected
vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect the offices of the Institute.
(4) The accounts of the Institute as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General
of India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report
thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government and that Government shall
cause the same to be laid before each House of Parliament in accordance with such
procedure as may be laid down by the Central Government.
23. (1) The Institute shall constitute for the benefit of its employees, including the
Director in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the
Statutes, such pension and provident funds and provide such insurance scheme as it may
deem fit.
(2) Where any such provident fund has been so constituted, the Central Government
may declare that the provisions of the Provident Funds Act, 1925 shall apply to such fund
as if it were a Government Provident Fund.
24. All appointments of the staff of the Institute, except that of the Director, shall be
made in accordance with the procedure laid down in the Statutes, by—
(a) the Board, if the appointment is made on the—
(i) academic staff in the post of Associate Professor or above; or
(ii) non-academic staff in any cadre up to a scale of pay as decided by
the Board; and
(b) the Director, in other cases.
25. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for all or any of
the following matters, namely:—
(a) the conferment of honorary degrees;
(b) the formation of departments or divisions of teaching;
(c) the fees to be charged for courses of study in the Institute and for admission
to the examinations of degrees and diplomas of the Institute;
(d) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions, medals and prizes;
(e) the term of office and the method of appointment of officers of the Institute;
(f) the qualifications of teachers of the Institute;
Accounts and
audit.
Pension and
provident
fund.
19 of 1925.
Appointments.
Statutes.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

8
(g) the classifications, the method of appointment and the determination of
the terms and conditions of service of teachers and other staff of the Institute;
(h) the constitution of pension and provident funds and insurance scheme for
the benefit of the officers, teachers and other staff of the Institute;
(i) the constitution, powers and duties of the authorities of the Institute;
(j) the establishment and maintenance of halls and hostels;
(k) the conditions of residence of students of the Institute and the levying of
fees for residence in the halls and hostels and of other charges;
(l) the allowances to be paid to the Chairperson and members of the Board;
(m) the authentication of the orders and decisions of the Board;
(n) the meetings of the Board, the Senate, or any Committee, the quorum at
such meetings and the procedure to be followed in the conduct of their business;
(o) any other matter which by this Act is to be or may be prescribed by the
Statutes.
26. (1) The first Statutes of the Institute shall be framed by the Central Government
with the previous approval of the Visitor and a copy of the same shall be laid as soon as
may be before each House of Parliament.
(2) The Board may, from time to time, make new or additional Statutes or may amend
or repeal the Statutes in the manner provided in this section.
(3) Every new Statute or addition to the Statutes or any amendment or repeal of
Statutes shall require the previous approval of the Visitor who may assent thereto or
withhold assent or remit it to the Board for consideration.
(4) A new Statute or a Statute amending or repealing an existing Statute shall have
no validity unless it has been assented to by the Visitor.
27. Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the Ordinances of the
Institute may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the admission of the students to the Institute;
(b) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees and diplomas of the
Institute;
(c) the conditions under which students shall be admitted to the degree or
diploma courses and to the examinations of the Institute, and shall be eligible for
degrees and diplomas;
(d) the conditions of award of the fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions, medals
and prizes;
(e) the conditions and mode of appointment and duties of examining bodies,
examiners and moderators;
(f) the conduct of examinations;
(g) the maintenance of discipline among the students of the Institute; and
(h) any other matter which by this Act or the Statutes is to be or may be
provided for by the Ordinances.
28. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this section, Ordinances shall be made by the
Senate.
Statutes, how
made.
Ordinances.
Ordinances,
how made.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

9
(2) All Ordinances made by the Senate shall have effect from such date as it may
direct, but every Ordinance so made shall be submitted, as soon as may be, to the Board
and shall be considered by the Board at its next succeeding meeting.
(3) The Board shall have power by resolution to modify or cancel any such Ordinance
and such Ordinance shall from the date of such resolution stand modified accordingly or
cancelled, as the case may be.
29. (1) Any dispute arising out of a contract between the Institute and any of its
employees shall, at the request of the employee concerned or at the instance of the
Institute, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of one member appointed by
the Institute, one member nominated by the employee, and an umpire appointed by the
Visitor.
(2) The decision of the Tribunal shall be final and shall not be questioned in any
court.
(3) No suit or proceeding shall lie in any court in respect of any matter, which is
required by sub-section (1) to be referred to the Tribunal of Arbitration.
(4) The Tribunal of Arbitration shall have power to regulate its own procedure.
(5) Nothing in any law for the time being in force relating to arbitration shall apply to
arbitrations under this section.
CHAPTER III
M
ISCELLANEOUS
30.  The Institute shall carry out such directions as may be issued to it from time to
time by the Central Government for the efficient administration of this Act.
31. No act of the Institute or Board or Senate or any other body set up under this
Act or the Statutes shall be invalid merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in or defect in the constitution thereof; or
(b) any defect in the selection, nomination or appointment of a person acting
as a member thereof; or
(c) any irregularity in its procedure not affecting the merits of the case.
32. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient
for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years
from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be
laid before each of House of Parliament.
33. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act,—
(a) the Board of Governors of the institute functioning as such immediately
before the commencement of this Act shall continue to so function until a new Board
is constituted for the Institute under this Act, but on the constitution of a new Board
under this Act, the members of the Board holding office before such constitution
shall cease to hold office;
(b) the Senate constituted in relation to the Institute before the commencement
of this Act shall be deemed to be the Senate constituted under this Act until a Senate
Tribunal of
Arbitration.
Control by
Central
Government.
Acts and
proceedings
not to be
invalidated by
vacancies, etc.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Transitional
provisions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

10
is constituted under this Act for the Institute, but on the constitution of the new
Senate under this Act, the members of the Senate holding office before such
constitution shall cease to hold office.
34. (1) The Indian Institute of Information Technology, Design and Manufacturing,
Kancheepuram Ordinance, 2011 is hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said
Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions
of this Act.
Repeal and
saving. Ord. 2 of
2011.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to declare the Indian Institute of Information Technology, Design and Manufacturing,
Kancheepuram, in the State of  Tamil Nadu, to be an institution of national importance
and to provide for its incorporation and for matters connected therewith.
————
(As passed by Lok Sabha)
GMGIPMRND— 1519LS(S3)—25-08-2011.