1
THE PROVISION OF FREE MEDICAL AND ENGINEERING
EDUCATION TO MERITORIOUS STUDENTS BILL, 2012
By
SHRI RAMEN DEKA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for free medical and engineering education to meritorious students who are
economically weak and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1)  This Act may be called the Provision of Free Medical and Engineering Education
to Meritorious Students Act, 2012.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 35 of  2012
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
Definitions.

2
(b) "economically weak student" means a student whose family income from all
sources is not more than rupees two thousand per month;
(c) "meritorious student" means a student,—
(i) who obtains such marks or grade in a school examination, as may be
prescribed, and gets selected in a medical or engineering course on the basis of
such marks or grade; or
(ii) who gets selected in a medical or engineering course on the basis of
rank secured by him in a State or national level entrance examination conducted
for the purpose of admitting students into medical or engineering course; and
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The appropriate Government shall provide free medical or engineering education
to every meritorious student who is economically weak.
Explanation.— For the purpose of this section, free education includes,—
(a) all expenses incurred on admission and tuition fees;
(b) books and stationery items;
(c) hostel facilities, wherever necessary; and
(d) scholarships, in such cases, as may be prescribed.
4. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament, in this
behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Governments for the purposes of this Act.
5. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters provided in this Act.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made,  the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Provision of
free medical or
engineering
education to
economically
weak students.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
5
10
15
20Provisions of
the Act not to
be in
derogation of
any other law
for the time
being in force.
Power to
make rules.
25
30

3
S3\F\BILL 2012\LS\4857LS(E)
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Most of the parents aspire to make their children either a doctor  or an engineer and
most of the youth studying in the schools also have the same desire. However, there are
many extraordinarily brilliant students whose dreams are not realised only due to poverty.
Medical and engineering education is so expensive that even middle class families cannot
afford to provide this education to their children. For this reason, a large number of meritorious
students are not able to get admission in medical or engineering colleges.
Since our country is a welfare State, it is our duty to provide opportunity to such poor
but meritorious students to continue the courses of  their interest and fulfil their life's ambition.
N
EW DELHI; RAMEN DEKA
March 12, 2012.

4
S3\F\BILL 2012\LS\4857LS(E)
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for free medical and engineering education by the
appropriate Government for meritorious students, who are economically weak. It also provides
for scholarships and certain other facilities to those students. Clause 4 provides that the
Central Government shall, after due appropriation, provide adequate funds to the State
Governments for the purposes of this Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees fifty
crore is likely to be involved as a recurring expenditure per annum.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

5
S3\F\BILL 2012\LS\4857LS(E)
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. These rules will relate to matters of detail only. The delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a  normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for free medical and engineering education to meritorious students who are
economically weak and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Ramen Deka, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4857LS(S3)—16-4-2012.