AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA.

3 - DEC 2004

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2004
By
Suri W. WancyuH Konyak, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
Be itenacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2004. Short title.
(2) This shall come into force at once. anes
Amendment

2. In article 164 of the Constitution, in clause (1A), after the existing provisos, the ४
lowing proviso shall be added, namely,— of article 164
"Provided further that nothing in this article shall apply to the State of Nagaland."


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Constitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Act, 2003, inter alia requires the States
through an amendment to article 164 to limit the number of members in the Council of
Ministers to 15 per cent. of total number of the Legislative Assembly of the State concerned,
subject toa minimum of 12 Ministers, The President of India had issued a notification on
7 January, 2004 in this regard. Accordingly, this restriction has come into force with effect
from 7 July, 2004. This has resulted in severe hardship to the task of carrying out governance
in the smaller States, in the North-Eastern States which are totally underdeveloped. The
State of Nagaland, which has 16 major tribes and several minor tribes, has to accommodate
the aspirations of all the tribal groups who desire participation in governance. The Naga
Political, social and cultural structure is a unique one and the Constitution of India has
accorded a very special place to Nagaland through article 371-A, The inclusion of Nagaland
in the sweep of article 164(1A) is being perceived there as an infringement on the |
Position of Nagas in India. The Nagaland Legislative Assembly duly passed a resolution
against the inclusion of Nagaland in the then impending amendment of article 164 in the
Constitution way back on 18 December, 2003. Since then, delegations led by the Chief
Minister, Speaker and other Ministers of Nagaland presented several representations
highlighting the need for exempting Nagaland from the application of article 164(1A) witha
view to maintaining the status quo on peace and tribal cohesion in the State. Under article
370 of the Constitution, Jammu and Kashmir stands exempted from the application of article
164(1), This Bill seeks to exempt Nagaland from the application of article 164(1 A) in view of
the special status of Nagaland under article 371-A,

New Det, 2 WANGYUH KONYAK
June 28,2004,


ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA,

. . . . . . .

164. (1) The Chief Minister shall be appointed by the Governor and the other Ministers
shall be appointed by the Governor on the advice of the Chief Minister, and the Ministers
shall hold office during the pleasure of the Governor.

Provided that in the States of Bihar, Madhya Pradesh and Orissa, there shall be a
Minister in charge of tribal welfare who may in addition be in charge of the welfare of the
Scheduled Castes and backward classes or any other work.

"(1A) The total number of Ministers, including the Chief Minister, in the Council of
Ministers in a State shall not exceed fifteen per cent. of the total number of members of the
Legislative Assembly of that State:

Provided that the number of Ministers, including the Chief Minister, in a State shall not
be less than twelve:

Provided further that where the total number of Ministers, including the Chief Minister,
in the Council of Ministers in any State at the commencement of the Constitution (Ninety,
first Amendment) Act, 2003 exceeds the said fifteen per cent. or the number specified in the
first proviso, as the case may be, then, the total number of Ministers in that State shall be
brought in conformity with the provisions of this clause within six months from such date as
the President may by public notification appoint.

* . . . . * *

‘Other
provisions as
to Ministers,


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India,

(Shri W. Wangyuh Konyak, M.P)

MGIPMRND—1081LS—12.07.2004.