As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

14 AUG 90

Bill No. 35 of 2006

THE GIRL CHILD (WELFARE) BILL, 2006
By
Suri CHANDRAKANT Kuaire, M.P.
A
BILL

to provide for welfare measures for the girl child and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as

follows:—
1. (J) This Act may be called the Girl Child (Welfare) Act, 2006. Short title,
(2) It extends to the whole of India. extent and
commence-
5 (3) It shall come into force at once. ment.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:— Definitions.

(a) "girl child” means a girl who has not completed the age of eighteen years;

(b) "Fund" means the Girl Child Welfare Fund constituted under section 15 of
this Act;

(©) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under the Act; and

(व) "scheme" means the Girl Child Welfare Scheme formulated under section 3 of
this Act.

10


Central
Government
to formulate
scheme for
the welfare of
girl child.

State/Union
territory
Governments
to implement
the Scheme in.
their
respective
jurisdictions.
Girl Child
Welfare Fund.

Act to apply
only to those
families
having two
girl children.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
State/Union
Territory
Governments
to forward
information
regarding girl
children.

Laying of
Annual
Report.

Power to make
rules.

2

3. (7) The Central Government shall formulate a scheme to be known as the
Girl Child Welfare Scheme for the welfare of girl child.

(2) The scheme shall, inter-alia, provide for:—

(@ free education in all courses including technical and professional courses
10 4 girl child if she is the only child of her parents;

(ii free education to two girl children upto senior secondary school level ifthe
parents have two girl children;

(iid) scholarship of an amount not exceeding rupees three thousand per month
to every girl child pursuing any professional or technical course;

(iv) free health care for all girl children;

(»)a fixed deposit of rupees two lakh in the name of every girl child at the time
of birth for a period of eighteen years;

(vi) an insurance scheme for the girl child; and

(vid) provision of financial assistance to such families as have girl children at
the time of marriage of such children on attaining the age of marriage.

4. The scheme shall be implemented by the State Governments and Union
territory administrations in their respective jurisdictions.

5. (7) The Central Government shall set up a fund to be known as the Girl
Child Welfare Fund for the implementation of the provisions of this Act.

(2) The Central Government and State Governments shall contribute to the
fund in such proportion as may be prescribed.

(3) Such other sums as may be received by way of donation, contribution or
assistance or otherwise by the Central Government or the State Governments shall
also be credited to the fund.

6. The provisions of this Act shall apply only to those families not having more
than two girl children.

7. The provisions of this Act shall take effect notwithstanding anything con-
tained in any other law for the time being in force regarding welfare of girl children.

8. (1) Every State Government or Union territory administration, as the case
may be, shall forward detailed information regarding number of gir! children, families
having more than one irl child, the amount required for assistance and such other
information as may be prescribed to the Central Government.

(2) On receipt of information, the Central Government shall release neces-
sary funds to the State Government for the welfare of girl children.

9. The Central Government shall lay before each House of Parliament, an
annual report giving full account of implementation of provisions of the Act.

10. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

20

25

30

35


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The dwindling sex ratio is one of the major problems facing the society and the nation
as a whole. In some States, it has taken the proportion of a crisis. Female infanticide has
become common in many parts of the country. There have been instances when, after birth,
girl children were killed by her own parents. The main reason for such actions is that in our
society the parents of a girl child have to spend a lot of money on her marriage. Majority of
the population liyes below poverty line and as such they are not in a position to spend a lot
of money on marriages. This has given rise to this social problem.

Though many steps have been taken to prevent female infanticide, yet it has not
stopped completely as it is done discreetly with the help of greedy medical practitioners.

Therefore, it is felt that giving incentives to the families of girl children may be a better
way out for the welfare of girl child and to prevent the occurrence of female infanticide.

Hence this Bill.

New Deut; CHANDRAKANT KHAIRE
March 2,2006

w


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM.

Clause 3 of the Bill envisages formulation of a scheme to be known as Girl Child
Welfare Scheme for the welfare of girl child. Clause 5 provides for setting up of 2 fund to be
-known as the Girl Child Welfare Fund for the welfare of girl children. Clause 8 of the Bill
provides that the Central Government shall release funds to the State/Union territories
Governments for taking welfare measures for girl child. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. A recurring expenditure of about
rupees five thousand crore per annum is likely to be involved.

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees ten thousand crore is also likely to be
involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Government to frame rules for carrying out the A
purpose of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.



LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for welfare measures for the girl child and for matters connected therewith or

(Shri Chandrakant Khaire, M.P)

MGIPMRND—6791LS (S-5)—18.04.2006.