THE PROHIBITION AND ERADICATION OF RAGGING BILL, 2019
By
SHRI ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY, M.P.
A
BILL
to prohibit and eradicate ragging in educational institutions and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act  may be called the Prohibition and Eradication of Ragging Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in  the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different provisions
of this Act and for different States, and any reference to commencement in any provision of
this Act in relation to any State shall be construed as a reference to the commencement of
that provision in that State.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. 35 of  2019
5
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “Committee” means the anti-ragging commitee constituted under section 7;
(c) “Educational institution” means any college, institute, university whether
established by the Government or by any citizen or body of citizens and whether in
receipt of aid from Government or not, recognised by Central or State Government for
the award of a certificate, diploma or a degree in any course of study, education or
training;
(d) “freshers” means those students who have taken admission in the first year
of under-graduate or post-graduate level in any stream in any educational institution;
(e) “head of the institution” means the Vice-Chancellor in case of a university or
a deemed university and in case of any other institution, the Principal or the Director,
as the case may be;
(f) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(g) “seniors” means those students who are not in first year of under-graduate
or post-graduate level in any stream in any educational institutions.
3. (1) The Act shall apply to all institutions coming within the definition of a University
under sub-section (f) of section 2 of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956, and to all
institutions deemed to be a university under section 3 of the University Grants Commission
Act, 1956, and to all other higher educational institutions, or elements of such universities
or institutions, including its departments, constituent units and all the premises, whether
being academic, residential, playgrounds, canteen, hostel or other such premises of such
universities, deemed universities and higher educational institutions, whether located within
the campus or outside, and to all means of transportation of students, whether public or
private, accessed by students for the pursuit of studies in such universities, deemed
universities and higher educational institution.
(2) In addition to the educational institutions mentioned in sub-section (1), the
provisions of this Act shall apply also to all vocational and professional institutions.
4. The ragging shall included following acts,—
(i) any conduct by any student or a group of students whether by words
spoken or written or by an act which has the effect of teasing, treating, torturing, or
handling with rudeness a fresher or any other student;
(ii) indulging in rowdy or indisciplinary activities by any student or a group of
students which causes or is likely to cause annoyance, hardship, physical or
psychological harm or to raise fear or apprehension thereof in any fresher or any
other student;
(iii) asking any student to do any act which such student shall not in the
ordinary course do and which has the effect of causing or generating a sense of
shame, or torment or embarrassment so as to adversely affect the physique or psyche
of such fresher or any other student;
(iv) any act by a Student that prevents, disrupts or disturbs the regular academic
activity of any other student or a fresher;
(v) exploiting the services of a fresher or any other student for completing the
academic tasks assigned to an individual or a group of student;
(vi) any act of financial extortion or forceful expenditure burden put on a fresher
or any other student by students;
2
Application of
the Act.
Acts which
constitute
ragging.
Definitions. 5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(vii) any act of physcial abuse including sexual abuse, homosexual assaults,
stripping, forcing obscene and lewd acts, gestures, causing bodily harm or any other
danger to health or person;
(viii) any act or abuse, by use of spoken words, telephone, short message
service (SMS), e-mails, multi-media messaging service, post, public insults,
pornographic material, photographs or video clips, etc., to derive perverted pleasure,
vicarious or sadistic thrill from actively or passively participating in the discomfiture
or fresher or any other student; and
(ix) any act that affects the mental health and self-confidence of a fresher or any
other student with or without an intent to derive a sadistic pleasure or showing off
power, authority or superiority by a student over any fresher or any other student.
5.  Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, for the time being in force,
in any trial under this Act, the burden of proof as to the innocence shall lie on the accused.
6. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force
the Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but within six months from the date of
commencement of this Act, issue such directives for prohibition of ragging in all colleges
and educational institutions functioning under Central Government as may be prescribed.
(2) The Central Government shall, issue similar directives to all State Governments for
taking steps to prohibit ragging in all colleges and educational institutions in their respective
jurisdiction.
(3) The prohibition under sub-section ( 1) shall also be extended to and educational
institutions in the Union territories.
(4) Every public declaration of intent by any educational institution for admission of
students to any course of study, brochure of admission or instruction booklet or the
prospectus, in any electronic, audio-visual or print or any other media shall expressly
provide that ragging is prohibited in the institution and anyone found guilty or ragging or
abetting ragging whether actively or passively or being a part of conspiracy to promote
ragging is liable to be punished in accordance with this Act.
7. (1) The appropriate Government shall ensure that an Anti-Ragging Committee is
constituted in every educational institution headed by the senior most faculty of the
institution and consisting of representatives of civil and police administration including at
least one female representative and representative other from non-governmental
organisation, parents, freshers and seniors.
(2) The appropriate Government shall extend its full support to the Anti-Ragging
Committee to enable it to perform its duties to the fullest to ensure that all colleges and
educational institution are free from ragging and harassment of freshers.
(3) The Anti-Ragging Committee shall perform the following functions:—
(a) to receive complaints on ragging and submit a report to the head of the
institution;
(b) to take inputs from various people including staff and freshers on any
incident of ragging;
(c) to conduct necessary awareness programme to enlighten the students
regarding the effects of ragging;
(d) after conducting thorough investigation, action to be taken against the
offenders as per the rules prescribed under this Act.
8. (1) Every educational institution shall have an Anti-Ragging Squad.
(2) The Anti-Ragging Squad shall function under the guidance of Anti-Ragging
Committee consisting of the representatives nominated by the head of the educational
institution.
Prohibition of
ragging.
Burden of
proof.
Constitution
of Anti-
Ragging
Committee
and its
functions.
Constitution
of Anti-
Ragging Squad
and its
functions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(3) The Anti-Ragging Squad shall—
(a) make surprise checks in hostel and campus to keep a check on ragging;
(b) report any incident of ragging to the committee;
(c) be in constant touch with the staff and students and consult various incidents of
ragging.
9. (1) Any student convicted under this Act shall be debarred from continuing his
studies in any educational institutions for a period of three years.
(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of this Act shall be punished with fine which
shall not be less than rupees twenty-five thousand but which may extend upto rupees one
lakh or with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend upto three years or, with
both.
(3) The appropriate Government shall direct University Grants Commission or the
funding agency of the educational institution, as the case may be, to take such steps against
the head of the educational institution who fails to prevent ragging in such manner may
deem necessary.
10. The proceeding under this Act shall be tried by the Educational Tribunal or the
High Court in the respective State as far as possible.
11. Save as provided under this Act, the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure
1973 shall be applicable to any trial under this Act.
12. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, any
other law for the time being in force.
13. (1) The Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Penalty.
Proceeding.
Provisions of
the Code of
Criminal
Procedure to
be applied.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

5
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Ragging is rising problem which is escalating on a daily basis needs to be addressed
immediately. It mainly concerns with the new generation who take admission in academic
institutes, colleges or university having a dream of a bright future which ultimately results in
the upliftment of the society and the country as a whole. Ragging has been recognised as a
Human Rights Violation. There have been many instances where ragging has led to death of
a student. In many cases, it has been observed that a lot of students go into depression or
drop out of the college, institute or university seeing the plight of these students, all sections
of the society are raising their voice to prohibit  ragging and are demanding that the Government
must take proactive steps to eradicate this menace to the society.
On the 8th May, 2009, the Hon'ble Supreme Court ordered the Union Government to
implement a plan for prevention of ragging. Following this Judgment the University Grants
Commission (UGC) and other regulatory authorities like All India Council for Technical
Education (AICTE), Medical Council of India (MCI), Dental Council of India (DCI), etc.
published a single set of regulations that would cover the entire nation and all educational
institutions. The regulations of University Grants Commission (UGC) came into effect on
June, 2009.
This Bill combines the essential elements of UGC regulations and the order of the
Hon'ble Supreme Court. Therefore, in a certain sense, the Bill simply formalises what exists as
of today. All elements of the Bill are actually in place at present.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
June  4, 2019.

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clasue 13 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of
legislative power is of normal charactor.

MGIPMRND—325LS(S3)—13-06-2019.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to prohibit and eradicate ragging in educational institutions and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury, M.P.)