     AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 35 of 2021
THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS
(AMENDMENT)  BILL, 2021
By
SHRI ANUBHA V MOHANTY, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Amendment)
Act, 2021.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title
and
commencement.
5

2. In section 11 of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960 (hereinafter
referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section (1),
(a) after clause (0), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:–
“(p) organizes, participates, promotes or in any manner is associated with
any sport or activity involving the use of animals, where such animals are
subjected to cruelty either during the sport or activity itself, or while in training;
(q) skins, roasts or kills for superstition or extracts parts of any live animals
through a procedure which causes pain and suffering, for the purpose of getting
skins, oils or other animal products;
(r) dynamites streams, rivers or other water bodies for the purpose of fishing
or harming aquatic animals; or
(s) electrifies a fence, without the authority of law, whereby pain and suffering
is caused to any animals;”; and
(b) for the words “he shall be punishable, in the case of a first offence, with fine
which shall not be less than ten rupees but which may extend to fifty rupees, and in
the case of a second or subsequent offence committed within three years of the previous
offence, with fine which shall not be less than twenty-five rupees but which may
extend to one hundred rupees or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
three months, or with both”, the words “he shall be punishable, in the case of a first
offence, with fine which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees but which may
extend to twenty five thousand rupees, or with imprisonment up to one year, or with
both, and in the case of a second or subsequent offence, with fine which shall not be
less than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees, and with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year but may extend to three
years.” shall be substituted.
3. After section 11 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted,
namely:–
“11A. If any person knowingly carries out an act of cruelty on any animal to
cause permanent bodily harm or commits an act that is known to cause imminent
danger to the life of an animal or likely to cause death or life threating trauma to
the animal, he shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to two years and/or with fine of rupees fifty thousand per animal or cost of the
animal, whichever is higher.
11B. (1) If any person commits an act with the intention of causing death to an
animal or commits an act which is likely to cause death in any given circumstances
of an animal with or without intention he shall be punished with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to five years, with fine of rupees one lakh or three
time the cost of the animals, whichever is higher.
(2) Nothing in this section shall apply  to acts of killing or slaughter of an animal
as exempted under clauses (d) and (e) of sub-section (3) of section 11 or any
other law for the time being in force.”
4. In section 12 of the principal Act, for the words “one thousand rupees, or with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years”, the words “forty five
thousand rupees or with imprisonment for a term of three years which may extend to
five years” shall be susbstituted.
5. In section 20 of the principal Act, for the words, “he shall be punishable with
fine which may extend to two hundred rupees, and, when the contravention or breach
of condition has taken place in any institution, the person in charge of the institution
5
2
10
15
20
25
30
Amendment of
section 11.
Penalty for
gruesome or
life threating
cruelty against
animals.
Penalty for
killing an
animal.
35
40
45
Amendment of
section 12.
Amendment of
section 20.
59 of 1960
Insertion of
new sections
11A and 11B.

shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be punishable accordingly,” the
words “such person or institution shall be punishable in the case of a first offence,
with fine which shall not be less than two lakh rupees and in the case of a second or
subsequent offence, with fine which shall not be less than five lakh rupees but which
may extend upto ten lakh rupees or with imprisonment for  a term which may extend
to two years or with both” shall be substituted.
6. In section 26 of the principal Act, for the words “five hundred rupees or with
imprisonment which may extend to three months,”, the words  “twenty five thousand
rupees per animal or with imprisonment which may extend to six months,” shall be
substituted.
7. In section 29 of the principal Act, in sub-section (5), for the words “one
hundred rupees, or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months.”,
the words “twenty five thousand rupees, or with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to six months,” shall be substituted.
8. In section 31 of the principal Act, for the words and figures “an offence
punishable under clause (1), clause (n), clause (1) or clause (o) of sub-section (1) of
section 11 or under section 12 the words and figures “an offence punishable under
section 11, section 12 and section 38” shall be substituted.
9. In section 38 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), for the words “one
hundred rupees or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months,”
the words, “seven thousand five hundred rupees per animal or with imprisonment for
a term which may extend to six months,” shall be substituted.
3
Amendment of
section 38.
Amendment of
section 31.
Amendment of
section 29.
Amendment of
section 26.
5
10
15
20

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
     The primary objective of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960 is
the prevention of infliction of unnecessary pain or suffering on animals. Since the
time of coming into force, the Act has not been amended. Resultantly, many of its
provisions have become either outdated or insufficient in dealing with the scourge of
animal cruelty.
The categories of acts that constitute the offence of animal cruelty under
section 11 are not comprehensive. They do not take into account various acts such as
involvement in sports or activities whereby animals are subjected to cruelty, injuring
or killing animals for superstition, extracting parts of live animals through a procedure
that inflicts cruelty for the purpose of getting animal products, dynamiting water
bodies for fishing and electrifying fences without authority of law which results in
causing pain and suffering to animals.
The quantum of penalty prescribed under sections 11, 12, 26, 29 and 38 of the
Act is extremely paltry, ranging from rupees ten to rupees two hundred. Such meager
penalties render the provisions of the Act highly ineffectual and practically toothless.
Consequently, the Act fails to serve as a strong deterrent to animal abuse and
inadvertently perpetuates recurring incidents of cruelty to animals.
In light of the foregoing, this Bill seeks to amend the provisions of penalty and
cognizability of offences under the Act to expand the scope of its application and
enhance the penalties prescribed under it. Through these changes, the Bill aims to
make the Act more comprehensive and bring its provisions in line with its aims and
purposes.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
  NEW DELHI;                      ANUBHA V MOHANTYJanuary 22, 2021

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960
* * * * * *
11. (1) If any person
(a)     * * * *
                        * * * *
(o) promotes or takes part in any shooting match or competition wherein
animals are released from captivity for the purpose of such shooting;
* * * * *
12. If any person upon any cow or other milch animal the operation called
practising phooka or 21[doom dev. or any other operation (including injection of any
or doom dev. substance) to improve lactation which is injurious to the health of the
animal] or permits such operation being performed upon any such animal in his
possession or under his control, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to
one thousand rupees, or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years,
or with both, and the animal on which the operation was performed shall be forfeited
to the Government.
* * * * *
20. If any person —
(a) contravenes any order made by the Committee under section 19; or
(b) commits a breach of any condition imposed by the Committee under
that section:
he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees, and,
when the contravention or breach of condition has taken place in any institution the
person incharge of the institution shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall
be punishable accordingly.
* * * * *
26. If any person —
(a) not being registered under this chapter, exhibits or trains any performing
animal; or
(b) being registered under the Act, exhibits or trains any performing animal
with respect to which or in a manner with respect to which, he is not registered; or
(c) exhibits or trains as a performing animal, any animal which is not to be
used for the purpose by reason of a notification issued under clause (ii) of
section 22; or
(d) obstructs or wilfully delays any person or police officer referred to in
section 25 in the exercise of powers under this Act as to entry and inspection; or
(e) conceals any animal with a view to avoiding such inspection; or
(f) being a person registered under ‘the Act, on being duly required in
pursuance of this Act to produce his certificate under this Act, fails without
reasonable excuse so to do; or
(g) applies to be registered under this Act when not entitled to be so
registered,
he shall be punishable on conviction with fine which may extend to five
hundred rupees or with imprisonment which may extend to three months, or
with both.
* * * * *
5
Offences.
Penalities.
Penalty for
practising
phooka or
doom dev.
Treating
animals
cruelty.

6
29. (1) If the owner of any animal is found guilty of any offence under this Act,
the court, upon his conviction thereof, may, if it thinks fit, in addition to any other
punishment, make an order that the animal with respect to which the offence was
committed shall be forfeited to Government and may, further, make such order as to
the disposal of the animal as it thinks fit under the circumstances.
(2) No order under sub-section (1) shall be made unless it is shown by evidence
as to a previous conviction under this Act or as to the character of the owner or
otherwise as to the treatment of the animal that the animal, it left with the owner, is
likely to be exposed to further cruelty.
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section (1), the court
may also order that a person convicted of an offence under this Act shall, either
permanently or during such period as is fixed by the order, be prohibited from having
the custody of any animal of any kind whatsoever, or, as the court thinks fit, of any
animal of any kind or species specified in the order.
(4) No order under sub-section (3) shall be made unless—
(a) it is shown by evidence as to a previous conviction or as to the character
of the said person or otherwise as to the treatment of the animal in relation to
which he has been convicted that an animal in the custody of the said person is
likely to be exposed to cruelty;
(b) it is stated in the complaint upon which the conviction was made that it
is the intention of the complainant upon the conviction of the accused to request
that an order be made as aforesaid; and
(c) the offence for which the conviction was made was committed in an
area in which under the law for the time being in force a licence is necessary for
the keeping of any such animal as that in respect of which the conviction was
made.
 (5) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any law for the time
being in force, any person in respect of whom an order is made under sub-section (3)
shall have no right to the custody of any animal contrary to the provisions of the
order, and if he contravenes the provisions of any order, he shall be punishable with
fine which may extend to one hundred rupees, or with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to three months, or with both.
(6) Any court which has made an order under sub-section (3) may at any time,
either on its own motion or on application made to it in this behalf, rescind or modify
such order.
* * * * *
31. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code or Criminal Procedure,
1898, (5 of 1898) an offence punishable under clause (1) or clause (n) or clause (o)
of sub-section (1) of section 11 or under section 12 shall be a cognizable offence
within the meaning of that code.
* * * * *
Power of court
to deprive
person
convicted of
ownership of
animal.
Cognizability
of offences.

38. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
and subject to the condition of previous publication, make rules to carry out the
purposes of this Act.
(2) * * * * *
(3) If any person contravens, or abets the contravention of, any rules made under
this section, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees,
or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with both.
* * * * *            *
Power to make
rules.
7

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
further to amend the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960
.
————
(Shri  Anubhav Mohanty, M.P .)