Chauses

21.
22.

Crt Ay Pp

3 WAY 20:

AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

But No. 35 or 2002

THE CASHEW BOARD BILL, 2002
By
‘Suri Kopikunni Suresi, M.P.

ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
CHAPTER-I
PRELIMINARY

Short title, extent.

Declaration as to expediency of control.
Definitions.

CHAPTER-I

ESTABLISHMENT OF CASHEW 8000
Establishment and constitution of Cashew Board.
Central Government to consult the Board.
Committees of the Board.
Salary and allowances and other conditions of service of Chairman.
Appointment of Marketing Officer, etc.
Registration.
State Government to make rules.

CHAPTER-IIT
ConTROL OF SALE, EXPORT AND RE-IMPoRT OF CASHEW

Fixation of price.
Restriction on sale.
Registered owners not to sell cashew without licence.

Export of cashew.
Exported cashew not to be re-imported.
Free sale quota.
Return.
Permission to sale unprocessed cashew.
Surplus pool.
Marketing.
CHAPTER-IV
CurING oF CASHEW

Curing of cashew in licensing establishment,
Licence,


24.

26.
27.
28.

29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37:
38.
39.

41.
42.
43.
44.
45.

(CHAPTER-V

General Fund.

Pool Fund.
Donations.

Power to borrow.
Payment to owners.

CHAPTER-VI

f PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE
Penalties for non-registration.
Penalties for violation of Act.
Penalties for processing establishment without licence.
Penalties for non-filing of returns.
Penalties for filing false returns.
Penalties for non-delivery of cashew.
Seizure.
Penalties for failure to produce records.
Offences by Companies.
Judicial Magistrate to try cases.
Control of Central Government.
Appeal. ;
Inspection.
Accounts. 4
Payment of fees for obtaining copies of proceedings.
Contracts in violation of the Act to be void.
Act done in good faith.
Power to make rules.

Gi)



As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

Bill No. 35 of 2002
THE CASHEW BOARD BILL, 2002
By
‘Suet Kopikunni SurESH, M.P.
A
BILL

to provide for the setting up of a Cashew Board for development of the cashew industry.
Whereas it is expedient to provide for the development under the control of the

Union of the cashew industry.
Beit enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER-I
‘PRELIMINARY
1. (J) This Act may be called the Cashew Board Act, 2002. Short title and
5 (2) 10 extends to the whole of India. —
2. It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the public interest that the Union should ‘Declaration as
take under its control the cashew industry. v=”
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — Definitions.

(a) “Board” means the Cashew Board constituted under section 4;
10 (b) “Chairman” means the Chairman of the Board;
(©) “Cashew” means and includes raw and processed cashew;


Z

(d) "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Customs as specified in
clause (0) of section 3 of the Custom's Act, 1962;

(e) "curing establishment" means any place to which raw cashew is transported
by aregistered owner for curing, and includes any estate which the Board may declare
to be a curing establishment for the purposes of this Act;

(f) "dealer" means a person carrying on the business of selling cashew whether
wholesale or by retail;

(g) “estate” means an area administered as one unit which contains land planted
with cashew plants;
(h) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;

(i "registered estate" means an estate in respect of which an owner is registered
under sub-section (1) of section 11 and includes also any estate in respect of which an
owner is required to be registered under the provisions of that sub-section;

(j) “registered owner" means an owner of a registered estate who has been or is
required to be registered under sub-section (1) of section 9;

(&) "surplus pool” means the stock of cashew accumulated by the Board out of
the amounts delivered to the Board under section 23 ; and

(D "year" means the period of twelve months beginning with the first day of
July and ending with the thirtieth day of June next following.

CHAPTER -I ,
[ESTABLISHMENT OF CASHEW BOARD

Establishment 4. (1) There shall be established a Board to be known as Cashew Board for the
and constitu-
and constitu development of cashew industry.
Board. (2) The Board shall consist of the following members namely:—

(a) a Chairman to be appointed by the Central Government by notification in

the official Gazette;
(6) a Vice-Chairman, who shall be elected from amongst the members of the

Board;
बे (0 three Members of Parliament, of whom two shall be elected by the House of
People and one by the Council of States; and

(@ such number of other members not exceeding eleven as the Central Govern-
ment may think expedient, to be appointed by that Government by notification in
the Official Gazette from among persons who are in its opinion of representing: —

() Governments of the principal cashew growing States;
(i) cashew growing industry;
(iii) cashew trade interests;
(iv) _ interests of labour;

(») _ interests of the consumer; and

(vi) such other interests as, in the opinion of the Central Government,
ought to be represented on the Board.

(3) The number of persons to be apppointed as members from each of the
categories specified in clause (d) of sub-section (2), the term of office of, the proce-
dure to be followed in the discharge of their functions by, and the manner of filling
vacancies among the members of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.



20

2s:

30

35

40

45

3

(4) Any officer of the Central Government when deputed by that Government
in this behalf shall have the right to attend meetings of the Board and take part in the
proceedings thereof but shall not be entitled to vote.

(5) Not act done by the Board shall be questioned on the ground merely on the
existence of any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Board,

(6) It is hereby declared that the office of member of the Board shall not dis-

qualify its holder for being chosen as, or for being, a member of either House of
Parliament.

(7) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name of the Cashew Board,
having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power to acquire and hold
property, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall by the said name
sue and be sued, है

$. Before taking any action regarding the affairs of the Board under this Act, the
Central Government shall ordinarily consult the Board.

6. (7) The Board may appoint such Committees for such purposes and may employ
such staff as it thinks necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under thisAct.

(2) The Board may authorise agents to discharge on its behalf its functions in
relation to the marketing, storing and processing of cashew.

7. The Chairman shall be entitled to such salary and allowances and such condi-
tions of service in respect of leave, pension, provident fund and other matters as may,
from time to time, be fixed by the Central Government.

8. (/) The Central Government shall appoint an officer to be called the Chief
Cashew Marketing Officer and a Secretary to the Board and may appoint a Deputy
Secretary to the Board and such number of Marketing Officers, as may be necessary, to
exercise such powers and to perform such duties under the direction of the Board as may
be prescribed.

(2) The officers appointed under this section shall be entitled to such salaries
and allowances and such conditions of service in respect of leave, pension, provident
fund and other matters as may, from time to time, be fixed by the Central
Government.

9, (1) Every owner of land planted with cashew plants, whether such land is comprised
in one estate or in more than one estate and whether it is situated wholly or partly in India,
shall, before the expiration of one month from the date on which he first became owner of
such estate or estates, apply to the registering officer appointed in this behalf by the State
Government to be registered as an owner in respect of each estate owned by him; and any
registration made before the commencement of the Cashew Board Act, 2002 shall be deemed
to have been made under this sub-section.

(2) A registration once made shall continue in force until it is cancelled by the
registering officer.

10. (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying into effect the provisions of section 9.

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may
prescribe the form of the application for registration and for cancellation of registra-
tion, the fee payable on such applications, the particulars to be included in such
applications, the procedure to be followed in granting and cancelling registration,
the registers to be kept by registering officers, and the supply by registering officers
of information to the Board.

Central
Government
to consult the
Board,
Committees
of the Board,

Salary and
allowances
and other
conditions of
services of
Chairman,

Appointment
of Marketing
Officer, etc.

Registration.

State
Government
to make rules.


Fixation of
Price.

Restriction on
sale.

Registered

Export of
cashew.

Exported
cashew not to
be re-imported.

Free sale
quota,

4
CHAPTER-IL
Conrrot oF 54%, Export AND RE-IMPORT OF CASHEW

11. (1) The Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette fix the
price or prices at which cashew may be sold wholesale or retail in the Indian market.

(2) No registered owner or licensed processor or dealer shall sell cashew whole-
sale or retail in the Indian market at a'price or prices higher than the price or prices
fixed under this section. है

12. No registered owner shall sell or contract to sell cashew from any registered estate
if by such sale the free sale quota allotted to that estate is exceeded nor shall a registered

owner sell or contract to sell any cashew produced in his estate in any year for which no free
sale quota is allotted to the estate.

13. No registered owner shall sell cashew unless either—

(@) it has been processed at or is delivered to the buyer through processing
establishment licensed under section 22, or

(b) it is sold under and in accordance with the provisions of a licence procured
from the Board under section 18.

14. No cashew shall be exported from India otherwise than by the Board or under an
authorisation granted by the Board in the prescribed manner and in the prescribed cases,
and the provisions of the Customs Act, 1962, shall apply:

Provided that nothing herein contained shall apply to cashew:
(0) shipped as stores on Board any vessel or aircraft in such quantity as the
Collector considers reasonable, having regard to the number of the crew and passen-

gers and the length of the voyage or journey, as the case may be, on which the vessel
or aircraft is about to proceed, or

(ii) carried as personal baggage of a passenger, not exceeding such quantities as
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify, or

(iii) exported for such purposes and in such quantities as the Central Govern-
ment may specify in the like manner:

Provided further that the Central Government may, by order in writing specify
the quantity of cashew which shall be permitted for export during any year and where
any such order is made, no cashew shall be exported from India in excess of the said
quantity.

15. (7) No cashew which has been exported from India shall be re-imported into India
except under and in accordance with a permit granted by the Board.

(2) The Board may in any fit case grant such a permit and no charge shall be made
therefor.

16. (7) Unless with the previous sanction of the Central Government the Board decides
that no free sale quota be allotted, the Board shall, as soon as may be, allot to each registered
estate a free sale quota for the year.

(2) the free sale quota shall be fixed at a percentage, common to all registered
estates, not exceeding fifty per cent of the probable total production of the estate in
the year as estimated by the Board:

Provided that the Board may, with the previous sanction of the Central Govern-
ment allot such quota at a percentage higher than fifty per cent of the said probable
total production.


15

20

25

30

35

40

45

5

(3) The,Board may at any time vary the quantum of free sale quota by varying the
fixed percentage common to all registered estates, or may express the whole or any part of
the free sale quota of an estate in terms of bulk instead of in terms of weight.

17. (1) Every registered owner shall file a return at such intervals with such particulars
as may be prescribed.

(2) The Board may authorize an officer to visit any estate at any time to verify the
accuracy of any return made under this section or to ascertain the productive capacity of the
estate.

18 The registered owner of any estate may, subject to the prescribed conditions,
obtain from the Board a licence for the sale from that estate of unprocessed cashew.

19. (7) All cashew produced by a registered estate in excess of the Quantity specified
in the cashew allotted to that estate or when no cashew quota has been allotted to any
estate, all cashew produced by the estate shall be delivered to the Board for inclusion in the
surplus pool by the owner of the estate or by the processing establishment receiving the
cashew from the estate:

Provided that where no free sale quotas have been allotted to estates, the Chair-
man may allow the owner of any estate to retain with himself for purposes of con-
sumption by his family such quantity of cashew the chairman may think reasonsable:

Provided further that where the Central Government is satisfied that it is not
practicable for any class of owners producing cashew in any specified area to comply
with the provisions of this sub-section on account of the small quantity of cashew
produced by them or on account of their estates being situated in a remote locality,
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, exempt such
class of owners from the provisions of this sub-section.

(2) Delivery shall be made to the Board in such places, (at such times) and in
such manner as the Board may direct, and such directions may provide for partial
delivery to the surplus pool at any time whether or not at that time the free sale quota
of cashew has been exceeded; and the cashew delivered shall be such as to represent
quantity and quality of the produce of the estate and the Board may reject any
consignment offered for delivery which does not satisfy this requirement, but shall
not reject any consignment merely for a defect in processing.

(3) Cashew delivered for inclusion in the surplus pool shall upon delivery to
the Board remain under the control of the Board which shall be responsible for
storage, processing where necessary, and marketing of the cashew.

(4) The Board shall from time to time prepare a differential scale for the valua-
tion of cashew, and shall in accordance with that scale classify the cashew in each
consignment delivered for inclusion in the surplus pool according to its kind and
quality, and shall make an assessment of its value based on its quantity, kind and
quality.

(5) The Board may, with the consent of a registered owner treat as having been
delivered for inclusion in the surplus pool any cashew from such’estate which the
registered owner may agree to have so treated.

(6) When cashew has been delivered or is treated as having been delivered for
inclusion in the surplus pool, the registered owner whose cashew has been so deliv-
ered or is treated as having been so delivered shall retain no rights in respect of such
cashew except his right to receive the payments referred to in section 28.

20, (1) The Board shall take all practical measures to market the cashew including in
the surplus pool, and all sales thereof shall be conducted by or through the Board.

Return,

Permission
to sale
unprocessed
cashew.

Surplus pool.

Marketing,


Curing of
cashew in
licensing
establisment
Licence.

Funds.

General Fund.

Pool Fund.

6
(2) The Board may purchase for inclusion in the surplus pool cashew not delivered
for inclusion im it.
CHAPTER -IV
Curinc oF CastEw
21. No registered owner shall cause of all cashew to be processed elsewhere than in a
licensed curing establishment, whether the curing establishment is maintained by himself
for by another person.
22. Every establishment processing the cashew shall obtain from the Board a licence
to operate as such.
CHAPTER -V
FINANCE,
23. The Board shall maintain two separate funds, a General Fund and a Pool Fund.
24. (1) To the General Fund shall be credited —
(a) all amounts paid to the Board by the Central Government; and
(6) any sums transferred to the General Fund under the proviso to sub-section
(2) of section 24; and
(0) all fees levied and collected by the Board under this Act;
(2) The General fund shall be applied—
(a) to meet the expenses of the Board;

(6) to meet the cost of such measures as the Board may consider advisable to
undertake for promoting agricultural and technological research in the interest
of the cashew industry in India;

(c) for making such grants to cashew estates or for meeting the cost of such
other assistance to cashew estates as the Board may think necessary for the
development of such estates;

(व) to meet the cost of such measures as the Board considers advisable to
undertake for promoting the sale and increasing the consumption in India and
elsewhere of cashew produced in India; and

(०) to meet the expenses for securing better working conditions and the
provisions and improvement of amenities and incentives for workers.

25. (1) To the Pool Fund shall be credited all sums realised by sales by the Board of
cashew from the surplus pool;

(2) the Pool Fund shall be applied to-

(a) the making to registered owners of estates of payments proportionate to the
value of the cashew delivered by them for inclusion in the surplus pool;

(6) the costs of storing; processing and marketing cashew deposited in and of
administering the surplus pool;

(c) the purchase of cashew not delivered for inclusion in the surplus pool:

Provided that where, after the requirements of the clauses of this sub-section
have been met, there remains any excess in the Pool Fund, the Board may, with the

previous sanction of the Central Government, transfer the whole or any part of such
excess to the credit to the General Fund.


20

25

30

35

40

7

26, Notwithstanding anything contained in section 25, the Board may apply any

part of the pool fund to the making of a donation to the Fund known as the Gandhi
National Memorial Fund.

27. The Board may, subject to any prescribed conditions borrow on the security of the
General Fund or the Pool Fund for any purposes for which it is authorised to expend money
from such fund, or on the security of the cashew delivered or treated as delivered for

inclusion in the surplus pool for any purposes for which it is authorised to expend money
from the Pool Fund.

28. (1) The Board shall at such times as it thinks fit make to registered owners who
have delivered cashew for inclusion in the surplus pool such payments out of the Pool
Fund as it may think proper.

(2) The sum of all payments made under sub-section (1) to any one registered
owner shall bear to the sum of the payments made to all registered owners the
same proportion as the value of the eashew delivered by him out of the year's crop
to the surplus pool bears to the value of all cashew delivered to the surplus pool out
of the year's crop:

Provided that in calculating the sums of all payments made under sub-
section (1) and the value of the cashew delivered to the surplus pool out of the year's
crop, respectively, any payment accepted by a registered owner as final payment in
immediate settlement for cashew delivered by him for inclusion in the surplus pool
and the value of any such cashew shall be excluded.

CHAPTER-VI
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE

29. Any owner of a cashew estate who fails to apply for registration shall be punish-
able with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees and to a further fine which may
extend to five hundred rupees for each month after the first month during which such failure
continues.

30. Any registered owner who contravenes the provisions of this Act shall be punish-
able with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees.

31. If any processing establishment operates as such without a licence, the owner
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees.

32. Any registered owner who fails to furnish the return required by sub-section (/) of
section 16 shall be punishable with fine which may extend lo ten thousand rupees.

33. Any person who makes in any return to be furnished under section 19 in any
report which is false and which he knows to be false or does not believe to be true shall be
punishable with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees.

34. Any registered owner of licensed processor who fails to deliver any cashew to the
Board shall be punishable with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, and the
Court by which such person is convicted may order the confiscation and delivery to the
Board of any cashew in respect of which the offence was committed.

35, If the Board is satisfied that any cashew which is required to be delivered for
inclusion in the surplus pool is being or is likely to be disposed of otherwise than by such
delivery, the Board may order the seizure of such cashew and may authorise an officer of the
Board to effect seizure thereof for delivery for inclusion in the surplus pool, and such

Donations,

Power to
borrow.

Payment to
‘owners.

Penalties
for non-
registration.

Penalties for
violation of
Act

Penalties for
processing
establishment
without
licence.

Penalties for
non-filing of
returns.

Penalties for

filing false
returns,

Penalties for
non-delivery
of cashew.

Seizure.


Penalties for
failure to
produce

_ record.

Offences by
‘Companies.

Judicial
Magistrate 1०
try cases.

Control of
Central

Government.

Appeal.

authorization shall be sufficient warrant for such officer to take all steps necessary to secure

possession of the cashew.

36. Whoever obstructs any member or officer of the Board or any person authorised
by the Board or by the Central Government in the discharge of any duty imposed on or
entrusted to him under this Act, or who having control over or custody of any records fails
to produce such records when required to do so or refuses information lawfully asked for by
a member or officer of the Board or by a person authorised by the Board or by the Central

Government to inspect such records or ask for such
fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees.

37. (J) If the person committing any offence under this Act is a company, every
person who, at the time the offence was ‘committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to,
the company for the conduct of the business of the company as well as the company shall
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and

punished accordingly:

Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person
liable to punishment provided in this Act if he proves that the offence was committed
without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of

such offence.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained

under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has
been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect

on the part of, any director, manager, secretary

director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that
‘offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.

Explanation, —For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association

of individuals; and

(6) “director” in relation to a firm means

38. (1) No court other than the court of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial
Magistrate of the first class shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act.

(2) No court shall take congnizance of an offence punishable under section 30
except on a complaint made by an officer authorised in this behalf by the State
Government or of the offence specified in sub-section (2) of section 1] except on 8
complaint made by an officer authorised in this behalf either by the State. Govern-
ment or by the Board or of an offence punishable under any other section except on
acomplaint made with the previous sanction of the Central Government by an officer

authorised in this behalf by the Board:
Provided that the Central Government

information shall be punishable with

in sub-section (1) where an offence

or other officer of the company, such

a partner in the firm.

may, by notification in the Official

Gazette, direct that the previous sanction of the Central Government shall not be
necessary for complaints in such cases or classes of cases as may be specified in the

notification.

39, (7) All acts of the Board shall be subject to the control of the Central Government
which may cancel, suspend or modify as it thinks fit any action taken by the Board.

(2) The records of the Board shall be open to inspection at all reasonable times.

by any officer authorised in this behalf by the

Central Government.

40. (7) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Board refusing a licence to or

cancelling the licence of a curing establishment may,
order, appeal to the Central Government.

within sixty days of the making of the


20

25

30

35

40

45

9

(2) Any person making an appeal under this section shall pay a fee of five
rupees which shall be credited to Central Revenues.

41, Any person authorised in this behalf by the Central Government or by the Board
or any member of the Board so authorised by the Chairman in writing or any officer of the
Board, may enter at all reasonable times any estate or any curing establishment or any place
where cashew is stored or exposed for sale, and may require the production for his
inspection of any records kept therein, or ask for any information relating to the production,
storage or sale of cashew.

42. (1) The Board shall keep accounts in such manner as may be prescribed of all
money received and expended by it.

(2) The account shall be kept separately for the General Fund and the Pool
Fund.

(3) The Board shall cause the accounts to be audited annually by auditors
appointed by the Central Government, and the auditors shall have the power to
disallow any item of expenditure which has, in their opinion, been incurred other-
wise than in accordance with this Act.

(4) The Central Government may on the application of the Board allow any
item of expenditure disallowed by the auditors under sub-section (3).

43. Any registered owner may, subject to the prescribed conditions, inspect the
records maintained by the Board and may on payment of the prescribed fee obtain copies of
any proceedings or orders of the Board.

44. All contracts for the sale of cashew so far as they are at variance with the provisions
of this Act shall be void,

45. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Board or any
officer of the Board for or in respect of anything in good faith done or intended to be done
under this Act.

46. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
tules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, rules may be
made providing for all or any of the following matters:—

(@ the constitution of the Board, the number of persons to be appointed
as members from each of the categories specified in cluasc (d) of sub-section (2)
of section 4, the term of office and other conditions of service of, the procedure
to be followed by, and the manner of filling vacancies among, the members of
the board;

(ii) the circumstances in which, and the authority by which, members
may be removed;

(iii) the procedure to be followed at meetings of the Board and at commit-
tees thereof for the conduct of business and the number of members which shall
form a quorum at meeting;

(iv) the maintenance by the Board of records of business transacted by
the Board and the submission of copies thereof to the Central Government;

(०) the holding of a minimum number of meetings of the Board every
year, 7

(vi) the powers of the Board, its Chairman and committees thereof with
respect to the incurring of expenditure;

Inspection.

Accounts.

Payment of
fees
obtaining
copies of
proceedings.

Contracts in
violation of

‘Act done in

good faith.

Power to
make rules.


10 .

(vii) the conditions subject to which the Board may incur expenditure
outside India;

(viii) the preparation of budget estimates of receipts and expenditure of
the Board and the authority by which the estimates are to be sanctioned;

(ix) the maintenance of the accounts of income and expenditure of the
Board and the audit of such accounts;

(x) the deposits of the funds of the Board in banks and the investment of
such funds;

(ai) the re-appropriation of the estimated savings from any budget head
to any other budget head;

(xii) the conditions subject to which the Board may borrow funds;

(aiii) the conditions subject to which and the manner in which contracts
may be entered into by or on behalf of the Board;

(xiv) the delegation to the Committee or Chairman or Vice-Chairman or
members or officers of the Board of any of the powers and duties of the Board
under this Act;

(xv) the staff which may be employed by the Board and the pay and
allowances and leave and other conditions of service of officers (other than
those appointed by the Central Government) and other employees of the Board;

(xvi) the travelling and other allowances of members of the Board and of
committees thereof;

(xvii) the maintenance of the registers and other records of the Board and
its various committees;

(xviii) the manner in which the free sale quota of cashew shall be deter-
mined;

(xix) the manner in which the Board shall exercise its powers of buying
and selling cashew;

(xx) the appointment by the Board of agents;

(xxi) the conditions to be fulfilled by a curing establishment before a
licence to operate as such can be issued;

(xxii) the form of, and the particulars to be contained in, any returns or
reports to be made to the Board under this Act;

(xxiii) the form of, manner of application for, fees payable for, procedure
in granting and conditions governing, the licences and permits to be issued by
the Board;

(xxiv) the collection of any information or statistics in respect of cashew
or any product of cashew;

(xxv) any other matter (other than any matter specified in section 12)
which is to be or may be prescribed under this Act.

(3) “Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or
the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in
the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the
validity of anything previously done under that rule.”.

20

|

30

35

40


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Government has taken many steps to improve various commercial crops which earn
huge foreign exchange and generate considerable employment opportunities. With a view
to promoting such crops, Government have set up Boards like Tea Board, Coffee Board,
Tobacco Board to improve such crops. But unfortunately, Government have not yet set up
Cashew Board. Cashew is one of the major foreign exchange earners.

In order to improve this crop, it is imperative that a Cashew Board be set up immedi-
ately.

New Dew, KODIKUNNIL SURESH
March 28, 2002.

i


The Bill envisages setting up of a Cashew Board which will in turn entail expendi-
ture from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely that an annual recurring expenditure
of about rupees fifty lakhs will be involved.

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one crore may also be involved.

12



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 46 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the provisions of the Bill. Since the matters will be with respect to administrative detail
only, the delegation of legislative power will be of a normal character.

13


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
to provide for the setting up of a Cashew Board :

(Shri Kodikunnil Suresh, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—396LS—19-04-2002.