AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2.0 APR 2000

Bill No. 35 of 2000
E2000

THE ABOLITION OF BEGGING BILL, 2000
By
Suri G. S. Basvaras, M.P.
A
BILL

‘e provide for abolition of begging and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto

BE it enacted by

'y Parliament in the Fifty-first year of Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (7) This Act may be called the Abolition of Begging Act, 2000.

Short title and
extent,
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, Definitions.

(2) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;

(0) “beggar” means a person who indulges in begging;


Abolition of
begging.
Punishment for
forcing or en-
couraging any
person for beg-
ging

Arrested beg-
gars to be sent
to receiving
centres.

Constitution of
Beggars’ Wel-
fare Fund,
Formulation of
Schemes, plans
for beggars.

Punishment for
maiming.

Offences to be
‘cognizable and
non-bailable.
Power to make
rules,

(c) “begging” means—

(i) to soliciting or receiving alms in a public place including railways, bus
stops, road sides or any other place where public has access;

(ii) exposing or exhibiting any wound, deformity or disease of self or any
other person or of an animal for the purpose of soliciting or collecting alms;

iii) allowing one self to be used as an exhibit for purpose of soliciting or
collecting alms;

(d) “child” means a boy or gir! who has not attained the age of eighteen years;

(e) “children home” means a children home established under Juvenile Justice
Act, 1986;

(0 “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.

(g) “receiving centre” means a centre established under this Act, where a person
arrested on the ground of begging shall be kept.

3. Begging by any person in any form is hereby abolished.

4. Whoever forces or encourages any person, including a child in his care, custody or
charge, for begging or whoever uses any person as an exhibit for the purpose of begging shall
be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than twenty years
and may extend to twenty-five years in case that person collects or solicits alms by forcing
two or more persons to indulge in begging.

5. (1) Any person found begging shall be arrested by the police and before making
every such arrest, the officer-in-charge of the concerned police station shall satisfy himself
as to the bonafide of the arrested beggar.

(2) Any person, other than a child, arrested, on the ground of begging shall be
sent to a Receiving Centre, to be established in every district by the appropriate Govern-
ment, where in such person shall be provided with facilities for his rehabilitation.

Explanation:— For the purpose of this section, facilities for rehabilitation includes
medical care, sustenance and training in agricultural or industrial or other pursuits aiming at
gainful employment to the beggars.

(3) Any child arrested on the ground of begging shall be sent to a children home.

6. The Central Government shall constitute a Fund to be called the Beggars’
Welfare Fund for the welfare of the beggars.

7.(1) The appropriate Government shall formulate such schemes, work out such
plans, including plans for provision of education, and create such suitable infrastruc-
ture in every district to enable beggars to take up suitable jobs for earning their liveli-
hood.

(2) The appropriate Government shall set up destitute homes in every district for
providing food, shelter and protection to the old, infirm, helpless and destitute persons
to ensure that they do not indulge in begging.

8. Any person who maims himself or other person for the purpose of soliciting or
collecting alms shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend
to twenty years.

9, Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, an
offence under this Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable.

10. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

10 53 of

20

25

45


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

For the last fifty years of our independence Government has failed to check
and abolish begging in the country. Despite welfare measures taken by the Cen-
tral and the State Governments, begging continues unabated all over the country,
especially in the metropolitan cities and urban centres.

In cities, beggars are seen lurking and forcing even foreign visitors to pay
_for alms, such unwarranted acts do not only leave bad impression in the minds of
visitors but also bring dishonour to the name of nation.

Drives launched by different State Governments and Union Territory Ad-
ministrations and anti-begging legislation enacted by various State Legislatures
so far have failed to curb and even contain this menace, which has assumed crimi-
nal proportions.

To root-out the menace of begging from the country, a national perspective
has to be created, by developing an infrastructure to tackle begging not only by a
legal framework but socially creating an environment of accommodation and
acceptance of beggars in the society, to assure them a life with dignity. Therefore,
it is necessary to create an atmosphere so that beggars are provided with suffi-
cient means of livelihood by the Government.

Hence, this Bill.

New Det; 6.5. BASVARAJ
February 9, 2000


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 5 of the Bill provides for establishment of “Receiving Centres” by the appro-
Priate Government. Clause 6 of the Bill provides for establishment of Beggars’ Welfare
Fund by the Central Government. Clause 7 of the Bill Provides for formulation of schemes
and creating suitable infrastructure in every district. The Central Government would have
to incur expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India for the establishment of receiving
centres, destitute homes and for formulation of ‘schemes and creating suitable infrastructure
in respect of Union Territories, As far as the establishment of Teceiving centres, destitute
homes and formulation of schemes and creating suitable infrastructure in the States are
concemed, the State Governments will incur expenditure from their respective Consoli-
dated Funds. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consoli-
dated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees eight
hundred crore per annum.

A non-recurring expenditure of about Tupees forty crore is also likely to be involved,


so

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying

__ out the purpose of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation
* of legislative power is of a normal character. पु



LOK SABHA

BILL
to provide for abolition of ‘begging and for matters connect

ted therewith or incidental
thereto,

(Shri 9.3. Basvaraj, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—3583Ls—25-02.2000,