1
THE SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO THE KORAPUT,
BALANGIR AND KALAHANDI REGION OF
THE STATE OF ODISHA BILL, 2020
By
SHRIMATI SANGEETA KUMARI SINGH DEO, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the Koraput, Balangir and Kalahandi
(KBK) Region of the State of Odisha for the purpose of  promoting the welfare
of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Sections
of people, assistance for relief and restoration of damaged infrastructure
in the State of Odisha due to recurrent natural calamities and for the
development, exploitation and proper utilization of its resources.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-first Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance to Koraput, Balangir and
Kalahandi Region of the State of Odisha Act, 2020.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No.  35  of  2020
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title and
commencement.
5

2
2. There shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India,
every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as special financial assistance
to the Koraput, Balangir and Kalahandi (KBK) Region of the Odisha to meet the costs of
such schemes of development, as may be undertaken by the State with the approval of the
Government of India, for the purposes of—
(i) promoting the welfare of the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the
Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Sections;
(ii) providing assistance to the State in matters of relief and restoration of
damaged infrastructure in the State due to recurrent natural calamities such as
drought and cyclones; and
(iii) development, exploitation and proper utilization of the resources in the
State.
3. The provisions of this act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
Special
financial
assistance to
the KBK
Regions of
Odisha.
5
10
Act not in
derogation of
any other law.

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Koraput, Balangir and Kalahandi (KBK) Region of the State of Odisha is socially
and economically backward. The problems such as poverty, unemployment and illiteracy
are rampant and required to be addressed urgently and in a time-bound manner. It is also
essential to take up measures for proper utilization of its resources, welfare of weaker
sections in the region and for initiating new development schemes for the most economically
backward KBK region.
Recurrent natural calamities like drought and cyclones warrants further assistance
from the Centre for relief and restoration of damaged infrastructure in the State in a time-
bound manner. The State of Odisha has also been facing the problem of naxalite violence for
a number of years.
It is, therefore, necessary that the Central Government should provide special financial
assistance to the KBK region of the State of Odisha for its all-round development including
the welfare of weaker sections and for the development and exploitation of its vast resources.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SANGEETA  KUMARI  SINGH  DEO
January  24, 2020.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that there shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the
Consolidated Fund of India, every year, as Parliament may, by due appropriation, provide as
special financial assistance to the Koraput, Balangir and Kalahandi (KBK) Region of the
State of Odisha to meet the costs of such schemes of development, as may be undertaken
by the State with the approval of the Government of India
The Bill, therefore, on enactment, will involve expenditure out of the Consolidated
Fund of India for providing special financial assistance to the KBK Region of the State of
Odisha. As the sums of moneys which will be given to the KBK Region of the State of
Odisha as special financial assistance by appropriation by law made by Parliament will be
known only after the welfare schemes to be implemented by the State Government with the
approval of Government of India are identified, it is not possible at present to give the
estimates of recurring expenditure, which would be involved out of the Consolidated Fund
of India at this stage.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of
India.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the Koraput, Balangir and Kalahandi
(KBK) Region of the State of Odisha for the purpose of  promoting the welfare
of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Sections
of people, assistance for relief and restoration of damaged infrastructure
in the State of Odisha due to recurrent natural calamities and for the
development, exploitation and proper utilization of its resources.
________
(Shrimati Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—5188LS—14-02-2020.