AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 35 of 2022
THE TUBERCULOSIS (TREA TMENT AND ERADICA TION)
BILL, 2022
By
SHRI S HRIRANG APPA B ARNE, M.P.
A
BILL
for combating and eliminating tuberculosis, and for the protection of the rights
of patients affected by the tuberculosis disease and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
WHEREAS the General Assembly of the United Nations has adopted the
Sustainable Development Goals, which call for a reduction in tuberculosis-
related deaths and the World Health Organization has adopted the End TB
Strategy for a reduction in the incidence of Tuberculosis by 2035 through
collective global efforts;
AND WHEREAS the Republic of India, being a signatory to the
aforementioned Goals and Strategy, it is expedient to give effect to the said
Goals and Strategy;

AND WHEREAS the Republic of India ratified the World Health Organisation
Framework Convention on Tobacco Control in 2005;
AND WHEREAS the Republic of India has framed a National Strategic Plan
for Tuberculosis Elimination 2017–2025.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic
of India as follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Tuberculosis (Treatment and
Eradication) Act, 2022.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,–
(a) “Aadhaar” means Aadhaar number issued by the Unique
Identification Authority of India under sub-section (3) of section 3 of the
Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and other Subsidies Benefits and
Services) Act, 2016;
(b) “annual report” means a report giving the details of developmental
activities taken up over the year by the Authority and detailing about targets
set and achieved;
(c) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the
Government of that State and in all other cases, the Central Government.
(d) “Authority” means the Tuberculosis Eradication Authority
constituted under section 4;
(e) “company” means an entity registered under the Companies Act,
2013;
(f) “discrimination” means any act or omission which directly or
indirectly, expressly or by effect, immediately or over a period of time,-
(i) imposes any burden, obligation, liability, disability or
disadvantage on any person or category of persons, based on one or
more tuberculosis-related grounds; or
(ii) denies or withholds any benefit, opportunity or advantage
from any person or category of persons, based on one or more
tuberculosis-related grounds, and the expression “discriminate” to be
construed accordingly;
(g) “guidelines” means any statement or any other document issued
by the Central Government indicating policy or procedure or course of action
relating to tuberculosis to be followed by the Central Government, State
Governments, Governmental and non-Governmental organisations and
establishments and individuals dealing with prevention, control and treatment
of tuberculosis;
(h) “Multi-drug Resistant Tuberculosis (MDR-TB)” means a strain
of the tuberculosis bacteria resistant to two of the most effective anti-
tuberculosis drugs available, isoniazid and rifampicin;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
2
Definitions.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.

(i) “prescribed” means prescribed by the rules made under this Act;
(j) “tuberculosis” means an infectious disease caused by a bacterium,
Mycobacterium Tuberculosis that is spread through the air;
(k) “tuberculosis-affected person” means an individual who is
suffering from any strain of the tuberculosis disease; and
(l) “society” means an entity registered as society under the Societies
Registration Act, 1860.
3. No person shall discriminate against the tuberculosis-affected person
on any ground including any of the following, namely:—
(a) the unfair treatment in, or in relation to employment or occupation;
(b) the denial or discontinuation of, or unfair treatment in, healthcare
services;
(c) the denial or discontinuation of, or unfair treatment in educational
establishments and services thereof;
(d) the denial or discontinuation of, or unfair treatment with regard
to, the right of movement;
(e) the denial or discontinuation of, or unfair treatment with regard to
the right to reside, purchase, rent or otherwise occupy, any property;
(f) the denial of access to, removal from, or unfair treatment in,
Government or private establishment in whose care or custody a person
may be; and
(g) the isolation or segregation of a tuberculosis-affected person.
4. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette  specify, there shall be constituted
an Authority to be known as the Tuberculosis Eradication Authority for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Authority shall consist of,—
(a) Minister of State, Union Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare—Chairperson, ex-officio;
(b) Minister of State, Union Ministry of Women and Child
Development—Vice-Chairperson, ex-officio;
(c) Director General of Health Services, Union Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare—member, ex-officio;
(d) Secretaries of the Union Ministries of Women and Child
Development, Health and Family Welfare and Statistics and
Programme Implementation—members, ex-officio;
(e) Chairperson, National Commission for Women—member,
ex-officio;
(f) Director, National Institute of Health and Family Welfare—
member, ex-officio; and
(g) five doctors having expertise and with not less than thirty
years of practice in the field of tuberculosis treatment to be
appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be
prescribed.
5
3
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Constitution
of the
Tuberculosis
Eradication
Authority.
Prohibition
of
Discrimination.

5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
4
(3) The Authority shall have a Secretariat consisting of such
number of officers and staff as may be necessary for efficient discharge of its
functions.
(4) The salary, allowances and terms of conditions of service of
doctors appointed as members of the Authority and officers and staff of
the Authority shall be such as may be prescribed.
(5) The Authority shall meet at such times and places and shall observe
such rules of procedure in regard to transaction of business at its meetings as
may be prescribed.
5. (1) The Authority shall discharge such functions as may be necessary
for treatment, prevention and eradication of tuberculosis in the country.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of forgoing provision, the
Authority shall–
(a) formulate a Charter outlining its objectives along with
roadmap to eradicate tuberculosis, within one year of its
constitution;
(b) provide knowledge and information relating to control of
tuberculosis  to Tuberculosis Control Centres for disseminating it to
people;
(c) within one year of constitution, undertake a baseline study to
collect comprehensive data about causes of tuberculosis, risk factors
and vulnerable population.
(d) direct the appropriate Government to assist in not necessary
the baseline study;
(e) direct healthcare service providers to follow the standard
tuberculosis diagnosis and treatment protocol; and
(f) undertake such other functions as may be assigned to it, from
time to time for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
6. (1) It shall be the responsibility of the appropriate Government to
set up, within one year of its coming into force of this Act, in every district a
centre to be known as the Tuberculosis Control Centre.
(2)The Tuberculosis Control Centres shall provide free screening of
tuberculosis and cost-free treatment to the patients.
7. (1) The appropriate Government shall take measures for
providing, as far as possible, Molecular Testing methods for diagnosis
and daily dosage treatment for those living with Multi-Drug Resistant
(MDR-TB) Tuberculosis, in particular.
(2) The Central Government shall issue and give wide  publicity to
the necessary guidelines in respect of protocols for tuberculosis relating to
Molecular Testing and Daily Dosage treatment.
8. The Central Government shall take steps to ensure the
introduction and availability of the latest anti tuberculosis drugs in all
public hospitals and Government-run pharmacies.
Functions of the
Authority.
Molecular
Testing and daily
dose of Multi-
Drug Resistant
(MDR-TB)
Tuberculosis.
Tuberculosis
Control Centre.
Availability of
latest Anti-
Tuberculosis
Drugs.

5
10
15
20
25
30
35
5
9. The Central Government and every State Government shall take
measures to ensure that every Tuberculosis-affected person is enrolled under
Aadhaar to ensure unique identification of patients seeking care and facilitate
direct benefit transfers under the welfare measures.
10. The appropriate Government shall also provide healthcare
coupons to patients diagnosed with tuberculosis, which may be redeemed
for cost-free treatment at private hospitals.
11.(1) The appropriate Government shall provide for mobile
tuberculosis vans for active screening of tuberculosis, especially in remote
rural areas.
(2) The Patients found tuberculosis positive on mobile screening,
shall be referred to the nearest tuberculosis Control Centre for
follow-up care and treatment.
12. The appropriate Government shall undertake mobile tuberculosis
immunization drive to vaccinate children who were either not vaccinated
or underwent incomplete vaccination.
13.The appropriate Government shall direct the concerned authorities to
undertake air borne infection control in high risk and vulnerable areas.
14. The appropriate Government shall provide additional nutritional
support to tuberculosis patients at tuberculosis Control Centres, to
incentivise patients to continue treatment and reduce drop outs.
15.Every registered company and society manufacturing and distributing
tobacco related products, shall contribute five per cent. of their annual sales
value towards research on new drugs and diagnostic tools for tuberculosis.
16. The State Government shall provide extensive facilities at the
primary health centres and tuberculosis Control Centres for diagnosis
and treatment of drug resistant strain of tuberculosis.
17.(1) The appropriate Government shall undertake outreach activities
to communicate to citizens of the factors contributing to tuberculosis,
symptoms of tuberculosis and its ill effects, especially in rural areas.
(2) The nurses and the staff at the tuberculosis Control Centres shall
educate the tuberculosis patients on the cough etiquette.
(3) The appropriate Government shall mobilise the local population
in increasing awareness of tuberculosis in citizens.
18.The appropriate Government shall provide for tobacco cessation
counselling services at all tuberculosis Control Centres.
Enrolment
under
Aadhaar for
Tuberculosis
Patients
seeking
treatment.
Healthcare
coupons.
Mobile
tuberculosis
vans for
active
screening.
Mobile
tuberculosis
vaccine
immunization
drive.
Air borne
infection
control in
high risk
areas.
Nutritional
support to
tuberculosis
patients.
Funding
research on
new drugs
and
diagnostic
tools for
tuberculosis.
Facilities for
treating drug
resistant
strain of
tuberculosis.
Outreach
activities to
increase
awareness of
tuberculosis.
Tobaccocessationservices.

5
10
15
20
25
30
35
6
19.The appropriate Government shall–
(a) undertake outreach and communication activities to increase
awareness in women, especially in rural areas, of ill effects of tobacco
consumption on their reproductive health and babies;
(b) provide for tobacco cessation counselling services at all antenatal
clinics and primary health centres; and
(c) increase awareness in rural households about the lethal effect of
indoor air pollution from chulhas, and undertake necessary steps to curb the
same.
20.(1) The Authority shall prepare once every year, as may be prescribed,
an annual report giving the summary of its activities, including schemes it
has undertaken and recommended to the Government over the year and it
shall contain statements of annual accounts of the Authority.
(2) A copy of the report shall be forwarded to the Central Government,
and the Central Government shall cause the report to be laid before each
House of Parliament.
21. The Central Government, shall from time to time, provide, after
due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, requisite
funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
22.If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act,
the Central Government may make such order or give such direction, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary or
expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the
period of two years from the date of commencement of this Act.
23.(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a
total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree
in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.
Awareness in
women of ill
effects of
tobacco
consumption
on
reproductive
health.
Annual
report and its
laying before
the
Parliament.
CentralGovernmentto providefunds.
Power toremovedifficulty.
Power to
make rules.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Tuberculosis (TB), the second (after COVID-19) deadliest infectious
killer, is caused by bacteria (Mycobacterium tuberculosis) that most often
affect the lungs. It can spread when people who are sick with TB expel
bacteria into the air – for example, by coughing. Most people who develop
the disease are adults in 2020 – men accounted for 56 per cent of all TB
cases, adult women accounted for 33 per cent and children for 11 per cent.
Many new cases of TB are attributable to five risk factors which are:
under-nutrition, HIV infection, alcohol use, (disorders) smoking and diabetes.
TB is preventable and curable. About 85 per cent of people who develop
TB disease can be successfully treated with a 6-month drug regimen. Treatment
has the added benefit of curtailing onward transmission of infection.
The COVID-19 pandemic has reversed years of global progress in tackling
tuberculosis and for the first time in over a decade, TB deaths have increased,
according to the World Health Organization’s 2021 Global TB Report.
Approximately, 1.5 million people died from TB in 2020 globally.
Reporting of tuberculosis (TB) cases in India went down by 41 per cent
between 2019 and 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic, according to the
World Health Organization’s 2021 Global TB Report. In March 2021, an
analysis by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare revealed that
notification of TB cases in India reduced by 25 per cent between January and
December 2020 because of the lockdown and diversion of resources for
COVID-19 control measures. In March, April and May 2020, TB case
notifications in India dropped by 20.55 per cent, 63.47 per cent and 46.33 per
cent respectively, according to the Nikshay database, a web-enabled patient
management system for TB control under the Union Government’s National
TB Elimination Programme. During India’s second COVID-19 wave in 2021,
a similar trend was seen, with notifications beginning to decline by April
2021. As many as 1,16,645 cases were notified in April 2021, according to
the Nikshay portal. India (26.2) was among the eight countries that accounted
for over two-thirds of the global TB cases. India was also among the
10 countries making up 74 per cent of the global gap between estimated
TB incidence and the number of people newly diagnosed with TB, according
to the Global TB Report 2021. An estimated 1.48 million people died due to
TB globally in 2020. India accounted for 34% of them. Deaths due to TB in
the country also rose by 13% compared to 2019. Keeping all these points in
view, a act is needed which ensures that proper treatment is given to
Tuberculosis patients irrespective to other factors.
The proposed Bill provides for free screening and treatment of tuberculosis
at tuberculosis Control Centres established at district level in every State,
provision for healthcare coupons that can be redeemed at any private hospital
for free tuberculosis related treatment and care, mobile tuberculosis vans for
screening of tuberculosis in high risk population, especially in rural areas.
Tuberculosis positive patients thus screened  shall be referred to the nearest
7

tuberculosis Control Centres for follow-up treatment and care. The Bill also
directs the appropriate Government to undertake mobile tuberculosis
immunization drive to vaccinate children and to undertake air borne infection
control activities in areas vulnerable to disease. The Bill aims to reduce drop
outs from treatment and increase the patients compliance, through provision
of nutritional supplements at tuberculosis Control Centres. To fund research
in new drugs and diagnostic tools for tuberculosis, the Bill mandates all private
and government companies involved in manufacture and distribution of
tobacco related products, to contribute five per cent of their annual sales
value. The Bill has provision to mobilise local population to increase outreach
to citizens about factors contributing to tuberculosis, symptoms of tuberculosis,
cough etiquette. The Bill provides for active screening and extensive facilities
for treatment of multi-drug resistant strain of tuberculosis at tuberculosis
Control Centres.
Tobacco use is one of the main causes of tuberculosis, contributing to
7.9 per cent of tuberculosis related deaths in the country. Research has shown
that providing tobacco cessation services to tobacco users, has proved to reduce
the disease burden of tuberculosis. Recognising tobacco as a major contributor
to tuberculosis, the Bill provides for integration of tobacco cessation
counselling services at all tuberculosis Control Centre. As per the World Health
Organisation statistics, India is home to second highest number of women
smokers globally. According to the National Family Health Survey-3, the
proportion of children with low birth weight, is greater among children born
to mothers who use tobacco. The Bill also has provision to educate women of
the ill effects of tobacco consumption on their reproductive health, provide
for tobacco cessation couselling services at all antenatal clinics and primary
health centres. The Bill also provides for measures to curb indoor air pollution
created by chulhas (used in rural areas for cooking purposes).
The Bill thus aims for the control, prevention and complete eradication
of tuberculosis in the country.
Hence this Bill.
   NEW DELHI;
18 January, 2022        SHRIRANG APPA BARNE
8

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the Tuberculosis
Eradication Authority and also appointment of such number of officers and
staff for its functioning. Clause 6 provides for establishment of Tuberculosis
Control Centre. Clause 7 provides for molecular testing methods for
diagnosis and daily dose of Multi-drug Resistant (MDR-TB) Tuberculosis.
Clause 8 provides for introduction and availability of the latest anti-
tuberculosis drugs in all public hospitals and Government- run pharmacies.
Clause 10 provides for the cost-free screening and treatment of tuberculosis.
Clause 11 provides for mobile tuberculosis vans for active screening of
tuberculosis. Clause 12 provides for mobile tuberculosis immunization
drive. Clause 14 provides for nutritional support to tuberculosis patients.
Clause 15 provides for funding research on new drugs and diagnostic tools
for tuberculosis. Clause 16 provides for facilities for treating drugs resistant
strain of tuberculosis. Clause 21 makes it obligatory for the Central
Government to provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this
Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve recurring expenditure of
three hundred crore rupees per annum which shall be charged from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees one hundred crore is
also likely to be involved.
9

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 23 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make
necessary rules for carrying out the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will
relate to matters of details only, the delegation of legislative power is of a
normal character.
10

LOK SABHA
A
BILL
for combating and eliminating tuberculosis, and for other purposes, and for the
protection of the rights of patients affected by the tuberculosis disease and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto
(Shri Shrirang Appa Barne, M.P .)