As tnrropuceD IN Lok SABHA
4 2 JUN 1998

No. 43 of 1998

GOVERNMENT OF UNION TERRITORY OF LAKSHADWEEP BILL, 1998
By
Suet Basupes Acuarta, M.P.
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
PARTI
PRELIMINARY

Short title and Commencement.
2. Definitions.

PART IT
LecisLative ASSEMBLY

3. Legislative Assembly and its composition.

4. Qualifications for membership of Legislative Assembly.

5. Duration of Legislative Assembly.

6. Session of Legislative Assembly, prorogation and dissolution.
7. Speaker and Deputy Speaker of Legislative Assembly.

8. Speaker or Deputy Speaker not to preside while a resolution for his removal from
office is under consideration.

9. Right of Lieutenant Governor to address and send message to Legislative
Assembly.

10. Special address by the Lieutenant Governor.
11. Rights of Ministers as respects Legislative Assembly.
12. Oath or affirmation-by members.

13. Voting in Legislative Assembly, Power of Assembly to act notwithstanding
vacancies and quorum.

14, Vacation of seats.
15. Disqualifications for membership.
16. Disqualification on ground of defection.

17, Penalty for sitting and voting before making oath or affirmation or when not
qualified or when disqualified.

18, Powers, privileges, etc. of members.
19, Salaries and allowances of members.
20. Exemption of property of the Union from taxation.

21. Restrictions on laws passed by Legislative Assembly with respect to certain
matters,

22. Special provisions as to financial Bills.
23. Procedure as to lapsing of Bills.

24. Assent to Bills.

25. Bills reserved for consideration.


(i)

CLausis

. Requirements as to sanction,

Annual financial statement,

28. Procedure in Legislative Assembly with respect to estimates.

29. Appropriation Bills.
30. Supplementary, additional or excess grants.
31. Votes on accounts.

32. Authorisation of expenditure pending

33. Rules of procedure.

34. Official lang
be used in 1.

35. Language to be used for Bills, Act, ete.

age or languages of the Union Territory and language or languages
lative Assembly.

36. Restriction on discus:

jon in the Legislative Assembly.

37. Courts not to inquire inte proceedings of Legislative Assembly.

PART II
Devimrration oF CONSTITUENCIFS
38. Election Commission to delimit constituencies.

39, Power of Election Commission to maintain delimitation orders upto date.

40, Elections to the Legislative Assembly.

PART IV

Cretain Provisions RELATING To LicUTENANT GOVERNOR AND MINISTERS

41. Matters in which Lieutenant Governor to act in his discretion.
42. Advice by Ministers.

43. Other provisions as to Ministers.

44, Conduct of busine:

45. Duties of Chief Minister as respect
utenant Governor,

६ the furnishing of information, etc. (० the

PART ५
MISCELLANEOUS AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS

46. Consolidated Fund of the Union territory,

47. Contingency Fund of the Union territory,

48, Audit reports.

49. Relation of Lieutenant Governor and his Ministers to President.

50. Period of order made under article and approval thereof by Parliament,

51, Authorisation of expenditure by President.

52. Contract and suits.

53. Power of President to remove difficulties.

54, Laying of Rules before Legislative Assembly.

55. Amendments to the Constitution.

56. Amendment of'section 27A of Act 43 of 1950.

THE SCHEDULE


OF UNION TERRITORY OF LAKSHADWEEP BILL, 1998
By
Suki Basupen AcHaria, M.P.
A
BILL.
to provide for the creation of a Legistative Assembly for the Union Territory of
Lakshadweep and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
PARTI
PRELIMINARY

- (1) This Act may be called the Government of Union Territory of Lakshadweep — short title and
8. commencement,

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may. by notifi-
‘in the Official Gazette, appoint:

Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of the Act
reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be con-
as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.


Definitions.

Legislative
Assembly and
its composi-
tion,

Qualifications
for member-
ship of
Legislative
Assembly.

Duration of
Legislative
Assembly,

Session of
Legislative
Assembly,
prorogation
and dissolution

2

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “article” means an article of the Constitution;

(0) “assembly constituency” means a constituency provided under this
for the purpose of election to the Legislative Assembly;

(c) “Election Commission” means the election commission referred to in arti-
cle 324;

(d) “Legislative Assembly” means the Legislative Assembly of the Union
territory of Lakshadweep;

(e) “Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes” in relation to the Union territory
means such castes, races or tribes or parts of or groups within such castes, races or
tribes as are deemed under articles 341 and 342 of the Constitution to be Scheduled
Caste or Scheduled Tribe in relation to that Union territory; and

(0 “Union territory” means the Union territory of Lakshadweep.
PART II
LecisLamive ASSEMBLY

3. (J) The total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly to be filled by persons
chosen by direct election from territorial constituencies shall be forty.

(2) For the purposes of eléction to the Legislative Assembly, the Union territory
shall be divided into single-member assembly constituencies in accordance with the pro-
visions of Part II in such manner that the population of each of the constituencies shall,
so far as practicable, be the same throughout the Union territory.

(3) Seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the
Legislative Assembly, and the number of seats so reserved shall bear, as nearly as may be,
the same proportion to the total number of seats in the Assembly as the population of the
Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes in the Union territory bears to the total population
of the Union territory.

4. A person shall not be qualified to be chosen to fill a seat in the Legislative
Assembly unless he,—

(a) is a citizen of India and makes and subscribes before some person author-
ised in that behalf by the Election Commission an oath or affirmation according to the
form set out for the purpose in the Schedule;

(6) is not less than twenty-five years of age; and

(c) possess such other qualifications as may be prescribed in that behalf by or
under any law made by Parliament.

5. The Legislative Assembly unless sooner dissolved, shall continue for five years
from the date appointed for its first meeting and no longer and the expiration of the said
period of five years shall operate as a dissolution of the Assembly:

Provided that the said period may be extended as while a proclamation of emer
gency issued under clause (1) of article 352 is in operation, by the President by order for
a period not exceeding one year at a time and not extending it in any case beyond a period
of six months after the proclamation has ceased to operate.

6. (1) The Lieutenant Governor shall, from time to time, summon the Legislative.
Assembly to meet at such time and place as he thinks fit, but six months shall not intervene
between its last sitting in one session and the date appointed for its first sitting in the next
session.



(2) The Lieutenant Governor may, from time to time —
(a) provogue the Assembly;
(७) dissolve the Assembly.

7. (1) The Legislative Assembly shall, as soon as may be, choose two members of
‘Assembly to be respectively Speaker and Deputy Speaker thereof and, so often as the
fice of Speaker or Deputy Speaker becomes vacani, the Assembly shall choose another
member to be Speaker or Deputy Speaker, as the case may be.

(2) A member holding office as Speaker or Deputy Speaker of the Legislative
sembly—

(a) shall vacate his office if he ceases to be a member of the Assembly;

(b) may, at any time by writing under his hand addressed, if such member is
the Speaker, to the Deputy Speaker, and if such member is the Deputy Speaker to
the Speaker resign his office; and

(c) may be removed from his office by a resolution of the Assembly passed by
‘a majority of all the then members of the Assembly:

Provided that no resolution for the purpose of clause (c) shall be moved unless at least
n days’ notice has been given of the intention to move the resolution

Provided further that whenever the Assembly is dissolved, the Speaker shall not
his office until immediately before the first meeting of the Assembly after the
lution.

(3) While the office of Speaker is vacant, the duties of the office shall be performed
the Deputy Speaker, if the office of Deputy Speaker is also vacant, by such member of
‘Assembly as may be determined by the rules of procedure of the Assembly.

(4) During the absence of the Speaker from any sitting of the Assembly, by the Deputy

Speaker, or if he is also absent, such person as may be determined by the rules of procedure

of the Assembly, or if no such person is present, such other person as may be determined by
Assembly, shall act as Speaker.

(5) There shall be paid to the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative
embly such salaries and allowances as may be respectively fixed by the Legislative
embly by law and until provision in that behalf is so made, such salaries and allowances
the Lieutenant Governor may, with the approval of the President, by order determine.

8. (/) At any sitting of the Legislative Assembly while any resolution for the removal
f the Speaker from his office is under consideration, the Speaker, or while any resolution
for the removal of the Deputy Speaker from his office is under consideration, the Deputy
r, shall 100, though he is present, preside and the provisions of sub-section (4) of
ion 7 shall apply in relation to every such sitting as they apply in relation to a sitting

under consideration in the Assembly and shall, notwithstanding anything in section 13, be
‘entitled to vote only in the first instance on such resolution or on any other matter during
ch proceedings but not in the case of an equality of vot

9, (1) The Lieutenant Governor may address the Legislative Assembly and for that
purpose require the attendance of members.

(2) The Lieutenant Governor may send message to the Legislative Assembly whether
with respect to a Bill then pending in the Assembly or otherwise and when a message is 50
1, the Assembly shall with all convenient despatch consider any matter required by the
8९० to be taken mto consideration.

Speaker and
Deputy
Speaker of
Legislative
Assembly.

Speaker or
Deputy
Speaker not
to preside
while a
resolution for
his removal
from office ts
under
consideration

Right of
Lieutenant
Governor to
address and
send message
to Legislative
Assembly.


Special
address by the
Lieutenant
Governor.

Rights of
Ministers as
respects
Legislative
Assembly,

Oath oF
affirmation by
member,

Voting in
Legislative
Assembly,
Power of
Assembly 10.
act notwith:
standing
vacancies and

quorum.

of

10. (/) At the commencement of the first session after each general election to the
Legislative Assembly at the commencement of the first session of each year, the Lieutenant
Governor shall address the Legislative Assembly and inform it of the causes of its
summons.

(2) Provision shall be made by rules to be made by the Assembly regulating its
procedure for the allotment of time for discussion of the matters referred to in such addre:

11. Every Minister who is not a member of the Legislative Assembly shall have the
right to speak in and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of the Legislative Assembly
and to speak in and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of any committee of the
Legislative Assembly which he may be named a member, but shall not by virtue of this
jon be entitled to vote.

12, Every member of the Legislative Assembly shall, before taking his seat, make
and subscribe before the Lieutenant Governor or some person appointed in that behalf by
him, an oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the Schedule.

13. (/) Save as otherwise provided in the Act, question at any sitting of the
Legislative Assembly shall be determined by a majority of votes of the members present
and voting other than the Speaker or person acting as such.

(2) The Speaker or person acting as such shall not vote in the first instance, but shall
have and exercise a casting vote in the case of an equality of votes.

(3) The Legislative Assembly shall have power to act notwithstanding any vacancy in
the membership thereof, and any proceedings in the Legislative Assembly shall be valid
notwithstanding that itis discovered subsequently that some person who was not entitled so
to do, sat or voted or otherwise took part in the proceedings.

(4) The quorum to constitute a meeting of the Assembly shall be one-third of the
total number of members of the Assembly,

(5) If at any time during a meeting of the Legislative Assembly there is no quorum,
it shall be the duty of the Speaker, or person acting as such, either to adjourn the Assembly
or to suspend the meeting until there is a quorum.

14. (J) No person shall be a member both of Parliament and of the Legislative
Assembly and if 8 person is chosen a member both of Parliament and of such Assembly,
then at the expiration of such period as is specified in or under the Representation of the
People Act, 1951, and the rules made by the President under clause (2) of article 190), that
person’s seat in Parliament shall become vacant, unless he had previously resigned his
seat in the Legislative Assembly.

(2) Ia member of the Legislative Assembly—

(a) becomes subject to any disqualification mentioned in section 15 or
section 16 for membership of the Assembly; or
(b) resigns his seat by writing under his hand addressed to the Speaker and his
resignation is accepted by the Speaker,
his seat shall thereupon become vacant:

Provided that in the case of any resignation referred to in clause (b), if from the
information received or otherwise and after making such inquiry as he thinks fit, the
Speaker is satisfied that such resignation is not voluntary or genuine he shall not accept
such resignation.

(3) If for a period of sixty days a member of the Legislative Assembly is without
permission of the Assembly absent from all meetings thereof, the Assembly may declare
his seat vacant:

Provided that in computing the said period of sixty days no account shall be taken of
any period during which the Assembly is prorogued or is adjourned for more than four
consecutive days,



“1S. (1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member
he Legislative Assembly—

(a) if he holds any office of profit under the Government of India or the
Government of any State or the Government of any Union territory other than an
‘office declared by law made by Parliament or by the Legislature of any State or by
the Legislative Assembly of any other Union territory not to disqualify its holder; or

(b) if he is for the time being chosen as, and for being, a member of either
_ House of Parliament under the provisions of sub-clause (b) or sub-clause (c) of sub-
clause (1) of article 102 or of any law made in pursuance of that article,

_ (2) For the purpose of the section, a person shall not be deemed to hold an office of
under the Government of India or the Government of any State or the Government of

jon territory by reason only that he is a Minister either for the Union or for such
te or Union territory.

(3) If any question arises as to whether a member of the Legislative Assembly has
disqualified for being such a member under the provisions of sub-section (1), the
jon shall be referred for the decision of the President and his decision shall be final.

(4) Belore giving any decision on any such question, the President shall obtain the
on of the Election Commission and shall act according to such opinion.

16. The provisions of the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution shall, subject to the
modifications (including modifications for construing references therein to the
ive Assembly of a State, article 188, article 194 and article 212 as references,
ively, to the Legislative Assembly, section 12, section 18 and section 37 of this
1), apply to and in relation to the members of the Legislative Assembly of a State and
c ingly:

(a) the said Tenth Schedule as so modified shall be deemed to form part of this Act:

(b) a person shall be disqualified for being a member of the Legislative Assembly if
‘is so disqualified under the said Tenth Schedule as so modified.

17. If a person sits or votes as a member of the Legislative Assembly before he has
iplied with requirements of section 12 or when he knows that he is not qualified or that
qualified for membership thereof, he shall be liable in respect of each ‘day on which
sits or votes to a penalty of five hundred rupees to be recovered as a debt due to the

egislative Assembly.

(2) No member of the Legislative Assembly shall be liable to any proceedings in
in respect of anything said or any vote given by him in the Legislative Assembly
committee thereof and no person shall be so liable in respect of the publication by
under the authority of such Assembly of any report, paper, votes or proceedings.

(3) In other respects, the powers, privileges and immunities of the Legislative
embly and of the members and the committees thereof shall be such as are for the tinie
enjoyed by the House of the People and its members and committees.

(4) The provisions of sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) shall apply in relation to persons
ho by virtue of this Act have the right to speak in, and otherwise ta take part in the

eedings, of the Legislative Assembly or any committee thereof as they apply, in rela-
mn 10 members of that Assembly,

Disqualifica-
tion for mem:
bership.

Disqualifiea-
tion on ground
of defection

Penalty for sit-
ting and voting
before making
‘oath or affirma-
tion or when
‘wot qualified or
‘when disquali-
fied

Powers, Privi-
leges, etc., of

members.


Salaries and
allowances of
members.

Exemption of
property of the
Union from
taxation

Restrictions on
laws passed by
Legislative As-
sembly with re-
spect to certain
matters,

Special provi-
sions as to
Financial Bills

Procedure as 10
lapsing of Bills.

19, Members of the Legislative Assembly shall be entitled to receive such sal. पु
and allowances as may from time to time determine by the Legislative Assembly by |
and until provision in that behalf is so made, such salaries and allowances as thé Lieut
nant Governor may, with the approval of the President, by order determine,

20. The property of the Union shall, save in so far as Parliament may by law 0
wise provide, be exempted from all taxes imposed by or under any law made by the Legis-
lative Assembly or by under any other law in force in the Union territory:

Provided that nothing in this section shall, until Parliament by law otherwise pro-
vides, prevent any authority within the Union territory from levying any tax on any pro-
perty of the Union to which such property was immediately before the commencement of
the Constitution liable or treated as liable, so long as the tax continues to be levied in the
Union territory.

21. (1) The provisions of articles 286, 287 and 288 shall apply in relation to any law
passed by the Legislative Assembly with respect to any of the matters referred to in those
articles as they apply in relation to any law passed by the Legislature of a State with
respect to those matters,

(2) The provisions of article 304 shall, with the necessary modifications, apply in
relation to any law passed by the Legislative Assembly with respect to any of the matters
referred to in that article as they apply in relation to any law passed by the Legislature of a
State with respect to those matters.

22. (1) A Bill or amendment shall not be introduced into, or moved in, the Legisla-
tive Assembly except on the recommendation of the Licutenant Governor if such bill or
amendment makes provision for any of the following matters, namely:—

(a) the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax;

(b) the amendment of the law with respect to any financial obligations under-
taken or to be undertaken by the Government of the Union territory;

(c) the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of the Union
territory;

(d) the declaring of any expenditure to the expenditure charged on the Consoli-
dated Fund of the Union territory or the increasing of the amount of any such
expenditure;

(e) the receipt of money on account of the Consolidated Fund of the Union
territory or the custody of such money:

Provided that no recommendation shall be required under this sub-section for the
moving of an amendment making provision for the reduction or abolition of any tax.

(2)A Bill or amendment shall not be deemed to make provision for any of the matters
aforesaid by reason only that it provides for the imposition of fines or other pecuniary
penalties, or for the demand or payment of fees for license or fees for services rendered, or
by reason that it provides for the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation
of any tax by any local authority or body for local purposes.

(3) A Bill which, if enacted and brought into operation, would involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory shall not be passed by the Legislative
Assembly unless the Lieutenant Governor has recommended to that Assembly the consi-
deration of the Bill,

23. (1) A Bill pending in the Legislative Assembly shall not lapse by reason of the
prorogation of the Assembly.

(2) Bill which in pending in the Legislative Assembly shall lapse on a dissolution
of the Assembly.



When a Bill has been passed by the Legislative Assembly it shall be presented
Jeutenant Governor and he shall declare either that he assents to the Bill or that he
ssent therefrom or that he reserves the Bill for the consideration of the

wided that the Lieutenant Governor may, ats soon as possible after the presenta-
tion of the Bill for his assent, return the Bill if it is nota Money Bill together with a
essage requesting that the Assembly will reconsider the Bill or any specified provi-
ons thereof, and, in particular, will consider the desirability of introducing any such
indments as he may recommend in his message and, when a Bill is so returned,
Assembly will reconsider the Bill accordingly, and if the Bill is passed again with
without amendment and presented to the Lieutenant Governor for assent, he shall
lare either that he assents, to the Bill or that he reserves the Bill for the consi-
ion of the President:

Provided further that the Lieutenant Governor shall not assent to, but shall
reserve for the consideration of the President, any Bill which,

(a) in the opinion of the Lieutenant Governor would, if it became law, so
erogate from the powers of the High Court as to endanger the position which that
is, by the Constitution, designed to fill; or

(b) the President may, by order, direct to be reserved for his consideration; or

(ce) relates 10 matter reterred to in sub-section (5) of section 7 or section 19 or
tion 34 or sub-section (3) of section 43.

tplanation,— For the purposes of this section and section 25, a Bill shall be deemed
Money Bill if it contains only provisions dealing with all or any of the matters
fied in sub-section (1) of section 22 or any matter incidental to any of those matters
neither case, there is endorsed thereon the certificate of the Speaker of the Legislative
mbly signed by him that it is a Money Bill.

j. When a Bill is reserved by the Lieutenant Governor for the consideration of the
i, the President shall declare either that he assents to the Bill or that he withholds.
| therefrom:

vided that where the Bill is not a money Bill, the President may direct the Lieu-
Governor to return the Bill to the Legislative Assembly together with such a
ge as is mentioned in the first proviso to section 24 and, when a Bill is so
ined, the Assembly shall reconsider it accordingly within a period of'six months
the date of receipt of such message and, if it is again passed by the Assembly

isideration.

No Aci of the Legislative Assembly, and no provision in any such Act, shall be
reason only that some previous sanction or recommendation requited by this Act

27. (1) The Lieutenant Governor shall in respect of every financial year cause to be
the Legislative Assembly, with the previous sanction of the President, a state-
the estimated receipts and expenditure of the Union territory for the year, in this

(a) the sums-required to meet expenditure described by this Act as expendi-
charged upon ‘the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory; and

Assent to Bills

Bills reserved
for considera-
tion,

Requireme
as to sanction,
ete.

Annual finan-
cial statement


Procedure in
Legislative As:
sembly with re-
spect to esti-
sates.

Appropriatic
Bills

‘Supplementary,
additional or
excess grants,

(b) the sums required to meet other expenditure proposed to be made
the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory and shall distinguish expenditure on
revenue account from other expenditure.

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, the
following expenditure shall be expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of the
Union territory: —

(a) the emoluments and allowances of the Lieutenant Governor and other ex-
penditure relating 10 his office as determined by the President by general or special
order;

(b) the charges payable in respect of loans advanced to the Union territory from
the Consolidated Fund of India including interest, sinking fund charges and redemp-
tion charges aud other expenditure connected therewith;

(0) the salaries and allowances of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the

Legislative Assembly;

(d) any sums required to satisfy any judgement, decree or award of any court
or arbitrator or tribunal;

(e) any other expenditure declared by the Constitution or by law made by
Parliament or by the Legislative Assembly to be so charged

28. (1) So much of the estimates as relates to expenditure charged upon the Cone
solidated Fund of the Union territory shall not be submitted to the vote of the Legislative
Assembly but nothing ia this sub-section shall be construed as preventing the discussion
in the Legislative Assembly of any of those estimates.

(2) So much of the said estimates as relates to other expenditure shall be submitted
in the form of demands for grants to the Legislative Assembly, and the Lewisiative Assem-
bly shall have the power to assent or to refuse to asseni, to any demand, or to assent to any
demand subject (o a reduction of the amount specified therein

(3) No demand for a grant shall be made except on the recommiendation of the
Lieutenant Governor

29. (1) As soon as may be after the grants under section 28 have been made by the
Legislative Assembly, there shall be introduced a Bill to provide for the appropriation
of the Consclidated Fund of the Union territory of all moneys required to meet—

(a) the grants so made by the Assembly; and

(b) the expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of the Union (ertitory
but not exceeding in any case the amount shown in the statement previously laid.
before the Assembly.

(2) No amendment shall be proposed to any such Bill in the Legistative Assembl
which will have the effect of varying the amount or altering the destination of any gr
made or of varying the amount of any expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund
the Union territory and the decision of the person presiding as to whether an amendme
is inadmissible under this sub-section shall be final.

(3) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, no money shall be withdrawn fr
the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory except under appropriation made by la
passed in accordance with provisions of this section.

30. (1) The Lieutenant Governor shall—

(a) if the amount authorised by any law made in accordance with provision:
of section 29 to be expended for a particular service for the current financial year is
found to be insufficient for the purposes of that year‘or when a need has ari
during the current financial year for supplementary ot additional expenditure ण
some new service not contemplated in the annual financial statement for that ye
or



9

(0) if any money has been spent on any service during a financial year in
‘excess of the amount granted for that service and for that year, cause to be laid
before the Legislative Assembly, with the previous sanction of the President,
another Statement showing the estimated amount of that expenditure or cause to be
presented to the Legislative Assembly with such previous sanction a demand for
‘such excess, as the case may be.

(2) The provisions of sections 27, 28 and 29 shall have effect in relation to any such

nt and expenditure or demand and also to any law to be made authorising the
fopriation of money out of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory to meet such
enditure or the grant in respect of such demand as they have effect in relation to the
financial statement and the expenditure mentioned therein or to a demand for a
and the law to be made for the authorisation of appropriation of moneys out of the
idated Fund of the Union territory to meet such expenditure or grant.

31. (1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Part, the Leg-
ive Assembly shall have power to make any grant in advance ih respect of the esti-
expenditure for a part of any financial year pending the completion of the proce-
escribed in section 28 for the voting of such grant and passing of the law in accord-
ith the provisions of section 29 in relation to that expenditure and the Legislative
embly shall have power to authorise by law the withdrawal of moneys from the Con-
Fund of the Union territory for the purposes for which the said grant is made.

(2) The provisions of sections 28 and 29 shall have effect in relation to the making
ly grant under sub-section (1) or to any law to be made under that sub-section as they

fect in relation to the making of a grant with regard to any expenditure mentioned
annual financial statement and the law to be made for the authorisation of appro-

of moneys, out of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory to meet such
ture

32, Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Part, the Lieuten-
overnor may authorise such expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the Union
as he deems necessary for a period of not more than six months beginning from
te of the constitution of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory, pending the
of such expenditure by the Legislative Assembly.

33, (J) The Legislative Assembly may make rules regulating, subject to the provi-
-of this Act, its procedure and the conduct of its business:

Provided that the Lieutenant Governor shall, after consultation with the Speaker of
lative Assembly and with the approval of the President, make rules
{a) for securing the timely completion of financial busine:
(b) for regulating the procedure of, and the conduct of business in, the Legislative
ly in relation to any financial matter or to any Bill for the appropy
of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory;
(©) for prohibiting the discussion of, or the asking of questions on, any matters
th affects the discharge of the functions of the Lieutenant Governor in so far as he is
ired by or under this Act or any law to act in his discretion.
_ (2) Until rules are made under sub-section (1), the rules of procedure and standing
with respect to the Legislative Assembly of the State of Uttar Pradesh in force
ly before the commencement of this Act shall have effect in relation to the
lative Assembly subject to such modifications and adaptations as may be made therein
8 Lieutenant Governor.
(J) The Legislative Assemply may by law adopt any one or more of the lan-
in use in the Union territory or Hindi as the official language ot languages to be
all or any of the official purposes of the Union territory:
ovided that the President may by order direct—

(i) that the official language of the Union shall be adopted for such of the
ial purposes of the Union territory as may be specified in the order.

ion of moneys

——

Votes on
account,

Authorisation
of expenditure
pending its
sanction by
Legislative As-
sembly,

Rules of Proce-
dure.

Official lan-
guage or lan-
guages of the
Union Territory
and language or
languages to be
used in Legisla-
tive Assembly.


Languages to
be used for
Bills, Acts, ete

Restrictions on
discussion in
the Legislative
Assembly
Courts aot to
inquire into
proceedings of
Legislative As:
sembly.

Election Com-
anission 10 de-
fimit constitu-
encies.

10

also be adopted throughout the | tert:
tory or such part thereof for such of the official purposes of the Union territory
may be specified in the order, if the President is satisfied that a substantial propor-
tion of the population of the Union territory desires the use of that other languay
for all or any of such purposes.

(ii) that any other language sh

al lan:

(2) The business in the Legislative Assembly shall he transacted in the offi
guage or languages of the Union territory or in Hindi or in English.

Provided that the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly or the person acting as such,
as the case may be, may permit any member who cannot adequately express himself it
any of the languag=s aforesaid, to address the Assembly in his mother-tongue

35. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 34, until Parliament by law oth
erwise provides, the authoritative texts—

(a) of all Bills to be introduced or amendments thereto to be moved in 0
Legislative Assembly;

(0) of जा Acts passed by the Legistative Assembly; and

(2) of all orders, ruleg, regulations and bye-laws issued under any law made by
the Legislative Assembly shall be in English language:

Provided that where the Legislative Assembly has prescribed any language other (
the English language for use in Bills introduced in, or Acts passed by, the Legislative As
sembly or in any order, rule, regulation or bye-law issued under any law made by
Legislative Assembly, a translation of the same in the English language published und
the authority of the Lieutenant Governor in the official Gazette shall be deemed to be ॥
authoritative text thereof in the English tangu:

36, No discussion shall take place in the Legislative Assembly with respect to 0
conduct of any Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court in the discharge of his duti

37. (1) The validity of any proceedings in the Legislative Assembly shall not
ied in question on the ground of any alleged irregularity of procedure.

(2) No officer or member of the Legislative Assembly in whom powers are vest
by or under this Act for regulating procedure or the conduct of business, or for maintait
ing order in the Legislative Assembly shall be subject to the jurisdiction of any court it
respect of the exercise hy him of those powers.

PART वा
Deuimirarton of Constirvencins, :

38. (4) The Election Commission shall, in the manner herein provided, dist
bute the seats assigned to the Legislative Assembly under section 3 to single-mem
territorial constituencies and delimit them having regard to the following provisi
namely:—

(a) all constituencies shall, as far as practicable, be delimited in such man
that the ratio between the population of each of such constituencies and the total po
lation of the Union territory is the same; and

(0) constituencies in which seats are reserved for the Scheduled Castes or Schedul
‘Tribes shall, as far as possible, be located in areas where the proportion of the populatic
to the total population is comparatively large.

(2) The Election Commission shall—

(qa) publish its proposals for the delimitation of constituencies in the offici
Gazette and also in such other manner as the Commission may consider fit toget!


with a notice inviting objections and suggestions in relation to the proposals and
specifying a date on or after which their proposals will be further considered by it;

(b) consider all objections and suggestions which may have been received by
it before the date so specified;

(c) after considering all objections and suggestions which may have been re-
ceived by it before the date so specified, finalise delimitation of constituencies and
cause such order or orders to be published in the official Gazette; and upon such
publication, the order or ordeis shall have the full force of law and shall not be called
in question in any court.

39, The Election Commission may, from time to time, by notification in the official

(a) correct any printing mistakes in any order made under section 38 or any
error arising therein from inadvertent slip or omission; and

(b) where the boundaries or name of any territorial division mentioned in any
‘such order are or is aliered, make such amendments as appear to it to be necessary or
expedient for bringing such order up to date.

40. (7) For the purpose of constituting the Legislative Assembly, a general election
॥ be held as soon as may be after the delimitation of all the assembly constituencies
section 38.

(2) For the purposes of sub-section (/), the Lieutenant Governor shall, by one or
notifications published in the Official Gazette, call upon all the said assembly con-
‘ies 10 elect members in accordance the provisions of the Representation of
eople Act, 1951 and of the rules and orders made or issued thereunder as applicable
sub-section (3).

(3) The Representation of People Act, 1950, the Representation of the People Act,
the rules and orders made or issued under the said Acts and all other laws for the time
‘in force relating to the elections shall apply with necessary modifications (including
ications for construing references therein to a State, State Government and Governor
jing references to the Union territory, Government of the Union territory and Lieu-
nt Governor, respectively) to, and in relation to, the general election referred to in
ion (7).

PART IV
CERTAIN PROVISIONS RELATING TO LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR AND MinisTERS
41. (1) The Lieutenant Governor shall act in his discretion in a matter—

(i) which falls outside the purview of the powers conferred on the Legislative
_ Assembly but in respect of which powers or functions are entrusted or delegated to
him by the President, or

(ii) in which he is required by or under any law to act in his diseretion or to
exercise any judicial or quasi-judicial functions.

(2) If any question arises as to whether any matter is or is not a matter as respects
the Lieutenant Governor is by or under any law required to act in his discretion, the
n of the Lieutenant Governor thereon shall be final.

(3) If any question arises as to whether any matter is or is not a matter as respects
the Lieutenant Governor is required by any law to exercise any judicial or quasi-
functions, the decision of the Lieutenant Governor thereon shall be final.

Power of Elec
tion Commis-
ston to main-
tain delimita-
tion orders up
to date,

Election to the
Legislative As-

Matters in
which Liewte-
nant Governor
to act in his dis-
cretion

‘Advice by Min-
ister.


Other provi

sions as to Min-

isters,

Conduct of
business,

Duties of Chiet
Minister as
respects the
furnishing of
information,
etc. to the
Lieutenant
Governor.

Consolidated
Fund of the Un-
ion territory,

12

43. (1) Before a Minister enters upon his office, the Lieutenant Governor shall
administer to him the oaths of office and of secrecy according to the forms set out for the
purpose in the Schedule.

(2) A Minister who, for any period of six months, is not a member of the Legislative
Assembly, at the expiration of that period, shall cease to be a Minister. ]

(3) The salaries and allowances of Ministers shall be such as the Legislative Assem-

bly may from time to time by law determine and until the Legislative Assembly so deter-
mines, shall be determined by the Lieutenant Governor with the approval of the President.

44. (1) The President shall make rules— |

(a) for the allocation of business to the Ministers in so far as itis business with |
respect 10 which the Lieutenant Governor is required to act on the aid and advice of |
his Council of Ministers; and

(b) for the more convenient transaction of business with the Ministers, includ-
ing the procedure to be adopted in the case of a difference of opinion between the |
Lieutenant Governor and the Council of Ministers or a Minister. ]

(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, all executive actions of the Lieutenant
Governor whether taken on the advice of his Ministers or otherwise shall be expressed to be
taken in the name of the Lieutenant Governor.

(3) Orders and other instruments made and executed in the name of the Lieutenant
Governor shall be authenticated in such manner as may be specified in rules to be made
by the Lieutenant Governor and the validity of an order or instrument which is so authen-
ticated shall not be called in question on the ground that it is not an order or instrument
made or executed by the Lieutenant Governor.

45. It shall be the duty of the Chief Minister—

(a) to communicate to the Lieutenant Governor all decisions of Council of
Ministers relating to the administration of the affairs of the Union territory and
proposals for legislation;

(0) to furnish such information relating to the administration of the affairs of
the Union territory and proposals for legislation as Lieutenant Governor may call for,
and

(c) if the Lieutenant Governor so requires, to submit for the consideration of
the Council of Ministers any matter on which a decision has been taken by a Minis
ter but which has not been considered by the Counci

PART ५
MISCELLANEOUS AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS

46. (/) As from such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the
official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, all revenues received in the Union territory by the
Government of India or the Licutenant Governor in relation to any matter with respect to
which the Legislative Assembly has power to make laws, and all grants made and all loans
advanced to the Union territory from the Consolidated Fund of India and all moneys
received by the Union territory in repayment of loans shall form one Consolidated Fund to
be entitled “the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory of Lakshadweep” (referred to in
this Act as the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory).

(2) No moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory shall be appro-

priated except in accordance with and for the purposes and in the manner provided in the
Act.

(3) The custody of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory, the payment of
moneys into such fund, the withdrawal of moneys therefrom and all other matters con-


1s

20 with or ancillary to those matters shall be regulated by rules made by the Lieuten-
jovernor with the approval of the President.

47. (/) There shall be established a Contingency Fund in the nature of an imprest to
entitled “the Contingency Fund of the Union territory of Lakshadweep” into which
| be paid from and out of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory such sums as
from time to time be determined by law made by the Legislative Assembly; and the
{Fund shall be held by the Lieutenant Governor to enable advances to be made by him
of such Fund.

(2) No advances shall be made out of the Contingency Fund referred to in sub-
n (1) except for the purposes 01 meeting unforeseen expenditure pending authorisa-
f such expenditure by the Legislative Assembly under appropriation made by law.

(3) The Lieutenant Governor may make rules regulating all matters congected with
lary to the custody of, the payment of moneys in to, and the withdrawal of moneys
aforesaid Contingency Fund.

48. The reports of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India relating to the ac-

Ms of the Union territory for any period subsequent to the date referred to in sub-section

of section 46 shall be submitted to the Lieutenant Governor who shall cause them to he
efore the Legislative Assembly,

19. Notwithstanding anything in this Act, the Lieutenant Governor and his Council
inisters shall be under the general control of, and comply with such particular direc
if any, as may from time to time be given by, the President

$0. (/) Every order made by the President under article 239AB shall expire at the
of one year from the date of issue of the order and the provisions of clauses (2) and (3)

356 shall, so far may be, apply to such order as they apply to a proclamation
ed under clause (1) of article 356

duration of the aforesaid order for a further period not exceeding two years from
of expiry of the order under sub-section (1) subject to the condition that every
ion of the said order for any period beyond the expiration of one year shall be

d by resolutions of both Houses of Parliament

51, Where the Legislative Assembly is dissolved or its functioning as such Assem
ins suspended on account of an order made by the President under article 239AB,
| be competent for the President (o authorise when the House of the People is not in
jon expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory pending the sanc-
such expenditure by Parliament.

For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that—

(a) all contracts in connection with the administration of the Union territory
contracts made in the exercise of the executive power of the Union; and

(6) all suits and proceedings in connection with the administration of the
Union territory shall be instituted by or against the Government of India,

53. (1) If any difficulty arises in relation to the transaction from the provisions of
repealed by the Act or in giving effect to the provisions of this Act and in parti
lation to the constitution of the Legislative Assembly, the President may by order
ything not inconsistent with the provisions of the Constitution or of this Act which
him to be necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing the difficulty:

ovided that na order under the sub-section shall be made after the expiry of three
mm the date of constitution of the first Legislative Assembly.

Contingency
Fund of the Un-
ton termitory

Audit Reports

Relation of
Lieutenant
Governor and
his Ministers to
President

Period of order
made under
AB
and approval
thereof by
Parliament

artivle

Autinorisation
of expenditure
hy President

Contracts and
suits

Power of Presi-
dent 10 remove
difficulties.


14

(2) Every order made under sub-section (1) shall be laid before each
Parliament. 8

Laying of rules 54. Every rule made by the Lieutenant Governor under this Act shall be laid, as

before Lexisla- son as it is made, before the Legislative Assembly.
tive Assembly

Amendments 55, On and from the appointed day—
tothe

Consttation (a) after article 239AA, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—

Special 239AAA. (1) As from the date of commencement of the Government

peovision With of Union territory of Lakshadweep Act. 1998 the administrator of the Union
एम न म्न ली territory of Lakshadweep appointed under article 239 shall be designated as
the Lieutenant Governor,

(2) The provisions of articles 239AA and 239AB shall, so far as may be,
apply mutatis mutandis in relation to the Union territory of Lakshadweep,
Lieutenant Governor and the Legislative Assembly, as they apply in relation
to the National Capital Territory of Delhi and its Legislature, respectively.”

(b) in article 240, in clause (1), for the existing proviso, the following provisos
shall be substituted, namely:—

“Provided that when any body is created under article 239A or 239AAA_
to function as a Legislature for the Union territory of Pondicherry or Union’
territory of Lakshadweep, as the case may be, the President shall not make.
any regulation for the peace, progress and good government of that Union
territory with effect from the date appointed for the first meeting of the Legis-
lature:

Provided further that whenever the body functioning as a Legislature
for tne Union territory of Pondicherry or Lakshadweep, as the case may be, is
dissolved, or the functioning of that body as such legislature remains suspended
on account of any action taken under any such law as is referred to in clause (1)
of article 239A or 239AB, as the case may be, the President may, during the
period of such dissolution or suspension, make regulations for the peace, progress
and good government of that Union territory.”

(c) In the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution, in the Table,

(a) entries 26 and 27 shall be re-numbered as entries 27 and 28 respec
tively, and before entry 27 as so re-numbered, the following entry shall be ine
serted, namely:—

“26. Lakshadwee} 1";
(6) for the figures “233”, the figures “234” shall be substituted.
Amendment of 56. In section 27A of the Representation of People Act, 1950, after sub-section (4),

section 27A of ‘ npn ite si
ee et iaso, the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely

“(5) The electoral college for the Union territory of Lakshadweep shall c
sist of the elected members of the Legislative Assembly constituted for that terri
under the Government of Union territory of Lakshadweep Act, 1998.”

THE SCHEDULE
(See sections 4, 12 and 43)
FORMS OF OATH OR AFFIRMATIONS
1
Form of oath or affirmation to made by a candidate for election to the Legis
Assembly:—

“I, AB, having been nominated as a candidate to fill a seat in the Legislative
Assembly, do swear in the name of God/solemnly affirm that I bear true faith



15

allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established and that I will uphold
the sovereignty and integrity of India.”

tl
| of oath or affirmation to be made by a member of the Legislative Assembly:—

“I, AB, having been elected a member of the Legislative Assembly, do swear
‘in the name of God/solemnly affirm that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the
Constitution of India as by law established, and that I will faithfully discharge the
duty upon which I am about to enter”.

पा
Form of oath of office of a member of the Council of Ministers:—

“1, AB, do swear in the name of God/solemnly affirm that I will bear true faith
and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by established, that 1 will uphold the
sovereignty and integrity of India, that I will faithfully and conscientiously discharge
my duties as a Minister, and that I will do right to all manner of people in accordance
with the Constitution and the law without fear or favour, affection or ill-will.”

Iv

Form of oath of Secrecy for a member of Council of Ministers:

“1, AB, do swear in the name of God/solemnly affirm that I will not directly or
indirectly communicate or reveal to any person or persons any matter which shall be
brought under my consideration or shall become known to me as a Minister except as
‘may be required for the due discharge of any duties as such Minister.”


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS,

Even after 50 years of Independence, the Union territory of Lakshadweep has not
been provided with a democratic set-up with a Legislative Assembly for the governance of
the affairs of the Union territory Administration. All powers are vested in the Lieutenant
Governor and the bureaucracy continues to reign supreme. In the absence of Legislative
Assembly with devolution of powers, the people of the islands are not enable to have a
sense of belonging and involvement in the developmental activities of the islands and do
not have a say in the utilisation of the funds provided by the Central Government in proper
perspective.

‘The type of administration provided to the Union territory is not at all befitting to a
democratic set-up and devolution of powers. The population of the Union territory has
crossed four lakhs mark and the literacy percentage is well over the national average and is
steadily heading towards achieving cent percent. literacy as per norms prescribed by the
Government of India.

However, despite of all these favourable points the people of the Union territory did
not get ad trative set-up of their own choice mainly due to unforesighted views of the
Central Government. They deserve a political set-up in the same line as Delhi, Pondicherry
and the like are having.

There have been series of demands from the people of the Union territory for provid-
ing a Legislative Assembly on the line of the set-up in Delhi and Pondicherry. The people of
the island territory are unanimous in this regard. Now, since a three-tier Panchayati Raj
system is also in offing in pursuance with the Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment)
Act, with the idea of devolution of powers at Panchayat, block and district levels, it is high
time that a Legislative Assembly was provided to set the tone and direction for the govern-
ance of the Union territory Administration on democratic norms.

The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objectives.

New Detut; BASUDEB ACHARIA
April 30, 1998.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

| 3 of the Bill provides for setting up of a Legislative Assembly for the Union
itory of Lakshadweep. Clauses 7(5), 19 and 43(3) relate to payment of salaries and
ces to the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker, Members of the Legislative Assembly and
Ministers. The expenditure on such salaries and allowances and other expenditure of
idental nature such as on the additional staff in the Legislative Assembly and Council
inisters will be met from the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory of Lakshadweep.

‘Clause 38 provides for the delimitation of thirty single member territorial constitu-
for the proposed Assembly of the Union territory of Lakshadweep. Clause 55 pro-
es that Union territory of Lakshadweep will be represented by one member in the
il of States. For this purpose, a non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifteen

is likely to be incurred. This expenditure will be met from the Consolidated Fund of

‘The Bill does not involve any other expenditure whether of a recurring or non-


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 33 of the Bill empowers the Legislative Assembly of the Union
Lakshadweep to make rules, subject to the provisions of this Bill, for regulating its p
dure and conduct of its business. It also provides that the Lieutenant Governor shall,
consultation with the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly and with the approval of
President make rules for securing the completion of the financial busine: + regulating
Procedure and conduct of business in the Legislative Assembly in relation to any fina
matter or to any Bill for appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of the Uni
territory of Lakshadweep and for prohibiting the discussion of or asking any questi

which affect the discharge of the functions of the Lieutenant Governor in so far as
required to act in his discretion,

Clause 44 empowers the President to make rules regarding allocation of business
Ministers and transactions of such business. It further empowers the Lieutenant Gov
to make rules providing the manner of authenticating the orders issued in his name.

Clause 46(3) and 47(3) provéde that the Lieutenant Governor may make rules reg
ing the custody, ete. of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory of Lakshadweep
the Contingency Fund of the Union territory of Lakshadweep.

Clause 53 empowers the President to issue orde!
giving effect to the provisions of this Bill
the Legislative Assembly.

rs for removing any difficulty
and in particular in relation to the constitution

‘The matters mentioned above are of
for them in the Bill itself, The delegation
character,

@ procedural nature and it is difficult to provi
of legislative power is , therefore, of a no

18


ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

* * ‘ * * *

240. Power of President to make regulations for certain Union (ertitories—(1) The
President may make regulations for the peace, progress and good government of the
Union territory of—

(a) the Andaman and Nicobar Islands;
(0) Lakshaweep;|

(0) dadra and Nagar Haveli;]

(d) Daman and Diu:]

Provided that when any body is created under article 239A to function as a Legislae
ture for the Union territory of Pondicherry the President shall not make any regulation for

the peace, progress and good government of that Union territory with effect from the date

appointed for the first meeting of the Legislature:

Provided further that when ever the body functioning as a Legislature for the Union
territory of Pondicherry is dissolved, or the functioning of that body as such Legislature
Femains suspended on account of any action taken under any such law as is referred to in
clause (1) of article 239A, the President, may, during the period of such dissolution or
suspension, make regulations for the peace, progress and good government of that Union
territory.

(2) Any regulation so made may repeal or amend any Act made by Parliament or any
other law, which is for the time being applicable to the Union territory and, when promul-
gated by the President, shall have the same force and effect as an Act of Parliament which
applies to that territory.

+ * * « « *
FOURTH SCHEDULE
[Articles 4(1) and 80(2)}
Allocation of Seats in the Council of States

To cach State or Union territory specified in the first column of the following table,
there shall be allotted the number of seats specified in the second column thereof Opposite
to that State or that Union Territory, as the case may be

TABLE
* « * * * *
125.] Arunachal Pradesh i
126.] Dethi 3
(27] Pondicherry 1
न * * न + x
* * नि . * *

Total 233

19°


os

LOK SABHA.

4
BILL

to provide for the creation of a Legislative Assembly for the Union territory of
Lakshadweep and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto

(Shri Basudeb Acharia, M.P.)

BILLS/929LS.PM5