1
THE SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO THE STATE OF
ANDHRA PRADESH BILL, 2015
BY
SHRI MURALI  MOHAN MAGANTI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Andhra Pradesh  for the
purpose of promoting the welfare of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other
Backward Sections of citizens, developing a new capital city at Vijayawada for
the State of Andhra Pradesh and for the  development, exploitation and
proper utilization of its resources.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance to the State of
Andhra Pradesh Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No.  35  of 2015
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. There shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India,
every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as special financial assistance
to the State of Andhra Pradesh to meet the costs of such schemes of development, as may be
undertaken by the State with the approval of the Union Government for the purpose of:—
(i) provide welfare measures for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes
and Other Backward Classes of citizens;
(ii) developing a new capital city at Vijayawada; and
(iii) development, exploitation and proper utilization and exploitation of the
resources in the State.
3. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
Special
financial
assistance to
the State of
Andhra
Pradesh.
Act not in
derogation of
other laws.
5
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
With the enactment of the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014, Hyderabad has
been declared common capital for the States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana for a period
of five years from the commencement of the Act. Owing to bifurcation of the State of
Andhra Pradesh into Andhra Pradesh and Telangana States, the present State of
Andhra Pradesh has suffered a loss in its share of revenue and is facing severe financial
problems. The recent occurrence of Hudhud cyclone in and around Visakhapatnam and its
neighbouring districts of Srikakulam and Vizianagaram, has resulted in loss of property
worth rupees seventy thousand crores approximately. Unless the Central Government comes
forward and support financially, it would be very difficult for the State of Andhra Pradesh to
come out from the financial debt. During passage of the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation
Bill, 2014, the government had assured that a special category will be accorded to the
State of Andhra Pradesh for five years. However, conferring of Special Status to the State of
Andhra Pradesh is still awaited. Therefore, releasing of financial assistance promised to the
State of Andhra Pradesh is the need of the hour.
Vijayawada has been identified as the new capital city for the present State of
Andhra Pradesh and for the development of Vijayawada as capital city huge funds are
required from the Central Government. The State of Andhra Pradesh is socially and
economically backward. Problems of poverty, unemployment and illiteracy are required to
be addressed urgently. Also, measures for proper utilization of resources, welfare of weaker
sections in the region and initiation of new development schemes need to be taken in a time
bound manner. It is, therefore, necessary that the Central Government should provide
appropriate special financial assistance to the State of Andhra Pradesh immediately for its
all-round development including the welfare of weaker sections and development and
exploitation of its vast resources. Such a step of providing financial assistance to the State
of Andhra Pradesh would go a long way in building this nation more and more strong.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MURALI MOHAN MAGANTI
December 22, 2014
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that there shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the
Consolidated Fund of India, every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as
special financial assistance to the State of Andhra Pradesh to meet the costs of such schemes
of development, as may be undertaken by the State with the approval of the Union
Government.
The Bill, therefore, on enactment, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. As the sums of moneys which will be given to the State of West Bengal as special
financial assistance will be known only after the welfare schemes to be implemented by the
State Government with the approval of Union Government are identified, it is not possible to
give at this stage the estimates of recurring expenditure, which would be involved out of the
Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of
India.
4

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Andhra Pradesh  for the purpose
of promoting the welfare of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other
 Backward Sections of citizens, developing a new capital city at
 Vijayawada  for the State of Andhra Pradesh and for the
 development, exploitation and proper
utilization of its resources.
————
(Shri Murali Mohan Maganti, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4323LS(S3)—23-02-2015.