1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
DR. MANOJ RAJORIA, M.P.
A
BILL
 further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After article 21A of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
"21B. The State shall provide affordable healthcare and medicines to all citizens
in such manner as the State may, by law, determine.".
Bill No. 35 of  2017
Short title and
commencement.
Insertion of
new article
21B.
Right to
health.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Article 47 of the Constitution provides for raising of the level of nutrition and the
standard of living of people and the improvement of public health as among primary duties
of State. But we could not achieve this goal and millions of citizens are denied access to
healthcare and medicines due to unaffordable hospitals and medical expenses. The public
healthcare system is not in a position to provide universal and free healthcare to its citizens.
The growing private sector in the healthcare segment has become unaffordable even for a
citizen having reasonable income. It is the duty of the State to treat healthcare as occupation
or profession and profiteering should not be permitted. In the light of the above, it is the duty
of the State to intervene and provide universal affordable healthcare to its citizens. In order
to fulfill this goal, it is felt that an explicit provision should be made in the Part III of the
Constitution relating to Fundamental Rights of citizens.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Constitution with a view to guarantee right to
affordable healthcare and medicines to all citizens.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MANOJ RAJORIA
February 9, 2017.

3
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to insert new article 21B in the Constitution with a view to
make right to affordable healthcare and medicines as fundamental right of the citizens. The
Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
estimated that recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand crores would be involved
per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

GMGIPMRND—4700LS(S3)—23.02.2017.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Dr. Manoj Rajoria, M.P.)