Bill No. 360-F of  2019
O                                                                                                                       INAL
THE NATIONAL CAPITAL TERRITORY OF DELHI
(RECOGNITION OF PROPERTY RIGHTS OF
RESIDENTS IN UNAUTHORISED
COLONIES) BILL, 2019
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT—
LOK SABHA ON 28TH NOVEMBER, 2019
RAJY A  SABHA ON 4TH  DECEMBER, 2019)
ASSENTED  TO
 ON 11TH DECEMBER , 2019
ACT NO. 45 OF 2019

1
THE NATIONAL CAPITAL TERRITORY OF DELHI (RECOGNITION
OF PROPERTY RIGHTS OF RESIDENTS IN UNAUTHORISED
COLONIES) BILL, 2019
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT)
A
BILL
to provide  special provisions for the National Capital Territory of Delhi for recognising
the property rights of resident in  unauthorised colonies by securing the rights of
ownership or transfer or mortgage in favour of the residents of such colonies
who are possessing properties on the basis of Power of Attorney, Agreement
to Sale, Will, possession letter or any other documents including
documents evidencing payment of consideration and for the matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
W
HEREAS there has been phenomenal increase in the population of the National Capital
Territory of  Delhi in the last few decades owing to migration and other factors but development
of planned housing colonies have not kept pace with the requirements of a burgeoning
population resulting in the increase of unauthorised colonies;
Bill No.  360-F of 2019

2
AND WHEREAS number of unauthorised colonies have been identified in the National
Capital Territory of Delhi on the basis of applications made by the Residents Welfare
Associations for regularisation in pursuance to notification number S.O. 683(E), dated the
24th March, 2008 of the Delhi Development Authority, published in the Gazette of India,
Extraordinary, Part II, Section 3, Sub-section (ii), dated the 24th March, 2008;
A
ND WHEREAS the properties in these colonies are not being registered by registering
authority and thereby the residents do not have any title documents in respect of such
properties and the Banks and financial institutions do not extend any credit facilities in
respect of said properties;
A
ND WHEREAS the ownership of the properties in unauthorised colonies have been
transferred several times through registered or un-registered or notarised Power of Attorney,
Agreement to Sale, Will, possession letter and other documents including documents
evidencing payment of consideration and stamp duty on these multiple transactions have
neither assessed nor been paid;
A
ND WHEREAS the stamp duty on the conveyance deed or authorisation slip, as the
case may be, is leviable as per minimum rates (circle rates) specified in the notification of the
Government of  the National Capital Territory of Delhi published vide number F.1(953)Regn.Br./
Div.Com/HQ/2014, dated the 22nd September, 2014 or the sale consideration mentioned in
the conveyance deed or authorisation slip, as the case may be, whichever is higher;
A
ND WHEREAS the Supreme Court in the case of Suraj Lamp & Industries (P) Ltd. Vs.
State of Haryana & others vide its judgment dated the 11th October, 2011 had held that sale
agreement/general Power of Attorney or Will transactions are not “transfers” or “sales” and
that such transactions cannot be treated as completed transfers or conveyances and they
can continue to be treated as existing agreement of sale;
A
ND WHEREAS keeping in view the socio-economic conditions of the residents of these
unauthorised colonies and ground realities, it is desirable to recognise and confer rights of
ownership or transfer or mortgage to the residents of such colonies on the basis of Power of
Attorney, Agreement to Sale, Will, possession letter and other documents including
documents evidencing payment of consideration and  to facilitate development or
re-development that may improve existing infrastructure, civic and social amenities which
may lead to better quality of life;
A
ND WHEREAS it is expedient to have a law to recognise and confer rights of ownership
or transfer or mortgage to the residents of unauthorised colonies as one time special measure.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Capital Territory of Delhi (Recognition of
Property Rights of Residents in Unauthorised Colonies) Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the National Capital Territory of Delhi.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "resident" means a person having physical possession of property on the
basis of a registered sale deed or latest Power of Attorney, Agreement to Sale, Will,
possession letter and other documents including documents evidencing payment of
consideration in respect of a property in unauthorised colonies and includes their
legal heirs but does not include tenant, licensee or permissive user;
(b) "unauthorised colony" means a colony or development comprising of a
contiguous area, where no permission has been obtained for approval of layout plan
or building plans and has been identified for regularisation of such colony in pursuance
to the notification number S.O. 683(E), dated the 24th March, 2008 of the Delhi
Development Authority, published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section 3,
Sub-section (ii), dated the 24th March, 2008.
Short title and
extent.
Definitions.

3
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 and the
Registration Act, 1908 as applicable to the National Capital Territory of  Delhi or any rules or
regulations or bye-laws made thereunder and the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case
of Suraj Lamp & Industries (P) Ltd. Vs. State of Haryana & others, dated the 11th October,
2011, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, regularise the
transactions of immovable properties based on the latest Power of Attorney, Agreement to
Sale, Will, possession letter and other documents including documents evidencing payment
of consideration for conferring or recognising right of ownership or transfer or mortgage in
regard to an immovable property in favour of a resident of an unauthorised colony.
(2) The Central Government may, by notification published in the Official Gazette, fix
charges on payment of which transactions of immovable properties based on the  latest
Power of Attorney, Agreement to Sale, Will, possession letter and other documents including
documents evidencing payment of consideration for conferring or recognising right of
ownership or transfer or mortgage in regard to an immovable property in favour of a resident
of an unauthorised colony through a conveyance deed or authorisation slip, as the case may
be.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 27 of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899,
the stamp duty and registration charges shall be payable on the amount mentioned in the
conveyance deed or authorisation slip, as the case may be.
(4) Any resident of an unauthorised colony having registered or un-registered or
notarised Power of Attorney, Agreement to Sale, Will, possession letter and other documents
including documents evidencing payment of consideration shall be eligible for right of
ownership or transfer or mortgage through a conveyance deed or authorisation slip, as the
case may be, on payment of charges referred to in sub-section (2).
(5) No stamp duty and registration charges shall be payable on any previous sale
transactions made prior to any transaction referred to in sub-section (4).
(6) The tenants, licensees or permissive users shall not be considered for conferring or
recognising any property rights under this Act.
2 of 1899.
16 of 1908.
Recognition
of property
rights.
2 of 1899.

A
BILL
to provide  special provisions for the National Capital Territory of Delhi for recognising the
property rights of resident in  unauthorised colonies by securing the rights of ownership
or transfer or mortgage in favour of the residents of such colonies
who are possessing properties on the basis of Power of Attorney, Agreement
to Sale, Will, possession letter or any other documents including
documents evidencing payment of consideration and for the matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(As passed by the Houses of Parliament)
MGIPMRND—4528RS(S3)—20-12-2019.