10K SABRA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE PUBLIC Pl10VIDENT FUND BILL, 1968 
(To be/As introduced in Lok Sabha) 
1. Page 2, in the marginal heading to clause 4,-
for "Subscri pto1n to Futld" ~ "Sllbscriptions to Fund" 
2. Page 2, line 28,-
3. 
4. 
5. 
(i) after "r)fficial Gazette" insert " " , 
(1i) after "time to time" insert " if , 
Page 2, 
omit -
Page 3, 
for 
Page 3, 
line' 33,-
" • II , 
line 7,-
ft suscri ptions ft ~ "subscriptions" 
in the marginal heading tn ch.use 9,-
after "against" 
"attachment" 
read -
ft. Page 4, line 7,-
7. 
8. 
9. 
after fl following" 
Page 4, line 9,-
insert " " , 
for "scheme or" read "Scheme or" 
Page 6, line 8, from hottom,-
for "Dupty" read -
Page 8', line 1, from bnttom,-
for 11 i tnerest" read "i nteres t" 
-
rElN DELHI; 
Atrll 15, 1968 
Oha tra 2h. 1890 (SakaJ 
"Deputy" 
• ,.t' 

s 
9 of I87S 10 
As INTRODUCED IN. LoK SABllA ON 
1 B APR 1968 
8W No. 3' __ ~ I~ 
THE PUBLIC PROVIDENT FUND BILL, 1968 
I-
BILL 
to prwide for the institution of a promdent fund for the ,tmef'tit 
pu.blic. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Nineteenth Year ot the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Public Provident Fund Act. ShOll titl. 
1968. ad eatalt. 
(2) Jrt extends to the whole of India. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "Fund" means the Public Provident Fund established 
under the Scheme; 
(b) "minor" means a person who is not deemed to haYe 
attained majority under the Indian Majority Act, 1875; 
DdWtiOlll. 

Public 
Provident 
Fund 
Scheme. 
Subacrip-
toln to 
FUIId. 
Interest. 
.. 
(c) "Scheme" means the Public Provident Fund Scheme 
framed under sub-section (1) of section 3; 
. (d) "subscriber" means an individual who makes subscrip-
tion to the Fund under section 4 and where such sUQscription is 
made by an individual on behalf of a minor, of whom he is the S 
guardian, such minor; 
(e) "year" means the financial year . 
. 3. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, frame a scheme to be called the Public Provident 
Fund Scheme for the establmhment of a provident fund for the 10 
general public and there shall be established, as soon as may be after 
the framing of the Scheme, a Fund in accordance with the provisions 
of this Act and the Scheme. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of thil Act, the Scheme ·may provide 
for aU or any of the matters specified in the Schedule. IS 
(3) The Scheme shaH have effect notwithstanding anything con-
tained in any law for the time being in force other than this Act or 
in any instrument 'laving effect by virtue of any law other than this 
Act. 
(4) The Central Government may, from time to time, by notifi- 20 
cation in the Official Gazette, add to, amend or vary the Scheme. 
4. Any individual may, on his own behalf or on behalf of a minor, 
of whom he is the guardian, subt;cribe to the Fund in such manner 
and subject to such maximum and minimum limits as may be speci-
fied ,in the Scheme. 25 
5. All subscriptions made uncIer section 4 shan bear interest at 
.' such rate al may be notified by the Central Goverrmtent in the 
Omclal Gazette from time to time ad the interest .mall be calcula-
ted·in such mBDDer as may be specified in the Scheme . 
Withdrawal, 6. (1) A subscriber shall be entitled to make withdrawals from 30 
the amount standing to his credit in the Fund (including any in-
terest accrued thereon) to such extent and subject to such terms 
and cOnditions as may be specified in the Scheme: 
Provided thai such withdrawal shall be allowed only after the 
,.expiry of a period of five years from the end of the year in whlcfl 35 
he makes the initial sublCription to the Fund. 

3 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), a 
subscriber shall be entitled to withdraw the entire balance standing 
to his credit in the Fund after the expiry of a period of fifteen years 
from the end of the year in which he makes the initial subscription 
to the Fund. 
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2). an 
individual who has made suscriptions to the Fund on behalf of a 
minor, af whom he is the guardian, shall be entitled to withdraw any 
amount from the Fund only for the use of the minor. 
10 7. A subscriber may be granted loans out of the amount standing =~ or 
to his credit in the Fund on such terms and conditions as may be 
specified in the Scheme and where the subscriber is a minOll', sucn 
loans shall be granted to his guardian only for the use of the minor. 
8. (1) If a subscriber dies and there is in force at the time of his ~:=~ OD 
IS death a nomination in favour of any person, all amounts standing lubllCribcr. 
to his credit in the Fund shall be payable to the nominee. 
(2) Where the nominee is a minor, the amounts referred to in 
sub-section (1) shall be payable to any guardian of the property of 
the minor appointed by a competent court, or where no such guardian 
20has been so appointed, to either parent of the minor, or where 
neither parent is alive, to any other guardian of the minor. 
(3) Where there is no nomination in force at the time of the 
death of the subscriber, the amounts referred to in sub-section (1) 
shall be payable to his legal heirs. 
p . 
~5 9. The amount standing to the credit of any subscriber in the .:::IOD 
Fund shall not be liable to attachmf'nt under any decree or order of ttee Mlent. 
any court in respect of any debt or Uability incurred by the 
subscriber. 
10. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against ~;ot;fitiOD 
30any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to tak~n i': 
be done under this Act or the Scheme. good faith. 
11. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions Power to 
of this Act or the Scheme, the Central Government may, by order ::kiel. 
published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not incon-
3Ssistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary 
or expedient for the removal of the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiration 
of three years from the commencement of this Act. 

Schlme 
to be 
l'aid be-
fore Par-
llamen'. 
4· 
- (2) EVery order made under Bub-section (1) shall be laid as soon 
as ~y be ~ter it is made before each House of ~arliament. 
12. The Scheme shall be laid, as soon as may be, after it is framed 
before each House of Parliament while it is in session for' a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in 5 
two suecessive sessions, and $£, before the expi'ry of' the session in 
which it is so laid or the sessrion immediately following both 
Houses agree in making any modificatjon in any provision of the 
scheme or both Houses agree that any prOVision in the Scheme 
should not be made, the provision of the Scheme shall thereafter 
have eft'ect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the 10 
case may be, so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that provision. 

THE SCHEDULE 
[See section 3 (2)] 
Matters for which provision may be made in the Scheme:-
(1) The mEMner in which subscriptions to the Fund may be 
5 made and the maximum and minimum limits of such subscrip-
tions. 
(2) The manner in which interest on sub!icriptions to the 
Fund may be calculated. 
(3) The documents to be issued to subscribers as evidence 
10 of the subscriptions made by them to the Fund. 
(4) The extent to which and the terms and conditions under 
which withdrawals may be made by subscribers from the amount 
standing to their credit in the Fund. 
(5) The auth'Jrity or authorities by or throu~h whom subs-
15 criptions to the Fund may be collected or withdrawals there-
from may be made. 
(6) The terms and conditions under which loans may be 
granted to subscribers out of the amounts standin" to their 
credit in the Fund and the authority or authorities by whom 
20 such loans may be granted. 
25 
(?) The accounts to be maintained with respect to subscrip-
tions to the Fund, and withdrawals and final payments made 
and loans granted therefrom and the authority or authorities by 
whom such accounts shall be maintained. 
(8) The nomination of any perSOll to receive the amount 
standing t'O the credit of a subscriber in the Fund in the event 
of his death and the cancellation or change of such nomination. 
(9) The issue of duplicate of any document issued as evi-
dence of any subscription to the Fund in the event of damage, 
Jos.o; or destruction of the original and the fee on the payment of 
which such duplicate may be issued. 
(10) Any other matter which is to be provided for in the 
SchE"me or which may be necessary or proper for the purpose of 
implementing the Scheme. 
~. ~... '- ' .. 5 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The object of this Bill is to provide for the institution of a provi-
dent fund for the general public. The Fund i5 meant to be a medium 
of lung. term savings for individuals. The Bill inter alia seeks to em-
power the Central Government to frame a Scheme specifying the 
maximum and minimum limits in respect of subscriptions to the 
Fund; the extent to which withdrawals may be made from the Fund; 
the procedure for maktng subscriptions to, and withdrawals from, 
the Fund; and other relevant matters. Interest on subscriptions will 
be credited to the individual accounts of subscn.bers to the Fund at 
the rate to be notified by the Central Government from time to time. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 2nd April. 1968. 
MORARJI DESAT. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. F. 14(47)-B/67, dated the 8th April. 1968 
from Shri Morarji Desai, Dupty Prime Minister aoad Minister of 
Finance to the Secretary, Lok Sabha.] 
The President, havin,g been informed of the subj'ect matter of 
the proposed Bill to provide for the institution of a provident fund 
for the general public, recomme'.lds under clauses (1) and (3) of 
article 117 of the Constitution, the introduction of the Public Pro-
vident Fund Bill, 1968 in the Lok Sabha and also the consideration 
of- the BilL . 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDuM 
Under clause 3 (2) of the Bill, read with items (5), (6) a'Jld (7) 
of the Schedule thereto, the authority OIl' authorities who will ope-
rate the Public Provident Fund by collecting subscripti.ons etc., will 
be as proposed to be provided for in the Scheme. 
The Fund is proposed to be operated by the Central Goverrunent 
through the agency of the State Bank of India and its subsidiaries. 
For adminis~ring the Fund it will be necessary to employ some 
additional staff in the Mi'ais~y of Finance. The expenditure on 
account of the additional staff together with incidental expenses 
will be Rs. 32,000 a year. There will be no non-recurring expendi-
ture. 
Requirement of person.neZ and finance 
No. Annual 
emolumenb 
Cost 
-----.-----------.- ... --..... ~-.-.- .. -------.----------- ---_ .... _------_ ... __ . 
Rs. 
I. Oflicer 
Under Secretary I x Rs. 15,300 IS·300 
n. Establishment 
Assistant I I x Rs. 6,500 6.500 
Lower Dh'ision Clerk 
(Typist) I x RH. 3,300 3.300 
Class IV 1 X Rs. 1.900 1.900 
III. Incidental. 5,000 
32,000 
---- -- --- - _ ...... _--- . --_ .. --_._---_. __ ._- -'--"--- .. _--------
On the basis that in the first year 2 lakh accounts will be opened 
and the avere.ge cO'atribution will be Rs. 500, a total contribution of 
Rs. 10 crores has been assum'ed in the Budget for 1968-69. At the 
rate of Rs. 5 per account in the first year and Rs. 3 per account per 
year in the subsequent years the remuneration payable to the State 
Bank of India and its subsidiaries would be Rs. 10 lakhs in the first 
year and Rs. 6 lakhs in subsequent years. 
7 

8 
In addition under clause 5 of th'e Bill, interest at the rate to be 
notified ,by Government from time to time, on the subscriptiO'ns 
made to the Fund, wiU have to be credited to the subscriber's. 
acoount. On the assumption that the Scheme will be introduced 
from the 1st July, 1968 and that the subscription of lts. 10 crores 
assumed in the Budget would be received uniformly during the 
remainin.g nine months of 1968-69 the interest charge, will come to 
approximately Rs. 18 to 20 lakhs for the 1st year. For the subse--
quent years the interest charge will depend upon the amount of 
subscri'ptions, the balances at the credit of each subscriber in the 
Fund and the rate of itnerest. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Sub-<:lause (1) of clause 3 of the Bill provides that the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Ofticial Gazette, frame • 
scheme to be called the Publie Provident Fund Scheme for the 
establishment of a provident fund for the general public. The matters 
which may be provided for in the Schem'e have been specified in the 
Schedule. They, inter alia, relate to the manner in which subscrlp-
tions to the Fund may be made and the maximum and minimum 
limits of such subscriptions; the manner in which interest an. 
f>ubscriptions to the Fund may be calculated; the extent to which and 
the terms and conditions under which withdrawals may be made by 
subscribers from the amounts standing to their credit in the Fund; 
the accounts to be maintained with respect to subscriptions to the 
Fund and withdrawals and fin,,1 pa~ents made therefrom; and the 
nomination by a subscriber of any person to receive the amount 
standjng tQ his ~ in ~ everitl of his death. These' are matters 
of procedure and administrative detail and it is hardly practicable to 
provide for them in the Bill .itself. Moreover, under clause 12 of the 
Bill, the Scheme shall 'be subject to the scrutiny of Parliament. The 
delegation of l'egislative power is, thus, of a normal character, 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the institution of a provident fund for the 
general public. 
'" 
(Shri Morarji Desai, 
Deputy Prime Minister and 
Minister of Finane,.) 