As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA Oll 
'. No. l6 of 1914 
THE NATIONAL SECURITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1984 
A 
BILL 
r'·.' to amend the Nciti01l4l Security Act, 1980, in it, ClPPUcation to the State 
of Punjab and the' Union territory of Chandigarh. 
BI it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-fifth Year of the Republic 
of Imiia as follows: - . 
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Security (Amendment) Short 
. A~. 1864. title and 
commenc:e-
5 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 5th day of April, ment. 
1984. 
2. The National Security Act, 1980 (hereinafter referred to as the' principal Amend. 
Act) shall, in its application to the State of Punjab and the Union territory of ment at. Act 
Chandigarh, have effect subject to tile ameadments specified in sections 3 to 5. 65 of 1980 
ia ill appli. 
cation to 
Punjab aDd 
Chandl. 
garb. 

Amend-
meat of 
lOCtion 3. 
Amend-
mentof 
.ec:tion 8. 
Jmertion 
efDew 
~on 
"'A. 
Circum-
.taDcea in 
which per-
IODS may 
bedetaiDed 
forperiodl 
Jonger 
tbanthree 
IllO!ltm 
withoot 
.btaiDiBa 
theopiDiOD 
ofAdviaory 
Boarda. 
2 
3. In sub-section (4) of section 3 of the principal Act, in the proviso,-
(_) for the words "ten days", the words "fifteen days" shall be 8ublU-
tuted; 
(b) for the words "fifteea days", the words "twenty days" shall be 
n~tu~. 5 
4. In section 8 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words "ten 
days", the words "fifteen days" shall be substituted. 
5. In the principal Act, after section 14, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
'14A. (l) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing pro- Ie 
visions of this Act, any person in respect of whom an order of detention 
bas been made under this Act at any time before the 3rd day of April, 
1985 may be detained without obtaining the opinion of the Advisory 
Board for a period longer than three months, but not eXceeding six 
months, from the date of his detention where such person had been de- 15 
tained with a view to preventing him from acting, in any disturbed area, 
ill any manner prejudicial to-
(0) the defence of India; or 
(b) the security of India; or 
(c) the security of the State; or 
(d) the main1eoance of public order; or 
(e) the maintenance of 8Upplies and services essential to the com-
munity. 
!lO 
ExpltJrrotion 1.-The provisions of the Explanation to sub-section 
(2) of section 3 shall apply for the purposes of this sub-iiection as they itS 
apply for the purposes of that sub-sectiOD. 
Explanation 2.-ln this sub-section, "distUrbed area" means any 
area which is for the time being declared by noti8catioo under section 
3 of the Punjab Disturbed Areas Act, 1983, or under section 3 of the '2 of 1913 
Chandigadl Disturbed Areas Act, 1983, to be a disturbed area. SO 33 01. 1983. 
(2) In the case ot any penon to whom sub-section (1) applies, 
IeCtioos 10 to 13 shall have effect subject t8 the following modificatiODB, 
name1y:-
(a) in section 10, for the worda "shall, within three weeks", the 
words "sball, within four months and two weeks" sba11 be substitu- '5 
ted; 
(b) in seet10n 11,-
(i) in sub-sectioD (I) for the wordS "seven weeks", the 
words "fiv~ months and three weeki" shall be subttituted; 

LuK SJillHA 
CuRRIGENDA 
"to 
THE NATlvNAL SiECUhl TY {#JiENTh'IENT) BI~L, 1~14 
t::I2 beMs intrvduced in &<;k Sabha 7 
1. Page 3, line 12~-
ftlr "lJrdinances" reaQ "lJrdinance" 
2. Pac;e 5, lin::; 1'-,-
B. "subjects" re ad "subject" 
NEW DELHI; 
th~~ 18,Cl~~~x Z IX '-, 

5 
3 
(ii) in sub-section (2), for the words "detention of the 
person concerned", the words "continued detention of the per-
son concerned" shall be substituted; 
(c) in section 12, (or the words "for the detention", at both the 
places where they occur, the words "for the continued detention" 
shall be substituted; 
(d) in section 13, for the words "twelve months", the words 
"two years" shall be substituted.'. 
I of 1884. 6. (1) The National Security (Amendment) Ordinance, 1984, is here-
10 
by repealed. 
- (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken 
under the principal Act, as amended Dr the said Ordinances, shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the prJnc:lP.al Act, as amended 
by this Act. 
Repeal 
and 
laving... 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The activities of the extremist and terrollst elements in the "disturbed 
areas" of P'Jnjab and Chandigarh have been a matter of serious concern. 
These persons have been indulging in violent activities and terrorist 
methods, including threats to persons involved in the investigation and 
prosecution of cases. 'To enable the Administration to deal effectively 
with such elements in these "disturbed. areas", and to enable them to 
- take preventive action, the President promulgated on the 5th AprU, 1984, 
the National Security (Amendment) Ordinance, 1984 (5 of ]984). 
2. The Ordinance amended the National Security Act, 1980 in its appli-
cation to the State of Punjab and the Union territory of Chandtgarb-
Ca) to increase from ten days to fifteen days the maximum 
period within which grounds of detention may in exceptional cir-
cumstances be communicated to the detenu, 
(b) to provide in certain cases for detention of persons without 
obtaining the opin1on of the Advisory Board for a period of more tlian 
three months but not exceeding six months from the date of their 
detention and to provide also in such cases for a longer maximum 
period of detention; and 
(e) to make the necessary consequential amendments in the Act. 
S. The Bill seeks to replace the above Ordinance. 
NEW DELIO:; P. C. SBTHl. 
Tile 12th Ami, 1984. 

3. (1) 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRAC'.rs FROM TII& NATIONAL SBcuIrJtf ACT, 1980 
,(e 01' 1980) 
... • • • 
* • ... ... 
(4) When. any order is made under this section by an ofticer mentioned 
in sub-section (3'), he shall forthwith report the fact. to th~ State Gov-
ernment to which he is subordinate together with the fP,"Ounds OD which 
the order has been made and such other particulars as, in his opinion, 
have a bearing on the matteI', and no such order shall remain in force 
for more than twelve days after the making thereof unless, in the mean-
time, it has been approved by the State Governm~nt: 
Provided that where under section 8 the grounds of detent jon arc 
communicated by th~ officer making the order after five days but not 
later than ten days from the date of detention, this sub-section shall 
apply subjects to the modification that, for the words "twelve days", the 
words "fifteen days" shall be substitut~d . 
• • • • • 
8. (1) Wh~Q a person is dtltained in punuanee of a detention order, 
the authority making the order shall, as soon as may be, but ordinarily 
110t later than five days and in exceptional circumstances and for reasons 
to be recorded in writing not later than ten days from the dale of deten-
tion. communicate to him the grounds on which the order has been made 
and shall afford him th~ earliest opportunity of making a representation 
against the order to the approprinte Government. 
• • • • • 
Power to 
make 
erdcrs 
detaininl 
eertain 
I'ICrso"~. 
Grounds 
of order 
of detcn-
titm to be 
disclosed 
to persons 
affected 
by the 
order . 

, . 
. . .~~ 
. ...• . . . . . ' 
; . 
. ,. 
LOK SABRA 
i .. 
,'.I 
BILL 
4 •. 
, .... 
y " 
to amend the National Security Act, 1980, in its application to the State 
. ~ " . 
,,, .. 
of Punjab and the Union' territory of Chandiprh . 
. ,' .. 4; ,~ 
" .... a.dJ miti 
;:'!:"r :, 
(Shri P. C. Sethi, 
Minister of Home Alairs) 