BW NO.3' of 19S' 
THE INDIAN INSTITUTE OF 
TECHNOLOGY (KHARAGPUR) 
BILL, 1956 
(As INTRODUCID IN Lo~ SABRA) 

BUI Ne. " of 1M' 
THE INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY 
(KHARAGPUR) BILL, 1956 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA) 
• 
BILL 
to declare :the· institution known as the Indian Institute of Techno-
logy, Kharagpur to be an institution of national importa.nce and 
to p1'ovide for its incorporation and matters connected there-
with. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Repub-
lic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Institute of Technology Shon title 
(Kharagpur) Act, 1956.. and com-mencemeat. 
S (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gaz~tte, appOint. 
Z. Whereas the' objects of the institution known as the Indian Declaration 
Institute of Technology at Kharagpur in the district of Midnapore rft~e Indiaa 
in the State of West Bengal are such as to make the institution one T=~icvof 
• 10 of national importance, it is hereby declared that the institution (KhaJ:aIpQr) 
known as the Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur is an insti- ~i~:U ms:;U-
tution of national importance. natioDal . ~ 
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- portance. DefinitioDs. 
(a) "Academic Council" means the Academic Council of the 
IS Institute; 
(b) "Board" means the Board of Governors of the Institute; 
(c) "Chairman" means the Chairman of the Board; 
(d) "Deputy Director" means the Deputy Director of the 
Institute; 

2 
(e) ":Director" means the Director of the Institute; 
(f) "Finance Committee" means the Finance Committee of 
the Institute; 
(g) "Institute" means the Institute known "as the Indian 
Institute of Technology, Kharagpur. incorporated under this S 
Act; 
(h) "Registrar" means the Registrar of the Institute; 
(i) "Statutes" and "Ordinances" means respectively the 
Statutes and Ordinances of the Institute made under this Act. 
IDcorporatioa. - •• (1).Tbe first Chairman, the first Director and the first members 10 
of ,the Board who shall be· the persons appointed in this behalf by 
the Central Government, by notification in the Official 'Gazette, and 
all persons, who may hereafter become or be appointed as officers 
or members of the Board, so long as they continue to hold such 
office or membership, are hereby constituted a body corporate by the IS 
name of the Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur. 
(2)- The Institute shall have perpetual succession .and a common 
seal, and shall sue and be sued by the said name .. 
Transfer of 5. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, every person who is 
:::~ e:.~ permanently employed in the Indian Institute of Technology at 20 
ployees o.f Kharagpur immediately before the commencement of this Act shall, 
~~tituIt!d~ on and from such commencement, become an employee of the Insti-
Technology tute and shall hold his office or service therein by the same tenure, 
;~r~- at the same remuneration and upon the same terms and conditions 
and with the same rights 'ond privileges as to pension, leave, 2S 
gratuity, provident fund and other matters as he would have held 
the same on the date of commencement of this Act if this Act had 
not been passed. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the 
Institute may, with the prior approval of the Visitor, aUer the terms 30 
and conditions of any employee specified in sub-section (1), and if • 
the alteration is not acceptable to such employee, his employment 
may be terminated bv the Institute in accordance with the terms 
of the contract with' the employee or, if no provision is made 
therein in this behalf,· on payment to him by' the Institute of 3S 
compensation equivalent to three months' remuneration. 
(3) Every person employed in the Indian Institute of 0 Techno-
:lolY at Kharagpur other than any such person as is referred to in 
sub-section (1) shall, on and from toe commencement of this Act 
become an employee of the Institute upon such terms and condi- 40 

• 
3 
tioJ\S as may be provided tor in the Statutes, and until such provi-
sion is mede, on the terms and conditions applicable to him imme-
diately before such ,commencement. 
S; ('1) The Institute sh. have the following powers, 1'l8IIlely.:- Powen of , the .Imti-
S «1) to provide for instruetion and research in such branchet 
of engineering and technology. applied sciences and applied 
arts, as the Institute may think fit, and for the advancement of 
learning and dissemination of knowledge in such branches; 
(b) 10 hold examinations and grant degrees, diplomas and 
10 other academic distinctions or titles to persons in the minnel' 
laid down by or under this Act; 
(c) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions under 
conditions laid down by the Statutes: 
(d) to fix and demand such fees and other charges as may 
IS be laid down by the Statutes; , 
(e) to establish, maintain and manage halls and hostels for 
the residence of students; 
(f) to supervise and control the residence and to regulate 
the discipline of stUdents of the Institute and to make arrange-
20 ments for promoting their health, general' welfare and cultural 
and corporate life; -
25 
3S 
• (g) to provide for the maintenance of units of the National 
Cadet Crops for the students of the Institute; 
(h) to institute teaching" ~dministrative and ministerial 
posts and to ma~ appointments thereto (except in the case of 
the Director) in accordance with the Statutes; 
(i) to frame Statutes and Ordinances and to alter, modify or 
rescind the same in accordance with the procedure prescribed 
under this Act; . 
(j) to deal with any pr.rty.beionging to or vestecl in t11.e, 
Institute in such manner as the Institute may deem fit for ad-
vancing. the objects of the Institute; , 
(k) to receive gifts, grants, donations or benefactillDS from' 
the Government and to receive bequests, donations and trans-
fers of movable fr immovable properties from testators, donors 
or transferors, as the case may ,be; . 
(1) to co-operate with educational or other institutions In 
. any part of the world having .objects wbolly or partly similar 
to those of the InsUtuteby exehance. of tea~hers, scholars and 
lute. 

4 
generally in such manner as may be conducive to their common 
objects; 
(mJ to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, prizes 
and medals in accordance with the s.&tutes and Ordinances; 
and 
(n) to do all such things as may be necessary, incidental or 
conducive to the attainment of all or any of the objects of the 
Institute. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the 
Institute shan not dispose of in any manner any immovable pro- 10 
perty, ·without the prior approval of the Visitor. 
::":.::n : T. (1) The Institute shall be open to persons of either sex, and of 
aU races, whatever race, creed, caste or class, and no test or condition shan 
.e:!:. and be imposed as to religious belief or profession in admitting or ap-
pointing members, students, teachers, workers or in any other con- IS 
nection whatsoever. 
(2) No benefaction shall hereafter be accepted by the Institute 
which in the opinion of the Board involves conditions or obligations 
opposed to the spirit and object of this section. 
rcac:hins a~ I. All teaching at the Institute shall be conducted by or in the 20 
~:e. Inltl- name of the Institute in accordance with the Statutes or Ordinances 
made in this behaU. 
Visitor. t. (1) The President of India shall be the Visitor of the Institute . 
. (2) The V~sitor may appoint one or more persons to review the 
work and progress of the Institute and to hold enquiries into the 2S 
aftairs thereof and to report thereon in such manner as the Visitor 
may direct. 
(3) Upon receipt of any Much report, the Visitor may take such 
action and issue such directions as he considers necessary in respect 
of any of the matters dealt with in the report and the Institute shall 30 
be bound to comply with such directions. 
Autho ri ties 10. The following shall be the authoriti.es 
of tbe namely:-
of the Institute, . 
Inltitute. 
• (a) the Board; 1 . 't. 
(b) the Academic Council; , \ 
(c) the Finance Committee; and 
(d) such other authorities as may be declared by the Sta-
tutes to be the authorities of the, Institute. 
3' 

• 
, 
11. The Board shall' consist of the following persons, namely:- The Boarc1. 
(a) the Chairman; 
('b) one non-official to be nominated by the Central Gov-
ernment; 
, (c) one person to be nominated by the All-India Council 
for Technical Education; 
(d) the Chairman, University Grants Commission, ex otfi.cioi 
(e) the Director of Scientific and Industrial Research, Gov-
ernment of Indis" ex officio; 
10 <f) the Director, ex officio; 
IS 
• 
(g) three persons nominated by the Central Government, 
one to represent the Ministry of Education, another the Ministry 
of Finance and the third the other Ministries;. 
(h) two members of Parliament, one to be elected from 
among themselves by the members of the House of the People 
and the other from amo~g themselves by the members of the 
Council of States. 
12. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this section, the term of Tenn of 
office of a member of the Board shall be five years from the date of ~ce vaa::~ 
"0 his nomination or election as the case may be: cies amona .. memben of. 
Provid~ that the term of office of a member elected under clause the Board. 
(h) of section 11 shall come to an end as soon as he ceases to be a 
member of the House from which he was elected. 
(2) The term of office of an ex officio member shall continue so 
2S long as he holds the office in virtue of which he is a member. 
(.~) The tenn of office of a member nominated to fill a casual 
vacancy shall continue for the remainder of the term of the member 
in whose place he has been nominated. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, au 
3G out-going member shen, unless the Central Government otherwise 
directs, continue in office until another person is nominated or 
elected as a member in his place. 
(5) -The manner of filling casual vacancies among members shall 
be such as may be provided for in the Statutes. 
3S (6) The members..Qf the Board shall be entitled to such allowan-
ces, if any, from the Institute as may be provided for in the Statutes, 
but no member other than- the Director shall be entitled to arq 
salary by reason of this sub-section . 
• 

• 
6 
Punctiona of 13. (1) The Board shall be the supreme governing body of the 
the Board. Institute and shall exercise all the powers ,of the Institute not other-
wise provided for by this Act, the Statutes and Ordinances, and shall 
have power to review the acts of the Finance Committee and the 
Academic Council. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board shall-
(a) take decisions on major questions of policy relating to 
the administration and working of the Institute; 
(b) institute courses of study at the Institute; 
(c) make Statutes; 
(d) institute and appoint persons to teaching as well as 
non-teaching posts in the Institute in accordance with the pro-
cedure laid down in the Statutes; 
(e) consider and modify Ordinances; 
5 
10 
(f) consider and pass resolutions on the annual report, the IS 
annual accounts and the financial estimates as it thinks fit; and • 
(g) exercise such other powers and perform such other 
duties as may be conferred or imposed upon it by this Act and 
the Statutes. 
(3) The Board shall have power to appoint such committees as it 20 
considers necessary for the performance of its functions and duties. 
Aca4cmic 14. (1) The Academic Council shall consist of the following per-
CowK:i1. sons, namely:-
(a) the Director, ex officio, who shall be the Chairman of the 
Council; 2S 
(b) the Deputy Director, ex-ofJicio, who shall pe the Vice-
Chairman of the Council; 
(c) the Registrar" ex officio; 
(d) the professors appointed or recognised as such by the 
Institute for the purpose of impa.rting instruction in the Insti- 30 
tute; 
(e) such other members of the staff as may be laid down' in 
the Statutes. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, Statutes and Ordinances, 
the Academic Council shall have the control and general regulation 3S 
of and be responsible for the mainte~ance of standards of instruc-
tion education and examination in, the Institute and shall exercise, 
, 

7 -
such powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred or 
imposed upon it by the Statutes and shall advise the Board on all 
academic matters. 
15. (1) The Finance Committee shall consist of the following per- Finane;e 
I Commtttee. 5 sons, name y:-
(a) the Chairman, ex ofJicio who shc:,u be the Chairman of 
the Committee; 
(b) two persons nominated by the Central Government; 
(c) one person nominated by the Board; and 
10 (d) the Director. 
(2) The Finance Committee shall-
(a) examine and scrutinise the annual budget of the InSti-
tute prepared by the Director and make recommendations to the 
Board; . 
15 (b) approve proposals of reappropriation as between different 
departments of the Institute without affecting the total sanction 
of the grant; 
(c) consider the periodical statements of accounts, reappro-
priation statements and the audit report and make recommenda-
20 tions to the Board; 
(d) give its views and make its recommendations to the 
Board either on the initiative of the Board or of the Director, or 
on its own initiative on any financial question affecting the 
Institute. 
2S 16. (1) The Chairman shall be nominated by the Visitor and ChairmaD. 
shall hold office for a period of five years. 
(2) The Chairman shall ordinarily preside at the meetings of the 
Board and at the Convocations of the Institute. 
(3) It shall be the duty of the Chairman to see that the decisions 
30 taken by the Board are given effect to. 0 
(4) The Chairman shall have such other powers as may be con-
ferred upon him by this Act or the Statutes. 
17. (1) The Director shall be appointed by the Visitor out of a Director. 
panel of three names submitted to him by the Board. 
3S (2) The Director shall be the principal academic and executive 
officer of the Il)Stitute and shall be responsible for the proper 
administration of the Institute and for the imparting of instruction 
and maintenance of discipline therein. 

Deputy 
Director. 
8 
(3) The Director shall have such other powers and perform such 
other dutie$ as may be laid down in this Act or the Statutes or 
Ordinances. 
18. The Deputy Director shall be appointed on IUch terms aDd 
condltlons as may be laid down by the Statutes and shall perform 5 
such duties and exercise such powers as may be assigned to hlm by 
this Act or the Statutes or by the Direetor. 
Registrar. 19. (1) The Registrar shall be a whole-time ollcer of the JDsU-
tute and shall be appointed on such terms and con41tlons as may be 
laid down by the Statutes and shall be the C1IltodIaD of records, the 10 
common seal, the funds of the Institute and snch other PNperty of 
the Institute as the Board shall commit to his charge. 
(2) The Registrar shall act as the Secretary of the Board, the 
Academic Council, the Finance Committee and such other Com-
mittees as may be prescribed by this Act or the Statutes. IS 
(3) The Registrar shall be directly responsible to the Director for 
the proper discharge of his duties and functions. 
(4) The Registrar shall perform such other duties and exercise 
such other powers as: may be assigned to him by this Act or the Sta~ 
tutes or by the Director. 20 
Other au- 20. The powers and duties of authorities and officers other than 
th~ritiea and those hereinbefore mentioned shall be determined by the Statutes. o ... c:ers. 
Grants by 21. For the purpose 01 enabUng the institute to discharge Its 
g:~ent tunetioDS eftlelently under this Act, the Central Governmeat may 
to. the out of moneys provided by Parliament for the purpose pay to the 25 
Inltltute. Institute In each financial year sudl lUlU of money and In ..... 
manner as It may think It. 
Fundi of 22. (1) The Institute shall maintain a Fund to which shall be 
the Institute. credited-
(a) all moneys provided by the Central Government; 
(b) all fees and other charges received by the Institute; 
(c) all moneys received by the Institute by way of grants, 
gifts, donations, benefactions, bequests or transfers; and 
(d) all moneys received by the'Institute in any other man-
30 
Der or from any other source. 3S 

9 
(2} All moneys credited to the Fund shall be deposited in such 
Banks or invested in such manner as the Institute may, with the 
approval of the Central Government, decide. 
(3) The Fund shall be applied towards meeting the expenses of 
S the Institute including expenses incurred in the exercise of its 
powers and discharge of its functions under this Act. 
23. (1) The Institute shall maintain proper accounts and other ACCOUllt~ 
relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in- and audit. 
cluding the balance sheet in such form as may be prescribed by 
10 the Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of I~dia. 
(2) The accounts of the Institute shall be audited by the Comp-
troller and Auditor-General of India and any expenditure incurred 
by him in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Insti-
lS tute to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any per-
son appointed by him in connection with the audit of the accounts 
of the Institute shall have the same rights, privileges and authority 
ni connection with such alJdit as the Comptroller and AudiJor-
20 General of India has in connection with the audit of the Govern-
ment accounts, and, in particular, shall have the right to demand 
the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other 
documents and papers and to inspect the offices of the Institute. 
(4) The accounts of the Institute as certified by the Comptroller 
25 and Auditor-General of India or my other person appointed by 
him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be 
forwarded annually to the Central Government and that Govern-
ment shall cause the same to be laid before both Houses of Parlia-
ment. 
30 24. No act done or proceeding taken by the Institute, the Bow'd. A~. and 
the Academic Council or the Finance Committee or any other body ~ot to lD~e 
set up under this Act or the Statutes, shall be questioned on the :validate~ 
ground merely of the existence of any vacancy in, or defect in the elc~acancles, 
constitution of, the Institute, the Board, the Academic Council, the 
35 Finance Committee or such body respectively. 
25. (1) The Institute shall constitute for the benefit of its officers Pension and 
including the Director, teachers and other servants, in such manner f~~tdent 
and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the Statutes. 
such' pension, insurance and provident funds as it may deem fit. 
40 (2) Where any such pension, insurance or provident fund has 
been so constituted, the Central Government may declare that the 
19 of 1925 provisions of the Proyident Funds Act, 1925 shall apply to such fund 
as if it were a Government Provident Fund. 

Appoint-
meats. 
Sb&tUtC8. 
10 
26. All appointments on the teaching or non-teaching staff of the 
Institute shall be made on the recommendation of a Selection 
Committee constituted for the purpose under the Statutes by-
(a) the Boarg with the prior concurrence of the Visitor, if 
the appointment involves emoluments of fifteen hundred rupees 5 
. or over per month; 
(b) the Board, if the appointment involves emoluments of 
three hundred and fifty rupees or over but less than fifteen 
hundred rupees per month; 
(c) by the Director in any other case. 
27. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may pro-
vide for all or any of the following matters, namely:-
(a) the conferment of honorary aegrees; 
(b) the formation of departments of teaching; 
10 
(c) the fees to be charged for courses of study in the Insti- IS 
tute and for admission to the examinations of degrees and 
diplomas of the Institute; 
(d) the instit.ution of fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions, 
medals and priZes; . 
(e) the term of office and the method of appointment of 20 
officers of the Institute; 
<f) qualifications of teachers of the Institute; 
(g) the classification and method of appointment and the 
determ{nation of the terms and conditions of service of teachers 
and other staff of the Institute; 25 
(h) the constitution of pension, insurance and provident 
. fund for the benefit of the officers, teachers and other staff of 
the Institute; 
(i) the constitution, powers and duties of the authorities 
of the Institute; 
(j) the establishment and maintenance of halls and hostels; 
(k) the conditions of residence of students of the Institute 
and the levying of fees for residence in the halls and hostels 
and of other charges; 
30 
(l) the manner of filling vacancies among members of the 35 
Board; 
(m) fixing allowances of the- Chairman and members of 
the Board; 

It 
(n) authentication of the orders and decisions of the Board; 
(0) the meetings of the Board, the Academic Council, the 
Finance Committee, or any other Committee, the quorum at 
su~h meetings and the procedUre to be followed in the conduct 
S of their business; and 
(p) any other matter which by this Act is to be or may be 
prescribed by the Statutes. 
28. (1) The first Statutes shall be framed by the Chairman after Statutes how 
consultation with the Director and with the previous approval of made. 
10 the Visitor . 
. (2) The Board may, from time to time, make new or additional 
Sta~utes or may amend or repeal the Statutes in the manner here-
after in this section provided. 
(3) Every new Statute or addition to the Statutes or any amend-
IS ment or repeal of a Statute shall require the previous approval of 
the Visitor who may assent thereto or withhold assent or remit it 
for further consideration. 
20 
30 
(4) A Statute passed. by the Board shall have no validity unless 
it has been assented to by the Visitor. 
29. Subject to the provisions of tbis Act and Statutes, the Ordi- Ord' 
nances mt,y provide for all or any of the following matters, mancea. 
namely:-
(a) the admission of the students to the Institute; 
(b) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees 
and diplomas of the Institute; 
(c) the conditions under which students shall be admitted 
to the degree or diploma courses and to the examinations of the 
Institute, and shall be eligible for degrees and diplomas; 
(d) the .condijions of award of the fellowships, scholarships, 
exhibitions, medals and prizes; 
(e) the conditions and power of appointment and duties 
of examining -bodies, examiners and moderators; 
(f) the conduct of examinations; 
(g) the maintenance of discipline among the students of 
the Institute; and 
(h) any other matter which by this Act or the Statutes is 
to be or may be provided for by the Ordinances. 

Ordinances 
how made. 
12 
30. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this section, Ordinances 
shall be made by the Academic Council. 
(2) All Ordinances made by the Academic Council shall have 
effect from such date as it may direct, but every Ordinance so made 
shall be submitted as soon as may be, to the Board and shall b(' 
considered by such Board at its next succeeding meeting. 
(3) The Board shall have power by resolution to modify or 
cancel any such Ordinance and such Ordinance shall, from the date 
of such resolution stand modified accordingly or cancelled as the 
case may be. 
5 
10 
Tribunal of 31. Every dispute arising out of a contract between the Institute 
Arbitration. and any of its officers or teachers shall be referred to a Tribunal ot 
Arbitration consisting of ope member nominated by the Board, one 
member nominated by the Officer or teacher ~cerned and an 
umpire appointed by the Visitor, and the decision of the Tribunal 15 
shall be tinal. 

.. 
13 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
For providing facilities on an extensive scale for advanced work 
and research in various branches of engineering and technology and 
training students in specialized fields for which facilities did not 
exist in the country, it was necessary to start a special type of 
technical institution like the Indian Institute of Technology, Kharag-
pur, on the lines of the famous Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
U.S.A. This Institute is the first. in the chain of four high-grade 
technical institutions proposed to be started in the country to im-
prove the tone of the engineering and technological education as well 
as to meet the present special needs of the industry which could not 
be achieved in the normal way. To meet the needs of well trained 
personnel, the Institute also undertakes training at first degree level 
and also in certain branches of engineering and technology. The 
Indian Institute of Technology, has an individuality and purpose of 
its own which are quite _distinct from those of a University. It is a 
unique institution which combines training upto the higher stand-
ards of professional and technical education with a broad back-
ground of teaching in the humanities to all undergraduates who 
receive training here. The Bill seeks, to retain the individuality of 
the institution by declaring it to be an institution of national import-
ance under Entry 64 in List I of the Seventh Schedule to 
the Constitution. The Institute will develop patterns of· teaching in 
undergraduate and post-graduate and research in various branches 
of engineering and technology. It will have the power to grant 
degrees, diplomas and other academic distinctions. 
ABUL KALAM AZAD. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 12th April, 1956. 

J4 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Bill contemplates the declaration of the Indian Institute of 
Technology, Kharagpur, as a body corporate. The Institute will 
maintain the departments covering various fields of engineering and 
teehnology for training of difterent types of technical personnel 
Finances required by the Institute for exercise of its powers aad 
discharge of its functions shall be payable by the Central Govern-
ment in the shape of grant-in-aid each year. At this stage it is not 
possible to frame an accurate estimate of the man-power, equip-
ment. etc. needed to enable the Institute to exercise the powers and 
discharge the functions provided under the Bill but, since the 
development of the Institute will be according to the programme 
approved by the Government, the funds will be in accordance with 
proposals accepted by Government of India, and will depend on the 
number of courses and departments which may be opened. by the 
Institute as determined by the GoVernment to fulfil its obligation to 
the industrial needs of the nation. 
2. In addition to the provision for completing the Building Works 
already in progress at the Institute, the following Budget provision 
has been made under Demand' No. 20-Education for the Institute 
during the year 1956-57: 
Recurring Rs. 47,50,000 
Non-Recurring Rs. 59,37,000 
3. Funds to be made available in the subsequent years will vary 
and will be determined from time to tnne. 
4. The Institute has been empowered to receive grants, gifts,. 
donations, benefactions, bequests or transfers from private bodies 
or individuals. 
5. All moneys placed at the disposal of the Institute will consti-
tute Fund of the Institute and unutilized amount of the Fund of the 
Institute at the end of the year will not lapse and shall be taken in . 
account for making funds available to the Institute in respect of 
subsequent years. 

IS 
.. MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION· 
Clause 28 of the Bill empowers the Chairman of the Board to 
make after consultation with the Director the first Statutes of the 
Institute to carry out the purposes of the Act subject to the approval 
of the Visitor (President of India).The Board of Governors of 
the Institute has been empowered by this· Bill to amend, repeal or 
add any of the Statutes thus made by the Chairman. These matters 
relate to the conferment of honorary degrees; the formation of 
departments of teaching; the fees to be charged for courses of study 
in the Institute and for admission to the examinations of -degrees 
and diplomas of the Institute; the institution of fellowships, scholar-
ships, exhibitions, medals and prizes; the terms of office and the 
fnethod of appointment of officers of the Institute; qualifications of 
teachers of the Institute; the classification and method of appoint-
ment and the determination of the terms and conditions of service 
of teachers and other staft of the Institute; the constitution of pen-
sion. insurance and provident fund for the benefit of the officers. 
teachers and other staff of the Institute; the constitution, powers and 
duties o'f the authorities of the Institute; the establishment and' 
maintenance of halls and hostels; the conditions of residence of stu-
dents of the Institute and the levying of fees for residence in the 
halls and hostels and of other charges; the manner of filling vacan-
cies among members of the Board; fixing allowances of the Chair-
man and members of the Board; authentication of the orders and 
decisions of the Board; the meetings of the Board, the Academic 
Council, the Finance Committee, or any other Committee, the 
quorum at such meetings and the procedure to be followed in the 
conduct of their business; and any other matter which by this Act 
is to be or may be prescribed by the Statutes. It is not possible at 
this stage to provide for these matters specially in the Bill. The 
Bill however prescribes that all such Statutes will be operative after 
tbe Visitor has approved them. 
2. Clause 30 of the Bill empowers the Academic Council of the 
Institute to make Ordinances consistent with the provisions of the 
Act and the Statutes. These matters relate to the admission of the 
students to the Institute; the courses of study to be laid down for all 
degrees and diplomas of the Institute; the conditions under which 
students shall be admitted to the degree or diploma courses and to' 
the examinations of the Institute, and shall be eligible for degrees 
and diplomas; tht! conditions of award of the fellowships, scholarships, 
exhibitions, medals and prizes; the conditions and power of appoint-
ment and duties of examining bodies, examiners and moderators; 
the conduct of examinations; the maintenance of discipline among 
the students of the" Institute and any other matter which by this Act 
or the Statutes is to be or may be provided for by the Ordinances. 
3. The delegated legislation is of a character normal to such Acts. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to declare the institution known as the Indian Institute 
of Technology, Kharagpur to be an institution of national impor-
tance and to provide for its incorporation and matters connected 
therewith. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (3) of article 117 
of the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha the 
consideration of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary .. 
(Maulana Abu! Kalam Azad, 
Minister of Education) 
MGIPND-LAD-3SSLS-IS-S-S6-I,7S 0 • 