• 
Bill Ko. 36 of 19fi~.' 
THE COFFEE (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1961 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABIIA 
ON sm MAY, 1961) 
I >- \" 

LOK SABRA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE COFFEE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1961 
(To be/As introduced in Lok Sabhtl). 
1. Page 1, line 14,-
after "of" insert "the," 
2. Page 3, line 8,-
f01' "barckets" read "brackets" 
3. Page 5, line 13.--
after "such" fOT' "member" read "number" 
4. Correct line numbers on page 1. 
NEW DELHI, 
May 4, 1961. 
VaiBakha 14, 1883 (Saka). 

Bill NO.3' of I,C51 
THE COFFEE (AMENDMENT) lJILL, 1961 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoB: SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the CofJee Act, 1942. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the TweUth Year of the Republic 
of India 9S follows:-
• 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Coffee (Amendment)· Act, 1961. Short title 
and com-
, (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern- IDC'DCIOmaIt. 
ment may, by notificatiDn in the Official Gazette, appt1)int. 
7 of J942. 2. In section 3 of the Coffee Act, 1942 (hereinafter referred to as Ameadmeut 
• 
the principal Act) ,- of aectioD 3. 
(a) for clause (i), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
10 '(i) "owner", in relation to any land planted with coffee 
plants, includes,-
(1) any agent of ,the owner, and 
(2) a mortgagee, lessee or other person in actual 
possession of land;'; and 
I, (b) for clause (n), the follOwing clause shall be substituted, 
~o 
namely:-
'(n) "year" means the period of twelve months begin-
ning with the first dray of July and ending with the thirtieth 
day of June next fo1lowing.'. 
3. In section 4 of the principal Act.,-
(i) for sub-sections (2) and (2A), the following sub-sections =:0.:. 
shall be substituted, namely:-
"(2) The Board shall consist of-
«(1) Il Chairman to be appointed by the Central Gov~ 

2 
ernment by notification in the Official Gazette; 
(b) three Members of Parliament of whom two shall 
be elected by the House of the People and one by the 
Council of S1ates; and 
(e) such number of other members not exceeding 5 
twenty-nine as the Central Government may think 
expedient, to be appointed by that Government by noti-
fication in the Official Gazette from among persons who 
are in its opinion capable of representing,-
(i) Governments of the principal coffee-growing 10 
States; 
(ii) coffee-growing industry; 
(iii) coffee trade interests; 
(iv) curing establishments; 
(v) interests of labour; 
(vi) interests of oonsumers; and 
(vii) such other interests as, in the opinion of 
the Central Government, ought -to be represented on 
the Board. 
IS 
(2A) The number of persons to be appointed as members 30 
from each of the categories specified in clause (e) of sub-
section (2), the term of office of, the procedure to be followed 
in the discharge of their functions by, and the manner of fill-
ing vacancies emong, the membef'd of the Board shall be such 
as may be prescribed."; 
(ii) sub-section (3) shall be omitted. 
Amendmcat 4. In section 12 of the principal Act, the words, brackets and figures 
ohoctioD IZ. !C, except coffee sold and delivered before the estate became subject 
.to the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 14," shall be omitted. 
as . 
AmcDdment 5. In section 13 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), the words 30 
of aec:tion 13- "and of any fees" shall be omitted. 
6. In section 14 of the principal Act,-
(a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be . 
sqbstituted, namely:-
"(1) Every owner of lend planted with coffee plants,3S 
whethEr such land is comprised in one estate or in more than • 

~ 
one estate and whether it is situated wholly or only partly in 
India, shall, ·before the expiration of one month from the 
date on which he first became owner of such estate or estates, 
apply to the registering officer appointed in this behalf by 
5 the State Government to be registered as an owner thereof."; 
10 
(b) sub-sections (2) and (4) shall be omitted. 
7. In section 17 of the principal Act,-
(a) for the words, barckets and figures "No registered own-
er shall, before the estate became subject to the provisions of 
sub-section (1) of section 14,", the words "No registered owner 
shall" shall be substituted; and 
(b) the proviso shall be omitted. 
AmeDdmedt 
or secdaa 17. 
8. Section 19 of the principal Act shall be omitted. OmisaioD of 
IOctioD 19. 
9. In section 20 of the principal Act, in the first proviso, for clauses AlI!CI!!cJmcDt 
rs (ii), (iii) and (iv), the following clauses shall be substituted, name- ofaectbuo •. 
ly:-
"(ii) carried as personal baggage of a passenger, not ex-
ceeding such quantities as the Central Government may, by noti-
fication in the Official Gazette, specify, or 
20 (iii) exported for such purposes and in such quantities as 
the Centrll Government may specify in the like manner:". 
10. In section a1 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),- Ameftdment 
(a) in clause (b), for the word and figures "section 32.", the of sectioD 31. 
words and figures "section 32; and" shall be substituted; 
2S (b) after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
" (c) all fees levied and collected by the Board under this 
Act.". 
11. In section 36 of the pz;ncipal Act, in sub-section (1), the 'f::::-t 
30 wC?rds and figures "and any person who contravenes the proVisions of 0 a 36. 
• 
35 
section 19" shall be omitted. 
12. Section 41 shall be omitted. 
13. In section 48 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (2), for clauses (i) and 
ing clauses shall be sqbstituted, namely:-
(ii), the follow-
"(i) the constitution of the Board, the number of per-
sonseto be appointed as members from each of the categories 
OmiIdaD of 
ICCdoD 41. 
Amcadment 
or aectiaa 48 • 

r 
4 
r 
specified in clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 4, the 
term of office and other concUtiODS of servfce of. the procedure 
to be followed by, and the manner of ft11ing vacancies among, 
the members of the.Board; 
(ii) the circi.unstances in which, and the authority by S 
which, members may be removedi"; 
(b) for sUb-section (3). the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under 
this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 10 
before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a 
total period of thirty days Which may be comprised in one 
session or in two successive sessions, and if, before the expiry 
of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately 
following, both Houses agree in making any modification in IS 
the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modi-
fied form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, 
that any such modification or QIUlulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 20 
that rule.". 
Reeoastitu- 14. On the commencement of this Act, the Board constituted undel-
:nouc!!..Boud section 4 of the principal Act shall stand dissolved and shall be recon-
lIlCDc:cmcDt stituted in the manner provided in section " of that Act as amended 
er thII AI:t. by section 3 of this Act. 25 

, , 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Section 4 (2) of the Coffee Act, 1942 prescribes the composition of 
the Coffee Board. As a result of the reorganisation of the States and 
consequent transfer of coffee growing areas from one State to an-
other, it has been found that a redistribution of seats for certain 
interests represented! on the -Board is necessary. In order, however, 
to avoid the necessity of amending the Act every time a similat 
change in the composition of the Board is found necessary in the 
future, it has been decided that, without affecting the general scheme 
of representation of the various interests on the Board, section 4 (2) 
of the Act may be amended so as to provide that the Board shall 
consist of a Chairman to be appointed by the Central Government, 
three members of Parliament and such member of other members, not 
exceeding twenty-nine, to represent the existing interests. 
2. In view of the fact that all owners of estates, irrespective of 
the areas of their estates, have been under an obligation to register 
themselves under the Act since 1943-44 crop season, it is proposed to 
amend the Act so as to bring it into line with the existing position. 
3. Opportunity has been taken to carry out certain other minor 
amendments in order to remove difficulties which have been experi-' 
enced in the working of the Act. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 2nd Ma.y, 1961. 
MANUBHAI SHAH. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 13 of the Bill which seeks to amend section 48 of the Coffee 
Act, 1942 confers on the Central Government the poWer to make rules 
regarding the constitution of the Board, the number of persons to be 
appointed as members froni each of the categories specified in ciause 
(c) of sub-section (2) of section 4, the term of office and other condi .. 
tions of service of members, the circumStances in which, and the 
authority by which, members may be removed, etc. These are mat-
ters of detail and the delegation of legislative power with respect 
to them is of a normal character. 
6 

• 
~I 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CoFFEE AcT, 1942 
(ACT No. 7 OF 1942) 
• • • • 
3. In this Act, unless tJaere is anything repugnant in the subject Dtflnitionl. 
or context,-
• * • • 
(i) "owner" includes any agent of IEUl owner, a mortgagee in 
possession or a lessee; 
• * • • 
(n) "year" means the period of twelve months beginning 
with the first day of August and ending with the thirty-first day 
of July next following. 
4. (1)· • • 
(2) The Board shall consist of-
(i) a Chairman to be appointed. by the Central Government; 
• • • • 
(iii) one person to represent the ('rl)vernment of Mysore, to 
be nominated by that Government; 
(iv) one person to represent the Government of Madras, to 
be nominated by tbat Government; 
(v) one person to represent the Government of Kerala, to be 
nominated by that Government; 
(vi) two persons to represent the coffee growing industry in 
Kerala; 
(vii) seven persons to represent the coffee growing industry 
in Mysore; 
(viii) three persons to represent the coffee growing industry 
in Madras; 
• 7 
Constitution 
of the Board. 

Datyof 
ezeile. 
S' 
(ix) three persons to repr~nt coffee trade interests, to be 
nominated by the Central Government; 
(x) one person to represent curing establishments, to be 
nominated by the Central Government; 
(xi) four persons to represent labour, to be nominated by 
the Central Government; 
(xii) three persons to represent the interests of consumers, 
to be nominated by the Central Government; 
(xiii) three persons to represent such other interests as in 
the opinion of the Central Government ought to be represented, 
to be nominated by the Central Government; 
(xiv) three Members of Parliament of whom two shall be 
elected by the House of the People and one by the Council of 
States. 
(2A) The persons to represent the interests referred to in clauses 
(vi), (vii) and (viii) of sub-section (2) shan be elected or nomina-
ted as may be prescribed . 
• • • • . 
(3) Where a member of the Board dies, resigns or is removed, or 
ceases to reside in India, or becomes incapable of acting, the Central 
Government may, on the recommendation of the authority or body 
which was entitled to make the first nomination under sub-section 
(2) , or where such recommendation is not made within a reason8'-
ble time, then on its own initiative. nominate a person to fill the 
vacancy. 
• • • • 
12. A duty of excise shall be levied at such rate not exceeding 
eleven rupees and eighty naye paise per quintal as may be fixed by 
the Central Government by Notification in the Official Gazette on 
all coffee, except coffee sold and delivered before the estate became 
subject to the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 14, which a re-
gistered estate is permitted by the internal sale quota allotted to it 
to sell in the Indian market, whether such coffee is actually sold or 
not, and on all coffee released for sale in India by the Board from 
the surplus pool. 
Payment of 
I'roceedl of 
iSutiel to 
tho Board 
mclmazmer 
of reaUsatioD 
by tbe Board' 
U. (1) The proceeds of the duty of customs and of the duty of 
excise and of any fees levied under this Act (all' of which shall form 
part of the Consolidated Fun4 of India), red1.lced by the cost of 

~ 
collection as determined by the Central Government, shall, if Par-
liament by appropriation made by law in this behalf so provides, be 
paid to the Board for being utilised for the purposes of this Act . 
• • • • 
14. (1) Every person owning land planted with coffee plants ReaistratiOD 
aggregating not less than four hectares, whether such land is com- ~;:ncrs of 
prised in one estate or in more than one estate and whether it is CltatOS. 
situated wholly or only partly in India, shall, unless it is already re-
gistered as required by this sub-section, before the expiration 'of one 
month from the date on which he first becomes subject to the pro-
visions of this sub-section, apply to the registering officer appointed 
in this behalf by the State Government to be registered as an owner 
and in respect of each estate owned by him. 
(2) The Central Government may. by notification in the Official 
Gazette, declare that the provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply 
to persons owning land planted with coffee plants aggregating less 
than four hectares~ 
• • • • 
(4) If any question arises whether an owner of an estate is or is 
not required to be registered under this section, the question shall 
be decided by the Chairman, subject to revision by the Central 
Government. 
• • • • 
17. No registered owner shall, before the estate became subject to Salc ofcoft'eo 
the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 14, sell or contract to ~t:nc:r~~ 
sell in the Indian market coffee from any registered estate if by quota. 
such sale the internal sale quota allotted to that estate is exceeded 
nor shall a registered owner sell or contract to sell in the Indian 
market any coffee produced on his estate in any year for which no 
internal sale quota is allotted to the estate: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to coffee sold 
from a registered estate in excess of the internal sale quota if such 
sale was in pursuance of a contract of sale entered into before the 
estate became' subject to the provisions of sub-section (1) of 
section 14 and if after the estate became so subject no coffee has been 
sold from that estate in the Indian market except in pursuance of a 
contract of sale entered into before the estate became subject to the 
provisions of sub-section (1) of section 14 . 
• • • • • 
19. No owner of an estate not registered under this Act shall ~~~'~kco 
sell from or store on his estate or cause or permit to be sold from on or from 
unte,i.tered 
• OltatC • 

~or 
General 
fund. 
10 
or stored on his estate any coffee not grown on the estate, and no 
owner of a registered estate shall sell from or store on his estate or 
cause or permit to be sold from or stored on ,his estate any coffee 
grown on any estate not registered under'~his Act. 
20. No coffee shall be exported from India otherwise than by the 
Board or under an authorisation granted by the Board in the pres-
cribed manner' and in the prescribed cases, and the provisions of the 
Sea Customs Act, 1878, shall have effect as if the provision made by 8 of 1878 
this section had been made by notification issued under section 19 
of that Act: 
Provided that nothing herein contained shall apply to coffee-
• • • • 
(ii) carried as personal luggage of a passenger, not exceed-
ing one kilogram, or 
(iii) exported by post or by air in packages containing not 
more than five kilograms, or 
(iv) exported by sea as bona fide samples in p,&lckages con-
taining not more than five hundred grams: 
• • • • 
~I. (1) To the general fund shall be credited-
• • • • 
(b) any sums transferred to the general fund under the 
proviso to sub-section (2) of section 32· 
• • • • 
~oDtmven- 36. (1) Any registered owner who contravenes the provisions of 
=: ~~.~;: sub-section (2) of section 16, or section 17 or section 18, any licensed 
J8 and 19. curer or dealer who contravenes the provisions of sub-section (2) 
of section 16, and any person who contravenes the provisions of 
section 19 shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees: I 
• • • • 
Power of 41. The Board shall have power to determine, after such inquiry 
=a:~e as it thinks fit, the amount of coffee which has, up to the time when 
amount of it first becomes subject to the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 
coffee sold been d h b . b, 1D estate. 14, sold, or been sold and elivered in t e year y any regll- • 
tered estate" and the amount so detennined shall be conclusive for 
the purposes of section 12 and section 17. 
• • • • 

II 
48. (1)· • • Powerof the . Central Gov-
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, ~~~ntle to ........ ru s. rules may be made providing for all or any of the following 
matters:- : 
(i) the principles regulating the nomination or election of 
members of the Board; I I 
(ii) the term of office of members of the Board, the circum-
stances in which, and the authority by which, members may be 
removed and the filling of casual vacancies in the Board; 
• • • • 
(3) All rules made by the Central Government under this Act 
shall, as soon as may be after they are made, be laid before both 
Houses of Parliament.' I 

lOt~sABHA 
& 
BILL 
further. to amend the Coffee Act, 1942-
The president has, in pursuance of clause (I) ot article 117 
of the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabh8 
the introduction of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri Manubhai Shah 
Minister of Industry.) 