As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA ON 
8iR No. 38 of 1979 
THE: PUNJAB EXCISE (DELHI AMENDMENT) BILL, 1979 
A 
BILL 
further to a~ the Punjab Excise Act, 1914 as in force in the Union 
territory of Delhi. 
WHEREAS by reason of certain excisable articles not being manufac-
tured or produced in Delhi, countervailing duty is not leviable on such 
articles whioh are imported into Delhi; 
AND WHERIlAS the consumption, except ilor medicinal purposes, of such 
articles would be injurious to health and the levy of a special duty on 
the importation of such articles into Delhi would be an endeavour 'Ilowards 
bringing about prohibition cf the consumption as aforesaid .of such arti-
cles; 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirtieth Year of the RepUiblic of 
India as follows: -' ... 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Punjab Excise (Delhi Amendment) Short 
Act, 1979. tiltle 
and 5 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 20th day of eom-
January, 1979. menee-
ment. 
2. In section 3 of the Punjab Excise Act, 1914, CIS in force in the Union Amend-
territory of Delhi (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),- ment of 
. . section 3 (a) after clause (5), the followmg clause shall be mserted and ot Punjab 
10 shall be deemeEl always to have been inserted, namely:- Act 1 of 
'(Sa) "duty" means the excise duty or c:ountervailing duty 1914. 
or, as the case may be, special duty;'; 

Amend~ 
ment of 
section 
31. 
Insertion 
of new 
Schedule 
IA. 
2 
(b), in clause (6),-
(i) in sub-clause (b), the word "or" shall be inserted. and 
shall be deemed always to have been inserted at the endj and 
(ii) after sub-clause (b), as so amended, the following sub.;. 
dause shall be inserted and shall be deemed always to have beerl j 
inserted, namely:-
.. (c) any spirit;"; 
(c) after clause (18), the f()llowing clause shall be i.nserted and 
shall be deemed a1ways to have been inserted, namely:-
'(lBa) "special duty" means a tax on the import of aDy Id 
excisable article being an article on which countervailing duty 
as is mentioned in entry 51 of List II in the Seventh Schedule to 
the Constitution is not imposable on the ground merely that such 
article is not being manufactured or produced in the territory to . 
which this Act extends;'. I' 
3. ln section 31 of the principal Act, for the words "excise duty, or 
countervailing duty, as the case may be, at such rate or rates", the words, 
figure and letter "excise duty, or a countervailing duty, or a special duty, 
3S the case may be, at such rate or rates not exceeding the rates set 
forth in Schedule IA" shall be substituted and shall be deemed always to 20 
have been 8Ubstituted. 
4. In the principal Act, after Schedule I, the following Schedule shall 
be inserted and shall be deemed always to have been inserted, namely:-
'SCHEDULE IA 
(See section 31) 
51. No. Description of excisable article 
I. CoWilry liquor: 
(i) Plain liquor 
(ii) Ordinary ~piced liquor 
(iii) Special spiced liquor 
(iv) Plain wh~n iaued to troops 
(v) Spiced liquor including lpecial liquor 
when u..ued to troopa 
iZ. Indian made rum iau~ to troops 
3. Rectified spirit or absolute alcohol 
4. All other IOrta of liquor including Indian 
Made Foreign Liquor except denatured 
Ipirit and apedal denatured apirit 
5. Spirituous preparations including cnt'nce but 
other thaD Medicinal and Toilet Preparation. 
as defiDcd in tb~ Medicinal and Toilet Pre-
parationa (EJCcile Dutiel) Act, 1955 (16 of 1955) 
6. Denatured ~pirit . 
7. Special dcD&tur~ Ipiri! 
8. Indian Beer contalninR 5 per cent. or l~ 
alcohol v/v. 
9. Indian Beer containing alcohol more than 
5 per cent. v/v. 
Rate 
(3) 
RI. 15'go per proof litre. 
Rt. 117'118 per proof litre. 
RI. 15'00 per proof litre. 
RI. 13'115 per proof litre. 
RI. IS'7S per proof litre. 
RI. 6'00 per proof litre. 
RI. I 3' 110 per proof litre. 
RI. III' 00 per proof Htre. 
lb. S'85 per proof litre. 
RI. II' 00 per litre. 
RI. 11'00 per litre. 
Re. o' 50 per bottle of 650 ml. 
RI. 5'00 per bottle of 650 mI. 
30 
35 
45 
10. Cider 
Jr. 1Jhang 
Re. 1'00 per bottle of 6~o ml. SO 
RI. So' 00 per 10 kgs. or part thereof. 
III. Any other intoxicating drug other than thOle 
mentioned above R •. so·oo per kg. 
E:q>lanation.-In this Schedule, "proof litre" means litre of the strength 
of London Proof.'. 

Ord.l 
of 1979. 
s 
3 
5. In the principal Act, in Schedule lA, as directed to be inserted by 
sect jon 4, for the entry in column (2) against seria] number 2, the follow .. 
fng entry shall be substituted and shall be deemed to have been so sub-
stituted with effect from the 50th day of July, 1972, namely:-
"Indian made rum ;ssued to tl'Ioops and the personnel of the 
Border Security Force.". 
Amend-
ment of 
new 
Schedule 
IA. 
6. Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court 'or Validation. 
other authority, anything ~r any action dJ()ne or taken or purported to 
have been done or taken under the principal Act before the commence-
10 mcnt of this Act shall be, and shall be deemed always to have been, as 
[5 
20 
valid and effective as if such thing or action had been done 'Or taken under 
the principal Act, as amended by this Act, and accordingly:-
(a) any duty. tax or fee levied, assessed or collected or purport-
ing to have been levied, assessed or collected under the principal Act 
before the C'()mmencement of this Act shall be deemed to have be~n 
validly levied, assessed or collected in accordance with law; 
(b) no suit or other proceeding shall be maintained or continued 
in any court or before any authority for the I'('fund, and no enforce-
ment shan be made by any court or other authority of any decree or 
order directing the refund, of any such duty, tax or fee which has· 
been so collected; 
(c) recoveries shall be made in accordance with the provisions 
of the principal Act of all amounts which would have been collected 
as duties, taxes or fees under the principal Act by reason of the 
amendments made in the principal Act by this Act but which had 
not been collected. 
Explanation..-For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that no 
act or omission 'On the part of any person before the commencement of 
this Act shall be punishable as an offence which would not have been 
30 so punishable if this Act had not been enacted, 
1. (1) The Punjab Excise (Delhi Amendment) Ordinance, 1979, is 
hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstandin~ such repeal, anythin~ done or any action taken 
under the principal Act as amended by the said Ordinance shall be deemed 
35 to have been done or taken under the principal Act as amended by thi!, 
At1;· 
Repeal 
and 
saving. 

STATEMENT OF OB..TECTS AND REASONS 
Section 31 of the Punjab Excise Act, 1914, as extended to the Union 
territory of Delhi provides for the levy of an excise duty or a countervail-
ing duty at such rate or rates, as the Administrator shall direct, on any 
excisable article including alcoholic liquor for human consumption. 
A single Beneh of the High Court of Delhi decided a batch of writ petitions 
on th~ 11th January, 1979 by delivering a judgment restraining the Delhi 
Administration from levying and collecting "countervailing duty" in 
respect of country liquor removed from the bonded warehouses licensed 
in Delhi (for sale by the petitioners)-till such time the factual f-ounda-
tion for the levy and collection of countervailing duty under the said 
section does not exist within the Union territory of Delhi. The High 
Court relied upon the observations of the Supreme Court in Kaly.~m-. Stores 
Vs. State of Orissa and ot~TS (AIR 1966 SC 1686) and held that no coun-
tervailing duty could be imposed on imported articles, and· articles 
similar to those which are not produced or manufactured within Delhi. 
2. The effects of the judgment as envisaged by the Delhi Administra-
tion would be a loss of. Rs. 7 crores in the current year and more than 
Rs. 75 crores on the refund of the levy from 1950 onwards on country 
liquor alone. This loss will be manifold if the same principles are applied 
to levy on other types of liquor. Besides the heavy losses of revenue, 
refund of. the duties collected earlier would enable the licensees to reap 
win~al1 benefits of the portion of the duty already borQe by the con-
sumers. 
3. Since the matter was of urgent importance and to otT-set immediate 
repercussions, the Punjab Excise (Delhi Amendment) Ordinance, 1979 
was promulgated by the President on the 20th January, 1979. This 
Ordinance has amended suitably sections 3 and 31 of the Punjab Excise 
Act, 1914 as in force in the Union territory of Delhi not only to validate 
duties levied in the past but also to empower collection of such duties 
in future. Section 3 has also amended the definition of excisable article 
so as to include within its scope spirit in order to validate duties levied 
in the past and also to empower collection of such duties in respect 
of spirit. Section 31 of the Act does not specify the -ceiling ill respect 
ot the duty which could be impesed on any excisable article. New 
Schedule IA has been added to the Act so as to empower t~e 
Lieutenant Governor of Delhi to impose on any excisable article duty at 
such rate as not exceeding the maximum specified in the Schedule. 
4. The Bill seeks to replace the above Ordinance. 
NEW DELJn; SATISH AGARWAL. 
The 10th March, 1979. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DEl$GATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 3 oil the PUDjab Exdse (Delhi Amendnaent.) Bill, 1979, seeks 
to amend sectiQIl. 3\ of tbe Puniah Excise Act, 1914,. M .\.D force in the 
Union territory of Delhi so as to empower the Lieutenant Governor to 
impose a duty on any excisable article at such rate or rates not exceed-
ing the .r~te::i:s~t ferth in new Sched41e lAo As. the. ma"im~rates have 
been specified, the delegation of legislative power is of a ll(U:lpal clw'M:ter. 

Defini-
tions. 
Duty 
on 
excisable 
articles. 
• 
ANNEXURE 
ExTRACTS FROM THJ: PmiJAB EXCISE Am, 1914 
AS IN FORCE IN THE UNroN 1'EIuuTORY OF DELHI 
• • • • 
3. In this Act, and the rules made under it, unless there is something 
regugnant in the subject or context-
• • • • • 
(6) 'excisable article' means-
• • • • • 
(b) any intoxicating drug; 
• • • • • 
31. An excise duty, or countervailing duty, as the case may be, at such 
rate or rates as the Lieutenant Governor of Delhi shall direct, may be 
imposed, either generally or hr any specified local area, on any excisable 
article-
(a) imported, exported or transported in accordance with the 
provisions of section 16; or 
(b) manufactured or cultivated under any licence granted under 
sectiJon 20; or 
(c) manufactured in any distillery established or any distillery 
or brewery licensed under section 21: 
Provided as follows:-
(i) Duty shall not be so imposed on any article which has been 
imported into India and was liable on importation to duty under the 
Indian Tariff Act, 1894 or the Sea Customs Act, 1878; 
• • • • • 
Explanation: -Duty may be imposo:!d under this section at different 
rates according to the places to which any excisable article is' to be re-
moved for consumption or according to the varying strengths and quality 
of such article. 
• • • • • 
6 

1..0K SABltA 
J. 
BILL 
:further to amend the Punjab Excise Act, 1914 as in force in the Union 
territory of, Delhi. 
(Shfi Satish Agarwal, Minister of State in the Ministry of Finance) 