"~to As IN'l'RODUCID IN Lolt SABlIA ~ 
'.1 ;' .. ' ' .. ~ 
Bill No. S6 '0; ..., 
THE PREVENTION OF CORRUPTION BILL, 1881 
, ., . 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
, - . CHAPTER I 
" PuLIMIN.\RY 
. " 
CHAPrER II 
APPOINT,I.aDrr 'OF sPIaA1. .JUiXIA 
3. Power to appoint special Judges.", 
4. Cases triable by spedal Judges. 
5. Procedure and powers, of specia~ Juclge. 
6. PoW~l' to try summarily. 
I " CHAPTER III ' -' . 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 
7. Public servant taking gratification other than legal remuneration 
in respect of an official act. 
8. Taking gratification, in order, by corrupt or illegal mean!;, to 
influence public servant. 
'9. Taking gratification, for exercise of personal influence with pub-
lic servant. 
10. Punishment for abetment by public servant of offences defined 
in section 8 or 9. 
U. Public servant obtaining valuable thing, without consideration 
from person concerned in proceeding or business transacted by 
such public servant. 
12. Punishment for abetment of offences defined in section 7 or 11. 
13. Criminal misconduct by a public servant. 
14. Habitual committing of offences under sections 8, 9 and 12. 
15. Punishment for attempt. 
16. Matters to be taken into consideration for fixing fine. 
CHAPTER IV 
INVESTIGATION INTO CASr.s UNDER THE Ar:r 
17. Persons authorised to investigate. 
18. Power to inspect bankers' books. 

(il) 
CHAPTEl\ V 
SANcnON FOR PROSICUTION AND 0'l'HBB MISCJ:LLANIOUS PROYUlOld 
c:&.AUSU 
19. Previous sanction necessary for prosecution. 
20. Presumption where public servant accepts gratification othor 
than legal remuneration. I 
21. Accused person to be a competent witness . 
.. The Code of Criminal Procedure, 19'73 to apply aubjeet to c:e:taID 
modifications. 
23. Particulars' in a charge in relation to an offence UDder section 
I ' 13 (1) (c). 
24. Statement by bribe eiver not to subject him to p1'Olfecution. 
25. Military. Naval and Air Force or other law not to be atrected. 
.. Special Judglee appointed under Act 48 of 1952 to be special 
Judges appotnted under this Act, 
27. Appeal and revision. 
28. Aet to be in addition to any other law. 
29. .Amendment of Ordinance 38 of 1944. 
~ 30. Repeal and saving. 
11. Omission of certain sections of Act45t 01 1860. 

.0 
BU1 No. 38 of 1887 
------1HE PREVENTION OF CORRUPl'ION BILL, 1987 
.\ 
BILL 
I ;', 
fo consolidate and atn.eftd the law ,..14ti"f1 to the prevention of eot'1'UptLoft 
and 1M matters connected thet'ewith., 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-eighth Year of the 
Repub.tic: 9t ladia II follOWl:-
CHAPT!R t 
PDJ,DalfAll'I' . 
1. (I) Thls Act may be called the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1981. Sbort 
dtle 
(2) tt extends to the whole of India exeept the state ot Jammu and aDd 
Kashmir and it applies a1lo to all citizens of India outside India. . extoDt. 
Z. In this Act, unless. the context otherwise req~,-
(4) "election" means any election, by whatever means held, 
under any law for the purpose Of se1ectklg members ot Parliament 
or of any Legislature, local authority or other public authority; 
(b) '-public duty" means a duty in the diseh~ge of ~h1eh the 
State, the public or the community at large has an fntE'rest: 
DeftDl· 
tions. 

• 
'J 
" 
. ~ ( 
Explanation.-In this clause "State" includes a corporatioll 
established by or under a Central, Provincial or State Act or an , 
authority or a body owned or controlled. or aided by the Govern-
ment or a Government company as defined in section 617 of the 
Companies Act, 1956; 5 1 of 19''-
(c) "public servant" means-
(i) any person in the service or pay of the Government or 
remunerated by the Government by fees or commission for the 
performance of any public duty; 
(ii) any person in the service or pay of a local authority; 10 
(iii) any person in the service or pay of a corporation estab· 
lished by or under a Central, Provincial or State Act, or an 
authority or a body owned or controlled or ai¥ by the Govern-
ment or a Gove.rnment company as defined in section 617 of the 
Companies Act, 1956; '15 1 of t951. 
(iv) any Judge, including any person empowered by law to 
discharge, whether by himself or as a member of any body of 
persons, any adjudicatory functions; 
(v) any ,person authorised by a court of justice to perform 
any duty, in connection with the administration of justice, incll.ld- 110 
ing a liquidator, receiver or comtnissioner appointed by such 
court; 
(vi) any arbitrator or other person to whom any cause or 
matter~as bren referred for decision or report oy'a court of 
,,~~ce or~t'!l competent public authority; 25 
(vii) 'any person who holds an. "t1lee by virtue of wb1ch he is 
empowered to prepare, publish, maintain or revise an electoral 
roll or to conduct an election or'part of an e1ection; 
·r :, •• 
(viii) any person who holds an office by virtue of whkh he 
isaU'thorised 6r ~tiired' to'peworitir..arlY· pu6Ue: 'daty~ " SO 
, . 
(i,r) any person who is the president, secretary or other 
oftic~bearer of a registered co-PP~r.~~!ye ~~~ety .en,.aaed ~nagrk 
culture, industry, trade orban1ting;recei~g9r havill' ~ceivea 
any financial aid from the Central Gove:mmerlt or a' ~ OovM ' 
ernment or from any ~~"Jestablished by or under a 35 
Central, Provincial or State Act, or any authority or body owned 
or controlled or aided b1'the"L: GbVernment or a Government 
'w'; e9~ny a,s, ~~ned i~ ts~:~tio.Dr 617, 9£ tJ'lt;. CQm~a~i~B,Ac:t!'J9~~; 
(x) any person who is a chairman, member or employee 
h'of '., Service 'Commiarion or' .Bbard, 'by whate:veJ: :name ca11~ 40 
or at membetof any selection. committee, appointed by aw::h 
Commission or Board for the conduct of any examination. or 
making any sele(:tion on behalf of such Comm~ssion or, Board; ,- . . . ,", ~ . ',' . _ '. .' ;' _ ,.. 
" (xi) any person who ~s a Vice-Chancellor or member of any 
;~:'(I g(jVeffflng . bOdy, i~'r()fe$sor,"~ea.deT;]ecturer'i6r at1~h')lher teacher 45 
t"~~';~ployee;by whatbverdeslgriatioricallM,bf 'anyUlliferatty 
8n(fany person Whose seMees have been' 80vailed of bya 
.,' l Unk,e(8iity ~,!.~. ot.her pubijq autb.Cj)t~ty . in ,~Qnn~tion; with 
hO~:l()l' conducting· exatnhlt1tion.s; 1 ' ~ 
1 of 1111, 

5 
(xii) any person who is an oftlce-bea.rer or an employee of 
an educational, scientific, social, cultural or other institution, in 
whatever manner established, receiving or having received any 
financial assistance from the Central Government or any State 
Government, or local or other public authority. 
ExpZafl4ticm I.-Persons falling under any Of the above sub-
clauses are public servants, whether appointed by the Government 
or not. 
Explanation 2.-Wherever the words "public servant" occur, they 
.0 shall be understood of every person who is in actual possession of 
the situation of a public servant, whatever legal defect there may be 
in: his right to hold that situation. 
CHAPTER II 
APPOINTMENT OF SPECIAL JUDGES 
15 3. (1) The Central Government or the State Government may, bJ 
notification in the Omcial Gazette, appoint as many special Judges as may 
be necessary for such area or areas or for such case or group of CRies-as 
may be specified in the notification to try the following offences, nam~Jy:-
(a) an offence punishable under section 7 to 9, 11, 13 and 14; 
gO and 
• 
(b) any conspiracy .to commit or any ~ttempt to commit or any 
abetment' of any of the offen.ces specified in clause (a). 
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a special .Judge 
under this Act unless he is or has been a Sessions .Judge or an Additional 
25 Sessions Judge or an Assistant Sessions Jud,ge under the Code of Criminal 
2 of 197~ Proc~dure, 1973. 
,-. (1) NotWithstanding anything contained in the Code ofC~al 
2 of 197t. Procedure, 1973, or in any other law for the time' being in force, the 
offences specified in sub-section (1) of section 3 shall be tried by special 
30 Judges only. 
{2) Every offe~ce specified iti sub-section (1) of section 3 shall be tried 
by the special Judge for the area within which it was committed, or, as 
the case may- be, by the special Judge. appointed for the case, or where 
there are more special Judges than one for such area, by such· one. of 
35 them as may be specified in this behalf by the Central Government. 
(3)-When'trying any case;'a specihl Judge may also try any-offenee, 
other than an offen:ce specifted in sectiOl'i 3, with which the accused may; 
2 of 1974. under the Code Of CriminaL Ptoceciure, 1973, be charged at the same trial. 
2 of 19'14. 
(4). NotWithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Pro-
40 cedure, 1973, a special Judge shall, as far as- practicable, hold the trial of 
an o-ffe'l1ce on day-to-day basis. 
5. (1) A special Judge may take cognizance of offences without the 
accused ,being committed to him for trial and, in trying the accused. per-
f,ons. shall follow the procedUre prescribed by the Code of Criminal 
2 or 1.t'7" 45 Procedure, 1973, for the trial 01 warran" t:ases by Magistrates. 
Power 
to 
appoint 
special 
Judges. 
Cases 
triable 
by 
special 
ludges. 
Proce-
dure and 
Powers of 
special 
ludge. 

Power to 
try sum-
marily. 
4 
(2) A special Judge may, with a view to obtaining the evidence of 
any person supposed to have been directly or indirectly concerned in, or 
privy to, an offence, tender a pardon to such person on condition of his 
making a full and true disclosure of the whole circumstances within his 
knowledge relating to the offence and to every other person concerned, 5 
whether as principal or abettor, in the commission thereof and any pardon 
so tendered shall, for .the purposes of sub-sections (1) to (5) of section 
308 of the. Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, be deemed to have been 2 of 1974. 
tendered under section 307 of that Code. 
(3) Save as provided in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), the 10 
provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, shall, so far"'as they 2 of 1974. 
are not inconsistent with this Act, apply to the proceedings before a special 
Judge; and fOr the purposes of the said provisions, the Court Of the 
special Judge shall be deemed to be a Court of Session and the person 
conducting a prosecution before n special Judge shall be deemed to be 15 
a public prosecutor. \ 
(4) In particular and without prejudice to the generality Of the 
provisions contained in sub-section (3), the provisions of sections 326 and 
475 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, shall, so far as may be, apply 2 of 1974. 
to the proceedings before a special Judge and for the purposes of the ao 
said provisions, a special Judge shall be deemed to be a Magistrate. 
(5) A special Judge may pass upon any person convicted by him any 
sentence authorised by law for the punishment of the offence of which 
such person is convicted. ! l 
(6) A special Judge, while trying an offence punishable under this Act, ~3 
shall exercise all the powers and fUnctions exercisable by a District Judge 
under the Criminal Law Amendment Ordinance, 1944. Ord. 
6. (1) Where a special Judge tries any offence specified in sub-section 
(1) of section 3, alleged to have been committed by a public servant in 
relation to the contravention of any special order referred to in sub-section 30 
38 of 1944. 
(1) of section 12A of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 or of an 10 of 19M, 
order r~ferred to in clause (a) of sub-section (2) of that section, then, 
notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) of section I 5 of 
this Act or section 260 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, the special 2 of 1974 
~ ... , 
Juclie shall try the offence in a summary way, and the provisions of 35 
flections 262 to 265 (both inclusive) of the said Code shall, as far as may 
be, apply to suc~, trial: 
.Provided that,· in the case of any conviction in a summary trial under 
thl& &ection, it shall be lawful for the special Judge to pass a sentence of 
imp~isonmeni for a term not exceeding one year: 
Provided further that when at the commencement of, or in the course 
of, a summary trial under this section, it appears to the special Judge 
that the nature of the case is such that a sentence of imprisonment for 
a term exceeding one year may have to be passed or that it is, for any 
other reason, undesirable to try the case summarily, the special Jttd~ 45 
sl llill , after hearing the parties, record an order to that ,effect and thE-re-
after recall any witnesses who may ba\'e been examined aDd pro~~ed 
'. 

20f 1974. 
to bear or re-hear the case in accordance with the procedure prescribed 
by . the laid Code for the trial of warrant easel by Magistrates. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act 
or in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, there shall be no appeal by 
, a convicted person in any case tried summarily under this section in 
which the special Judge passes a sentence of imprisonment not exceeding 
10 of 1955. one month, and of fine not exceeding two thousand ru~ whether or 
not any order under section 452 of the said Code is made in addition to 
such sentence, but an appeal shall lie where any s:entence in excess of 
30 of 197.. the aforesaid limits is passed by the special Judie. 10 
CHAPI'ER III 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 
7. Whoever, being, or expecting to be a public servant, accepts or 
obtains or agrees to accept or attempts to obtain from any person, for 
1 S himself or for any other ~on, any gratification whatever, other than 
legal remuneration, as a motive Or reward for doing or forbe8rlng to do 
any official act or for showing or fo.rbearing to show, in the exercise of 
his official functions, favour or disfavour to any person or for rendering 
or attempting to render any service or disservice to any person, with the 
Public 
servant 
lakin, 
aratift-
cation 
other 
than 
Jcpl 
reulImo-
ration ia 
reepect 
of an 
omclal 
20 CPIltral Government or any State Government or Parliament or the Le-
gislature of any State or with any local authority, corporation or Govern-
ment company referred to in clause (c) of section 2, or with any public 
servant, whether named or otherwise, shall, be punishable with imprison-
ment which shall be not less than six months but which may extend. to act. 
25 five years and shall also be liable to fine. 
Explanations.- (a) "Expecting to be a public servant." U a person not 
expecting to be in office obtains a gratification by deceiving others into a' 
belief that he is about to be in oftice, and that he will then serve them, 
he may be guilty of cheating, but he is not guilty of the offence defined in 
30 this section; 
(b) "Gratification." The word "gratification" is not restricted to 
pecuniary gratifications or to gratifications estimable in money; 
(c) "Legal remuneration." The words "legal remuneration" are not 
restricted to remuneration which a public servant can lawfully demand, 
35 but inclu~ aU remuneration which he is permitted by the Government 
or the organisation, which he serves, to accept; 
(d) CIA motive or reward fo.r doing." A person who receives a grati-
fication as a motive or reward for doing what he does not intend or is not 
In a position to do, or has not done, comes within this expression; 
40 (t) Where a public servant induces a person erroneou8~ to believe 
that his influence with the Government has obtained a title for that 
persOn and thus induces that person· to give the public servant, money 
or any other gratiftcation as a reward for this service, the public servant 
has committed an offence under this section. 

'akin, 
gratifica-
tion in 
by corrupt 
or illegal 
means, to 
influence 
public 
servant. 
Taking 
Il'atifica-
ILio:1. 
for 
exercise 
of per-
IODal 
influence 
with 
public 
serv.at. 
Puni" 
rrteM for 
al!etment 
by pabIIc 
servant· 
of offe1lcea 
defined 
in section 
8 or 9. 
Public 
"IVant 
obtaining 
valuable 
thing, 
without 
consi-
deration 
from 
perIOD 
conc:emed 
In proceed- . 
ing or 
business 
trannct-
cd byauch 
public 
I«V8Dt. 
Puniab-
ment for 'j 
abetment of' 
offences 
de8Ded 
In MCtioD 
'lor 11. 
6 
t. WhoeVer accepts or obtains, or agrees to accept, or attempts to 
obt.ain, :from any person, for himself or for any other person, any gra+'ifi-
cation whatever as a motive or reward for indUCing, by corrupt or illegal 
means, any public servant, whether named or otherwise, to· do or to for-
bear to do any official act, or in the exercise of the official functions of S 
such public s:ervant to show favour or disfavour to any person, or to render 
or attempt to render any service or disservice to any person with the 
Central Government or any State Government or Parliament or the 
Legislature of any State or with any local authority, corporation or 
Government company referred to in clause (c) of section 2, or with any 10 
public servant, whether named or otherwise, shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which shall be not less than six months but 
which may extend to five years and shall also be liable to fine. 
9. Whoever accepts or obtains or agrees to accept or attempts to ob..: 
tain, from any person, for himself or for any other person, any gratifica- 1 S 
tion whatever, as a motive or reward for indUCing, by the exercise of 
personal influence, any public servant whether named or otherwise to do 
or to forbear to do any official act, or in the exercise of the official func-
tions of such public servant to show favour or disfavour to any 
person, or to render or attempt to render any service or disservice 20 
to any person with the Central Government or any State Government or 
Parliament or the Legislature of any State or with any local authority, 
('(lrporation or Government company referred to in clause (c) of section 
2, or with any public servant, whether named or otherwise, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall be not less than six 25 
. months but which may extend to five years and shall also be liab~ to fine. 
14). Whoever, being a public ~('rvant, in respect of whom either of the 
offences defined in section 8 or section 9 is committed, abets the offence, 
whether Or not that offence is committed in consequence of that abetment, 
shaH be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall be not 30 
less than six months but which may extend to five years and shall also be 
liable to fine. 
11. Whoever, being a public servant, accepts or obtains or agrees to 
accept or attempts to obtain fOr himself, or for any other person, any 
valuable thing without consideration, or for a consideration which he 3S 
knows to be inadequate, from any person whom he knows to have been or 
to be, or to be likely to he concerned in any proceeding or business trans-
aeted or about to be transacted by such public servant, or having any con-
nection with the official function&of himseU or of any public servant to 
whom he is subordinate, or from any person whom he knows to be 40 
interested in or related to the person 80 concerned, shall be punishable 
with imprisonment for a term which shall be not less than six months but 
which may extend to five years and shall also be liable to fine. 
12. Whoever abets any offence punishable under section 7 or section 
11 whether or not that offence is committed in consequence of that abet.; 45 
·ment, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall be 
;·:not less than six months but which may extend to five years and shall 
also be liable to fine. I ' ~ 

7 
13. (1) A public servant is said to commit the offence of criminal C":-l-al_ 
a:WIcoDduet,~ mi.,.-
10 
'20 
25 
II ~ I. 
(4) if he habitually accepts or obtains or agJ:ees to accept or 
attempts to obtain from any person for himself or for any other person 
anYl1'ati1ication otheJ: than legal remuneration as a motive or reward 
aueA as is mentioned in section 7; or 
(b) if he habitually accepts or obtains or agrees to accept or 
a~tempts to obtain for himself or for any other person, any valuable 
thiDa without consideration or for a consideration which he knows 
to be 1I1adequate from any person whom he knows to have been or 
to be or ~ be likely to be concerned in any proceeding or busineas 
~~ or about to be tr~ted by him, or having any connectioD 
with the official functions of himself or of any public 'servant to whom 
he is subordinate, or .from any person whom he knows to be interest-
ed in or related to the person so concerned; Or 
(c) if he dishonestly or fraudulently nlisappropriates or otherwiae 
. converts for his own use any property· entrusted to him or UIlder hia 
ccmtroJ eB a public servant or allows any other person SO to do; or 
(d) if be,-
(l) by corrupt or illegal means, obtains for himself or tor any 
other person any valuable thiDg or pecuniary advantage; or 
(ii) by abusing his position as a public servant, obtains for 
himself or for any other person any valuable thing or pecuniary 
advantage; or . 
(iii) while holding oflice as a public servant" obtains for any 
person any valuable thing or pecuniary advantage without any 
public interest; or 
<e) if he or any person on his behalf, is in possession or has, at 
. any time during the period of his office, been in possession for which 
30 the public servant cannot satisfactorily account, of pecuniary resources 
or property disproportionate to his known sources of income. 
E.,lcm4ticm.-For the purposes of this section, "known sources (If 
iDCOlDe" meaDS income received from any lawful source and such receipt 
hat been intimated in accordance with the provisions of any law, rules 
35 or orders for the time be!ng applies hIe to a public servant. 
(2) Any public servant who commits criminal misconduct shall be 
pwiahable with imprisonment for a term which shall be not less than one 
year but which may extend to seven years and shall also be liable to 
ftne. 
14. Whoever habitually commits,-
coaduct 
bya r' 
public 
servant. 
(a) an offence punishable under section 8 or section 9; or 
(b) an offence punishable under section 12, 
Habitual 
committ-
jill of 
odIeDce 
J 
IIhall be punishable with imprisonment fOr a term which shall be not ::as 
leas than two years but which may extend to seven years and shall also • • 8, II 8Dc:I 
J be liable to fine, 12. 
16. Whoever attempts to commit an offence referred to in clause (e) PuaiIb· 
Dr e1auae (d) of sub-section (1) of section 13 shall be punishable with meat for 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and with fine. attetllpt. 

8 
16. Where a sentence of fine is imposed under su~Uon (3). lot 
section 13 or section 14, the court in fixing the amount of the~,~t~· 
take into consideration the" amount Or the value of the property, U any, 
which the accused person has obtained by committing the ofleace or 
where the conviction is fllr an offence referred to in clause (e) of sub- 5 
section (1) of section 13, the pecuniary resources or property refeiTed 
to in that clause for which the accused person is unable to aeeotmt 
satisfcu;toril y. 
CHA~ IV 
INVESTIGATION INT-G CASES UNDER THB ACT 
U. Notwit~nding anything contained.(n the Code of Criminal 'Pro-
ced\lr~. 19~3, no police officer below the rank,-
(a) in the case of the Dellii Special Police ~~~U~}lJ~~~.~, Qf 
an Inspector of Police; 
10 
(l?) .ill the ~tfo~litan QJ'e8S. of aorn~. Ca1~uUa. ~.ud 15 
~~apad and in any other metrQpQlitan ~ no~ed. ,sa' ,mob 
under sub-section (1) of section 8 of the Code of CriIl)i,~ P~ure, 
j' \ 
2 et I" •. 
" ' 
1973, of an Assistant Com~issioner of Police; ~ 11'74 
(c) else;wheFe, Q~., a ~~~u~y S:¥~ri.n.teAAent.~ ~Q~;~'.Jpoltee 
officer of equivalent rank, 
sha~ !nvestiB~te any oftence punishable under this Act without-tbe ,order 
(If a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Magistrate of the ftrstcla8, u tile case 
ma;y be, or mak~ allY arr~tthe:r;'ef')r without a w~rap.t: 
Pr-Ovided that if, a police 'officer not below the rank of an Inspector 
20 
of Police is authorised by the State Government in this behalf bY!J.5 
general or special, order, he Il¥ly also investigate any Sl1CP offence 
Wi~qlJt the order of a Me~opoli~ ~i!,gistrate or a Mag~~ .. Qt. ~ 
first., cJJw~, as tl;le ca5e may be, or make aJ,Test thtu:9.f9J;' w~t,. 
warrant: 
Provided furtAer that. an offence referi'ed to in dauM (e) of -__ SO 
section (1) of section 13 shall not, be investigated without the order" , 
a police. ofticer . not below the rank of a Superintendent of Poltce. 
18. If from mforllUltion, r(;(.(:iveo or otherwise, a poli,ce ofB~ h,¥\ 
re8SQ,~ to syspe~t the commiss~on of an offence whi~h he is, ~JXlW~, 
to investii~e unc;ler section 17 a.Jld considers that for ~e p~ 0(., 
investigation or inquiry into such offence, it is necessary to inspeet any" 
bankers' books, then. notwithstanding anything contained in any law . 
for the time being in force, he may m.~t any bankers' books 1ft .. 
far a~ they relate to the accounts of the persons suspected to have com-
mitted that offence or of any other person suspected to be holding money 40 
on bt:half of such person, and take or cause to be taken cert.ijie4 copies 
of the relevant entries therefrom, and the bank concerned shan be bound 
to assist the police officer in the exercise of his powers under this section: 
Provided that no power under this section in relation to the &CCouaU 
of any person shall be exercised by a police officer below the rank of a, 45 
Suferintendent of Police, unless he is specially authorised in this. behdf 
by IS police officer of or above the rank of a SuperintendeTlt of Pollee. 

9 
EzploMtion.-Ir. this section, the expressions "Bank" and "Bankers' 
~ .. , IfltOlliave thfr1ileanbtgs ~vely assigned to them in the 
Bankers' Books Evidence Act, 189i. 
CHAPTER V 
5 SANCTION FOR PROSECUTION AND oTHER MIstEl.LANEOtrs PROVIsroNs 
'Q~(1)No court shall take cognizance of an offence puniShable unc1er 
.UOiij· '7, 10, 11, 13 and 15 alleged to have been comiriitted by a pUblic 
servant,' eXcept with the previous sanction,-
(4) in the ease of a person Who is employed in cOnnee'tionWith 
10 . t'tti 8f!afts' of' Uie ttnfon and Is' not removable from htl dmee Ave 
"by'" "br"" With the sanction of the Central Government, of that Gmrefn. 
intat; 
'(b) in _ cae of "a person who is employed in eonnection wttb 
the affairs of a State and is not removable from hit oftlce lave by 
15 or with the sanction of the State Government, of that Government; 
(e) in the case of any othet person; of theauthotity competent 
to ftmove 1Wn from his offtce. 
't!) Where fOr any reason whatiloever any aoubt arises as to ""'ether 
• tweVtoUiI sanction as required under sub-section (1) should be gtv~ by 
20 thei ($rrtoral Govertrment or the State Government or any other Imho-
m;;' ftti~ slinetion snall be ¢V'enbv that GOvernment or authorlty 
which would have been competent to remove the public servant fi'om 
IUs"" offtce at the time when the offence was alleged to have been com· 
mJttEod. 
25 (f/l Notwft'h!ltandhig anything contained in the Code of Crlmmal 
2,., 1974. PtocMure. 1913,- . 
(~) no findln~, sentence or or-der passed by a special Jud~e shall 
. be reversed or altered by a Court in aopeal. confirmation or revfsiOn 
" on the ground of the absence of. or any error. omission or irre~larlty 
30 in, the sanction reauired under sub.section (1). unless in thE> oplnfon 
of that court, a fanure of justice has in fact been occasioned thereby; 
(b) no cou!"t !'ih!!1t "tav the pr,:ceedin£>''!! ":-,dt'r this Act on 'h~ 
ground of any error, omission or irre~larity in the sanction ~anted 
by the authClrity. unless it is satisfied that such error, omission or 
35 irregularity has resulted in the failure of justice; 
(c) no court shall stay the proceedings under this Act on any 
other ground and ne court shan exerr.ise the powers of revision in 
relatfon to any interlocutory order passed in any inquiry. trial. 
IiIppeal" or other proceedings. 
40 (4) In determining under sub-section (3). whether the absence "f, or 
any error, omission or irregularity in, suC'h sanction has occasioned or 
tesultedtn a tsHure of iustfce the court shall have re~rd to the faet 
whetlil"t' the ob1edion could and should hav'e been raised at any p.!!!!fC!r 
stage in the !'roceedings, 
~ 
aaCtlo.. 
oec:e-.J for _ 
euUoa. 

Preeump-
tfOD wIaere 
)MIhI1c 
..... 
acc:epCa 
il'N 1",.,., 
oCher thaD 
l8p1 
reIIl1II*'L 
doll. 
Ac:cusod 
porIOn 
to boa 
coa1ptlflet 
wftaeIs, 
10 
ltIp£CZnatwn..-For the plIlrposes of this section,-
(4) error includes competency of the authority to grant eanatioQi 
(b) a sanction required for pro~ution includes reference to any 
requirement that the prosecution shall be at the instance of • 
specified authority or with the sanction of a specified person or 5 
any requirement of a similar nature. 
ZOo (1) Where, in any trial of an offence punishable under 
section 'i or section 11 or clause (a) or clause (0) of sub-Beetlon 
(1) of section 13 it is proved, that an accused person has aeceptled or 
obtained or has agreed to accept or attempted to obtain for hfmIelf, or 10 
for any other person, any graUfication (other than legal remuneration) 
or any valuable thing from any person.. it shall be 'presumed, unless the 
contrary is proved, that he accepted or obtained or agreed to accept or 
attempted to obtain that gratification or that valuable thtng,as the cue 
may be, as a motive or reward such as is mentioned in section '7 or, 88 15 
the C8!:e may be, without consideration or for a consideration which he 
knows to be inadequate. 
(2) Where in any trial of an offence punishable under seetlon 
12 Ilr under clause (b) of section 14, it is proved that any grattftcatioD 
(other than legal remuneration) or any valuable thing has been glvell 01' 110 
offered to be given or attempted to be given by an accused penon, it 
shall be presumed, unless the contrary is proved, that he gave or otrered 
to give or attetnpfed to give that gratification or that valuable thing •• 
the case may be, as a motive or reward such as is mentioned in section 7, 
or, as the case may be, without consideration or for a consideration whleh A5 
he lmows to be inadequate. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and (2), 
the court may decline to draw the presumption referred to in either of 
the said sub-sections, if the gratlfi.cation or thing aforesaid is, In its 
opinion, so trival that no inference of corruption may fairly be drawn. :40 
21. Any person charged with an offence punishable under this Act, 
shall be a competent witness for the defence imd may give evldenee 
011 oath in disproof of the charges made against him or any person eharg-
ed. together with him at the same trial: -
Provided that-
(a.) he shall not be called as a witness except at his own request; 
(b) his failure to give evidence shall not be made the subject of 
any comment by the prosecution or give rise to lUly presumption 
against himself or any person charged together with him at the lame 
trial; 
(c) be shall not be asked., and if asked shall not be req~ired to 
answer, any question tending to show that he has commit~ed or been 
cnnvicted of any offence other than the offence with which he is 
charged, or is of bad character, unless-
40 
(i) the proot that he has committed or been convi~ed of such 45 
offence is admissible evidence to show that he is guilty of 
the offence with which he is charged, or 

lof .94' 
11 
(U) be bas personally or by his plead.er _eel any quest10Da 
of any witness for the prosecution with a view to eatabl1'lh bta 
own good character, or has given evidence of his good character, 
or the natW'e or conduct of the defence is such as to involve 
5 impUtations on the character of the prosecutor or of any witness 
for the prosecution, or 
(iii) he has given evidence against any other penon charged 
with the same offence. 
II. The provisions of the Code of Criminal ProceciW'e, 1973, shall in 
10 their appUeation to any p~g in relation to an offence punishable 
under this Act have effect as if.-
(A) in sub-~tion (1) of section 243, for the words "'The accueed 
than then be called. upon", the words "The accused shall then be r. 
qu1red to give in writing at once or within such time as the Court 
15 may allow, a list of the persons (if any) whom he proposes to 
examine as his witneaes and of the documents (if any) on wbteb 
hie proposes to rely and he shall then be called upon" had been 
substttuted; 
(b) in sub-section (2) of section 309, after the third proviso, the 
following proviso had been inserted, namely:-
"Provided also that the proceeding shall not be acljouraed 
or postponed merely on the ground that an appUcation under 
section 397 bas been made by a party to the proceeding."; 
(e) after sub-lection (2) of section 317, the following sub-section 
115 bad been inserted, namely:-
"(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in s\,1b-section (1) 
or Bub-section (2), the Judge may, if he thinks fit and for reasons 
to be recorded by him, proceed with inquiry or trial in the 
absence of the accused or his pleader and record the evidence 
Of any witness subject to the right of the accused to recall the 
witness for cross-examination."; 
(d) in sub-section (1) of section 397, before the EzpZanc&tion. the 
following proviso had been inserted, namely:-
"Provided that where the powers under this section are ..... 
35 cised by a Court on an application made by a party to such pro-
ceedings, the Court shall not ordinarily call for the record of the 
proceedings: - . 
(4) without giving the other party an opportunity of 
showing cause why the record should not be called for; or 
4(' (b) if It is satisfied that an examination of the record of 
the proceedings may be made from the certified copiefll. fl. 
21. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure. 1973, when an accused is charged with an offence under 
clause (e) ot sub-aection (1) of section 13, it-shall be suftldent to deacrtbe 
45 in the ("barge the property in respect of which the offence is alleged to 
have heen committed and the dates between whim the offence Is alleged 
to have been committed, without specffyinR particular items or exact 
da_. and the marge so framed shall be deemed to be a charge of one 
offence within the meaning of section 219 of the said Code: 
11ao0Ddeof 
CrimIaal 
Pr"'*'-e, 
1"3 to 
apply do 
jec:l1D 
certaia 
mocUIca-
tioa 
pardcalan 
lIu 
c:barp ill 
relatloDto 
.... ofteDce 
UDCIor 
eec:doD 
11(1) (c:). 

Statemect 
by bribe 
pver Ilot 
to aubject 
him to 
prosecutiOIl. 
MiliIAty, 
NavUud 
AIr,force 
or other 
law nOt 
to be 
aft~ed. 
Special 
JudletJ 
appoint--
eel under 
Act 46 of 
1952 
to be 
specl~ 
Judges 
appoint_ 
ed under 
this Act. 
Appeal 
IUId 
revision. 
Act to 
beln 
addi-
tion to 
any 
other 
law. 
AmoDdlDCftt 
of the 
Ord.38 
of IP4t. 
}2 
~ProYlded 'that the time iIKftud~ 'be~en the. flrIt 'and'lalt of .uch 
Utes shall not e1twed one -;ear. 
jz.a. 'NotwithStanding anything 'contained in any law for the ttJne being 
in force, a" statement made by a person in any proceedirig' against 8 
putlic servant for an offence uncfur sections 7 to 11 or Ul1aer . section 13 5 
or'eecUon 15, that he 'offere4 ot agreEtd to 'ofter any grat1fttation (other 
than 1egal remuneration) or any valuable thIng to the public servant, 
shall not subject such person to a prosecution under section 12., .. ., ~'1 '.. . . ' 
. ts.(1) Nothing in this Act shall affect the jurisdiction e~~.~\e . 
by, or the procedure applicable to, any court Or other authorIty utidettb.~ 10 t6 of 1Il10. 
'Awtty Act .. 19~, the Air Force Aet;1950, the· Navy Act, 1957, 'the Border 48 oUIIO. 
Sfctlrity Force Aet, 1988, the Coast Guard Act. 1918 and the Netfonal 82 of 181.,. 
~ity GUard Act, 1986. 47 of I_ 
so of 11'1'1. 
; (2) ;J'or the removal of doubt~, it 'is hereby declared that fot the 47 of 1_ 
p~ of'ahy such law as is referred to in sub-section (1., the court 15 
of a special Judge shall be deemed to be a court of ordinary erfrhinal 
jl1ltice. 
26. Every special Judge appointed under the Criminal Law Amend-
~t Act, 1952, fot any· area Or areas and is holding office on the com-
Wlen~tnent dl tnis Act shall be deemed to be a special Judge appointed 20 
under sectionS of this Act f01" that area 'or are8'S and, aecotdingly, on and 
frt')m such commencement,every such Judge shalt eontinue to ,deal with 
all the proceedings pencHng before him on such commencement . in ac-
cordance with the provisions of this Act. 
!'1.Subject to the provisions of this Act, the High. Court may exercfse, "5 
50 far as they may' be applicable, all the powers of appea},and revJsion 
conferred by the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 on a High Court as 2 of I"" 
if the court of the special Judge were a ('durt of SessIon trYing cases 
withjn the local limits of the High Court. ' 
'S. The' provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in de- 30 
rIj~atfon of. any t>therlawfor the time being in forc~. and nothing con-
tained. herein shall exempt any public servant from any proceeding which 
might. apart from this Act, l;>e instituted against him, 
-21. In the Criminal Law Amendment Ordinance, 1944,--
(a) in sub-section (1) of section 3, SUb-section (1) of sectlon 9, 35 
clause (a) of section 10, sub-section (1) of section 11 and sub~ 
(1) of section 13,foT the V/.ords "State Government", whet-ewt-1fl\ey 
~ccur, the words "State Government or. as th~ caF.!." may lie, tile ' 
Central Oovemment" shall be substituted; 
(b) in section 10. in clause (a); for the words "three mOt'ftlMe", ,'0 
th~ words "one year" sha"n' be substituted; 

loflH8. 
Jot 1141. 
Mol 1952. 
5 
10 
15 . . 
13 
(c) in the Schedule,-
(i) paragraph 1 shall be omitted; 
(ii) in paragraphs 2 and 4,-
,(a.) after the words "a local authority", the words and_ 
figures "or a corporation established by or under a Central, 
. Provincial or State Act, or an authority 'or a body owned 
or eontrolled or aided by Government or a Government coIn-
pany as defined in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956 or 
a society aided by such corporation, authority, body or Gov-
er~.ment company" sb~l1 be inserted; 
(0) after the words "or authority", the words "or C01'-
porationor body or Government company or aociety" shaD 
·be inserted; 
(iii) for paragraph 4A" the followiI;lg .paragraph sha,U be ~l,1p., 
stituted,' n~ly':-
: .' ' . 
"4A.. An offence punishable under the Prevention of C('ti'-
ruptlon Act, 1987."; 
(iv) in paragraph 5, fOr the words and figures "items 2, 3 
and''!, the w~ds, figures and letter "items 2. 3,4 and 4-A" shall 
20 be substjtuted. 
a80 (1) The Preventi.on of Corruption Act, 1947 and the Criminal Law 
AmeDdment Act, 1952 are hereby repealed. 
~) Nctwithsta~ding,such l'ti'eal, but without prejudice to the.applica. 
10 of 1811 ti0A, qf sec~n 6. ()f the General Clauses Act, 1897. anything done or any 
25 action taken or purported to have been done or taken under 01' in pur. 
suance of the Acts so repealed shall, in so far as it is not inconsisten,t 
with tile provi'sions of this Act, be deemed to have been' done or taken 
uncler or In pursuance of the corresponding provision 'of this Act. 
31. SecUo,ns 161 to 16!>A (both inclusive) of the Indian P-enal Code 
10 of 1897. 30 shall be omitted, and section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897, shall 
apply to such omission as if the said sections had been repealed by 8 
Central Act. 
Repeal 
and 
saving, 
Omisaion 
of certaill 
sections 
of Act 
45 of 1860. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Bill is intended to make the existing anti-corruption laws more 
effective by widening their coverage and by strengthening the 
provisions. 
2. The Prevention of Carruption Act, 1947, was amended in 1964 hued 
on the recommendations of the Santhanam Committee. There are 
provisions in Chapter IX of the Indian Penal Code to deal with public 
servants and those who abet them by way of criminal uiiseonduct. 
There are also provisions in the Crin.inal Law Amendment Ordi-
nance, 1944, to enable attaclunent of ill-gotton wealth obtained throup 
corrupt means, 'including from transferees of such wealth. The BW 
seeks to incorporate all these provisions with modifications so as to 
make the provisions more effective in combating corruption amOlli 
pubic sprvants. 
3. The Bill, inter aHa, envisages widening the scope of the definition of 
the expression "public servant", incorporation of offences under ~ns 
161 to 165A of the Indian Penal Code, enhancement of penalties pro-
vided for these offences and incorporation of a provision that the order 
of the trial court upholding the grant of sanction for prosecution would 
1?e final if it has not already been challenged and the trial has com~ 
menced. In order to expedite the proceedings, provisions for day-to-day 
trial of cases and prohibitory provisions with regard to giant of stay 
and exercise of powers of revision on interlocuto~ orders have alRo 
been inc I uded. . -
4. Since the prOvisions of sections 161 to 165A are incorporated in the 
proposed legislation with an enhanced punishment, it is not necessary to 
retain those sections in the Indian Penal Code. ConsequenUy, it is 
proposed to delete those sections with the necessary saving proviafon. 
5. T11P notes on clauses explain in detail the provisions of the BnJ. 
NEW DELHI; 
P. CHIDAMBARAM. 
The 20th Feb'Ml4:ry, 1987. 

tv dtes on dauses 
Clause 2.-This clause defines the expressions used in the Bill. Clause 
2 (r) defines "public servant". In the existing definition the emphasis 
is on the authority ~mploying and the authority remunerating. In the 
proposed definition the emphasis is on public duty. The definition of 
"election" is based on the definition of this express10n in the Indian 
Penal Code. 
CZau~'e 3.-This clause provides for appointment of special Judges 
both by the Central Government and the State Governments. Except 
tp.e power conferred on the Central Government to appoint special 
Judges, this clause is based on section 6 of the Criminal Law Amend-
ment Act, 1952. 
Clause 4.-This clause deals with the cases triable by a special 
Judge. Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides for holding of trial by a 
s.pecial Judge on day-to-day basis for speedy trial of the cases. Other 
provisions in this clause are based on section 7 of the Criminal Law 
Amendment Act, 1952. 
Clause 5.-This clause deals with the procedure and powers of a 
special Judge. Sub-clause (6) of this clause confers on t.qe speciaJ 
Judge powers exercised by a District Judge under the Criminal Law 
,Amendment Ordinance, 1944 for the purposes of attachment of property. 
The remaining provisions of this clause are based. on the provisions ot 
.sectlon 8 of the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1952. 
Clause S.-This clause empowers the special Judge, where he tries 
any offence specified in clause 3 alleged to have been committed by a pub-
lic servant in relation to the contravention of any special order referred 
to in sub-section (1) of section 12A of the Essential Commodities Act, 
1955, or of an order referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (2) of that 
section, to try the offence in a summary way. 'This clause is based on sec-
tion 8A of the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1952. 
CZauses 7 to 12.-The provisions of sections 161 to 165A of the Indian 
Penal Cod~ dealing with offences by or relating to public servants haw 
been incorporated in these clauses, with slight modifications. By theIJe 
lnodifications a minimum punishment has been introduced, the alternatc' 
punishment now available in the Indian Penal Code has been dispensed 
with. the existing punishment has been increased and the illustrations 
. have been omitted. 
ClaUSe 13.-This clause deals with criminal misconduct bya public 
5ervant and corresponds to existing sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 5 
of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947. Section 5(1) (d) of the 
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 relates to misconduct by a publili 
servan t by corrupt or illegal means or otherwise and obtaining pecuniary 
ad.van; age for himself or for others. The effectiveness of this provisjcn 

i6 
has been somewhat blunted. by judicial pronouncements. In order to 
make the original intention of the legislature more clear, clause 13 (1) (d) 
has been split into three parts. Further, a definition of the expression 
"known sources of income" has ¥en added to remove any ambiguity. 
Clause H.-This dause deals with habitual committing of o1fences 
under clauses 8, 9 and 12 and is analogous to section 5 (3) of the Preven-
tion of Corruption Act, 1947 with the modification that the minimum 
punishment shall be two years. 
Clause 15.-This clause deals with punishment for attempt to com-
mit l.he offences referred to in clause 13(1) (c) or (d) and is analolous 
tc. section 5(3..4) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947. 
Clause l6.-This clause deals with matters to be taken into considera.-
tion by the Court in fixing the fine and is analogous to sub-sections (3B) 
and (4) of section 5 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947. 
Clause 17.-This clause deals with persons authorised to investigate 
CClloes under the Bill and is analogous to section SA (1) of the Prevention 
of Corruption Act, 1947. 
Clause 18.-This clause deals with the power to inspect banker's 
Book by a police officer and is analogous to section 5A (2) of the Preven-
tion of Corruption Act, 1947. 
Clame 19.-This clause provides for previous sanction for prosecu-
tion in the case of a person ~mployed in connection with the affairs of 
the Union, State Government or other authority and is analogous to 
section 6 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 except clause 19(3) 
which provides that on the ground of irregularity of sanction, 110 
findmg of t¥ court can be reversed. Also no court can stay the ~ 
ceedings in these cases because of irregularity in sanction or on any 
other ground. 
Clause 20.-This clause provides for the presumption in any trial 
for an offence punishable under clause 7 or clause 11 or clause 13(1) (a) 
or (b), where an accused public servant has accepted gratification other 
than legal remuneration and is analogous to section 4 of the Prevention of 
Corruption Act, 1947. 
Clause 21.-This clause provides that an accused person shall be a 
competent witness for his defence and is analogous to ~ion 7 of the 
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947. 
c.Lause 22.-This clause provides for the application of the .Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973, subject to certain modifications and i~ 
analogous to section 7A of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947. 
, 
Clause 23.-This clause provides for the particulars in a charge in 
relation to an offence under clause 13 (1) (c) and is analogous to I!!ection 
6A of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947. 

Clause 24.-This clause provides that a statement by a bribe giver 
shall not subject him to prosecution under clause 12 and is analogous 
to section 8 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947. 
Clause 25.-This clause provides for military, naval, air force Or other 
law not to be affected by the provisions of the Bill and is analogous to 
section 11 of the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1952. 
Clause 26.-This clause provides that a special Judge appointed under 
the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1952 and holding office on the com-
mencement of the proposed legislation shall be deemed to be a special 
Judge appointed under clause 3. 
Clause 27.-This clause provides ,for the exercise of powers of appeal 
and revision by the High Court and is analogous to siection 9 of the 
Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1952. ' 
Clause 28.-This clause provides that the provisions of this Act shall 
be in addition to, and not in derogation of, any other law for the time 
being in force. 
Cla~ 29.-This clause seeks to amend the Criminal Law Amend-
ment Ordinance, 1944. At present only the State Governmlents are , ~ . 
empowered to move the District Judge for attachment of property. It 
is proposed to take powers for the Central Government. The ad-interim 
attachment which is at present valid only for three months is also pro-
posed to be made valid for one year in the first instance. The Schedule 
to the Ordinance is also proposed to be amended to include the offences 
against the property of not only the Central or State Governments but 
also of corporation established by or under a Central, Provincial or 
State Act or an authority or a body owned Or controlled or aided by 
Government or a Government Company or a Society aided by 
such corporation, authority, body or Government company. 
ctause 30.-This clause provides for the repeal of the Prevention of 
Corruption Act, 1947 and the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1952. 
Clause 3l.-This clause provides for the omission of sections 161 to 
165A of the Indian Penal Code with necessary saving provision. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 (1) of the Bill provides that the Central Government or the 
State Government may appoint as many special Judges as may be 
necessary for such area or aneas or for such case or group of cases as 
may be. specified to try the oftences mentioned therein. To begin with, 
it is proposed to appoint about 20 special Judges by the Central Govem-
ment. The expenditure involved in this regard is estimated at Rs. 41 
lakhs(Rs. 29 lakhs recurring and Rs. 12 lakhs non-recurring). This 
expenditure will tie met from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
2. The Bill will not involve any other expenditure either recurring 
or non-recurring. 
16 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CRIMINAL LAW (AMENDMENT) ORDINANCE, 1944 
(Olm. 38 OF 1944) 
• • • • • • 
3. Application for attachmellt of property.-(l) Where the State Gov-
ernment has reason to believe that any person has committed (whether 
after the commencement of this Ordinance or not) any scheduled offence, 
the State Government may, whether or not any Court has taken cognizance 
of the offence, authorise the making of an application ro the District 
Judge within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the said person ordi-
narily resides or carnes on his business, for the attainment under this 
Ordinance of the m~ney or other property which the State Government 
believes the said person to have procured by means of the offencp, or 
if such money or other property cannot for any reason be attached, of 
~ther property of the said person of value as nearly as may be equivalent 
tl) that of the aforesaid money or other property. 
\ . • • • • • 
9. Administration of attached property.-(1) The District Judge may, 
on the application of any person interested in any property attached 
under this Ordinance and after giving the agent of the State ~vernment 
an opportunity of being heard make such orders as the District Judge 
considers just and reasonable for-
• • • • • • 
10. Duration of attachment.-An order of attachment of property 
under this Ordinance shall, unless it is withdrawn earlier in accordance 
with the provisions of this Ordinance, continue in force-
(a) where the Court has taken cognizance of the alleged sche-
duled offence at the time when the order is applied for, fOr three 
months from the date of the order under sub-section (1) of set-tin., 4 
or sub~section (2) of section 6, as the case may be, unless cO'gnizance 
of such offence is in the meantime so taken, or unless the District 
Judge on application by the agent of the State Government thinks 
it proper and just that the period should be extended and passes an 
order accordingly;. or "It -'--.,..'--r-' 
• • • •• • • 
11. Appeel-(1) The State Government or any person who has 
shown cause under section 4 or section 6 Or has made an objection under 
section 4 or has made an application under section 8 or section 9, if 
aggrieved by any order of the District Judge under any of the fore!!oing 
provisions of this Ordinance, may appeal to the High Court within thirty 
days from the date on which the order complained against was passed . 
• • • • • 
13. Disposal of attached property upon termination of cirminaJ pro-
ceedings.-(l) Upon the termination of any criminal proceedings for any 
scheduled offence in respect of which any order of attachment of property 
- . 

Public 
Serva.nt 
taking 
grati-
. fication 
otbertbe.n 
legal ro-
muneTa-
tion in 
respect of 
an official 
~t. 
20 
has been made under the Ordinance or security given in lieu thereof, the 
agent Of the Provisional Government shall without delay inform the 
District Judge, and shall where criminal proceedings have ben taken in 
any Court, furnish the District Judge with a copy of the judgment or 
order of the trying Court and with copies of the judgments or orders, if 
any of the appellate or' revisional Court., thereon . 
• • • 
THE SCHEDULE 
(See section 2) 
• • 
Offences in connection wit~ which 'Pf'upeny is liGble to be' .. ta.ched 
1. An offence ,punishable under section 161 or section 165 of the 
Indian Penal Code or any conspiracy to comniit or any attempt to commit 
or any abetment of such offence. 
2. An offence punishable under section 406 Or section 408 'Or Sectil;>n 
409 of the Indian Penal Code, where the property in respect of which the 
offence is committed is property entrusted by His Majesty's Govem-
ment in the United Kingdom or in any part of His Majesty's dominions 
or the Central Or a State Government or a department of any such Grw-
ernment or a local authority or a person acting on, behalf of any such 
Government or department or authority. . 
3. An offence punishable under section 411 Or section 414 of the 
Indian Penal Code, where the stolen property in respect of which the 
offence is committed is property such as' is • described in the. preceding 
item and in respect of which an offence punishable under section 406 or 
section 408 or section 409 of the said Code has been committed. 
4. An offence punishable under Section 417 or section 420 at the Indian 
Penal Code, where the person deceived is His Majesty's Government in 
the United Kingdom or in any part of His Majesty's dominions or the 
Central or a State Government or a department of any such Govern-
ment or a local authority or a per~n acting on behalf of any such Gov-
ernment or department or authority. 
4A. An offence punishable under section 5 of the Prevention of 
Corruption Act, 1947. 
5. Any conspiracy to commit or any attempt to commit or any' abet-
ment of any of the offences specified in items 2, 3 and 4 . 
• • • • .. 
ExTRACTS J'lIOM THE INDIAN PENAL CoDt, 1860 
(45 OF 1860) . 
• • • • 
' . 
CHAPTER IX 
OF OFFENCES BY OR RIlLA'l'ING TO PuBLtc SERV.QrIS-\' 
161, WhoeveT, being or, expecting to be a public servant, accepts 
or obtains, or agrees to accept, or attempts to· .obtain from anyper.on, 
for himself or for any other person, any gratification whatever, o~er 
., 
• 
4S of 1860. 
45 of 1860. 
4S of 1860. 
45 of 1160 
2 of 1947 

than legal relri4neration, as ~ motive or reward f.Jr doing Or forbear· 
~ to do any official act or for shoWing or fO~bearing to ~ow, in the 
exercise ~ bis official functions, favour or disfavour to any person, 
or for rendering o.r attempting to render any service or disservice to any 
person, with the Central or any State Government or Parliament or the 
LeSislaiure of any State or with any local authority, corpol'ation or 
Goyernment company referred to in section 21, or with any public servant, 
a~ such, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for 
a term which may extend to thl'ee years, or with fine, or with both. 
EXp14714tion.-"Expecting to be a public servant." If a person not 
eltpectlng to be in oftice obtains a gratification by deceiving others into 
a belief that he is about to be in offiCe, and that he will then serve them. 
he may be guilty of cheating, but he is not guilty of the offence defined 
in this section. 
"Gratification." The word "gratification" is not restricted to pecuniary 
gratifications, or to gratifications estimable in money . 
• 'Legal remuneration." The words "legal remuneration" are not res· 
tricted to remuneration· which a public servant can lawfully demand, 
b~t include all remuneration which he is permitted by the Govern-
ment, which he serves, to accept. 
"A motive or reward for doing." A person who receives a gratification 
as u motive for doing what he does not intend to do, or' as a reward for 
doing what he has not done, comes within these words. 
Illustrations 
(a) A, a mUl'lsif, obtains from Z, a banker, a situation in Z's bank for 
A's brother, as a reward. to A fOr deciding a cause in favour of Z. A has 
committed the offence defined in this section. 
(b) A, holding the office of Consul in a Foreign State, accepts a lakh of 
rupees from the Minister of that State. It does not appeBl' that A accepted 
this sum as a motive or reward for doing Or forbearing to do any parti. 
cular official act, or for rendering or attempting to render any particular 
service to that State with the Government of India. But it does appear 
that A accepted the SUm as a motive or reward for generally showing 
favour in the exercise of his oftlcial functions to that State. A has com. 
mitted the offence defined in this section. 
(c) A, a public servant, induces Z e.rroneously to believe that A's in-
fluence with the Government has obtained a title for Z and thus induce~ 
Z to give A money as a reward for this service. A has committed the 
offience defined in this section. 
162. Whoever accepts .Or obtains, or agrees to accept, or attempts to 
obtain, from any person, for himself or for any other person, any gratifi. 
cation whatever as a motive or reward tor ·inducing, by corrupt or illegal 
means, any public servant to do or to forbear to do any official act, at 
in the exercise of the official fUnctions of such public servant to show 
favour or disfavour to any person, or to render or attempt to render any 
service Or disservice to any person, with the Central or any State Gove,rn. 
mCJ'lt or Parliament or the Legislature of any State or with any local 
Taking 
gratiftca-
tion, in 
order, by 
corrupt or 
illegal 
means, to 
in fluenoe 
public 
servant. 

Taking 
gratifica-
tion, for 
exercise of 
personal 
influence. 
with 
public 
servant. 
Punish-
ment for 
abetment 
by public 
servant of 
offences 
defined in 
section 
182 or 163. 
Public 
servant 
obtaining 
valuable 
thing, 
without 
consider-
ation, 
from per-
son con-
cerned in 
proceed-
ing or 
business 
transacted. 
authority, corporation o.r Government company referred to in section 2i. 
Or with any public servant, as such, shall be punished with imprisonment 
of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with 
fine, or with both. I 
163. Whoever acc8:!>ts or obtains, or agrees to accept or attempts to 
obtain, from any person, for himself or for any other person, any gratifi-
cation whatever, as a motive or reward for inducing, by the exercise of 
personal influence, any public servant to do or to forbear to do any official 
act, or in the exercise of the official functions of such public servant to 
show favour or disfavour to any person, or to render or attempt to render 
any service or disservice to any person with the Central or any State Gov-
ernment or Parliament or the Legislature of any State or with any local 
authority, corporation or Government company referred to in section 21, 
or with any public servant, as such, shall be punished with simple im-
prisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with 
both. 
Illustrations 
An advocate who receives a fee for arguing a case before a Judge; a 
person who receives pay for arranging and correcting a- memorial add-
ressed to Government, setting forth the services and claims of the memo-
rialist; a paid agent for condemned criminal, who lays before the Gov-
ernment statements attending to show that the condemnation was 
unjust.-are not' within this section, inasmuch as they do not exercise 
or profess to exercise personal ir1fluence. 
164. Whoever. being a public servant, in respect of whom either 
of the offences defined in the last two preceding sections is committed, 
abets the offence, shall be punished with imprisonment of either des-
cription for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or 
with both. 
IlZustmtion 
A is a public servant. B, A's wife, receives a present as a motive for 
soliciting A to give an of-lce to a particular person. A abets her doing so. 
B is punishable with imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year, 
or with fine, or with both. A is punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. 
165. Whoever, being a public servant, accepts or obtains, 01' agrees 
to accept or attempts to obtain, for himself, or for any other person, 
any valuable thing without consideration, or for a consideration which 
he knows to be inadequate, 
from any person whom he knows to have been, or to be, or to be 
likely to be concerned in any . proceeding or business transacted or 
about to be transacted by sueh public servant, or having any connection 
with the official functions of himself or of any public servant to whom he 
is subordinate, 
or from any person whom he knows to be interested in or related to 
the person so concerned, 

shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term 
which may extend to th~ years, or with fine, or with both. 
mu.strations 
(a) A, a Collector. hires a house of Z, who has a settlement case pend-
ing before him. It is agreed that A shall pay fifty rupees a month, the 
house being such that, if the bargain were made in good faith, A would 
be required to pay two hundred rupees a month. A has obtained a valu-
able thing from Z without adequate consideration. 
(b) A, Judge, buys of Z, who has a cause pending in A's Court, Gov-
ernment promissory notes at a discount, when they are selling in the 
market at a preminum. A has obtained a valuable thing from Z without 
adequate consideration. 
(c) Z's brother is apprehended and taken before A, a Magistrate, on 
a charge of perjury. A sells to Z shares in a bank at a premium, when 
they are selling in the market at a discount. Z pays A for the shares 
accordingly. The money so obtained by A is a valuable thing obtained 
by him without adequate consideration. 
165A. Whoever, abets any offence punishable under section 161 or 
section 165, whether or not that offence is committed in consequence of 
the abetment, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description 
for a term which may extend to three years, or with fuie, or with both. 
• • • • 
by such 
public 
servant. 
Punish-
mentfor 
abetment 
of offences 
defined in 
section 
161 or 
section 
1t~:;. 

• ,I#'..I I; • .. 
LOI{ SABRA 
A 
BILL 
to consolidate and amend the law relating to the prevention of corruption 
and for matters connected therewith. 
(Shri P. Chid4mbarcm, MinistB1' of State in the MiniB'try of Personnel, 
Public Grievance. cmd Peuions and the Min4Bter of State ift 
the Ministry of Home Alairs.) 