As Inrropucep In Lok Sapua

Bill No. 36 of 1992
ea

THE GOVERNORS (EMOLUMENTS, ALLOWANCES AND
PRIVILEGES) AMENDMENT BILL, 1992

A
BILL

further to amend the Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and
Privileges) Act, 1982

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-third Year of the Reputlic
of India as follows:

1. (1) This Act may be called the Governors (Emoluments, Allowances Short
and Privileges) Amendment Act, 1992. title.

3 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the ist day of pare
June, 1988.

2 In-section 3 of the Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privi-
leges) Act, 1982, in the proviso, in clause (a) —

(a) im sub-clause (ii), for the word “and”, occurring at the end, Act oF
10 the word “or” shall be substituted; =

(b) sub-clause (iii) shall be omitted.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS

AND REASONS

| 3 of the Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges)
Act, 1982 (43 of 1982) provides that there shall be paid to every Gover-
nor emoluments at the rate of Rs. 11,000/- per measem. Clause (a) of
the proviso of this section also provides that if a Governor, at the time
of his appointment, is in receipt of a pension (other than disability or
wound pension) in respect of any previous ser
ment of India or any of its prea
ernment of a State or any of
ments shall be reduced —

vice under the Govern-
lecessor Governments or under the Gov-
predecessor Governments, his emolu-

(i) by the amount of that pension; and

(i) if he has. before such appointment, received in lieu of 2
portion of the pension due to him in respect of such previous service

the commuted value thereof, by the amount of that portion of the
pension; and

(ii) if he has. before such appointment, received a retirement
atuity in respect of such previous service, by the pension equiva-
lent of that gratuity

gr

Governmento? india in the Ministry of Persosnnel, Public
Grievances and Pensions have issued orders ie the effect that the pen-
sion equivulent of gratuity may not be deducted while fixing the pay of
re-employed pensioners. The Ministry of Finance bave also issued orders
that the pension equivalent of gratuity will not be taken into account
while fixing the initial pay of retired Judges of the High Courts and
Supreme Court appointed to Committees or on Commissions. These
orders have been made effective from the 1st June. 1988,

3. The Bill seeks to amend the Governors (Emoluments, Allowances
and Privileges) Act. 1982 to allow the benefit of not deducting pension
equivalent of gratuity from the emoluments payable to Governors.
Aevording to the amendments proposed in the Bill, Governors who had

Teceived retirement gratuity in respect of previous service would be
benefited,

4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above object.

New Detur;
The 2ist February, 1992. 8. B. CHAVAN



ANNEXURE

Extract From THe Governors (EMOLUMENTS, ALLowANcES AND PrrviLeces)
Act, 1982
(43 oF 1982)

* * * *

3. There shall be paid to every Governor emoluments at the rate of gmolu.
ments

rupees eleven thousand per mensem:

Provided that if a Governor, at the time of his appointment,—-

(a) is in receipt of a pension (other than disability or wound
pension) in respect of any previous service under the Government
ef India or any of its predecessor Governments or under the Govern-
ment of a State or any of its predecessor Governments his emolu-
ments shall be reduced.

(i) by the amount of that pension; and

(ii) if he has, before such appointment. received in lieu of
a portion of the pension due to him in respect of such previous
service, the commuted value thereof, by the amount of that
portion of the pension;

(iii) if he has, before such appointment, received a retire-
ment gratuity in respect of such previous service, by the pen-
sion equivalent of that gratuity; or

(७) is in receipt of any benefit by way of contributory provident
fund, his emoluments shall be reduced by the pension equivalent of
such benefit.



i * ! LOK SABHA

4
BILL

futher to amend the Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and
Privileges) Act, 1982