.. 
Bill No. 36 of 1959 
THE RESERVE BANK OF INDIA 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1959 
·r 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
ON 27TH APRIL, 1959) 

5 
10 
15 
4 of 1940. 
Bill No. 36 of 1959 
,THE RESERVE BANK OF INDIA (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1959-
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Tenth Yeat of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Reserve Bank of India (Amendment) Short tille. 
Act, 1959. 
2. After section 28 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, the Insertion- of 
following section shall be inserted, namely: _ new section 28A in Act 
'28A. (1) For the purpose of controlling the circulation of 
bank notes without India, the Bank may, notwithstanding any-
thing contained in any other provision of this Act, issue bank 
notes of such design, form and material as may be approved 
under sub-section (3) (hereinafter in this section referred to as 
special bank notes) of the denominational values of five rupees, 
ten rupees and one hundred rupees. 
- - . (2) For the purpose of ~ontrolling the circulation of 
Government of India one rupee notes without India, the Central 
Government may, notwithstanding anything contained in any 
other provision of this Act or in the Currency Ordinance, 1940, 
issue Government of India notes of the denominational value of 
2 of 1934. 
Iss\1e of 
special bank 
notes and 
special one 
rupee n->tes 
in certain 
case~. 

2 
one rupee of sDch design, form and material as may be adopted 
under sub-section (3) (hereinafter in this section referred to as 
special one rupee notes). 
(3) The design, form and material of the special bank notes 
shall be such as may be approved by the Central Government 
after consideration of the recommendations made by the Governor 
and of the special one rupee notes shall be such as the Central 
Government may think fit to adopt. 
(4) Neither the special bank notes nor the special one rupee 
notes shall be legal tender in India. 
(5) The special one rupee note shall be deemed to be included 
in the expression "rupee coin" for all the purposes of this Act 
except section 39, but shall be deemed not to be a currency note 
for any of the purposes of this Act. 
(6) Where a special bank note is on its face expressed to 
be payable at a specified ·office or branch of the Bank, the 
obligation imposed .by section 39 shall be only on the specified 
office or branch and,_ further, shall be subject to such regulations 
as may be made under this section. 
(7) The Bank may, with the previous sanction of the Central 
Government, make regulations to provi~e for all matters for 
which provision is necessary or convenient for the purpose of 
giving effect to the provisions of this section, and, in particular, 
the manner in which, and the conditions or limitations subject 
to which-
(i) bank notes and one rupee notes in circulation in Any 
country outside India may be replaced by special notes i8Sued 
under this section; 
(ii) any such special notes may be exchanged for any 
other bank notes or one rupee notes.'. 
, .. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASqNS 
The object of the Bill is to amend the' Reserve 9ank of India Act, 
1954, to enable the Reserve Bank of India to issue special bank notes 
which 'will not be legal tender in India but which will otherwise be 
in the same position as other bank notes and similarly to enable the 
Govemment of India to issue special one rupee notes. The issue of 
these notes has been found necessary for thepU1!pose of controlling 
the circulation of Reserve ,Bank of India notes and Government of 
India one rupee notes without India. The Bill authorises the issue 
of the special notes and provides for the Reserve Bank, with the 
previous s~ction of the Central Government, making the necessary 
regulations for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of the 
Bill. 
MORARJI DESAI. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 24th April, 1959. 
3 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Bill provides for the issue of special one rupee notes of the 
Government of India and special bank notes by the Reserve Bank of 
Inciia .. The cost of printing the bank notes is borne by the Reserve 
Bank. while the Government of India bear the cost of printing the 
rupee notes~ The expenditure on the printing of the initial supply of 
one rupee notes is estimated .at Rs. 2,70,000. 
/ 
4 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED 
LEGISLATION 
The object of this amendment being the control of the circulation 
of bank notes outside India, regulations may be necessary to provide 
for the manner in which and the conditions or limitations subject 
to which bank notes and one rupee notes in circulation outside India 
may be replaced by the special notes which will not be legal tender 
in India. Provision may also be necessary for exchange of special 
notes for other bank notes, for exchange of mutilated special notes 
by new notes and the like. The regulation-making power is thIS of 
a normal character. 
5 

• 
LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934. 
The President has, in pursuance of clauses (1) and (3) of article 
II7 of the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok 
Sabha, the introduction. and consideration of the Bill. 
M.N.KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri Morarji Desai, 
Minister of Finance.) 