AS INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA.

1 2 JUN 1990

Bill_ No. 35 of 1998

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1998
By
‘Suri BAsupes Acuaria, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

क्‍ it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
—

1, This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1998.
2. in article 311 of the Constitution,—
(a) In clause (2), in the second proviso—
(7) for sub-clause (5), the following sub-clause shall be substituted, namely:—

“(b) where the authority empowered to dismiss or remove a person or to
reduce him in rank is satisfied that for reasons, which are to be specified,
substantiated by evidence and to be recorded by that authority in writing
and also intimated to the person concerned, it is not reasonably practicable
to hold such inquiry; or”;

(ii) sub-clause (c) shall be omitted;
(b) clause (3) shall be omitted.

Short title.

Amendment of
article ३11.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS,

The provisions of article 311 have been unreasonably used several times by the
bureaucracy to unjustifiably punish the employees for many reasons. This provision is mostly
used to punish those employees who are not in the good books of senior officers. The
employees who are involved in association activities are branded as political activists and
are punished under these provisions without giving them any opportunity to explain their
point of view or to argue their case. The provisions of fundamental rights enshrined in the
Constitution are being violated in as much as the aggrieved employees are not given a chance
to defend themselves. Rules of natural justice and fair play require that the employees must
have a chance to know as to why they are being punished and also they should be given a
chance to explain their position and also to submit documents and evidence, if any, in their
favour, Senior officers should not be vested with powers to dismiss employees without holding
an inquiry. The procedure regarding holding inquiry should be dispensed with only in
exceptional cases and that too after the officer who was conducting inquiry has recorded in
writing that it is not practicable to hold an inquiry.

It is, therefore, proposed to amend article 311 of the Constitution suitably with a view
to protecting the interests of employees.

New Detit; BASUDEB ACHARIA.
April 30, 1998.


ANNEXURE

EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

* * *

(J) No person who is a member of a civil service of the Union or an all-Indi
or a civil service of a State or holds a civil post under the Union or a State shall be
or removed by an authority subordinate to that by which he was appointed.

(2) No such person as aforesaid shall be dismissed or removed or reduced in rank
after an inquiry in which he has been informed of the charges against him and
a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those charg

Provided that where it is proposed after such inquiry, to impose upon him any such
y, such penalty may be imposed on the basis of the evidence adduced during such
७॥ and it shall not be necessary to give such person any opportunity of making
tation on the penalty proposed:

Provided further that this clause shall not apply—

(a) where a person is dismissed or removed or reduced in rank on the ground of
conduct which has led to his conviction on a criminal charge; or

(b) where the authority empowered to dismiss or remove a person or to reduce
him in rank is satisfied that for some reason, to be recorded by that authority in
writing, it is not reasonably practicable to hold such inquiry; or

(c) where the President or the Governor, as the case may be, is satisfied that in
the interest of the security of the State it is not expedient to hold such inquiry.

(3) If, in respect of any such person as aforesaid, a question arises whether it is
ly practicable to hold such inquiry as is referred to in clause (2), the decision
॥ of the authority empowered to dismiss or remove such person or to reduce him in
६ shall be final.

rank of persons
employed in
civil capacities
under the
Union ora
State


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Basudeb Acharia, M.P.)

GAGAZETTE\222LS.PM5