s 
10 
IS 
As INTRODUCED IN Los: SAmu. ON 
2,. APR 1_ 
Bl11 No. 18 at 18ft 
THE CONSTITUTION (EIGHTEENTH AMENDMEN1)., ..... _-1-\ 
BIlL, 1964 '" Lr 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitution Of India 
I~~.J}~ 
2.-SJ~ .~ 
~ - -" ,- .. -~~..,.". 
BE it enacted by Par'liamen.t in the Fifteen.th Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Eighteenth Amend- Shan title. 
ment) Act, 1964. 
2. In article 359 of the Constitution,- Amendment 
of article 
(4) after clause (1), the following clause shall be inaerted, 359. 
and shall be deemed alway. to have been inserted, namely:-
.. (2) While an order made under clause (1) in relation to 
any of the rights conferred by Part III iSt in operation, nothing 
in that Part conferring those rights shall restrict the power 
of the State as defined in the said Part to make any law or 
to take any _ executive action which the State would but 
for the provisions contained in that Part be competent to 
make or to take, but any law so made shall, to the extent 
of the incompetency, cease to have effect as soon as the 
order aforesaid ceases to operate, except as respects things 
done or omitted to be done before the law so ceases to have 
effect."; 
(b) the existing clauses (2) and (3) shall be re-numbered 
as clauses (3) and (4); 
(c) in clause (3) as so r~bered, after ilie words "the 
territory O!f India", -the words "or may apply to all persons or 
any class of persons therein, and any such order may be made 
so as to be retrospective to any date not earlier than the date 
of the issue of the Proclamation" shall be inserted, and shall 
be deemed always to have been inserted. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
When a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, the President 
is empoweI:ed ander article 359 of the Constitution to make an order 
suspending the right to move any court for the enfarcement of such 
of ,the rights conferred by Part III as may be mentioned in that order. 
It was intended that the powers conferred by this ar¢icle should be 
exercised during an emergency according to the needs of the situation. 
On the other hand, article 358 renders the provisions of article 19 
automatically inoperative while the Proclamation Of Emergency is 
in operation, and the power to make any law or to take any executive 
action is not restricted by the provisions of that article. The inten-
tion underlying article 359 appears to be that when an order is made 
under clause (1) of that article in relation to any of the rights con-
ferred by Part Ill, the order so made would have the same effect 
in relation to those rights as article 358 has in relaticm to article 19. 
On account, however, of rthe difference in language between article 
358 and article 359, doubts may arise as to the effect; ol an arder made 
under article 359. The Bill seeks to remove these doubts by insert-
ing a new clause in article 359 which follows the language of article 
358. 
2. It is fu~er proposed to make it clear that the ocrder made 
under clause (1) of article 359 may be made so as to make it appli-
calble to all persons or any class ~ persona. It is also proposed. to 
take powers to make the order with retrospective eftect; to any date 
not earlier than the date of issue of the Proclamation. 
NEW DI:LHI; A. K. SEN. 
The 4th March, 19M. 

LOK 
SABRA 
CORRIGE7.JDUM 
to 
THE 
COHS7ITUTIO~~ 
(EIGHTEENTH 
AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 
1964 
(To 
be/As 
introduced 
in 
Lok 
Sabha) 
1. 
Page 
1, 
line 
20, 
-
after 
n 
(4)n 
insert 
"respectively" 
New 
Delhi; 
April 
21~ 
1964 
llaisakha 
1, 
1886(Saka) 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE CONS'l'IIOTlON OF INDIA 
• • • • • 
359. (1) Where a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, the SUlpemioD 
President may by order declare that the right to move any court for ~:ccmcat 
the enforcement of such of the rights conferred by Part III as may of the riahtl 
be mentioned in the order and all proceedings pending in any court ~~ by 
for the enforcement of the rights so mentioned shall'remain suspended durlDa • 
for the period during which the Proclamation is in force or for such emezauCiel. 
shorter period as may be specified in the order. 
(2) An order made as aforesaid may extend to the whole or any 
part of the territory of India. 
• • • • • 
3 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
(Shri Asoke K. Sen, 
Minister of L(JfJ).) 