DIU NO.3' of 19S5. 
THE PRESS AND REGISTRATION 
OF BOOKS (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1955-
(As INTRODUCBD IN LOK SABHA) 

lIill No. 3G of 1955 
THE PRESS AND REGISTRATION OF BOOKS 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1955 
(As iNTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
/tvrther to amend the l?ress and Registration of Books Act, 1867. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act maybe called the Press and Registration of Books Short title 
(Amendment) Act 1955. and com-, mencement. 
S (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In the long title of the Press and Registration of Books Act, Amendment 
1867 (hereinafter referred to as the pz:incipal Act), after the word !!::o~Vh~ 
"books" occurring in both the places, the words "and newspapers" 1867· 
10 shall be inserted. 
3. In the preamble to the principal Act, for the words "every Amendment 
book printed or lithographed in India and for the registration of~: kl'e8~~ 
such books", the words ""every book Ind newspaper printed in India of 1867· 
and for the registration of such books and newspapers" shall be 
IS substituted. 
20 
25 
4. In section 1 of the principal Act,- Amen~ment 
of section I, 
(a) in the definition of "book", the words "or lithographed" shall Act XXV of 
be omitted; 1867. 
(b) after the definition of "newspaper", the following definitions 
shall be inserted, namely:-
''paper'' means any document, including a newspaper, other 
than a book; 
"printing" includes cylostyling and printing by litho-
graphy; 
"prescribed" means prescribed by rules made by the 
Central Government under section 20Aj 

~ 
"Press Registrar" means the Registrar of newspapers for 
India appointed by the Central Government under 
section 19A and includes any other person appointed 
by the Central Government to perform all or any of 
the functions or the Press Registrar; S 
"Register" means the Register of newspapers maintained 
under section 19B. 
Amendment 5. Section 4 of the principal Act shall be re-numbe,red as sub-
~'jglVD!r section (l) of that section and after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, 
1867· the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely: - 10 
AmcDdmeot 
of aec:tiOD 5. 
ActXXV of 
11167· 
"(2) As often as the place where a press is kept is changed, a 
new declaration shall be necessary: 
Provided that where the change is for a period not exceeding 
sixty days and the place where the press is kept after the 
change is within the local jurisdiction of the Magistrate IS 
referred to in sub-section (1), no new declaration shall be 
necessary 1£-
(a) a statement relating to the change is furnished to the 
said Magistrate within twenty-four hours thereof; and 
(b) the keeper of the press continues to be the same.". 
6. In section 5 of the principal Act,-
(ar in the declaration contained in rule (2), for the words "and 
printed or published, or printed and published", the words 
"alul to be printed or published, or to be printed and pub-
20 
lished" shall be substituted; 2S 
(b) after rule (2), the following rule shall be inserted, namely:-
"(2A) Every declarati~ under rule (2) shall specify the 
title of the newspaper, the language in which it is to 
be published and the periodicity of its publication and 
shall contain such other particulars as may be pres- 30 
cribed."; 
(c) to rule (3), the following proviso shall be added, namely:-
"Provided that where the change is for a period not exceed-
ing thirty days and the place of printing or publica-
tion after the change is within the local jurisdiction of 35 
the Magistrate referred to in rule (2), no new declara-
tion shall be necessary if-:-
(a) a statement relating to the change is furnished to the 
said Magistrate within twenty-four hours thereof; 
and 

3 
(b) the printer or publisher or the printer and publisher 
of the newspaper continues to be the same."; 
(d) in rule (4), for the words "shall leave India", the words 
"shall leave India for a period exceeding thirty days" shall 
S be substituted; 
(e) after rule (4) and before the proviso, the following rules shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"(5) Eva-y declaration made in respect of a newspaper shall 
be void, where the newspaper does not commence pub-
10 lication-
(a) within six weeks of the declaration, in the case (,f a 
newspaper to be published once a week or oftener; 
and 
(b) within three months of the declaration, in the case 
IS of any other newspaper, 
and in every such case, a new declaration shall be neces-
sary before the newspaper can be published. 
(6) Where, in any period of three months, any daily, trI-
weekly, bi-weekly, weekly or fortnightly newspaper 
20 publishes issues the number of which is less than half 
of what should have been published in accordance with 
the declaration made in respect thereof, the declaration 
shall cease to have effect and a new declaration shall 
be necessary before the publication of the newspaper 
25 can be continued. 
(7) Where any other newspaper has ceased publication for 
a period exceeding twelve months, every declaration 
made in respect thereof shall cease to have effect, and 
a new declaration shall be necessary before. the news-
30 paper can be re-published. 
3S 
40 
, 
(8) Every existing declaration in respect of a newspaper 
shall be cancelled by the Magistrate before whom a 
new declaration is made and subscribed in respect of 
the same.". 
7. In section 6 of the principal Act,- Amendment 
of section 6, 
(a) after the first paragraph, the following proviso shall be inser- Act XXV of 
ted, namely: _ 1867· 
"Provided that where any declaration is made and subscri-
bed under section 5 in respect of a newspaper, the dec-
laration shall not, save in the case of newspapers owned 
by the same person, be so authenticated unless the 

Amendmenl 
ofsection 8, 
Act XXV of 
1867. 
4 
Magistrate is satisfied from such inquiry as he thinks 
fi t to make from the Press Registrar or otherwise that 
the newspaper proposed to be published does not bear 
a title which is the s~e as, or similar to, that of any 
other newspaper published either in the same language S 
or in the same State."; 
(b) after the third paragraph, the following paragraph shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"A copy of the declaration attested by the official seal of 
the Magistrate shall be forwarded to tlie Press Regis- 10 
trar." . 
8. In section 8 of the principal Act,-
(a) for the first paragraph, the following paragraph shall be 
substituted. namely:-
"If any person has subscribed to any declaration in respect IS 
of a newspaper under section 5 and the declaration has 
been authenticated by a Magistrate under section 6 and 
subsequently that person ceases to be the printer or 
publisher of the newspaper mentioned. in such declara-
lation, he shall appear before any District, Presidency 20 
or Sub-Divisional Magistrate, and xnake and subscribe 
in duplicate the following declaration:-
'I, A.B .. declare that I have ceased to be the printer or 
publisher or printer and publisher of the newspaper 
entitled· ."; 25 
(b) after the fourth paragraph, the following paragraph shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"A copy of the latter declaration attested by the official 
_seal of the Magistrate shall be forwarded to the Press 
Registrar". 30 
Amenc:!ment 9. In section 9 of the prineipal Act, the words "or lithographed" 
of section 9 . Act XXV of wherever they occur shall be omItted. 
1867· 
Insertion of 10. After section llA of the principa! Act, the following section 
new section ·shall be inserted, namely:-
lIB in Act 
XXV of 
186,. 
Copies of 
newspapers 
to be deliver-
ed to Press 
Registrar. 
"l1B. Subject to any rules that. may be made under this Act, the 35 
publisher of every newspaper in India shall deliver free of 
expense to the Press Registrar one copy of each issue of 
such Ilewspaper as soon as it is published". 
Amendment 11. In section 13 of the principal Act, for the words dwithout 
~c~~~{} I~; making such a deciaration as is required by section 4 of this Act", 40 
1867· 

S 
the words "in contravention of any of the provisions contained in 
section 4 of this Act" shall be substituted. 
12. In section 14 of the principal Act, for the words "any declara- Ameadmcnt 
t~on", the words "any declaration or other statement" shall be subs- tc:~ I:r 
S tltuted. 1867. 
10 
IS 
20 
13. After section 15 of the principal Act. the following section Inlertion of 
shall be inserted, namely: _ new secUon ISA in Act 
XXVofI 867. 
"15A. If any person who has ceased to be a printer or publisher P~nalty for 
of any newspaper fails or neglects to make a declaration in :e a ~~ 
compliance with section 8, he shall, on conviction before a lantion. uil-
Magistrate, be punishable by fine not exceeding two hun- der section 8· 
died rupees." 
14. After section 16A of the principal Act, the following section IDlemon. of new section 
shall be inserted, namely: - r6B in Act 
XXVof1867. 
"16B. If any publisher of any newspaper published in India Pefi .Dal Ity for 
1 t d 1· . f th . l' 'th at ure to neg ec s to elver copIes 0 e same 10 comp lance WI luppl y copi-
section lIB, he shall, on the complaint of the Press Registrar, CI of newI-
b . h bi . ibM' h'" papera to e pums a e. on conVIct on y a aglStrate avmg lurlS- the Pres. 
diction in the place where the newspaper was printed, by Registrar. 
fine which may extend to fifty rupees ror every default." 
15. In section 18 of the prinCipal Act. in item (12) ot the parti- Amef_~~ment . 0 K"Uon 18 culars, for the words "or hthographed", the words "cyclostyled or Act XXV of 
lithographed" shall be substituted. 1867· 
16. After Part V of the principal Act, the following Part shall be lnaettion of 
inserted namely'- new Pan VA 2S ' . in Act XXV 
of 1867. 
30 
35 
"PART VA 
REGISTRATION OF NEWSPAPERS 
19A. The Central Govemment may appoint a Retriatrar of news- :r=~ 
papers for India and such other olken UDder the general,istrar Ind 
superintendence and control of the Press ReJistrar as may other officera. 
be necessary for the purpose of performing the functions 
assigned to them by or under this Act and may, by general 
or special order, provide for the distribution or allocation 
of functions to be performed by them UDder this Act. 
19B. (1) The Press Registrar shan maintain in the prescribed Reailter of 
manner a Register of newspapers. newspapers. 
,(2) 1'he Register shall, as far as may be practicable, contain the 
following particulars about every newspaper published in 
India, namely:-

Ccrtiftaatct 
of reaima-
don. 
Annual state-
m:nt etc., to 
be furnilhed 
by QeWlpa-
pen. 
6 
(a) the title of the newspaper; 
(b) the language in which the newspaper is published; 
(c) periodicity of the publication of the newspaper; 
(d) the name of the editor, printer and publisher of the 
newspaper; 
(e) the place of printing and publicatiOlt; 
(f) the average number of pages per week; 
(g) the number of days of publication in the year; 
(h) the average number of copies printed, the average num-
ber of copies sold to the public and the average numbel' 10 
of copies distributed free to the public, the average 
being calculated with reference to such period as may 
be prescribed; 
(i) retail selling price per copy; 
(j) the names and addresses of the owners of the newspaper IS 
and such other particulars relating to ownership as may 
be prescribed; 
(k) any other particulars which may be prescribed. 
(3) On receiving infonnation from time to time about the afore-
said particulars, the Press Registrar shall cause relevant 20 
entries to be made in the Register and may make such 
necessary alterations or corrections therein as may be 
required for keeping the Register up-to-date. 
19C. On receiving from the Magistrate under section 6 a copy 
of the declaration in respect of a newspaper, the Press Regis- 25 
trar shall cause relevant entries to be made in the Register 
in respect of the newspaper and shall, as soon as practicable 
thereafter, issue a certificate of registration in respect of 
that newspaper to the publisher thereof. 
19D. It shall be the duty of the publisher of every newspaper-· 30 
(a) to furnish to the Press Registrar an annual tltatement in 
respect ot the newspaper at such time and containing 
such of the particulars referred to in sub-section (2) of 
section 19B as may be prescribed; 
(b) to publish in the newspaPer at such times and ~uch of 35 
the particulars relating to the newspaper referred to In 
sub-section (2) of section 19B as may be specified in 
this behalf by the Press Registrar. 
'*' 

XLV of 
18'0. 
10 
IS 
2S 
'1 
19E. The publisher of every newspaper shall furnish to the Retuma -:d 
Press Registrar such returns, statistics and other information =:~ b; 
with respect to any of the particulars referred to in SUO-f newspapeR. 
section (2) of section 19B as the Press Registrar may from' 
time to time . require. 
19F. The Press Registrar or any person authorised by him in Right of ac-
writing in this behalf shall, for the purpose of the collection ~!s!d:: 
of any information relating to a newspaper under this Act, ments. 
have access to any relevant record or document relating 
to the newspaper ill the possession of the publisher thereof, 
and may enter at any reasonable time any premises when 
he believes such record or document to be and may inspect 
or take copies of the relevant records or documents or ask 
any question necessary for obtaining any information reo 
quired to be furnished under this Act. 
19G. The Press Registrar shall prepare, in such form and at such Annual 
time each year as may be prescribed, an annual report con. repone 
taining a summary of the information obtained by him 
during the previous year in respect of the newspapers in 
India and giving an account of the working of such news-
papers, and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the Central 
Government. 
. . Furnishing 19H. On the application of any person for the supply of the of cop lei of 
copy of any extract from the Register and on payment of ~r~ from 
such fee as may be prescribed, the Press Registrar shall eiliter. 
furnish such copy to the applicant in such form md manner 
as may be prescribed. 
191. Subject to the provisions of this Act and regulations made ~~=~ 
thereunder, the Press Registrar may delegate all or any of 
his powers under this Act to any officer subordinate to him. 
19K. The Press Registrar and all officers appointed under this ::' Re:ci 
Act shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning other officeR 
of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code" • to be public • servants. 
~7. In section 20 of the principal Act, after the words "make such Amef nc!mento 3 It I" d ft " . . . h hi' 0 ICcUon 2 ~ ru es • the wor sand gures not Inconsistent Wit t e regu allons Act XXV of 
made by the Central Government under section 20A" shall be inser- 1867. 
ted. 
18. After section 20 of the principal Act, the following 
shall be inserted, namely:-
section IDleman' of 
new aec:tion 
20A In Act 
XXV of 
1867. 

Power of 
Central 
GoftrDJIICDt 
to make 
rulel. 
8 
"20A. The Central Government may, by notification in the Offi-
cial Gazette, make rules-
(a) prescribing the particulars which a declaration made and 
subscriobed under section 5 may contain; 
(b) prescribing the manner in which copies of any dt>clara- S 
tion attested by the official seal of a Magistrate may 
be forwarded to the Press Registrar; 
(c) prescribing the manner in which copies of any news-
paper may be sent to the Press Registrar under section 
liB; 
(d) prescribing the manner in which a Register may be 
maintained under section 19B and the particulars 
which it may contain; 
(e) prescribing the particulars which an annual statement 
10 
to be furnished by the publisher of a newspaper to the 15 
Press Registrar may contain; 
(f) prescribing the fees for furnishing copies of extracts 
from the Register and the manner in which such 
copies may be furnished; 
(g) prescribing the manner in which a certificate of regis- 20 
trationmay be issued in respect of a newspaper; 
(h) prescribing the. form in whfcll, and the time within 
, which, annual reports may be prepared by the Press 
Registrar and forwarded to the Central Government." 
IDICrti~,~ 19. After section 21 of the prinCipal Act, the following section 2S new IQ,;uuD . 
22 in Act shall he inserted, namely:-
xxv of 
1867· 
B~t~ "22_ This Act extends to the whole of India except th, 
~~~ Qf J~DlDlu ~t;i KMl\mh''', 

9 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Press Laws Inquiry Committee which was set up by the 
Government to enquire into the Press laws made certain recom-
mendations in 1948 for amending the Press and' Registration of 
Books Act, 1867. Bas~d partly on these recommendations and 
partly on recommendations made by State Governments, who had 
experienced practical difficulties in the working of the Act, the 
Press and Registration of Books (Amendment) Bill. 1952 was intro-
duced in Parliament. The Press Commission, which was appoint-
ed shortly thereafter, reviewed the entire position in respect of the 
working of the Act. They substantially endorsed the provisions of the 
above Bill and made certain' further recommendations for the 
amendment of the Act.· The present Bill. incorporates the provi-
sions of the earlier Bill and makes certain further provisions in 
order to give effect to the recommendations of the Press Commission. 
2. The Bill makes certain provisions for practical contingencies 
like temporary changes in the place of printing or pUblication. It 
also provides that a declaration in respect of a newspaper shall 
cease to have effect if the newspaper does not commence publica-
tion within a specified period or if it ceases publication for a year 
or more or if it publishes issues the number of which is less than 
half of what should have been published in accordance with the 
declaration made in respect thereof. 
3. The Act was intended to apply to all papers printed (includ-
ing posters, etc.), and, as recommended by the Press Commission, 
this intention has been clarified by removing the doubt which 
judicial decisions seem to have created. 
4. In accordance with the recommendations of the Press Commis-
sion, it is proposed to set up an organisation under a Press Regi.&-
trar for the purpose of registration of all newspapers published In 
India and for the collection, maintenance and publication of infor-
mation concerning them. 
NEW DELHI; 
'rhe 15th July, 1955. 
B. V. KESKAR. 

10 
EXPLANATORY MEMORANDUM REGARDING 
DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 18 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to 
make regulations for carrying out certain procedural requirements 
laid down in the Bill. These are purely procedural matters of a 
routine character and relate inter alia to prescribing particulars of 
declaration, the manner of sending copies of declaration to the 
Press Registrar, the delivery of copies of newspapers to the Press 
Registrar, the maintenance of a register and the issuing of certi-
ficates by the Press Registrar and fees for furnishing copies of the 
extracts of register maintained by the Press Registrar. 
The delegated legislation is of a normal character. 

11 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The proposed section 19A in clause 16 of the Bill contemplates 
the appointment of a Press Registrar and such other officers as may 
be necessary for the purpose of performing the functions assigned 
to them. 
The nuclear organisation, as at present envisaged, would require 
an initial non-recurring expenditure of about Rs. 20,000/- and an 
annual recurring expenditure of about Rs. 50,000/-. The cost may 
increase depending upon the functions which may be assigned to 
this organisation and it is, therefore, not possible at this stage to 
form a more accurate estimate. 
For the year 1955-56, it is expected that the following sums will 
be required:-
Non-recurring Rs. 20,000/-. 
Recurring Rs. 30,000/-. 
No provision has been made in the budget for this purpose, but the 
necessary funds will be made available by re-appropriation, if 
~sible. 
Funds in respect of subsequent years will vary from year to 
year, and will be provided for in the budget estimates in the nor-
mal way. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE PREss AND lUGISTRATION. or 
BooKS Ac:r, 1867 (No. XXV OF 1867) 
An Act for the regula~on of Pri~ting presses and Newspapers, 
for the preservation of COpIes of books printed in India 
and for the registration of such books. 
Preamb.e. WHEREAS it is expedient to provide for the regulation of printing 
presses and of newspapers, for the preservation of copies. of every 
book printed or lithographed in India and for the registration of 
such books; It is hereby enacted as follows:-
PART I 
PRELIMINARY 
Interpreta- 1. In this Act, unless there shall be something repugnant in the 
tion clause subject or context,-
•• Book ". "book" includes every volurite, part or division of a volume, 
and pamphlet. in any language, and· every sheet of. m~c, 
map, chart or plan separately printed or lithographed . 
• • • • • 
Rules al to 5. No newspaper shall be published in India, except in confor-
~~':'~on mity with the rules hereinafter laid down: 
ptIperI. ' • • • • • 
• 
(2) The printer and the publisher of every such newspaper shall 
appear in person or by agent authorised in this behalf in accordance 
with rules made under section 20. before a District, Presidency or 
Sub-divisional Magistrate within whose local jurisdiction such 
newspaper shall be printed or published, or such printer or pub-
lisher resides, and shall make and subscribe, in duplicate, the fol-
lowing declaration:-
"I, A.B., declare that I am the printer or publisher, or printer 
and publisher of the. newspaper entitled .............. '" . and 
printed or published, or printed and published, as the case 
may be at ................... ". 
And the last blank in this form of declaration shall be filled up 
with ·a true and precise account of the premises where the printing 
or publication is conducted: . . ., . . 
(4) As often as the printer or the publisher who shall have 
made such declaration as is aforesaid shall leave India, a new dec-

13 
laration from a printer or publisher resident within the said terri-
tories shall be necesspry: 
Provided that no person who has not attained majority in ac-
cordance with the provisions of the Indian Majority Act, 1875, or 
of the law to which he iSi subject in respect of the attainment of 
majority, shall be permitted to make the declaration prescribed 
by this section, nor shall any such person edit a newspaper . 
• • • • • 
8. Provided always that any person who may have subscribed ~:: t!ec~~~: 
any such declaration as is aforesaid, and who may subsequently sons , who 
cease to be the printer or publisher of the newspaper mentioned in !i~fara':i,:ed 
such declaration, may appear before any District, Presidency or and subtle-
Sub-divisional Magistrate, and make and subscribe in duplicate the ~:a~~~Yto be 
following declaration: - printer. or publishen . 
• • • • • 
PART III 
DELIVERY OF BOOKS 
9. Printed or lithographed copies of the whole of every 'book Copies ,of 
which shall be printed or lithographed in India after this Act shalf :tj~e!~: 
come into force, together with all maps, prints or other engravings n;.encement 
belonging thereto, finished and coloured in the same manner as the de~~ be 
best copies of the same, shall, notwithstanding any agreement (if gratis lo~Go-
, d h' I' h vernmcnt. the book be pubhshe ) between t e prmter and pub IS er thereof, 
be delivered by the printer at such place and to such officer as the 
State Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
from time to time direct, and free of expense to the Government. 
as follows. that is to say:-
(a) in any case, within one calendar month after the day on 
which any such book shall first be delivered out of the 
pl'ess, one such copy, and 
(b) if within one calendar year from such day the State Gov-
ernment shall require the printer to deliver other such 
copies not exceeding two in number, then within one 
calendar month after the day on which any such requisi-
tion shall be made by the State Government on the prin-
ter, another such copy, or two other such copies, as 'the 
State Government may direct, 
the copies so delivered being bound, sewed or stitched together 
and upon the best paper on which any copies of the book shall be 
printed or lithographed. 

14\ 
The publisher or other person employing the printer shall, at a 
reasonable time before the expiration of the ~id month, supply 
him with all maps, prints and engravings finished and coloured as . 
aforesaid, which Blay be necessary to enable him to comply with 
the requirements aforesaid. 
Nothing in the former part of this section shall apply to -
(i) any second or subsequent edition of a book in which edi- ~ 
tion no additions or alterations either in the letter-press 
or in the maps, book prints or other engravings belonging 
to the book have been made, and a copy of the first or 
some preceding edition of which book has been delivered 
under this Act, or 
(ii) any newspaper published in conformity with the rules -laid 
down in section 5 of this Act. 
• • • • • 
Pena!ty for 13. Whoever shall keep in his possession any such press as 
~:~mgwith_ aforesaid, without making such a declaration as is required. by 
out 1ara~ng section 4 of this Act, shall, on conviction before a Magistrate, be 
:~Ui~onbY punished by fine not exceeding two thousand rupees, or by simple 
section 4. imprisonment .for a term not exceeding six months, or by both. 
• • • • • 
Punishmc~ U. Any person who shall, in making any declaration under the 
~~e m::~! authority of this Act, make a statement which is false, and which 
ment. he either knows or believes to be false or does not believe to be 
true, shall, on conviction before a Magistrate, be punished by fine 
not exceeding two thousand rupees, and imprisonment for a term 
not exceeding six months. . 
• • • • • 
PART V 
REGISTRATION OF BOOKS 
Regi,tration 18. There shall be kept at such office, and by such officer as the 
~ m~State Government shall appoint in this behalf a book to be called 
book!. a Catalogue of Books printed in India, wherein shall be registered 
a memorandum of every book whi~h shall have been delivered pur-
suant to clause (a) of the first paragraph of section 9 of this Act. 
Such memoranclum shall (so, far as may be practicable) contain 
the following particulars (that is t~ say):-
(1) the title of the book and the contents of the title-page, 
with a translation into English of such title and contents, 
when the same are not 1n the English language; 
(2) the language in which the book is written; 

IS 
(3) the name of the author, translator or editor of the book or 
any part thereof; 
(4) the subject; 
(5) the place of printing--and the place of publication; 
(6) the name or firm of the printer and the name or firm of the 
publisher; 
(7) the date of issue from the press or of the publication; 
(8) the number of sheets, leaves or pages; 
(9) the size; 
(10) the first, second or other number of the edition; 
(11) the number of copies of which the edition consists; 
(12) whether the book is printed or lithographed; 
(13) the price at which the book is sold to the public; and 
(14) the name and residence of the proprietor of the copyright 
or of any portion of such copyright. 
Such memorandum shall be made and registered in the case of 
each book as soon as practicable after the delivery of the copy 
thereof pursuant to clause (a) of the first paragraph of section 9. 
PART VI 
MISCELLANEOUS 
20. The State Government shall have power to make such rules Power to 
as may be necessary or desirable for carrying out the objects of make rules. 
this Act, and from time to time to repeal, alter and add to such 
rules. 
All such rules, and all repeals and alterations thereof, and addi- Publication. 
tions thereto, shall be published in the Official Gazette. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Press and Registration of Books Act, 
1867. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (3) of article I 17 
of the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha 
the consideration of the Bill. 
GIPD-LAD-S3S LS-29-1-S5-17S0 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary, 
Dr. B. V. Keskar, 
Minister of In/ormation 
and Broadcasting. 