AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA
‘

' 90 APR 2000

Bill No. 36 of 2000

THE POPULATION CONTROL BILL, 2000

By
‘SurrY.S. VIVEKANANDA ReDpy, M.P.
A
. BILL

to provide for population control measures and for promoting small family norm and for
matters connected therewith,

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Population Control Act, 2000.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, "appropriate Government" means
the Central Government in relation to Union territories and the State Government in relation
toa State.

Short title,
extent and

Definition.


2

Facilities for 3. A married couple who have no child shall be provided with the following facili-
those who are tieg.
childless,
(@ free two room house;
(® Out of tun promotion to those who are in Government/State/Public Under-
taking service or any other organisation connected with the Government; 5
(०) one time cash reward of rupees twenty five thousand to those who are not
in Government service;
(०) free medical treatment, food, pension, etc. in their old age.
Facilities to 4. A married couple who have only one child shall be provided with the following
those having facilities: — 10
‘one child,
(@) two bed room house at concessional rates;
(6) free education including technical education, to the child, free of cost;
(०) out of tum promotion in one grade to those who are in Government service
and one time cash reward of rupees twenty five thousand to those who are not in
Government service; and 15°
(@ employment to the child after completion of his education,
Facilities for 5. A married couple who have two children shall be provided with the following
those persons facilities: —
having two
children. (2) free education to both children;
(0) job to one child;
(0) two bed room house at concessional rates; and
(@ two advance increment its in any grade to those who are in Government service
and one time cash reward of rupees twenty five thousand to those who are not in Govern.
ment service,
‘Compulsory 6. The appropriate Government shall introduce a compulsory subject relating to
oer Poulation control in all educational institutions for all children who have attained the age
Population _ Of fifteen years irrespective of course they are pursuing,
control in
schools.
Minimum age 7. No marriage shall be solemnised between a male who is less than twenty eight
(ermarage. years of age and a female who is less than twenty five years of age.
Constitution of 8. (1) There shall be constituted a fund to be called the National Population Control
National Fund by the Central Government.
Population |
‘Control Fund. (2) The Central Government and every State Government shall contribute to the
fund in such ratio as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
Utilisation of 9. The fund constituted under section 8 shall be utilised for the following purposes:—
aia © giving of national population control award to the State Government ot’. 35
Union territory which has recorded the least Population growth during the year; -
(i) giving wide publicity through print and electronic media regarding need:
for population control; and
(iii) providing funds to popularise the family planning programmes, है
रे
Provisions 10. (1) Any person who is serving in connection with the affairs of the Union’
rae ta Government or in any undertaking or organisation under the control of the Government.
fn

Government 4nd who has only one child or who has not procreated any child or who is unmarried of
employees etc, the date of coming into force of this Act, shall give an undertaking that he shall not procre:?
ate more than two children. ¢



(2) Any person violating the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be subject to such
action may be determined by the Central Government.

11. Any person who is running his own company, firm, society or corporation, if
violates the provisions of the Act shall not be allowed to avail himself of any loan or
facility of any kind from any Government company or financial institution.

12. Any person, except those mentioned in sections 10 and 11, violating the provisions
of this Act shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less
than five years and with fine which shall not be less than rupees fifty thousand.

13. The provisions of this Act shall apply notwithstanding anything contained to the
contrary in any other law for the time being in force.

14. The Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.

Disincentives
for violation of
the provision of
the Act.

Punishment for
violation of the
provisions of
the Act.

Act to have
overriding
effect,

Power to make
rules.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

For the last 50 years India has doubled its population and by the tum of the century
India shall have three out of the ten most Populous cities in the world, and half the Population
of these cities would be living in slums under squalid conditions. Without Massive public
contributions for air pollution control and Perspective planning, living conditions in all
urban areas will Progressively deteriorate.

The break down of the civic amenities due to over crowding, law and order situation,
unemployment and widening of the gap between the haves and haves not has
Progressively created an explosive situation, The need for housing is far beyond the available
finances and educational facilities are hopelessly inadequate to meet the existing demands.
There is no balance between Population growth and the infrastructure and available
opportunities,

The provisions of the Bill are, therefore, the most effective method to check the
Population growth. The steps taken so far have not yielded good results,

The country has achieved the Production targets but due to over Population it is
becoming insufficient and the progress of the country is hampered.

Therefore, the time has come when strong measures have become essential and if
such measures are not taken at the earliest the future generations may not forgive us for this
lapse.

Therefore, the Bill seeks to provide incentives to those who adopt family planning
methods and disincentives to those who do not adopt small family norm.

Hence this Bill.

New Deui; YS. VIVEKANANDA REDDY
February 8, 2000


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM.

Clause 3 to 5 provides that certain benefits are to be given to those who have no child
‘or who have one child or who have two children. Clause 6 provides for introduction of
compulsory subject relating to population control in all educational institutions. Clause 8
provides for establishing National Population Control Fund to which the Central Government
shall also contribute. The Central Government shall have to incur some expenditure for
implementing the provisions of this Bill in respect of Union territories. The State Governments
will incur expenditure in respect of their State out of their respective consolidated funds.

‘The Bill, therefore, will involve an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand
crore out of the Consolidated Fund of India.

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED L

ISLATION

Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the provisions of the Bill. As the rules to be made relate to matters of detail only, the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. \


' LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide population control measures for promoting small family norm and for matters
connected therewith.

(Shri Y.S. Vivekananda Reddy, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—3577LS—25-2-2000.