THE PENSION FUND REGULATORY AND DEVELOPMENT
AUTHORITY BILL, 2005
_______
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
________
CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
PENSION FUND REGULATORY AND DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
3. Establishment and incorporation of Authority.
4. Composition of Authority.
5. Term of office and conditions of service of Chairperson and members of the Authority.
6. Removal of members from office.
7. Salary and allowances of Chairperson and members.
8. Bar on future employment of members.
9. Administrative powers of Chairperson.
10. Meetings of Authority.
11. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Authority.
12. Officers and employees of Authority.
CHAPTER III
E
XTENT AND APPLICATION
13. Extent and Application.
CHAPTER IV
DUTIES, POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF AUTHORITY
14. Duties, powers and functions of Authority.
15. Power to issue directions.
16. Powers of investigation.
17. Search and seizure.
18. Power of Authority to ensure compliance.
19. Management by Administrator.
CHAPTER V
N
EW PENSION SYSTEM
20. New Pension System.
21. Central recordkeeping agency.
22. Point of presence.
23. Pension funds.
A
S INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 36 of 2005

CHAPTER VI
REGISTRATION OF INTERMEDIARIES
24. Registration of central recordkeeping agency, pension fund, point of presence, etc.
CHAPTER VII
PENALTIES AND ADJUDICATION
25. Penalty for failure by an intermediary or any other person to comply
with provisions of the Act, rules, regulations and directions.
26. Crediting sums realized by way of penalties to Subscriber Education and Protection
Fund.
27. Power to adjudicate.
28. Attachment of assets and supersession of management of intermediary.
29. Offences.
30. Power to grant immunity.
31. Exemption from tax on wealth, income, profits and gains.
32. Cognizance of offences by court.
33. Appeal to  Securities Appellate Tribunal.
34. Civil court not to have jurisdiction.
35. Appeal to Supreme Court.
CHAPTER VIII
F
INANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
36. Grants by Central Government.
37. Constitution of Pension Regulatory and Development Fund.
38. Constitution of Subscriber Education and Protection Fund.
39. Accounts and Audit.
CHAPTER IX
M
ISCELLANEOUS
40. Power of Central Government to issue directions.
41. Power of Central Government to supersede the Authority.
42. Furnishing of returns, etc., to Central Government.
43. Members, officers and employees of the Authority to be public servants.
44. Protection of action taken in good faith.
45. Offences by companies.
46. Power to make rules.
47. Power to make regulations.
48. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.
49. Power to remove difficulties.
50. Delegation of powers.
51. Application of other laws not barred.
52. Savings.
53. Repeal and saving.
(ii)

Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE PENSION FUND REGULATORY AND DEVELOPMENT
AUTHORITY BILL, 2005
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of an Authority to promote old age income security by
establishing, developing and regulating pension funds, to protect the interests of
subscribers to schemes of pension funds and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority
Act, 2005.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 29th day of December, 2004.
Bill No. 36 of 2005

2
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Authority” means the Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority
established under sub-section (1) of section 3;
(b) “central recordkeeping agency” means an agency registered under  section
24 to perform the functions of recordkeeping, accounting, administration and customer
service for subscribers to schemes;
(c) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Authority;
(d) “individual pension account” means an account of a subscriber, executed by
a contract setting out the terms and conditions under the New Pension System;
(e) “intermediary” includes pension fund, central recordkeeping agency, pension
fund adviser, retirement adviser, point of presence and such other person or entity
connected with collection, management, recordkeeping and distribution of accumula-
tions;
(f) “member” means a member of the Authority and includes its Chairperson;
(g) “New Pension System” means the contributory pension system referred to in
section 20 whereby contributions from a subscriber are collected in an individual
pension account using points of presence and a central recordkeeping agency and
accumulated by pension funds for pay offs as specified by regulations;
(h) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;
(i) “pension fund” means an entity registered with the Authority under sub-section
(3) of section 24 as a pension fund for receiving contributions, accumulating them and
making payments to the subscriber in the manner specified by regulations;
(j) “Pension Regulatory and Development Fund” means the fund constituted
under sub-section (1) of section 37;
(k) “point of presence” means an entity registered with the Authority under sub-
section (3) of section 24 as a point of presence and capable of electronic connectivity
with the central recordkeeping agency for the purposes of receiving and transmitting
funds and instructions and pay out of funds;
(l) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(m) “regulated assets” means the assets and properties, both tangible and
intangible, owned, leased or developed by and other rights belonging to, the central
recordkeeping agency;
(n) “regulations” means  regulations  made by the Authority under this Act;
(o) “scheme” means a scheme of pension fund approved by the Authority under
this Act;
(p) “Securities Appellate Tribunal” means a Securities Appellate Tribunal
established under sub-section (1) of section 15K of the Securities and Exchange Board
of India Act, 1992;
(q) “subscriber” includes a person who subscribes to a scheme of a pension
fund;
(r) “Subscriber Education and Protection Fund” means the fund constituted under
sub-section (1) of section 38;
(2) Words and expressions used and not defined in this Act, but defined in—
(i) the Insurance Act, 1938;
(ii) the Companies Act, 1956;
Definitions.
15 of 1992.
4 of 1938.
1 of 1956.

3
(iii) the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956; and
(iv) the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992,
shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them under those Acts.
CHAPTER II
PENSION FUND REGULATORY AND DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
3. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification,
appoint, there shall be established, for the purposes of this Act, an Authority to be
called the Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority.
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having
perpetual succession and a common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this
Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to
contract and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.
(3) The head office of the Authority shall be in the National Capital Region referred
to in clause (f) of section 2 of the National Capital Region Planning Board Act, 1985.
(4) The Authority may establish offices at other places in India.
4. The Authority shall consist of a Chairperson and not more than five members, of
whom at least three shall be whole-time members, to be appointed by the Central Government
from amongst persons of ability, integrity and standing and having experience and knowledge
in economics, finance, law or administrative matters with at least one person from each
discipline.
5. (1) The Chairperson and every whole-time member shall hold office for a term of
five years from the date on which he enters upon his office and shall be eligible for
reappointment:
Provided that no person shall hold office as the Chairperson after he has attained the
age of sixty-five years:
Provided further that no person shall hold office as a whole-time member after he has
attained the age of sixty-two years.
(2) A part-time member shall hold office as such for a term not exceeding five years
from the date on which he enters upon his office.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), a member
may—
(a) relinquish his office, by giving in writing to the Central Government, a notice
of not less than thirty days; or
(b) be removed from his office in accordance with the provisions of section 6.
6. (1) The Central Government may remove from office the Chairperson or any other
member who—
(a) is, or at any time has been adjudged as insolvent; or
(b) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a member; or
(c) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central
Government, involves moral turpitude; or
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially
his functions as a member; or
(e) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, so abused his position as to
render his continuance in office detrimental to the public interest.
42 of 1956.
15 of 1992.
Establishment
and
incorporation
of Authority.
Composition of
Authority.
Term of office
and conditions
of service of
Chairperson
and members
of Authority.
Removal of
members from
office.
2  of 1985.

4
(2) No such Chairperson or other member shall be removed under clause (d) or clause
(e) of sub-section (1) unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the
matter.
7. (1) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of
service of, the members other than part-time members shall be such as may be
prescribed.
(2) The part-time members shall receive such allowances as may be prescribed.
(3) The salary, allowances and other conditions of service of a member shall not
be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.
8. The Chairperson and the whole-time members shall not, for a period of two years
from the date on which they cease to hold office as such, except with the previous approval
of the Central Government, accept—
(a) any employment either under the Central Government or under any State
Government; or
(b) any appointment in any regulated entity in the pension sector.
9. The Chairperson shall have the powers of general superintendence and direction in
respect of all administrative matters of the Authority.
10. (1) The Authority shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules
of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including quorum at
such meetings) as may be provided by regulations.
(2) The Chairperson or, if for any reason, he is unable to attend a meeting of the
Authority, any other member chosen by the members present from amongst themselves at
the meeting, shall preside at the meeting.
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Authority shall be decided
by a majority of votes by the members present and voting, and in the event of an equality of
votes, the Chairperson or in his absence, the person presiding shall have a second or casting
vote.
(4) If any member, who is a director of a company and who as such director, has any
direct or indirect pecuniary interest in any matter coming up for consideration at a meeting
of the Authority, he shall, as soon as possible after relevant circumstances have come to his
knowledge, disclose the nature of his interest at such meeting and such disclosure shall be
recorded in the proceedings of the Authority, and the member shall not take part in any
deliberation or decision of the Authority with respect to that matter.
11. No act or proceeding of the Authority shall be invalid merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Authority; or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member of the Authority;
or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Authority not affecting the merits of
the case.
12. (1) The Authority may appoint such officers and other employees as it considers
necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under this Act.
(2) The terms and other conditions of service of officers and other employees of
the Authority appointed under sub-section (1) shall be such as may be determined by
regulations.
Salary and
allowances of
Chairperson
and members.
Bar on future
employment of
members.
Administrative
powers of
Chairperson.
Meetings of
Authority.
Vacancies etc.,
not to
invalidate
proceedings of
Authority.
Officers and
employees of
Authority.

5
CHAPTER III
EXTENT AND APPLICATION
13. (1) This Act shall apply to—
(a) the New Pension System;
(b) any other pension scheme not regulated by any other enactment.
(2) Every pension scheme referred to in clause ( b) shall conform to the regulations
made by the Authority within such time as may be specified in the regulations.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the provisions of this Act
shall not apply to–
(a) the schemes or funds under–
(i) the  Coal Mines Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act,
1948;
(ii) the Employees’ Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act,
1952;
(iii) the Seamen’s Provident Fund Act, 1966;
(iv) the Assam Tea Plantations Provident Fund and Pension Fund Scheme
Act, 1955; and
(v) the Jammu and Kashmir Employees’ Provident Funds Act, 1961;
(b) contracts referred to in sub-section ( 11) of section 2 of the Insurance Act,
1938;
(c) any other pension scheme, which the Central Government may, by notification,
exempt from the application of this Act;
(d) persons appointed before the 1st day of January, 2004 to public services in
connection with the affairs of the Union,  or to All-India Services constituted under
section 2A of the All-India Services Act, 1951;
(e) persons appointed to public services in connection with the affairs of any
State, or such Union territories as may be specified by notification by the Central
Government.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3), any State Government  or
administrator of a Union territory may, by notification, extend the New Pension System to
its employees.
(5) Any person governed under any of the schemes or funds referred to in sub-section
(3) may, at his option, join the New Pension System.
CHAPTER IV
D
UTIES, POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF AUTHORITY
14. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and any other law for the time being in
force, the Authority shall have the duty, to regulate, promote and ensure orderly growth of
the New Pension System and pension schemes to which this Act applies and to protect the
interests of subscribers of such System and schemes.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in sub-section (1),
the powers and functions of the Authority shall include–
(a) regulating the New Pension System and the pension schemes to which this
Act applies;
(b) approving the schemes, the terms and conditions thereof and laying down
norms for the management of the corpus of the pension funds, including investment
Extent and
Application.
Duties, powers
and functions
of Authority.
46 of 1948.
19 of 1952.
4 of 1966.
Assam Act X
of 1955.
Jammu and
Kashmir Act
XV of 1961.
4 of 1938.
61 of 1951.

6
guidelines under such schemes;
(c) registering and regulating intermediaries;
(d) issuing to an intermediary, on application, a certificate of registration and
renewing, modifying, withdrawing, suspending or cancelling such registration;
(e) protecting the interests of subscribers;
(f) establishing mechanism for redrassal of grievances of subscribers to be
determined by regulations;
(g) promoting professional organisations connected with the pension system;
(h) adjudication of disputes between intermediaries and between intermediaries
and subscribers;
(i) collecting data and requiring the intermediaries to collect such data and
undertaking and commissioning studies, research and projects;
(j) undertaking steps for educating subscribers and the general public on issues
relating to pension, retirement savings and related issues and training of intermediaries;
(k) standardising  dissemination of information about performance of pension
funds and performance benchmarks;
(l) regulating the regulated assets;
(m) levying fees or other charges for carrying out the purposes of this Act;
(n) specifying by regulations the form and manner in which books of account
shall be maintained and statement of accounts shall be rendered by intermediaries;
(o) calling for information from, undertaking inspection of, conducting inquiries
and investigations including audit of, intermediaries and other entities or organisations
connected with pension funds;
(p) exercising such other powers and functions as may be prescribed.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
while exercising the powers under clause (o) of sub-section (2), the Authority shall have the
same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 while
trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely:–
(i) the discovery and production of books of account and other documents, at
such place and at such time as may be specified by the Authority;
(ii) summoning and enforcing the attendance of persons and examining them on
oath;
(iii) inspection of any book, register and other document of any person or entity
referred to in section 24, at any place;
(iv) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;
(v) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(4) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) and
section 15, the Authority may, by order, for reasons to be recorded in writing, in the interests
of subscribers, take any of the following measures, pending investigation or inquiry, namely:–
(i) restrain persons from participating in any scheme;
(ii) restrain any office bearer of an intermediary from acting as such;
(iii) impound and retain the proceeds under the scheme in respect of any activity
which is under investigation;
5 of 1908.

7
(iv) attach, after passing an order, on an application made for approval, by the
Judicial Magistrate of the first class having jurisdiction, for a period not exceeding
one month, one or more bank account or accounts of any intermediary  or any person
associated with the scheme in any manner involved in violation of any of the provisions
of this Act or the rules or the regulations made thereunder:
Provided that only the bank account or accounts or any transaction entered therein,
relating to the proceeds actually involved in the violation of any of the provisions of
this Act or the rules or the regulations made thereunder shall be allowed to be attached;
(v) direct any intermediary or any person associated with the scheme in any
manner not to dispose of or alienate an asset forming part of any activity which is
under investigation:
Provided that the Authority shall, either before or after, passing such orders,
under this section, give to such intermediaries or persons concerned an opportunity of
being heard.
15. Save as otherwise provided in section 14, if after making, or causing to be made,
an inquiry, the Authority is satisfied that it is necessary–
(i) in the interests of subscribers or orderly development of New Pension System
or a pension scheme to which this Act applies; or
(ii) to prevent the affairs of any intermediary or other persons or entities referred
to in section 24 being conducted in a manner detrimental to the interests of subscribers;
or
(iii) to secure the proper management of any such intermediary or person or
entity,
it may issue such directions to such intermediaries or entities or to any person or class of
persons referred to in section 24, or associated with the pension fund, as it may deem fit:
Provided that the Authority shall, either before or after passing such orders, give an
opportunity of hearing to such intermediaries, entities or persons concerned.
16. (1) Where the Authority has a reasonable ground to believe that–
(a) the activities of  the pension fund are being conducted in a manner detrimental
to the interest of the subscriber; or
(b) any intermediary or any person associated with the schemes of the pension
fund has violated any of the provisions of this Act or the rules or the regulations made
or directions issued by the Authority thereunder,
it may, at any time, by order in writing, direct any person (hereafter in this section referred to
as the Investigating Authority) specified in the order to investigate the affairs of such
intermediary or persons associated with the pension fund and to report thereon to the Authority.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sections 235 to 241 of the Companies Act,
1956, it shall be the duty of every manager, managing director, officer and other employee
of the company, in case of a company and every intermediary referred to in section 24 or
every person associated with the pension fund to preserve and to produce to the Investigating
Authority or any person authorised by him in this behalf, all the books, registers, other
documents and record of, or relating to, the company or, as the case may be, of or relating to,
the intermediary or such person, which are in their custody or power.
(3) The Investigating Authority may require any intermediary or any person associated
with the pension fund in any manner to furnish such information to, or produce such books,
or other documents, or record before him or any person authorised by him in this behalf as
he may consider necessary if the furnishing of such information or the production of such
books, or register, or other documents, or record is relevant or necessary for the purposes of
its investigation.
Power to issue
directions.
Power of
investigation.
1 of 1956.

8
(4) The Investigating Authority may keep in its custody any books, registers, other
documents and record produced under sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) for six months and
thereafter shall return the same to any intermediary or any person associated with the pension
fund by whom or on whose behalf the books, registers, other documents and record are
produced:
Provided that the Investigating Authority may call for any book, register, other
documents and record if they are needed again:
Provided further that if the person on whose behalf the books, registers, other documents
and record are produced requires certified copies of the books, registers, other documents or
record produced before the Investigating Authority, it shall give certified copies of such
books, registers, other documents or, as the case may be, record to such person or on whose
behalf the books, registers, other documents and record were produced.
(5) Any person, directed to make an investigation under sub-section (1), may examine
on oath any intermediary or any person associated with the pension fund in any manner, in
relation to the affairs of his business and may administer an oath accordingly and for that
purpose may require any of those persons to appear before him personally.
(6) Notes of any examination under sub-section (5) shall be taken down in writing and
shall be read over to, or by, and signed by, the person examined, and may thereafter be used
in evidence against him.
(7) If any person fails without reasonable cause or refuses–
(a) to produce to an Investigating Authority or any person authorised by him in
this behalf any book, register, other document or record which it is his duty under sub-
section (2) or sub-section (3) to furnish; or
(b) to furnish any information which it is his duty under sub-section (3) to furnish;
or
(c) to appear before the Investigating Authority personally when required to do
so under sub-section ( 5) or to answer any question which is put to him by the
Investigating Authority in pursuance of that sub-section; or
(d) to sign the notes of any examination referred to in sub-section (6),
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with
fine, which may extend to twenty-five  crore rupees, or with both, and also with a further fine
which may extend to ten lakh rupees for every day after the first day during which the failure
or refusal continues.
17. (1) Where the Authority, in consequence of information in its possession, has
reason to believe that–
(a) any person who has been required under sub-section ( 3) of section 16 to
produce, or cause to be produced, any books, accounts or other documents in his
custody or power has omitted or failed to produce, or cause to be produced, such
books, accounts or other documents, or
(b) any person to whom a requisition to produce any books, accounts or other
documents as aforesaid has been or might be issued will not, or would not, produce or
cause to be produced, any books, accounts or other documents which will be useful
for, or relevant to, an investigation under sub-section (1) of section 16, or
(c) a contravention of any provision of this Act has been committed or is likely
to be committed by an intermediary, or
(d) any claim which is due to be settled by the intermediary, has been or is likely
to be rejected or settled at a figure higher than a reasonable amount, or
Search and
seizure.

9
(e) any claim which is due to be settled by an intermediary, has been or is likely
to be rejected or settled at a figure lower than a reasonable amount, or
(f) any illegal fees and charges have been transacted or are likely to be transacted
by an intermediary, or
(g) any books, accounts, papers, receipts, vouchers, survey reports or other
documents, belonging to an intermediary are likely to be tampered with, falsified or
manufactured,
it may authorise any officer of the Authority, not below the rank equivalent to that of a
Gazetted Officer of the Government (hereafter referred to as the authorised officer), to–
(i) enter and search any building or place where he has reason to suspect that
such books, accounts or other documents, or any books or papers relating to any claim,
rebate or commission or any receipts, vouchers, reports or other documents are kept;
(ii) break open the lock of any box, locker, safe, almirah or other receptacle for
exercising the powers conferred by clause (i) where the keys thereof are not available;
(iii) seize all or any such books, accounts or other documents, found as a result
of such search;
(iv) place marks of identification on such books, accounts or other documents
or make or cause to be made extracts or copies therefrom.
(2) The authorised officer may requisition the services of any police officer or of any
officer of the Central Government, or of both, to assist him for all or any of the purposes
specified in sub-section (1) and it shall be the duty of every such police officer or officer to
comply with such requisition.
(3) The authorised officer may, where it is not practicable to seize any such book,
account or other document, specified in sub-section (1), serve an order on the person who is
in immediate possession or control thereof that he shall not remove, part with or otherwise
deal with it except with the previous permission of such officer and such officer may take
such steps as may be necessary for ensuring compliance with this sub-section.
(4) The authorised officer may, during the course of the search or seizure, examine on
oath any person who is found to be in possession or control of any books, accounts or other
documents, and any statement made by such person during such examination may thereafter
be used in evidence in any proceeding under this Act.
(5) The books, accounts, papers, receipts, vouchers, reports, or other documents seized
under sub-section (1) shall not be retained by the authorised officer for a period exceeding
one hundred and eighty days from the date of the seizure unless the reasons for retaining the
same are recorded by him in writing and the approval of the Authority for such retention is
obtained:
Provided that the Authority shall not authorise the retention of the books, accounts,
papers, receipts, vouchers, reports, or other documents for a period exceeding thirty days
after all the proceedings under this Act, for which the books, accounts, papers, receipts,
vouchers, reports, or other documents are relevant, are completed.
(6) The person from whose custody the books, accounts, papers, receipts, vouchers,
reports, or other documents are seized under sub-section ( 1) may make copies thereof, or
take extracts therefrom, in the presence of the authorised officer or any other person
empowered by him in this behalf at such place and time as the authorised officer may appoint
in this behalf.
(7) If a person legally entitled to the books, accounts, papers, receipts, vouchers, reports
or other documents seized under sub-section (1) objects for any reason to the approval given
by the Authority under sub-section (5), he may make an application to the Central Government

10
stating therein the reason for such objection and requesting for the return of the books,
accounts, papers, receipts, vouchers, report or other documents.
(8) On receipt of the application under sub-section (7), the Central Government may,
after giving the applicant an opportunity of being heard, pass such order as it thinks fit.
(9) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 relating to searches and
seizures shall apply, so far as may be, to every search and seizure made under sub-section
(1).
(10) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules in relation to any search
or seizure under this section and in particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for the procedure to be followed by the authorised
officer,–
(i) for obtaining ingress into such building or place to be searched where free
ingress thereto is not available;
(ii) for ensuring safe custody of any books, accounts, papers, receipts, vouchers,
reports, or other documents seized under this section.
18. If the Authority finds, after causing an inquiry to be made, that any person has
violated, or is likely to violate, any provisions of this Act, or any rule or regulation made
thereunder, the Authority may pass an order requiring such person to cease and desist from
committing or causing such violation.
19. (1) If at any time the Authority has reason to believe that the Central recordkeeping
agency or pension fund is acting in a manner likely to be prejudicial to the interests of
subscribers, it may, after giving the Central recordkeeping agency or pension fund, as the
case may be, an opportunity of being heard, make a report thereon to the Central Government.
(2) If the Central Government, after considering the report made under sub-section (1)
is of the opinion, that it is necessary or proper to do so, it may appoint an Administrator to
manage the affairs of the central recordkeeping agency or pension fund, as the case may be,
under the direction and control of the Authority, in such manner as may be specified by
notification.
CHAPTER V
N
EW PENSION SYSTEM
20. The contributory pension system notified by the Government of India in the Ministry
of Finance vide notification number F. No. 5/7/2003-ECB & PR, dated the 22nd December,
2003, as amended from time to time, and having the following basic features, shall form the
New Pension System under this Act, namely:–
(a) every subscriber shall have an individual pension account;
(b) the functions of recordkeeping, accounting and switching of options by the
subscriber shall be effected by the central recordkeeping agency;
(c) there shall be a choice of multiple pension funds  and multiple schemes;
(d) there shall be portability of individual pension accounts in case of change of
employment;
(e) collection and transmission of contributions and instructions shall be through
points of presence to the central recordkeeping agency;
(f) there shall not be any implicit or explicit assurance of benefits except market
based guarantee mechanism to be purchased by the subscriber;
(g) a subscriber shall not exit from the New Pension System except as specified
by the Central Government by notification;
2 of 1974.
Power of
Authority to
ensure
compliance.
Management by
Administrator.
New Pension
System.

11
(h) at exit, the subscriber shall purchase an annuity from a life insurance company as
specified under the New Pension System.
21. (1) The Authority shall, by granting a certificate of registration under sub-section
(3) of section 24, appoint a central recordkeeping agency:
Provided that the Authority may, in public interest, appoint more than one central
recordkeeping agency.
(2) The central recordkeeping agency shall be responsible for receiving funds and
instructions from subscribers through the points of presence, transmitting such instructions
and transferring such funds to pension funds, effecting switching instructions received from
subscribers and discharging such other duties and functions, as may be assigned to it under
the certificate of registration or as may be determined by regulations.
(3) All the assets and properties owned, leased or developed by the central recordkeeping
agency, shall constitute regulated assets and upon expiry of certificate of registration or
earlier revocation thereof, the Authority shall be entitled to appropriate and take over the
regulated assets, either by itself or through an administrator or a person nominated by it in
this behalf:
Provided that the central recordkeeping agency shall be entitled to be compensated
the fair value, to be ascertained by the Authority, of such regulated assets as determined by
regulations:
Provided further that where the earlier revocation of the certificate of registration is
based on violation of the conditions in the certificate of registration or the provisions of this
Act or regulations, unless otherwise determined by the Authority, the central recordkeeping
agency shall not be entitled to claim any compensation in respect of such regulated assets.
22. (1) The Authority may, by granting a certificate of registration under sub-section
(3) of section 24, permit one or more persons to act as a point of presence  for the purpose of
receiving contributions and instructions, transmitting them to the central recordkeeping agency
and paying out benefits to subscribers in accordance with the regulations made by the Authority
from time to time in this regard.
(2) A point of presence shall function in accordance with the terms of its certificate of
registration and the regulations made under this Act.
23. (1) The Authority may, by granting a certificate of registration under sub-section
(3) of section 24, permit one or more persons to act as a pension fund for the purpose of
receiving contributions, accumulating them and making payments to the subscriber in such
manner as may be specified by regulations.
(2) The number of pension funds shall be determined by regulations and the Authority
may, in public interest, vary the number of pension funds.
(3) The pension fund shall function in accordance with the terms of its certificate of
registration and the regulations made under this Act.
(4) The pension fund shall manage the schemes in accordance with the regulations.
CHAPTER VI
R
EGISTRATION OF INTERMEDIARIES
24. (1) No intermediary, including a pension fund or a point of presence to the extent
regulated under this Act, shall commence any activity relating to a pension fund except
under and in accordance with the conditions of a certificate of registration granted by the
Authority in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the regulations:
Provided that any intermediary, including any point of presence, who may be associated
with a pension scheme immediately before the establishment of the Authority for which no
Central
recordkeeping
agency.
Point of
presence.
Pension funds.
Registration of
central
recordkeeping
agency,
pension fund,
point of
presence, etc.

12
registration certificate was necessary prior to such establishment, may continue to do so for
a period of three months from such establishment or, if he has made an application for such
registration within the said period of three months till the disposal of such application.
(2) Every application for grant of a certificate of registration under this Act shall be in
such form and manner and shall be accompanied by such fees as may be determined by
regulations.
(3) The Authority may, after considering the application and subject to such terms and
conditions as it may specify, grant a certificate of registration as a central recordkeeping
agency, point of presence, pension fund or such other intermediary, as the case may be.
(4) The Authority may, by order, suspend or cancel a certificate of registration granted
under sub-section (3) in such manner as may be determined by regulations:
Provided that no order under this sub-section shall be made unless the person concerned
has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
CHAPTER VII
P
ENALTIES AND ADJUDICATION
25. (1) Any person, who is required under this Act or any rules or regulations made
thereunder,–
(a) to obtain a certificate of registration from the Authority for carrying on any
activity under this Act, carries on such activities without obtaining such certificate of
registration, he shall be liable to a penalty of one lakh rupees for each day during
which the failure continues or one crore rupees, whichever is less;
(b) to comply with the terms and conditions of a certificate of registration fails
to do so,  he shall be liable to a penalty of one lakh rupees for each day during which
the failure continues or one crore rupees, whichever is less;
(c) to furnish any information, document, books, returns or report to the Authority,
fails to furnish the same within the time specified by the Authority, he shall be liable to
a penalty which may extend to one crore rupees or five times the amount of profits
made or losses avoided, whichever is higher;
(d) to maintain books of account or records,  fails to maintain the same, he shall
be liable to a penalty of one lakh rupees for each day during which the failure continues
or five times the amount of profits made or losses avoided, whichever is higher.
(2) If any person, who is required under this Act or any rules or regulations made
thereunder, to enter into an agreement with his client, fails to enter into such agreement, he
shall be liable to a penalty of one lakh rupees for each day during which the failure continues
or five times the amount of profits made or losses avoided, whichever is higher.
(3) If any intermediary registered with the Authority, after having been called upon by
the Authority, in writing, to redress the grievances of subscribers, fails to redress such
grievances within the time stipulated by the Authority, he shall be liable to a penalty of not
more than one crore rupees or five times the amount of profits made or losses avoided,
whichever is higher.
(4) If any person, who is registered under this Act as an intermediary, fails to segregate
moneys of the client or clients or uses the moneys of a client or clients for self or for any
other client, he shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding one crore rupees or five times the
amount of profits made or losses avoided, whichever is higher.
(5) Whoever fails to comply with any provision of this Act, the rules or the regulations
made or the directions issued by the Authority under the provisions of this Act for which no
separate penalty has been provided, he shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to one
crore rupees or five times the amount of profits made or losses avoided, whichever is higher.
Penalty for
failure by an
intermediary or
any other
person to
comply with
provisions of
the Act, rules,
regulations and
directions.

13
26. All sums realised by way of penalties under this Act shall be credited to the
Subscriber Education and Protection Fund established under sub-section (1) of section 38.
27. (1) For the purposes of adjudging under section 25, the Authority shall appoint
any of its officers not below the rank specified by regulations to be an adjudicating officer
for holding an inquiry as determined by regulations, after giving the person concerned a
reasonable opportunity of being heard for the purpose of imposing any penalty.
(2) While holding an inquiry, the adjudicating officer shall have the power to summon
and enforce the attendance of any person acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the
case to give evidence or to produce any document which, in the opinion of the adjudicating
officer, may be useful for or relevant to the subject matter of the inquiry and if, on such
inquiry, he is satisfied that the person has failed to comply with the provisions of section 25,
he may recommend such penalty as he thinks fit in accordance with the provisions of that
section, to the member in charge of investigation and surveillance.
(3) The penalty shall be imposed by a member other than the member in charge of
investigation and surveillance:
Provided that while adjudging the quantum of penalty under section 25, the member
shall have due regard to the following factors, namely:–
(a) amount of disproportionate gain or unfair advantage, wherever quantifiable,
made as a result of the default;
(b) amount of loss caused to a subscriber or group of subscribers; and
(c) the repetitive nature of the default.
28. (1) Any person aggrieved may apply to the Authority for an interim measure of
protection in respect of any of the following matters, namely:–
(a) the detention, preservation, interim custody or sale of any asset or property
which is regulated by the provisions of this Act;
(b) securing any pension fund, monies and other assets and properties owned by
or under the control of the pension fund;
(c) interim injunction or appointment of an administrator; and
(d) such other interim measures as may appear to the Authority to be just and
necessary,
and the Authority shall have power to make such orders including an order for attachment of
assets of the pension fund as it deems fit in this regard.
(2) Where, on a complaint received by the Authority or suo motu, the Authority, after
conducting an inquiry, comes to a conclusion that the governing board or board of directors,
by whatever name called, or the persons in control of any intermediary to the extent regulated
under this Act are indulging in any activity which is in contravention of the provisions of this
Act or regulations, it may supersede the governing board or board of directors or management
of the intermediary in accordance with the provisions of the regulations.
29. (1) Without prejudice to any award of penalty by the member under this Act, if any
person contravenes or attempts to contravene or abets the contravention of the provisions of
this Act or of any rules or regulations made thereunder, he shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, or with fine, which may extend to
twenty-five crore rupees or with both.
Crediting sums
realised by way
of penalties to
Subscriber
Education and
Protection
Fund.
Power to
adjudicate.
Attachment of
assets and
supersession of
management of
intermediary.
Offences.

14
(2) If any person fails to pay the penalty imposed by the member or fails to comply
with any of the directions or orders issued by the member, he shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one month but which may extend to ten
years, or with fine, which may extend to twenty-five crore rupees, or with both.
30. (1) The Central Government may, on the recommendation by the Authority, if
satisfied, that any person, who is alleged to have violated any of the provisions of this Act or
the rules or the regulations made thereunder, has made a full and true disclosure in respect of
alleged violation, grant to such person, subject to such conditions as it may think fit to
impose, immunity from prosecution for any offence under this Act, or the rules or the
regulations made thereunder and also from the imposition of any penalty under this Act with
respect to the alleged violation:
Provided that no such immunity shall be granted by the Central Government in cases
where the proceedings for the prosecution for any such offence have been instituted before
the date of receipt of application for grant of such immunity:
Provided further that the recommendation of the Authority under this sub-section shall
not be binding upon the Central Government.
(2) An immunity granted to a person under sub-section ( 1) may, at any time, be
withdrawn by the Central Government, if it is satisfied that such person had, in the course of
the proceedings, not complied with the condition on which the immunity was granted or had
given false evidence, and thereupon such person may be tried for the offence with respect to
which the immunity was granted or for any other offence of which he appears to have been
guilty in connection with the contravention and shall also become liable to the imposition of
any penalty under this Act to which such person would have been liable, had no such immunity
been granted.
31. Notwithstanding anything contained in–
(i) the Wealth Tax Act, 1957;
(ii) the Income-tax Act, 1961, or
(iii) any other enactment for the time being in force relating to tax on wealth,
income, profits or gains,
the Authority shall not be liable to pay wealth-tax, income-tax or any other tax in respect of
its wealth, income, profits or gains derived.
32. (1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act or any
rules or regulations made thereunder, save on a complaint made by the Authority.
(2) No court inferior to that of a Court of Session shall try any offence punishable
under this Act.
33. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order made by the Authority or by an adjudicating
officer under this Act may prefer an appeal before the Securities Appellate Tribunal which
shall have jurisdiction over the matter.
(2) Every appeal under sub-section (1) shall be filed within a period of forty-five days
from the date of receipt of the order appealed against and it shall be in such form and manner
and shall be accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed:
Provided that the Securities Appellate Tribunal may entertain an appeal after the expiry
of the said period, if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal
within that period.
(3) On receipt of an appeal under sub-section ( 1), the Securities Appellate Tribunal
may, after giving the parties to the appeal, an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders
thereon as it thinks fit, confirming, modifying or setting aside the order appealed against.
Power to grant
immunity.
Exemption from
tax on wealth,
income, profits
and gains.
27 of 1957.
43 of 1961
Cognizance of
offences by
Court.
Appeal to
Securities
Appellate
Tribunal.

15
(4) The Securities Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every order made by it to
the Authority, the parties to the appeal and to the adjudicating officers concerned.
(5) The appeal filed before the Securities Appellate Tribunal under sub-section ( 1)
shall be dealt with by it as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made by it to
dispose of the appeal finally within six months from the date on which the appeal is presented
to it.
(6) Without prejudice to the provisions of sections 15T and 15U of the Securities and
Exchange Board of India Act, 1992, the Securities Appellate Tribunal shall deal with an
appeal under this section in accordance with such procedure as may be  prescribed.
34. No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceeding in respect
of any matter which an adjudicating officer appointed under this Act or a Securities Appellate
Tribunal is empowered by or under this Act to determine and no injunction shall be granted
by any court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of
any power conferred by or under this Act.
35. Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the Securities Appellate Tribunal
under this Act may file an appeal to the Supreme Court within sixty days from the date of
communication of the decision or order of the Securities Appellate Tribunal to him on any
question of law arising out of such order:
Provided that the Supreme Court may, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented
by sufficient cause from filing the appeal within the said period, allow it to be filed within a
further period not exceeding sixty days.
CHAPTER VIII
F
INANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
36. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament
by law in this behalf, make to the Authority grants of such sums of money as that
Government may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.
37. (1) There shall be constituted a fund to be called the Pension Regulatory and
Development Fund and there shall be credited thereto–
(a) all Government grants, fees and charges received by the Authority;
(b) all sums received by the Authority from such other source as may be
decided upon by the Central Government.
(2) The Fund shall be applied for meeting–
(a) the salaries, allowances and other remuneration of the Chairperson
and other members and officers and other employees of the Authority;
(b) other expenses of the Authority in connection with the discharge of its
functions and for the purposes of this Act.
38. (1) The Authority shall establish a fund to be called the Subscriber Education
and Protection Fund.
(2) There shall be credited to the Subscriber Education and Protection Fund the
following amounts, namely:–
(a) grants and donations given to the Subscriber Education and Protection
Fund by the Central Government, State Governments, companies or any other
institutions for the purposes of the Subscriber Education and Protection Fund;
(b) the interest or other income received out of the investments made from
the Subscriber Education and Protection Fund;
(c) the sums realised by way of penalties by the Authority under section 26.
15 of 1992.
Civil court not
to have
jurisdiction.
Appeal to
Supreme
Court.
Grants by
Central
Government.
Constitution
of Pension
Regulatory and
Development
Fund.
Constitution of
Subscriber
Education and
Protection
Fund.

16
(3) The Subscriber Education and Protection Fund shall be administered and
utilised by the Authority for protection of the interests of subscribers in accordance
with regulations made for the purpose.
39. (1) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and
prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by the Central
Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The accounts of the Authority shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred
in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Authority to the Comptroller and
Auditor-General.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any other person appointed by
him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the Authority shall have the same rights,
privileges and authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General
generally has in connection with the audit of the Government accounts and, in particular,
shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and
other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of the Authority.
(4) The accounts of the Authority as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General
of India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit-report
thereon, shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government and that Government shall
cause the same to be laid before each House of Parliament.
CHAPTER IX
M
ISCELLANEOUS
40. (1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act, the Authority shall,
in exercise of its powers or the performance of its functions under this Act, be bound by such
directions on questions of policy, other than those relating to technical and administrative
matters, as the Central Government may give, in writing to it, from time to time:
Provided that the Authority shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity to
express its views before any direction is given under this sub-section.
(2) The decision of the Central Government, whether a question is one of policy or
not, shall be final.
41. (1) If at any time the Central Government is of the opinion that–
(a) on account of circumstances beyond the control of the Authority, it is unable
to discharge the functions or perform the duties imposed on it by or under the provisions
of this Act; or
(b) the Authority has persistently defaulted in complying with any direction
issued by the Central Government that the Central Government is entitled to issue
under this Act or in the discharge of the functions or performance of the duties imposed
on it by or under the provisions of this Act and as a result of such default the financial
position of the Authority or the administration of the Authority has deteriorated; or
(c) circumstances exist which render it necessary in the public interest so to do,
the Central Government may, by notification and for reasons to be specified therein, supersede
the Authority for such period, not exceeding six months, as may be specified in the notification:
Provided that before issuing any such notification, the Central Government shall give
a reasonable opportunity to the Authority to make representations against the proposed
supersession and shall consider the representations, if any, of the Authority.
Accounts and
audit.
Power of Central
Government to
issue directions.
Power of Central
Government to
supersede the
Authority.

17
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-section ( 1) superseding the
Authority,–
(a) the Chairperson and other members shall, as from the date of supersession,
vacate their offices as such;
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the provisions of
this Act, be exercised  or discharged by or on behalf of the Authority shall, until the
Authority is reconstituted under sub-section (3), be exercised and discharged by the
Central Government; and
(c) all properties owned or controlled by the Authority shall, until the Authority
is reconstituted under sub-section (3), vest in the Central Government.
(3) On or before the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the notification
issued under sub-section (1), the Central Government shall reconstitute the Authority.
(4) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, cause a copy of the notification
issued under sub-section (1) and a full report of any action taken by it, to be laid before each
House of Parliament.
42. (1) The Authority shall furnish to the Central Government at such time and in such
form and manner as may be prescribed, or as the Central Government may direct to furnish
such returns, statements and other particulars in regard to any proposed or existing programme
for the promotion and development of the pension industry as the Central Government may,
from time to time, require.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), the Authority shall, within
nine months after the close of each financial year, submit to the Central Government a report
giving a true and full account of its activities including the activities for promotion and
development of schemes of pension funds regulated under this Act during the previous
financial year.
(3) Copies of the reports received under sub-section (2) shall be laid, as soon as may
be, after they are received, before each House of Parliament.
43. The Chairperson and other members and officers and other employees of the
Authority shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the
provisions of this Act, to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian
Penal Code.
44. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Central
Government or the Authority or any officer of Central Government or any member, officer
or other employees of the Authority for anything which is in good faith done or intended to
be done under this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder.
45. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every
person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to,
the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be
deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person liable
to any punishment provided in this Act if he proves that the offence was committed without
his knowledge or that he has exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such
offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where any offence under
this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed
with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of any director,
manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or
Furnishing of
returns, etc., to
Central
Government.
Members,
officers and
employees of
the Authority to
be public
servants.
Protection of
action taken in
good faith.
Offences by
companies.
45 of 1860.

18
other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded
against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.–For the purposes of this section–
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association
of individuals; and
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
46. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the
provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:–
(a) the salary and allowances payable to and the other conditions of service of
the Chairperson and whole-time members under sub-section (1) of section 7;
(b) the allowances payable to part-time members under sub-section ( 2) of
section 7;
(c) the additional functions which may be performed by the Authority under
clause (p) of sub-section (2) of section 14;
(d) any other matter in respect of which the Authority may exercise the powers
of a civil court under clause (v) of sub-section (3) of section 14;
(e) the procedure to be followed by the authorised officer under sub-section
(10) of section 17;
(f) the form and manner in which an appeal may be filed before the Securities
Appellate Tribunal and the fee which shall accompany such appeal, under sub-section
(2) of section 33;
(g) the procedure to be followed by the Securities Appellate Tribunal in dealing
with an appeal, under sub-section (6) of section 33;
(h) the form in which annual statement of accounts shall be maintained by the
Authority under sub-section (1) of section 39;
(i) the time within which and the form and manner in which returns and reports
are to be made by the Authority to the Central Government under sub-section (1) of
section 42;
(j) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of which
provision is to be made, by rules.
47. (1) The Authority may, by notification, make regulations consistent with this Act
and the rules made thereunder for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:–
(a) the time and places of meetings of the Authority and the procedure to be
followed at such meetings (including the quorum at such meetings) under sub-section
(1) of section 10;
(b) the terms and other conditions of service of the officers and other employees
of the Authority under sub-section (2) of section 12;
(c) the regulations to be made by the Authority in respect of pension schemes
referred to in clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of section 13 and the time within which
Power to make
rules.
Power to make
regulations.

19
such schemes should conform to the regulations, made under sub-section (2) of that
section;
(d) the establishing of mechanisms for redressing grievances of subscribers under
clause (f) of sub-section (2) of section 14;
(e) the form and manner in which books of account shall be maintained and
statement of accounts shall be rendered by intermediaries under clause ( n) of sub-
section (2) of section 14;
(f) the duties and functions of central recordkeeping agency under sub-section
(2) of section 21;
(g) the determination of compensation of fair value of the regulated assets payable
to central recordkeeping agency under proviso to sub-section (3) of section 21;
(h) the manner of receiving contributions and instructions and transmitting them
to the central recordkeeping agency and paying out the benefits to the subscribers,
under sub-section (1), and the regulations governing functioning of points of presence
under sub-section (2), of section 22;
(i) the manner in which a pension fund may receive contributions, accumulate
them and make payments to the subscriber under sub-section (1), the number of pension
funds under sub-section (2), the functioning of the pension fund under sub-section (3),
and the manner of managing the schemes by the pension fund under sub-section (4),
of section 23;
(j) the form and manner in which an application for grant of certificate of
registration shall be made and the fee which shall accompany such application under
sub-section (2) of section 24;
(k) the conditions subject to which a certificate of registration may be granted to
an intermediary under sub-section (3) of section 24;
(l) the procedure and manner of suspension or cancellation of certificate of
registration of intermediaries under sub-section (4) of section 24;
(m) the procedure for holding inquiry by an adjudicating officer under sub-
section (1) of section 27;
(n) the supersession of the governing board or board of directors of the
intermediary under sub-section (2) of section 28;
(o) the manner of administering and utilising the Subscriber Education and
Protection Fund under sub-section (3) of section 38;
(p) delegation of powers and functions of the Authority to committees under
sub-section (2) of section 50;
(q) any other matter which is required to be or may be specified by regulations
or in respect of which provision is to be or may be made by regulations.
48. Every rule and every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation
or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be;
so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity
of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.
Rules and
regulations to
be laid before
Parliament.

20
49. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the
difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of five years
from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament.
50. (1) The Authority may, by general or special order in writing, delegate to any
member, officer of the Authority or any other person subject to such conditions, if any, as
may be specified in the order, such of its powers and functions under this Act (except the
powers under section 47) as it may deem necessary.
(2) The Authority may, by a general or special order in writing, also form committees
of the members and delegate to them the powers and functions of the Authority as may be
specified by the regulations.
51. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the
provisions of any other law for the time being in force.
52. Anything done or any action taken by the Central Government under the Resolution
of the Government of India in the Ministry of Finance number F.No. 5/7/2003-ECB&PR,
dated the 10th October, 2003 and notification number F. No. 5/7/2003-ECB & PR, dated the
22nd December, 2003, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding
provisions of this Act.
53. (1) The Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority Ordinance, 2004 is
hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said
Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions
of this Act.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Delegation of
powers.
Application of
other laws not
barred.
Savings.
Repeal and
saving.
Ord. 8 of 2004.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Central Government operationalised the New Pension System (NPS) from
1st January, 2004 through a notification dated the 22nd December, 2003. The NPS is
mandatory for new recruits to the Central Government services (except to the armed forces
in the first stage).
2. An early legislative mandate was considered necessary as the NPS was already in
place without the full architecture and a statutory regulatory mechanism. Contributions are
not being invested as envisaged under the NPS and are being credited, in the interim, into
the public account, earning an administered rate of return equal to the rate on the General
Provident Fund. Further, more than 40,000 new Central Government employees are already
mandatorily covered by the NPS since 1st January, 2004 and it became imperative to quickly
replace the interim arrangements with proper infrastructure under a regulatory framework
in order to avoid future complications.
3. Seven State Governments, namely, the Governments of Andhra Pradesh,
Chhattisgarh, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Manipur, Rajasthan and Tamil Nadu have
already notified and introduced defined contribution pension schemes and intend to join the
NPS. Some of the other State Governments have also evinced interest in joining the NPS as
and when its architecture and mechanism are ready. It is, therefore, crucial that the full
architecture and regulatory mechanism are quickly put in place.
4. In view of the urgency of the matter, the Pension Fund Regulatory and Development
Authority Ordinance, 2004 (Ord. 8 of 2004) was promulgated on the 29th December, 2004
to provide for the establishment of an Authority to promote old age income security by
establishing, developing and regulating pension funds, to protect the interests of subscribers
to schemes of pension funds and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
5. The aforesaid Ordinance, inter alia, provides for—
(i) establishing a statutory regulatory body to be called the Pension Fund
Regulatory and Development Authority (PFRDA) which will undertake promotional,
developmental and regulatory functions in respect of pension funds;
(ii) empowering PFRDA to regulate the New Pension System, as amended from
time to time by the Central Government;
(iii) empowering PFRDA to perform promotional, developmental and regulatory
functions relating to pension funds (including authorising and regulating intermediaries)
through regulations or guidelines, prescribing disclosure standards,  protecting the
interests of subscribers to schemes of pension funds;
(iv) authorising PFRDA to levy fees for services rendered, etc., to meet its
expenses;
(v) empowering PFRDA to impose penalties for any violation of the provisions
of the legislation.
6.  The Bill seeks to replace the said Ordinance.  The notes on clauses explain in detail
the various provisions contained in the Bill.
.
N
EW DELHI; P. CHIDAMBARAM
The 12th February, 2005.
————
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 117 AND 274 OF THE
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
[Copy of letter No. 5/52/2004-ECB&PR dated the 23rd February, 2005 from
Shri P. Chidambaram, Minister of Finance to the Secretary-General, Lok Sabha]
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Pension Fund
Regulatory and Development Authority Bill, 2005, has recommended, under clause (1) of
article 117 and article 274 of the Constitution of India, the introduction of the Bill in Lok
Sabha, and consideration of the Bill by Lok Sabha under clause (3) of article 117 of the
Constitution.
21
SERVER3\BILL-2004\LS\4466LS/4466LS1

Notes on clauses
Clause 1.— This clause gives the short title of the Bill, its extent and commencement.
Sub-clause (3) provides that the proposed legislation shall be deemed to have come into
force on the 29th December, 2004.
Clause 2.— This clause contains definitions of various expressions used in the Bill.
The definitions of “Authority”, “central recordkeeping agency”, “intermediary”, “New
Pension System”, “pension fund” and “point of presence” are some of them.  An intermediary
includes pension fund, central recordkeeping agency, pension fund adviser, retirement adviser,
point of presence and such other person or entity connected with collection, management,
record keeping and distribution of accumulations.
Clause 3.— This clause seeks to provide for the establishment and incorporation of an
authority to be called the Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority.  Sub-clause
(3) provides that the head office of the Authority shall be in the National Capital Region.
Sub-clause (4) empowers the Authority to establish offices at other places in India.
Clause 4.—This clause specifies the composition of the Authority. The Authority shall
consist of a Chairperson and not more than five members of whom at least three shall be
whole-time members to be appointed by the Central Government from amongst persons of
ability, integrity and standing and having experience and knowledge in economics, finance,
law or administrative matters with at least one member from each discipline.
Clause 5.—This clause contains provisions in respect of the term of office and
conditions of service of the Chairperson and other members of the Authority. Sub-clause (1)
provides that the Chairperson and every whole-time member will hold office for a term of
five years or till attaining the age of sixty-five years in case of the Chairperson and sixty-two
years in case of other members, whichever is earlier and they will be eligible for reappointment.
Sub-clause (2) provides that part-time members shall be entitled to hold office as such for a
term not exceeding five years.  Sub-clause (3) provides that a member can relinquish his
office by giving notice of at least thirty days in writing to the Central Government or he may
be removed by the Central Government as per the provisions of clause 6.
Clause 6.—This clause lays down the various grounds on which the members of the
authority can be removed from office.  Sub-clause (1) empowers the Central Government to
remove the Chairperson or any other member on grounds of insolvency, physical or mental
incapacity, conviction of an offence involving moral turpitude, acquisition of financial or
other interest prejudicial to his functions as a member or abuse of position.  Sub-clause (2)
provides that where the grounds for removal of the Chairperson or other member are
acquisition of financial or other prejudicial interest or abuse of position, he shall not be
removed unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.
Clause 7.—This clause provides that the salary, allowances and other terms and
conditions of service of the Chairperson and whole-time members and the allowances of
part-time members shall be laid down by the Central Government, by rules and that they
shall not be varied to their disadvantage after their appointment.
Clause 8.—This clause provides for bar on future employment of Chairperson and
whole-time members under the Central Government or any State Government or in any
regulated entity in the pension sector, for a period of two years from the date on which they
cease to hold office, except with the prior approval of the Central Government.
Clause 9.—This clause provides that the Chairperson shall have the powers of general
superintendence and directions in respect of all administrative matters of the Authority.
22

23
Clause 10.—This clause contains detailed provisions regarding conduct of meetings
of  the Authority. Sub-clause (1) empowers the Authority to frame regulations regarding
rules of procedure for transaction of business at its meetings (including the quorum at such
meetings) and the time and places of such meetings.  Sub-clause (2) provides that the
Chairperson will preside at the meetings of the Authority and in his absence, the members
present may choose any other member from amongst themselves to preside over. Sub-clause
(3) provides that the decisions at the meetings of the Authority will be taken by a majority of
votes and the Chairperson or the member presiding over will have a second or casting vote.
Sub-clause (4) provides that any member who is a director of a company will disclose any
direct or indirect pecuniary interest in any matters to be discussed at a meeting of the Authority
and will not take part in any related deliberations or decisions. Further, such disclosure is to
be recorded in the proceedings of the meeting.
Clause 11.—This clause seeks to provide that mere existence of any vacancy or defect
in the constitution of the Authority or any irregularity in procedure which does not affect the
merits of the case will not invalidate any act or proceeding of the Authority.
Clause 12.—This clause empowers the Authority to appoint such officers and other
employees as may be necessary for its efficient functioning under the proposed legislation.
The Authority is also empowered to make regulations providing for  laying down the detailed
terms and other conditions of service of its officers and employees.
Clause 13.—This clause provides for the extent and application of the proposed
legislation.  The proposed legislation will apply to the New Pension System notified by the
Government of India in the Ministry of Finance vide notification number 5/7/2003-ECB &
PR dated 22
nd December, 2003 and any other pension scheme not regulated by any other
enactment.  The Authority shall make regulations for these pension schemes and specify the
time limit within which these schemes have to conform to such regulations.  Sub-clause (3)
specifically excludes from the provisions of the proposed legislation, the schemes or funds
under the Coal Mines Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1948, the Employees’
Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952, the Seamen’s Provident Fund
Act, 1966, the Assam Tea Plantations Provident Fund and Pension Fund Scheme Act, 1955,
the Jammu and Kashmir Employees’ Provident Funds Act, 1961, contracts referred to in
sub-section (11) of section 2 of the Insurance Act, 1938, and any other pension scheme,
which the Central Government may, by notification, exempt from the application of this the
proposed legislation.  Further the said sub-clause excludes from the purview of the proposed
legislation, Central Government employees appointed before 1
st January, 2004, persons
appointed to All-India Services and to persons in public services appointed in connection
with the affairs of any State, or such Union territories as may be specified by the Central
Government by notification.  Sub-clause (4), however, provides that any State Government
may, by notification, extend the New Pension System to its employees. Sub-clause (5) enables
any person specifically excluded under sub-clause (3) to voluntarily join the New Pension
System.
Clause 14.— This clause contains provisions regarding the duties, powers and functions
of the Authority.  Sub-clause (1) provides that the Authority shall have the duty to regulate,
promote and ensure the orderly growth of the New Pension System and pension schemes to
which this Act applies and, to protect the interests of subscribers of such System and schemes.
Sub-clause (2) specifies the powers and functions of the Authority.  These, inter alia, include
regulation of the New Pension System and the pension schemes to which the proposed
legislation shall apply; approving schemes and their terms and conditions, laying down of
norms for the management of the corpus of the pension funds including investment guidelines;
registration and regulation of intermediaries; protection of the interests of subscribers to
pension funds, establishment of a grievance redressal mechanism, adjudication of disputes
between intermediaries and between intermediaries and subscribers and  standardization of
information dissemination regarding performance of pension funds and performance bench
marks. Sub-clause (3) empowers the Authority to exercise certain powers which are vested

24
in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit, in respect of (i)
the discovery and production of books of account and other documents, at places and times
specified by the Authority; (ii) summoning and enforcing the attendance of persons and
examining them on oath; (iii) inspection of any books, registers and other documents of
intermediaries, at any place; (iv) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or
documents; and (v) any other matter which may be specified by Central Government by
rules.  Sub-clause (4) provides that pending enquiry or investigation, the Authority may, by
an order, for reasons to be recorded in writing, in the interests of subscribers (i) restrain
persons from participating in any scheme; (ii) restrain any office bearer of an intermediary
from acting as such; (iii) impound and retain the proceeds under the scheme in respect of
any activity which is under investigation; (iv) attach bank accounts of any intermediary or
any person associated with the scheme who is in any manner involved in violation of any of
the provisions of the proposed legislation or the rules or regulations made thereunder. This
can be done for a period not exceeding one month, with the approval of a Judicial Magistrate
of the first class having jurisdiction. However, only the bank account or any transaction
entered therein, relating to the proceeds actually involved in the violation of any of the
provisions of the proposed legislation or the rules or regulations made thereunder can be
attached. Further, the Authority can direct any intermediary or any person associated with
the scheme in any manner not to dispose of or alienate an asset forming part of any activity
which is under investigation. However, the Authority has to give such intermediaries or
persons concerned an opportunity of being heard.
Clause 15.—This clause seeks to empower the Authority to issue directions to
intermediaries or persons or entities associated with pension funds if it  is satisfied,  after an
inquiry, that it is necessary to do so in the interests of subscribers or orderly development of
New Pension System or a pension scheme to which the proposed legislation applies or to
prevent the conduct of affairs of any such intermediary or other persons or entities in a
manner detrimental to the interests of subscribers or to secure the proper management of any
such intermediary or person or entity. However, before or after passing such orders, the
Authority has to give an opportunity of hearing to such intermediaries, entities or persons
concerned.
Clause 16.—This clause contains provisions relating to powers to investigation. Sub-
clause (1) empowers the Authority to direct a person (Investigating Authority) to investigate
and report on the affairs of intermediaries or persons associated with a pension fund if the
Authority has a reasonable ground to believe that the activities of the pension fund are being
conducted in a manner detrimental to the interests of subscribers or that any intermediary or
any person associated with the schemes of the pension fund has violated any of the provisions
of the proposed legislation or the rules, regulations made thereunder or directions issued by
the Authority. Sub-clause (2) seeks to provide that without prejudice to the provisions of
sections 235 to 241 of the Companies Act, 1956, in case of companies, every employee and
every intermediary or every person associated with the pension fund has to preserve and
produce all the books, registers and other documents of, or relating to the company, the
intermediary or such person, which are in their custody or power, to the Investigating Authority
or authorised person.  Sub-clause (3) empowers the Investigating Authority to require any
intermediary or person associated with the pension fund to furnish any material which is
relevant or necessary for the purposes of its investigation.  Sub-clause (4) provides that the
Investigating Authority can keep such material in its custody for six months and thereafter it
has to return the same. However, the Investigating Authority can call for the material if
needed again. Further, if the person on whose behalf the  material is produced requires
certified copies of the same, then the Investigating Authority has to give certified copies.
Sub-clause (5) empowers the Investigating Authority to examine on oath, any intermediary
or any person associated with the pension fund in any manner, in relation to the affairs of his
business. Sub-clause (6) of the proposed section requires that notes of any examination
under have to be taken down in writing, read over to, or by, and signed by, the person
examined, and may thereafter be used in evidence against him.  Sub-clause (7) provides that

25
if any person fails without reasonable cause to produce any relevant material or information
to the Investigating Authority or authorised person or to appear before the Investigating
Authority personally when required to do so or to answer any question which is put to him
by the Investigating Authority while under examination; or to sign the notes of any
examination, then he will be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
one year, or with fine, which may extend to twenty five  crore rupees, or with both, and also
with a further fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees for every day after the first day
during which the failure or refusal continues.
Clause 17.—This clause contains provisions relating to powers of search and seizure
of the Authority.  Sub-clause (1) provides that if the Authority has information causing it to
believe that any person, who is required to do so, does not or will not provide books, documents
or other material relevant for an investigation; or that the provisions of this Act have been or
may be contravened; or that any claim to be settled by the intermediary is likely to be rejected
or settled at a figure higher or lower than a reasonable amount; or that any illegal fees and
charges have been transacted or are likely to be transacted by an intermediary; or that relevant
material are likely to be tampered with, falsified or manufactured, then the Authority  can
authorise any officer of the Authority, who is equivalent in rank to that of a Gazetted Officer
of the Government, to enter and search any building or place where he suspects such books,
documents and other material may be kept, seize all such material, place marks of identification
on them, take extracts from them or make copies. Sub-clause (2) provides that the authorised
officer may requisition the services of any police officer or of any officer of the Central
Government, or of both, to assist him in the exercising the powers of search and seizure.
Sub-clause (3) provides that if it is not practicable to seize any relevant book, document and
other material, the authorised officer can serve an order on the person in immediate possession
or control of the relevant book, document or other material, as the case may be, that he shall
not remove, part with or otherwise deal with them except with the previous permission of
such officer.  Sub-clause (4) empowers the authorised officer to examine on oath any person
who is found to be in possession or control of any books, accounts or other documents, and
any statement made by such person during such examination may thereafter be used in
evidence in any proceeding under the proposed legislation.  Sub-clause (5) provides that the
books, accounts, papers and other documents seized shall not be retained by the authorised
officer for more than one hundred and eighty days from the date of the seizure unless he
records the reasons in writing and obtains the approval of the Authority. However, the
Authority cannot authorise the retention of the same for more than thirty days after all the
related proceedings under the proposed legislation are completed.  Sub-clause (6) provides
that the person from whose custody the books, accounts and other documents are seized may
make copies of the same and take extracts from them, in the presence of the authorised
officer or any other person empowered by him.   Sub-clause (7) provides that if a person
legally entitled to the books, and other documents seized objects for any reason to the approval
given by the Authority for retention of the same, he may make an application to the Central
Government for their return. Sub-clause (8) provides that on receipt of the above application
the Central Government may, after giving the applicant an opportunity of being heard, pass
such order as it thinks fit.  Sub-clause (9) provides that the provisions of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 relating to searches and seizures shall apply to the extent possible, to every
search and seizure.  Sub-clause (10) empowers the Central Government to make rules in
relation to search or seizure.
Clause 18.—This clause empowers the Authority to ensure compliance with the
provisions of the proposed legislation.   If the Authority finds, after causing an inquiry to be
made, that any person has violated, or is likely to violate, any provisions of the proposed
legislation, or the rules or regulations made thereunder, the Authority may pass an order
requiring such person to cease and desist from committing or causing such violation.
Clause 19.—This clause contains provisions regarding management of central
recordkeeping agency or pension funds by an Administrator to be appointed by the Central

26
Government.  Sub-clause (1) provides that if at any time the Authority has reason to believe
that the central recordkeeping agency or pension fund is acting in a manner likely to be
prejudicial to the interests of subscribers, it may, after giving an opportunity to it of being
heard, make a report to the Central Government.  Sub-clause (2) provides that if the Central
Government, after considering the above report considers that it is necessary or proper to do
so, it may appoint an Administrator to manage the affairs of the central recordkeeping agency
or pension fund, as the case may be, under the direction and control of the Authority, in a
manner specified by notification.
Clause 20.—This clause describes the New Pension System as notified by the
Government of India in the Ministry of Finance vide notification number F. No. 5/7/2003-
ECB & PR dated the 22nd December, 2003, as amended from time to time. It also specifies
the basic features of the New Pension System.  These are– (a) every subscriber shall have an
individual pension account; (b) the functions of recordkeeping, accounting and switching of
options by the subscriber shall be effected by the central recordkeeping agency; (c) there
shall be a choice of multiple pension funds and schemes; (d) individual pension accounts
will be portable in case of change of employment; (e) collection and transmission of
contributions and instructions shall be through points of presence to the central recordkeeping
agency; (f) there shall not be any implicit or explicit assurance of benefits except market
based guarantee mechanism to be purchased by the subscriber; (g) a subscriber shall not exit
from the New Pension System except as specified by the Central Government by, notification;
and (h) at exit, the subscriber shall purchase an annuity from a life insurance company as
specified under the New Pension System.
Clause 21.—This clause contains provisions regarding the Central Recordkeeping
Agency. Sub-clause (1) empowers the Authority to appoint a central recordkeeping agency
by granting a certificate of registration.  The Authority may, in public interest, appoint more
than one central recordkeeping agency. Sub-clause (2) provides that the central recordkeeping
agency shall be responsible for receiving funds and instructions from subscribers through
the points of presence, transmitting such instructions and transferring such funds to pension
funds, effecting switching instructions received from subscribers and discharging such other
duties and functions, as may be assigned to it under the certificate of registration or as may
be determined by regulations. Sub-clause (3) provides that all the assets and properties of
the central recordkeeping agency are regulated assets. When the certificate of registration of
the central recordkeeping agency expires or is revoked then the Authority can appropriate
and take over the regulated assets. However, the central recordkeeping agency will be entitled
to be compensated the fair value of the regulated assets, as determined by regulations, unless
the revocation is on account of any violation of the conditions of the certificate of registration
or the provisions of the proposed legislation or the regulations.
Clause 22.—This clause contains provisions regarding points of presence. Sub-clause
(1) empowers the Authority to permit points of presence, by granting them registration
certificates, to receive contributions and instructions, transmit them to the central
recordkeeping agency and pay out benefits to subscribers in accordance with the regulations
made by the Authority. Sub-clause (2) provides that a point of presence shall function in
accordance with the terms of its registration certificate and regulations made under the
proposed legislation.
Clause 23.—This clause contains provisions regarding pension funds.  Sub-clause (1)
provides that the Authority may, by granting registration certificates, permit persons to act
as pension funds for the purpose of receiving contributions, accumulating them and making
payments to the subscriber as specified by regulations.  Sub-clause (2) provides that the
number of pension funds shall be determined by regulations and the Authority may, in public
interest, vary the number of pension funds.  Sub-clause (3) provides that a pension fund shall
function in accordance with the terms of its registration certificate and regulations made
under the proposed legislation.  Sub-clause (4) provides that the pension fund shall manage
schemes in accordance with the regulations.

27
Clause 24.—This clause provides for the registration of intermediaries including central
recordkeeping agency, pension funds and points of presence.  Sub-clause (1) provides that
no intermediary, to the extent regulated under the proposed legislation, can commence any
activity relating to a pension fund except as provided in the registration certificate.  Sub-
clause (2) provides that every application for grant of a registration certificate under the
proposed legislation shall be in the form and manner and accompanied by such fees as
determined by the Authority by regulations made by it.  Sub-clause (3) provides that the
Authority may grant the registration certificate, after considering the application and subject
to such terms and conditions as it may specify.  Sub-clause (4) provides that the Authority
may, by order, suspend or cancel a certificate of registration in a manner determined by
regulations.  However, it can only do so after giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard
to the person concerned.
Clause 25.—This clause contains provisions regarding penalties for failure by an
intermediary or any other person to comply with provisions of this proposed legislation,
rules, regulations and other directions.  Sub-clause (1) lays down certain penalties. If any
person, who is required under the proposed legislation or rules or regulations made thereunder
to obtain a certificate of registration from the Authority for carrying on any activity under
the proposed legislation, carries on such activities without doing so, he shall be liable to a
penalty of one lakh rupees for each day during which the failure continues or one crore
rupees, whichever is less.  Further, if any person who is required to comply with the terms
and conditions of certificate of registration fails to do so, he shall be liable to a penalty of
one lakh rupees for each day during  which the failure continues or one crore rupees, whichever
is less.  If any person who is required to furnish any information, document, books, returns
or report to the Authority, fails to furnish the same within the time specified by the Authority,
he shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to one crore rupees or five times the amount
of profits made or losses avoided, whichever is higher.  If any person who is required to
maintain books of accounts or records, fails to maintain the same, he shall be liable to a
penalty of one lakh rupees for each day during which the failure continues or five times the
amount of profits made or losses avoided, whichever is higher.  Sub-clause (2) provides that
if any person, who is required under the proposed legislation or the rules or regulations
made thereunder, to enter into an agreement with his client, fails to do so, he shall be liable
to a penalty of one lakh rupees for each day during which the failure continues or five times
the amount of profits made or losses avoided, whichever is higher.  Sub-clause (3) provides
that if any intermediary registered with the Authority, after having been called upon by the
Authority, in writing, to redress the grievances of subscribers, fails to do so within the time
stipulated by the Authority, he shall be liable to a penalty of not more than one crore rupees
or five times the amount of profits made or losses avoided, whichever is higher.  Sub-clause
(4) provides that if any person, who is registered under this Act as an intermediary, fails to
segregate moneys of the client or clients or uses the moneys for self or for any other client,
he shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding one crore rupees or five times the amount of
profits made or losses avoided, whichever is higher.  Sub-clause (5) provides that whoever
fails to comply with any provision of this Act, rules, regulations or directions issued by the
Authority for which no separate penalty has been provided, shall be liable to a penalty which
may extend to one crore rupees or five times the amount of profits made or losses avoided,
whichever is higher.
Clause 26.—This clause provides that all sums realised by way of penalties under the
proposed legislation shall be credited to the Subscriber Education and Protection Fund.
Clause 27.—This clause empowers the Authority to adjudicate on matters relating to
penalties.
Sub-clause  (1) provides that for the purposes of adjudging on penalties, the Authority
shall appoint any of its officers not below the rank specified by regulations to be an
adjudicating officer for holding an inquiry as determined by regulations, after giving the
person concerned a reasonable opportunity of being heard for the purpose of imposing any

28
penalty.  Sub-clause (2) provides the adjudicating officer with the power to summon and
enforce the attendance of any person acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case
to give evidence or to produce any relevant document. If, on such inquiry, he is satisfied that
the person has failed to comply with the matters referred to in the section on penalties, he
may recommend a penalty to the member in charge of investigation and surveillance.  Sub-
clause (3) provides that the penalty shall be imposed by a member other than the member in
charge of investigation and surveillance.  Further, while adjudging the quantum of penalty
the member has to take into account the amount of disproportionate gain or unfair advantage
made as a result of the default the amount of loss caused to subscribers and the repetitive
nature of the default.
Clause 28.—This clause provides for attachment of assets and supersession of
management of intermediaries.  Sub-clause  (1) provides that on receiving an application
from aggrieved persons for an interim measure of protection, the Authority can pass an
order for the detention, preservation, interim custody or sale of any asset or property which
is regulated by the provisions of the proposed legislation, securing any pension funds, monies
and other assets and properties of the pension fund interim injunction or appointment of an
administrator, the attachment of assets of the pension fund and such other interim measures
as the Authority may consider it to be just and necessary.  Sub-clause (2) provides that if on
a complaint received by the Authority or suo motu, the Authority, after conducting an enquiry
comes to a conclusion that the governing board or board of directors or the persons in
control of any intermediary, to the extent regulated under the proposed legislation, are
indulging in any activity which is in contravention of the provisions of the proposed legislation
or the regulations made thereunder, it may supersede the governing board or board of directors
or management of the intermediary in accordance with the provisions of the regulations.
Clause 29.—This clause deals with offences.  Sub-clause (1) provides that if any
person contravenes or attempts to contravene or abets the contravention of the provisions of
the proposed legislation or the rules or regulations made thereunder, he shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, or with fine, which may extend
to twenty five crore rupees or with both.  Sub-clause (2) provides that if any person fails to
pay the penalty imposed by the member or fails to comply with any of the directions or
orders issued by the member, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term of at least
one month, which may extend to ten years, or with fine, which may extend to twenty-five
crore rupees, or with both.
Clause 30.—This clause empowers the Central Government to grant  immunity.  Sub-
clause (1) provides that the Central Government, on the recommendation of the Authority,
may grant immunity from prosecution and from the imposition of penalties, to any person
alleged to have violated any of the provisions of the proposed legislation or the rules or
regulations made thereunder, if he makes a full and true disclosure regarding the violation.
However, the recommendation of the Authority is not binding on Central Government, and
moreover, if the prosecution proceedings were instituted before the application for immunity
was received, then the Central Government cannot grant immunity.  Sub-clause (2) empowers
the Central Government to withdraw the immunity if it is satisfied that the person concerned
had, during the proceedings, not complied with the condition on which the immunity was
granted or had given false evidence.
Clause 31.—This clause seeks to exempt the Authority from tax on wealth, income,
profits and gains.
Clause 32.—This clause provides for cognizance of offences by court. Sub-clause (1)
provides that no court can take cognizance of any offence punishable under the proposed
legislation or the rules or regulations made thereunder, except on a complaint made by the
Authority.  Sub-clause (2) provides that no court inferior to that of a Court of Session can try
any offence punishable under the proposed legislation.

29
Clause 33.—This clause provides for appeal to the Securities Appellate Tribunal.
Sub-clause (1) provides that any person aggrieved by an order made by the Authority or by
an adjudicating officer may appeal before the Securities Appellate Tribunal.  Sub-clause (2)
provides that such appeals have to be filed within forty-five days from the date of receipt of
the order appealed against and also empowers the Central Government to make rules regarding
the form, manner and fees for such appeals. However, the Securities Appellate Tribunal may
entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period, if it is satisfied that there was sufficient
cause for not filing it within that period.  Sub-clause (3) provides that on receipt of an
appeal, the Securities Appellate Tribunal may pass orders after giving the parties to the
appeal an opportunity being heard. Sub-clause (4) provides that the Securities Appellate
Tribunal has to send a copy of every order made by it to the Authority, the parties to the
appeal and to the adjudicating officers concerned.  Sub-clause (5) provides that the Securities
Appellate Tribunal has to deal with an appeal filed before it as expeditiously as possible and
endeavour to dispose of it finally within six months from the date on which it received the
appeal.  Sub-clause (6) provides empowers the Central Government to make rules regarding
the procedure to be followed by the Securities Appellate Tribunal for dealing with an appeal.
Clause 34.—This clause lays down that no civil court can entertain any suit or
proceeding in respect of any matter which an adjudicating officer appointed under the
proposed legislation or a Securities Appellate Tribunal is empowered to determine under the
proposed legislation. Further, no court or other authority shall be competent to grant an
injunction in respect of any action taken or to be taken as empowered under the proposed
legislation.
Clause 35.—This clause provides that any person aggrieved by any decision or order
of the Securities Appellate Tribunal under the proposed legislation may file an appeal to the
Supreme Court on any question of law arising out of such order. This has to be done within
sixty days from the date of communication of the decision or order. However, the Supreme
Court may allow an appeal to be filed within a further sixty days, if it is satisfied that the
appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal within sixty days.
Clause 36.—This clause provides that the Central Government may sanction grants to
the Authority after due appropriation made by Parliament, to be utilised for the purposes of
the proposed legislation.
Clause 37.—This clause contains provisions regarding the Pension Regulatory and
Development Fund.  Sub-clause (1) provides for the constitution of the Fund into which all
Government grants, fees and charges received by the Authority and all sums received by the
Authority from other sources decided by the Central Government, will be credited.  Sub-
clause (2) provides that the Fund is to be used for meeting the salaries, allowances and other
remuneration of the Chairperson and other members and officers and other employees of the
Authority and other expenses of the Authority in connection with the discharge of its functions
and for the purposes of the proposed legislation.
Clause 38.—This clause contains provisions regarding the Subscriber Education and
Protection Fund.  Sub-clause (1) provides for the establishment of the Subscriber Education
and Protection Fund. Sub-clause (2) provides that all grants and donations given to the Fund
by the Central Government, State Governments, companies or any other institutions for the
purposes of the Fund, the interest or other income received out of the investments made
from the Fund and penalties received by the Authority will be credited to the Fund.  Sub-
clause (3) provides that the Fund shall be administered and utilised by the Authority for
protection of the interests of subscribers in accordance with regulations made for the purpose.
Clause 39.—This clause contains provisions regarding accounts and audit of the
Authority.  Sub-clause (1) provides that the Authority has to maintain proper accounts and
other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts according to rules made
by the Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of
India.  Sub-clause (2) provides that the accounts of the Authority shall be audited by the

30
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.  Sub-clause (3) provides that the Comptroller
and Auditor-General of India and any other person appointed by him of the Authority shall
have the same rights, privileges and authority as the Comptroller and Auditor-General,
generally has in connection with the audit of Government accounts and can demand the
production of books, accounts and other documents and inspect any of the offices of the
Authority.  Sub-clause (4) provides that the audited accounts of the Authority have to be
forwarded annually to the Central Government which then has to lay them before each House
of Parliament.
Clause 40.—This clause empowers Central Government to issue directions on matters
of policy.  Sub-clause (1) provides that directions on matters of policy issued, in writing, by
Central Government will be binding on the Authority. As far as practicable, Central
Government should give the Authority an opportunity to express its views before giving any
such direction.  Sub-clause (2) provides that the decision of the Central Government, whether
a question is one of policy or not, shall be final.
Clause 41.—This clause contains provisions regarding supersession of the Authority
by Central Government.  Sub-clause (1) empowers Central Government to supersede the
Authority for a maximum period of six months by issuing a notification, specifying the
reasons. However, before issuing any such notification, the Central Government has to give
a reasonable opportunity to the Authority to make representations against the proposed
supersession and consider any representations of the Authority. This step can be taken by
Central Government if it is of the opinion that the Authority is unable to discharge its functions
or perform its duties on account of circumstances beyond its control or if the Authority has
persistently defaulted in complying with any direction issued by the Central Government or
in the discharge of its functions or performance of its duties and as a result of such default,
the financial position of the Authority or the administration of the Authority has deteriorated;
or in public interest.  Sub-clause (2) provides that when the notification superseding the
Authority is published, the Chairperson and other members have to vacate their offices as
from the date of supersession. Further, all the powers, functions and duties of the Authority
shall be exercised and discharged by the Central Government and all properties owned or
controlled by the Authority shall vest in the Central Government, until the Authority is
reconstituted.  Sub-clause (3) provides that the Central Government shall reconstitute the
Authority on or before the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the notification.
Sub-clause (4) provides that the Central Government shall, as soon as possible place a copy
of the notification regarding supersession of the Authority and a full report of any action
taken by it, before each House of Parliament.
Clause 42.—This clause contains provisions regarding furnishing of returns, etc., to
Central Government. Sub-clause (1) provides that the Authority shall furnish to the Central
Government returns, statements and other particulars in regard to any proposed or existing
programme for the promotion and development of the pension industry as required by Central
Government. The Central Government shall by rules, lay down the form and manner of
making such returns, statements, etc.  Sub-clause (2) provides that the Authority shall, within
nine months after the close of each financial year, submit to the Central Government a report
on its activities during the previous financial year, including the activities for promotion and
development of schemes of pension funds regulated under the proposed legislation.  Sub-
clause (3) provides that copies of the reports shall be laid, as soon as possible, after they are
received, before each House of Parliament.
Clause 43.—This clause provides that the Chairperson, other members, officers and
other employees of the Authority shall be deemed to be public servants, when carrying out
any of the provisions of the proposed legislation.
Clause 44.—This clause provides that prosecution or other legal proceedings can
be taken against the Central Government or the Authority or any of their officers, etc., for
anything done in good faith under the proposed legislation or the rules or regulations
made thereunder.

31
Clause 45.—This clause contains provisions regarding offences by companies. Sub-
clause (1) provides that if an offence under the proposed legislation has been committed by
a company, then every person in charge of or responsible for the conduct of business of the
company at the time the offence was committed shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence
and can be proceeded against and punished accordingly. However, if he proves that the
offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to
prevent the commission of such offence, then he shall not be liable to any punishment.  Sub-
clause (2), however, provides that if any offence under the proposed legislation has been
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the
consent or connivance of any officer of the company, then he shall also be deemed to be
guilty of the offence and can be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Clause 46.—This clause empowers the Central Government by notification in the
Official Gazette to make rules for carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation.
Sub-clause (2) enumerates the various matters in respect of which Central Government may
make rules. These, inter alia, include, the salary, allowances and the other conditions of
service of the Chairperson, whole-time members and part-time members; functions which
may be performed by the Authority in addition to those already mentioned in this Act; the
procedure to be followed by the authorised officer for searches and seizures; the form, manner
and the fee for appeals before the Securities Appellate Tribunal; the procedure to be followed
by the Securities Appellate Tribunal in dealing with an appeal and; the form in which the
Authority shall maintain an annual statement of accounts and provide returns and reports to
the Central Government.
Clause 47.—This clause empowers the Authority to make, by notification in the Official
Gazette regulations for carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation.  Such
regulations should be consistent with the provisions of the proposed legislation and the rules
made thereunder.  Sub-clause (2) enumerates the various matters in respect of which the
Authority can make regulations. These inter alia,  include, the time, places and procedure
for meetings (including the quorum at such meetings) of the Authority, the terms and other
conditions of service of the officers and other employees of the Authority, regulations for
pension schemes not regulated by any other enactment; mechanisms for redressing grievances
of subscribers, the form and manner in which books of account shall be maintained and
statement of accounts shall be rendered by intermediaries; the duties and functions of central
recordkeeping agency, the determination of compensation of fair value of the regulated assets
payable to central recordkeeping agency, regulations governing the functioning of pension
funds and points of presence, the manner of managing schemes by pension funds, the form
and manner of application for grant of registration certificate, conditions for grant of the
certificate and the accompanying fee.
Clause 48.—This clause provides that every rule made by the Central Government
and every regulation made by the Authority under the proposed legislation shall be laid
before each House of Parliament.
Clause 49.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to remove
difficulties. Sub-clause (1) provides that if any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions
of the proposed legislation, the Central Government may make provisions, by order, published
in the Official Gazette, for removing the difficulty. These orders must be consistent with the
provisions of the proposed legislation. However, no order shall be made under this clause
after the expiry of five years from the commencement of the proposed legislation.  Sub-
clause (2) provides that every order made under this clause shall be laid, as soon as may be
after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
Clause 50.—This clause provides for delegation of powers by the Authority.  Sub-
clause (1) provides that the Authority may delegate its powers (other than the power to make
regulations) and functions by general or special order in writing, to any member, officer of
the Authority or any other person subject to conditions, if any, specified in the order.  Sub-
clause (2) provides that the Authority may, by a general or special order in writing, also form

32
committees of the members and delegate to them the powers and functions of the Authority
as may be specified by the regulations.
Clause 51.—This clause provides that the provisions of the proposed legislation shall
be in addition to and not in derogation of the provisions of any other law for the time being
in force.
Clause 52.—This clause is a savings clause providing that anything done or any action
taken by the Central Government under the Resolution of the Government of India in the
Ministry of Finance number F.No. 5/7/2003-ECB&PR dated the 10th October, 2003 and
notification number F. No. 5/7/2003-ECB & PR dated the 22nd December, 2003, shall be
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of the proposed
legislation.
Clause 53.—This clause seeks to repeal the Pension Fund Regulatory and Development
Authority Ordinance, 2004 (Ord. 8 of 2004).  Sub-clause (2) saves all things done and all
actions taken under the said Ordinance by deeming it to have been done or taken under the
corresponding provisions of the proposed legislation.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the Central Government may, from such date as may
be appointed by it,  establish for the purposes of the proposed legislation an authority to be
called the Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority. In terms of clause 7 of the
Bill, the Central Government will prescribe the salary, allowances and other terms and
conditions of service of the Chairperson and other members of the Authority. Clause 12 of
the Bill provides that the Authority will appoint officers and other employees as it considers
necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under the proposed legislation and frame
regulations regarding their terms and other conditions of service.
2. Clause 36 of the Bill provides that the Central Government may make grants to the
Authority to be utilized for the purposes of the proposed legislation, after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law.
3. Clause 37 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a fund to be called the Pension
Regulatory and Development Fund into which all Government grants, fees and charges
received by the Authority and all sums received by the Authority from other sources decided
by the Central Government shall be credited. The Fund is to be used for meeting the salaries,
allowances and other remuneration of the Chairperson, other members and officers and
other employees of the Authority and other expenses of the Authority in connection with the
discharge of its functions and for the purposes of the proposed legislation.
4. Clause 38 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a Subscriber Education and
Protection Fund into which all grants and donations given to the Fund by the Central
Government, State Governments, companies or any other institutions for the purposes of the
Fund, the interest or other income received out of the investments made from the Fund and
the amount by way of penalties received by the Authority will be credited. The Fund is to be
administered and utilised by the Authority for the protection of the interests of subscribers in
accordance with the regulations made by the Authority for the purpose.
5. It is estimated that there would be an expenditure of approximately eight crores of
rupees in the first year of establishment of the Authority, including grants given to the Authority,
to be borne by the Central Government, for the purposes mentioned in paragraphs 3 and 4
above. This would include non-recurring capital expenditure of three crores of rupees and a
further recurring expenditure of five crores of rupees on salaries, rent for office
accommodation, etc. Eventually, it is expected that major recurring expenses of the Authority
would be funded out of the fees and charges as may be received by the Authority.
6. The Bill, if enacted and brought into operation, would not involve any other
expenditure of a recurring or non-recurring nature.
33

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 46 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make, by notification in
the Official Gazette, rules for carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation. Sub-
clause (2) enumerates the matters in respect of which such rules may be made. These matters,
inter alia, include matters relating to the salary, allowances and other terms and conditions
of service of the Chairperson and other members of the Pension Fund Regulatory and
Development Authority, the powers and functions of the Authority in addition to those already
specified in the Bill, the procedure and other matters related to the exercise of powers of
search and seizure by the Authority, the form, manner and fee for filing an appeal before the
Securities Appellate Tribunal and the procedure to be followed by the  Securities Appellate
Tribunal in dealing with appeals, the form in which the Authority shall maintain annual
statement of accounts and the time within which and the form and manner in which returns
and reports are to be made by the Authority to the Central Government.
2. Clause 47 of the Bill empowers the Pension Fund Regulatory and Development
Authority to make, by notification in the Official Gazette, regulations for carrying out the
provisions of the proposed legislation. Such regulations should be consistent with the
provisions of the proposed legislation and the rules made thereunder. The matters in respect
of which the Authority may make regulations, inter alia, include matters relating to the
transaction of business of the Authority at its meetings (including the quorum at such meetings)
and the time and places for such meetings, the terms and conditions of service of the officers
and employees of the Authority, regulations for pension schemes not regulated by any other
enactment, establishing a grievance redressal mechanism for subscribers, the form and manner
of maintaining books and statement of accounts by intermediaries, the duties and functions
of the central recordkeeping agency and the determination of compensation of fair value of
the regulated assets payable to the central recordkeeping agency, the functioning of point of
presence and the manner of receiving contributions and instructions and transmitting them
to the central recordkeeping agency and paying out benefits to subscribers, the number of
pension funds and the manner in which a pension fund may receive contributions, accumulate
them and make payments to the subscribers and the manner of managing schemes by the
pension funds, registration of intermediaries, the procedure for holding inquiry by
adjudicating officers, matters relating to supercession of the governing board or board of
directors of intermediaries, the manner of administering and utilising the Subscriber Education
and Protection Fund and delegation of powers and functions to committees of members of
the Authority.
3. The rules and regulations made under the proposed legislation shall be required to
be laid before the Parliament.
4. The matters in respect of which rules or regulations may be made are matters of
procedure and administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill
itself.  The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
34

Memorandum explaining the modifications contained in the Bill to replace the
Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority Ordinance, 2004
Apart from changes of a formal drafting nature, the Pension Fund Regulatory and
Development Authority Bill, 2005 which seeks to repeal and replace the Pension Fund
Regulatory and Development Authority Ordinance, 2004 closely follows the said Ordinance
with slight modifications as explained below:—
(1) Sub-clause (2) of clause 2 of the Bill has been modified rearranging the
various Central Acts mentioned therein.
(2) Clause 10 of the Bill corresponds to section 10 of the Ordinance.  Sub-
section  (5) of section 10 of the Ordinance has been omitted as the provisions of the
same are contained in sub-section  (1) thereof.  Consequential modifications have
been made in sub-clause (2) of clause 47 of the Bill.
(3) Sub-clause (3) of clause 13 of the Bill has been revised rearranging the
enactments mentioned therein. Sub-clause (4) of clause 13 has been modified so as to
make the intention more clear.
(4) Sub-clauses (6) and (7) of clause 16 of the Bill correspond to sub-sections
(7) and (6) respectively of section 16 of the Ordinance. The re-arrangement of provisions
has been made for clarity and elegance.
35

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of an Authority to promote old age income security by
establishing, developing and regulating pension funds, to protect the interests of
subscribers to schemes of pension funds and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
(Shri P. Chidambaram, Minister of Finance)
MGIPMRND—4466LS—23.02.2005.