 AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 36 of 2023
THE CITIZENSHIP (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023
By
SHRI V .K. SREEKANDAN, M.P.
A
BILL
 further to amend the Citizenship  Act, 1955.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of
India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 18 of the Citizenship Act, 1955, after  sub-section (2), the following
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(2A) The Central Government shall, within six months from coming into force
of this Act, frame rules under clause (eei) of sub-section (2):
Provided that if the Central Government fails to frame rules within the said period
of six months, the Central Government shall cause it to be laid a written statement
before each Houses of Parliament the reasons for not framing the rules within the
said period.”.
Short title and
commencement.
5
Amendment of
section 18.
10
57 of 1955

2
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The intention of giving assent after hours of debate in both the Houses of
Parliament on any Bill(s) is to implement or promulgate the contents thereon.
Therefore, no Bill has to be kept in abeyance merely due to not being able to frame
rules and such action amounts to disrespect to our temple of democracy.
The Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2019 was passed in Lok Sabha on 10.12.2019
and in Rajya Sabha on 11.12.2019. The President gave his assent to the Bill on
12.12.2019 and has become an Act. However, the Act could not be implemented as
rules under section 6B(1) relating to conditions, restrictions and manner for granting
certificate of registration or certificate of naturalisation to a person belonging to Hindu,
Sikh, Buddhist, Jain, Parsi or Christian community from Afghanistan, Bangladesh or
Pakistan who entered India on or before 31.12.2014 are yet to be framed, despite
giving 7(seven) extensions in all these three years. This indicates there needs to be
more study and debates before any such bills are passed and becoming Acts.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Citizenship Act, 1955 with a view to
provide that the Central Government shall frame rules relating to conditions,
restrictions and manner for granting certificate of registration or certificate of
naturalisation to a person belonging to Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain, Parsi or Christian
community from Afghanistan, Bangladesh or Pakistan who entered India on or before
31.12.2014 as envisaged under section 18 within six months.
Hence this Bill.
    NEW DELHI;                   V .K. SREEKANDAN
January 19, 2023.

ANNEXURE
[EXTRACT FROM THE CITIZENSHIP ACT, 1955]
(ACT NO. 57 OF 1955)
* * * * * *
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) * * * * *
(b) “illegal migrant” means a foreigner who has entered into India—
(i) without a valid passport or other travel documents and such other
document or authority as may be prescribed by or under any law in that
behalf; or
(ii) with a valid passport or other travel documents and such other
document or authority as may be prescribed by or under any law in that
behalf but remains therein beyond the permitted period of time:
Provided that any person belonging to Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain, Parsi
or Christian community from Afghanistan, Bangladesh or Pakistan, who
entered into India on or before the 31st day of December, 2014 and who has
been exempted by the Central Government by or under clause (c) of
sub-section (2) of section 3 of the Passport (Entry into India) Act, 1920
(34 of 1920) or from the application of the provisions of the Foreigners Act,
1946 (31 of 1946) or any rule or order made there under, shall not be treated
as illegal migrant for the purposes of this Act;
6B. (1) The Central Government or an authority specified by it in this behalf
may, subject to such conditions, restrictions and manner as may be prescribed, on an
application made in this behalf, grant a certificate of registration or certificate of
naturalisation to a person referred to in the proviso to clause (b) of sub-section (1) of
section 2.
(2) Subject to fulfillment of the conditions specified in section 5 or the
qualifications for naturalisation under the provisions of the Third Schedule, a
person granted the certificate of registration or certificate of naturalisation under
sub-section (1) shall be deemed to be a citizen of India from the date of his entry into
India.
18. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette
make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
power, such rules may provide for—
(a)  * * * * *
(eei) the conditions, restrictions and manner for granting certificate of
registration or certificate of naturalisation under sub-section (1) of section
6B.
* * * * * *
3
Interpretation.
Special provisions
as to citizenship
of person covered
by proviso to
clause (b) of sub-
section (1) of
section 2.
Power to make
rules.

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
further to amend the Citizenship Act, 1955.
.
————
(Shri V.K. Sreekandan, M.P .)