As Intropucen in Lox SaBHA

“44 mie 2006

Bill No. 36 of 2006

THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR EXPLOITATION OF NATURAL
RESOURCES BILL, 2006
By
‘SHR CHANDRAKANT KHAIRE, M.P.
A
BILL

to provide for the setting up of a National Commission Sor exploitation of natural
resources for the economic development of the country and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1, (7) This Act may be called the National Commission for Exploitation of Natural
Resources Act, 2006.

5 (2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In'this act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) “natural resources" means any naturally occurring material, which, after
processing, can be used in commercial or industrial activities and includes all minerals
10 including gold, diamond, platinum or herbs of medicinal value and fossil fuels; and

(6) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.

Short title,

extent and

commence-
ment.

Definitions.


National
Commission
for
Exploitation
of Natural
Resources.

State
Commission
and Union
territory
Commission
for
Exploitation
of Natural
Resources.

Functions of
the National
Commission.

Functions of
the State
Commission
and Union
territory
Commission.

2

3. (7) The Central Government shall set up a National Commission for the
exploitation of natural resources, hereinafter to be referred to as the National
‘Commission.

(2) The National Commission shall consist of—

(0) a Chairman, who shall be a qualified geologist, to be appointed by the
Central Government; and

(ii) seven other Members, who shall be experts in the fields of environment,
wild life, mineralogy, medicinal herbs, fossil fuels and water resources, who shall be
nominated by the Central Government.

(3) The terms and conditions of service and salaries and allowances of Chairman and
other members of the National Commission shall be such as may be prescribed.

4. (7) Each State Government and Union territory administration shall set up a Com-
mission for the exploitation of natural resources, hereinafter to be referred to as the State
Commission or the Union territory Commission, as the case may be.

(2) The State Commission or the Union territory Commission shall consist of a
Chairman and nine other Members, who shall be experts in the fields of geology, environ-
ment, wild life, mineralogy, medicinal herbs, fossil fuels and water resources.

(8) The terms and conditions of service and salaries and allowances of Chairman and
other members of the State Commission or the Union territory Commission shall be such
as may be prescribed.

5. The National Commission shall perform the following functions, namely:—

(# co-ordinate the functioning of the State Commissions and Union territory
Commissions;

(ii) verify and confirm the findings of State Commissions and Union territory
Commissions by deputing experts to the States or the Union territories, as the case
may be; है

(iii) recommend to the Central or the State Government or the Union territory
administration, as the case may be, to set up industries or other methods to be adopted
for exploitation of natural resources;

(iv) recommend to the Central Government regarding methods to be adopted for
the conservation of natural resources;

(v) report to the Central Government about the effects of exploitation of natural
Tesources on environment; and

(vi) any other function that may be assigned to it by the Central Government.

6. The State Commission and the Union territory Commission shall perform the
following functions:
(# exploration and identification of the area where natural resource in exploit-
able quantity are likely to be found;
(i) communication of the fact of existence of natural resource in any part of the
State or the Union territory to the National Commission; and

(iii) any other function that may be assigned to it by the respective State
Government or the Union territory administration.

20

25

30

35

40


3

7. (1) The National Commission shall, on receipt of communication under section 6
from a State Commission or a Union territory Commission, immediately depute a team of
experts for verification, confirmation and further investigation of the findings of the State
Commission or the Union territory Commission, as the case may be.

(2) The team of experts shall submit their report to the National Commission as soon
as possible but not later than six months from the date of receipt of the communication sent
by the State Commission or the Union territory Commission, as the case may be.

(3) The National Commission shall make its recommendations on the basis of report of
the team of experts and the communication of the State Commission or the Union territory
Commission to the Central Government regarding setting up of industries or other methods
to be adopted for exploitation of natural resources in the area.

8. The Central Government, on receipt of recommendation under section 7, shall
take steps for setting up of industry or other means of exploitation of natural resources on
its own or shall extend full financial assistance to the State Governments or the Union
territory administrations for the same.

9. It shall be the duty of the Central Government to ensure that all natural resources
are properly and fully exploited so as to result in maximum benefit to the country.

10. The Central Government may, by notification in the official gazette, make rules for
carrying out the provisions of this Act.

National
Commission
to act on the
communication
sent by a
State
Commission
or a Union
territory
Commission.

Central
Government
to take steps
to implement
the
recommenda-
tions of the
National
Commission.
Duty of the
Central
Government
to ensure
optimum
exploitation
of natural
resources.

Power to
make rules.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Our country has no dearth of natural resources. Almost all resources crucial for
economis development are found in sufficient quantities in our country. But the problem lies
in their proper exploration and then exploitation. We have to import several items at
considerable cost when they could be easily manufactured indigenously. We lag far behind
So the areas of mineral exploration and the techniques used in mining are obsolete which
wo its in waste of valuable resources. Ifall available resources are fully and properly exploited,
India will become an economic power.

With this object, itis proposed to set up a National Commission for proper and full
utilization of natural resources available in the country.

The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.

New DELHI; CHANDRAKANT KHAIRE
March 2, 2006.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the setting up of the National Commission for the
exploitation of Natural Resources. Clause 4 provides for the setting up of State Commissions
and Union territory Commissions. Clause 7 provides that the National Commission shall
depute team of experts to the States for verification/confirmation of the report submitted by
the State Commission. Clauses 8 and 9 provide that the Central Government shall take all
steps to ensure that natural resources in the country are fully and properly exploited and
shall provide financial assistance to the States so that their resources are properly developed.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of rupees ten thousand crore
would be involved.

A non-recurring expenditure of rupees fifty thousand crore is also likely to be involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only and as such the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

(Shri Chandrakant Khaire, M.P,)

MGIPMRND—6795LS(S1)—18-04-2006.