AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

3- DEC Au

Bill No. 36 of 2004

THE DROUGHT PRONE AREAS DEVELOPMENT
AUTHORITY BILL, 2004

BY
‘Suri Surest CHanvet, M.P.
A
BILL

| provide for the formulation of special development plans and establishment of an
autonomous authority 10 implement such plans in respect of the drought prone areas of
the country and for matters connected therewith.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1, (/) This Act may be called the Drought Prone Areas Development Authority Act,

(2) Itextends to the whole of India.

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
inthe Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —

(a) “Authority” means the Drought Prone Areas Development Authority
established under section 4;

Short title.,
extent and
‘commencement.

Definitions.


Central
Government
to formulate
special
development
plans for
drought
prone arcas,

Establishment
of Drought
Prone Areas
Development
Authority

Authority to
implement
the special
development
plans

Funds of the
Authority

Development

Fund

Annual
Report

Savings,

Power to
make rules,

=

(8) "drought prone areas" mean such areas in the country which, in the opinion
of the Certral Government, is drought prone and declare, by notification in the Official
Gazette, as such in consultation with the Government of the States and Union territory
Administrations;

(०) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act,

3. The Central Government shall, within a period of six months from the date of
commencement of this Act, formulate special development plans for providing industrial
Browth, railways, roads, post and telegraph and other means of communications, and in
particular, plans relating to agriculture, irrigation facilities, drinking water through wells,
hand pumps and tap water, fodder facilities, electricity, development of forests, livestock,
milk and poultry co-operatives, health services including family welfare schemes, education
and vocational training and special employment drives in the drought prone areas in the
country.

4.(1) For the purposes of this Act, with effect from such date, as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, in this behelf, there shall be established
by the Central Government an Authority to be called the Drought Prone Areas Development
Authority,

(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual
Svecession and a common seal with the power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both
movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall by the said name sue and be sued,

(3) The head office of the Authority shall be at Dharamshala in Kangra district in
the State of Himachal Pradesh and the Authority may establish its offices at such places in
the country and in such manner as may he prescribed.

(4) The Authority shall consist of a Chairman, Vice-Chairman and such other
members as may be prescribed.

(5) The Authority shail have such officers, employees and the conditions of services
ofsuch officers and employees shall be such as the Central Government, may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, determine from time to time for the efficient functioning of the
Authority.

(6) The Authority shall conduct its business in such manner as may be prescribed.

5. It shall be the duty of the Authority to implement the special development plans
formulated under section 3

6. The Central Government shall provide, from time to time, after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law, adequate funds for the implementation of special development
Plans in the drought prone areas and for the administrative expenses of the Authority,

7. The Authority shall havea fund to be called the ‘Drought Prone Areas Development
Fund! to which shall be credited all moneys received from the Central and State Governments,
international financial institutions, industrial establishments and individuals for the
development of drought prone areas in the country and all payments by the Authority
towards development expenditure shall be made therefrom.

8. The Authority shall submit an annual report, in such form and in such manner, as
may be prescribed, of its activities of development in the drought prone areas of the country
to the President of India who shall cause the 7९7०१ to be laid before both the Houses of
Parliament, as soon as may be. after it is received by him.

9. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
‘aw for the time being in force relating to any of the provisions contained in this Act.

10. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act,

5

20

25

35

40

45


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Unprecedented drought conditions play consistent havoc in various parts of the
country, Drought conditions are prevailing for the last many years in the tribal belt of
‘Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Palamu division of Jharkhand, Kalahandi of Orissa, various
ts of Andhra Pradesh, Rajasthan, Himachal Pradesh and Gujarat and other paris of the
country. The farmers cannot grow their crops in the parched land of these areas and rain God
ins consistently evasive in such areas resulting in acute shortage of even drinking

ter because the wells and hand pumps have either dried up or the groundwater level has

6 down considerably. There arc no irrigation facilities in these areas. The inhabitants do

get food to eat and water to drink resulting in their exodus to other places. In many places
tion deaths have also been reported. The worst affected is the mute livestock dying

some relief, it is inadequate and even negtigible, The situation often goes from bad to
due to the apathy of the authorities. To save the situation, urgent steps have to be
n at the national level.

Drought is not a temporary phenomenon in these areas. It is almost a continuous
. Therefore, a long term national policy will have to be formulated for the proper

evelopment of these drought prone areas. The onus of formulating such a policy lies on the
entral Government and an autonomous Authority needs to be established for implementing
¢ plans formulated for the development of drought prone areas in the country. This has to
undertaken on priority.

This Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.

New Dewi; SURESH CHANDEL
25,2004,


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a Drought Prone Areas
Development Authority, Clauses 6 and 7 provide for the funds of the Authority. The Bill, if
enacted and brought into operation, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India, It is estimated that a sum of rupees two hundred fifty crore will be involved as recurring
expenditure per annum.

It may also involve a non-recurring expenditure of rupees sixty crore from the
Consolidated Fund of India.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only.

The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character,


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the formulation of special development plans and establishment of an
autonomous authority to irplement such plans in respect of the drought prone areas of the
country and for matters connected therewith.

(Shri Suresh Chande!, M.P.)

MGIPMRNO—12201.S—13.07.2004.