 AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
Bill No.  36 of 2024 
THE SPECIAL ECONOMIC ASSISTANCE TO THE STATE OF BIHAR 
BILL, 2024 
By 
DR. ALOK KUMAR SUMAN, M.P. 
A 
BILL 
to provide for special economic assistance to the State of Bihar for the purpose of 
promoting the welfare of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and Other 
Backward Sections of people and for the development, 
exploitation and proper utilization 
of its resources. 
      Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows :- 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Special Economic Assistance to the State
of Bihar Act, 2024. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Short title and 
commencement. 

-2- 
 
2. There shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the Consolidated 
Fund of India, every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, 
as special economic assistance to the State of Bihar to meet the costs of such 
schemes of development, as may be undertaken by the State with the 
approval of the Government of India for the purpose of promoting the 
welfare of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward 
Sections of people or for the development, proper utilization and exploitation 
of the resources in the State. 
 
 
 
 
Special 
Economic 
assistance to 
the State of 
Bihar 
3. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of 
any other law to be made by Parliament or for the time being in force. 
Act not in 
derogation of 
other laws. 
 
  

 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 
 The State of Bihar is socially and economically backward. The low pace of development in 
the State has resulted in the impoverishment of the State and its people. The development of Bihar 
is the need not only of that State but of the entire country as a whole.  
The development of the State can be ensured only with the active involvement of the Central 
Government. For this, it is necessary that the Central Government provides special economic 
assistance to the State for its all round development including the welfare of weaker sections and 
for the development and exploitation of its vast resources. Such a step would go a long way in 
building our nation more and more strong. 
 
 
  NEW DELHI;                     ALOK KUMAR SUMAN 
July 3, 2024 
  
 
 
 
  

 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
 
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that there shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the 
Consolidated Fund of India, every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as 
special economic assistance to the State of Bihar to meet the costs of such schemes of 
development, as may be undertaken by the State with the approval of the Government of India.  
 
The Bill, therefore, on enactment, will involve expenditure out of the Consolidated Fund of 
India for providing special financial assistance to the State of Bihar. As the sums of moneys which 
will be given to the State of Bihar as special financial assistance by appropriation by law made by 
Parliament will be known only after the welfare schemes to be implemented by the State 
Government with the approval of Government of India are identified, it is not possible to give the 
estimates of recurring expenditure, which would be involved out of the Consolidated Fund of India 
at this stage.  
 
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India.
   
  

LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
--------- 
 
 
 
A 
 
 
 
BILL 
  
to provide for special economic assistance to the State of Bihar for the purpose of 
promoting the welfare of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and Other 
Backward Sections of people and for the development, 
exploitation and proper utilization 
of its resources. 
 
 
 
 
----------  
 
 
 
(Dr. Alok Kumar Suman, M.P.)  