1
Bill No. 36 of  2020
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE LABOUR (WELFARE AND REHABILITATION) BILL, 2020
By
SHRI SHY AM SINGH YADAV, M.P.
A
BILL
to constitute a Labour Welfare and Rehabilitation Authority to look into the dynamic
trends in the labour market, provide for schemes to give interest free loans to workers
unemployed for certain periods, issue guidelines for social sector schemes including
universal basic income for all working in private and public sector, provide for
wages during non-work time for seasonally employed workers, provide for
hardship bonus for plantation workers, formulate schemes for rehabilitation
of workers of closed industries and for all matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Labour (Welfare and Rehabilitation) Act, 2020.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Annual Report" means a report giving the details of developmental activities
taken up over the year by the Authority and detailing about targets set and achieved;
Definitions.
5

2
(b) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State or a Union territory
having legislature, the concerned State Government or the Union territory Government,
as the case may be, and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(c) "Authority" means the Labour Welfare and Rehabilitation Authority
constituted under section 3;
(d) "health certificate" means a document signed by a competent health authority
providing proof that person is healthy and competent to work; and
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by the rules made under this Act.
3. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification,
appoint, there shall be constituted, for the purposes of this Act, an Authority to be known as
the Labour Welfare and Rehabilitation Authority.
(2) The Authority shall consist of —
(a) the Union Minister of Ministry of Labour and Employment—
ex officio Chairperson;
(b) the Secretaries of the Union Ministeries of Labour and Employment, Heavy
Industries and Statistics and Programme Implementation—ex officio Members;
(c) the Director  General V.V. Giri National Labour Institute— ex officio
Member;
(d) the Director, Central Board for Workers Education, Union Ministry of
Labour and Employment—ex officio Member; and
(e) the Director, Directorate General of Employment, Union Ministry of Labour
and Employment—ex officio Member.
(3) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and staff as it
considers necessary for the efficient functioning of the Authority.
(4) the salary and allowances payable to and other terms of conditions of services of
officers and staff of the Authority shall be such, as may be prescribed, from time to time.
(5) the head office of the Authority shall be at New Delhi and the Authority may
establish offices at other places in the country as it may deem necessary for carrying out
the purposes of this Act.
4. (1) The Authority shall meet at such interval and place and shall determine its own
procedure in regard to transaction of business at its meetings as may be prescribed.
(2) The expenditure incurred to attend meetings by the Members referred to in
sub-clauses (a) to (e) of section 3 shall be borne by their concerned controlling authorities.
5. ( 1) The Authority shall discharge such functions as it may deem necessary to
ensure welfare and rehabilitation of workers in the country and formulate   a comprehensive
policy within one year of its constitution for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section ( 1), the Authority
shall perform the following functions:—
(a) to undertake a baseline study to collect comprehensive data about the existing
minimum working standards in all industries and necessary data on the labour industry
which shall be completed within one year of setting up of the Authority;
(b) to formulate a scheme for giving interest free loans for workers who are
unemployed upto a certain period till they get employment;
(c) to recommend to the appropriate Government to formulate social security
schemes including a universal basic income for all workers in private and public
enterprises;
Constitution
of Labour
Welfare and
Rehabilitation
Authority.
Meetings of
the Authority.
Functions of
the Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(d) to formulate scheme for providing wages all through the year for those
employed seasonally;
(e) to study and recommend schemes including hardships bonus for workers in
the plantation sector and other heavy industry sector;
(f) to study existing safety guidelines for workers and formulate a comprehensive
set of common guidelines for workers keeping in line with international standards;
(g) to undertake organisation of labour  fairs and labour awards region-wise and
sector-wise for creating greater awareness on importance of a high quality labour
force;
(h) to create an establishment to maintain data of workers of closed sick industries
and to formulate schemes for the welfare of such workers;
(i) to undertake, promote and publish studies relating to the importance of
labour safety standards and welfare; and
(j) to undertake such other activities as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.
(3) The Authority shall disseminate the necessary knowledge and information collected,
to the respective department of the Central Government and the State Governments.
6. (1) The Authority shall prepare once every year in such form and at such time as
may be prescribed, an Annual Report giving the summary of its activities including schemes
it has undertaken and recommended to the Government during the previous year and it shall
contain statements of Annual Accounts of the Authority.
(2) A copy of the Annual Report shall be forwarded to the Central Government, and
the Central Government shall cause the Annual Report to be laid as soon as may be after it is
received, before each House of Parliament.
7. The Central Government shall, from time to time, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
8. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government in consultation with the State Governments, may make such order or give such
direction, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or
expedient for the removal of any difficulty:
Provided that no such orders shall be made after the expiry of the period of
three years from the date of commencement of this Act.
9. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.
Annual
Report and its
laying before
Parliament.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
India is being termed as the next big economic powerhouse and recently we surpassed
China to become the fastest growing economy in the world. The challenge that we as a
country face though is to ensure better labour market conditions to couple with this high
growth rate. Vast majority of workers in our country still work in the informal sector. Though
there has been a shift of workforce from agriculture to the manufacturing sector, still majority
of the workforce are out of the social security net provided by existing legislations.
Data shows that between 2004-05 and 2011-12, the share of workers in unorganised
sector fell from 86% to 82%. At the same time though, the informal workers in the organised
sector (contract and other forms of casual labour) increased. These workers do not have
access to proper social security. As of 2011-12, 79% of the non-agricultural wage workers
had no written contract. Unemployment rates among skilled workforce is also high. Favourable
policy needs to be put in place to capitalise on the demographic dividend of the country and
to keep up with the changing trends in the labour market.
This Bill aims at creating a Labour Welfare and Rehabilitation Authority, to study the
dynamic trends in the labour market and provide inputs for actionable schemes. The Authority
shall formulate a scheme to give interest free loans for those unemployed upto a certain
period until they get a job. This Authority will issue guidelines for a social security scheme
applicable to all private and Government workers. The scheme shall include a minimum basic
income. Those who have seasonal employment will be given the same wages for the other
months when they don't have work. The Authority will also make a study of plantation
workers and other heavy factory workers and provide for a scheme to give hardships bonuses
for labourers in these sectors. This will also include framing uniform safety guidelines relating
to working conditions in these sectors. It will also be responsible for conducting labour fairs
and also constitute labour awards sector-wise to enthuse the worker community. A body to
rehabilitate workers from closed or sick industries will be formed by this Authority.
The economic growth is sustainable only as long as the quality of the labour force is
maintained. A well-nourished labour market is the fuel which drives this growth engine.
Since, a large number of workers are not covered within the ambit of existing laws, this Bill
provides for the necessary safety net. By providing for these measures, it will be the much
needed antidote required for a faster and more inclusive growth within the country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SHYAM SINGH YADAV
January 16, 2020.
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of the Labour Welfare and Rehabilitation
Authority. It also provides for appointment of officers and staff for efficient functioning of
the Authority. Clause 7 makes it obligatory for the Central Government to provide requisite
funds for carrying out the purposes of this Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve
recurring expenditure of three thousand crore rupees per annum from the Consolidated Fund
of India.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation
of legislative power is of normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to constitute a Labour Welfare and Rehabilitation Authority to look into the dynamic
trends in the labour market, provide for schemes to give interest free loans to workers
unemployed for certain periods, issue guidelines for social sector schemes including
universal basic income for all working in private and public sector, provide for
wages during non-work time for seasonally employed workers, provide for
hardship bonus for plantation workers, formulate schemes for rehabilitation
of workers of closed industries and for all matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
.
————
(Shri Shyam Singh Yadav, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—4842LS(S3)—14-02-2020.