1
Short title and
commencement.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
SHRI VINOD KUMAR BOIANAPALLI, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 36 of  2017
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In article 134 of the Constitution, in clause (1), after sub-clause (b), the following
sub-clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
"(ba) has confirmed the sentence of death of an accused person; or
(bb) has enhanced the sentence of an accused person to a sentence of death; or
Amendment
of article 134.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Article 134 of the Constitution lays down the appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court
in criminal matters. Presently article 134 (1) (a) and (b) provide for a mandatory appeal before
the Supreme Court where the High Court reverses an order of acquittal of an accused person
and sentences him to death, and where the High Court withdraws for trial before itself a case
from any subordinate Court and in such trial sentences the person to death. A mandatory
appeal does not lie where the High Court either confirms a death sentence by the Sessions
Court or enhances a sentence to sentence of death. Therefore appeals from such cases are
ordinarily preferred under article 136 by way of Special Leave Petitions (SLPs). However,
article 136 confers the Court with discretionary powers, and therefore the Court may dismiss
such death sentence cases  in limine, i.e.  without admitting it for a hearing on merits, or
without recording reasons for such dismissal.
According to the Death Penalty India Report by National Law University, Delhi, there
have been nine cases of in limine dismissals in death penalty SLPs since 2004. A report
entitled "Lethal Lottery" by Amnesty International and People's Union for Civil Liberties
which studied the Supreme Court judgments in death penalty cases between 1950 to 2006
also notes that a large number of SLPs have been dismissed in limine.
Further, in September, 2014, a Constitution Bench in Mohd. Arif Ashfaq vs. The
Registrar; Supreme Court (2014) 9 SCC held that all Review Petitions in death sentence cases
must be heard in open court. It was held that such cases belong to a distinct category owing
to the irreversibility of the punishment, and that different judicially trained minds can come
to diametrically opposite conclusions on the same set of facts. Review jurisdiction of the
Supreme Court under article 137 of the Constitution succeeds special leave jurisdiction
under article 136. It is, therefore, anomalous that death sentence SLPs under article 136 may
be dismissed in limine without reasons being recorded, while Review Petitions in this category
are required to be heard in open court. Without a reasoned order in a death sentence in a SLP,
the open court hearing of review petitions as contemplated in Mohd. Arif Ashfaq case will be
rendered meaningless.
The 187th Law Commission Report on Mode of Execution of Death Sentence and
Incidental Matters recommends a statutory right to appeal before the Supreme Court in all
death sentence matters, especially given that such right of appeal is conferred in many
legislations pertaining to civil cases. It argued that the death penalty is qualitatively different
because of its irreversibility and its imposition has serious consequences. The 262nd Law
Commission Report on the Death Penalty supported this recommendation in light of the
scope of error inherent in the criminal justice system.
The present Bill thus seeks to amend article 134 (1) to expand the appellate jurisdiction
of the Supreme Court to provide for mandatory appeals when death sentences are confirmed,
and when sentences are enhanced to the death penalty by High Courts. The expansion of
the Court's powers will ensure that every case in which the death sentence is in question is
heard and disposed off as a criminal appeal.
The death penalty is a unique punishment in that it is irreversible, and therefore the
procedure administering it must comply with due process envisaged under article 21 of the
Constitution, which is violated by in limine dismissals. It is imperative that the Supreme Court
in its appellate jurisdiction has every opportunity to reappreciate evidence and sentencing
in all death sentence cases.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; VINOD KUMAR BOIANAPALLI
February 9, 2017.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *
134. (1) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court from any judgment, final order or
sentence in a criminal proceeding of a High Court in the territory of India if the High Court—
(a) has on appeal reversed an order of acquittal of an accused person and
sentenced him to death; or
(b) has withdrawn for trial before itself any case from any court subordinate to
its authority and has in such trial convicted the accused person and sentenced him to
death; or
(c) [certifies under article 134A] that the case is a fit one for appeal to the
Supreme Court:
Provided that an appeal under sub-clause (c) shall lie subject to such provisions
as may be made in that behalf under clause (1) of article 145 and to such conditions as
the High Court may establish or require.
(2) Parliament may by law confer on the Supreme Court any further powers to entertain
and hear appeals from any judgment, final order or sentence in a criminal proceeding of a
High Court in the territory of India subject to such conditions and limitations as may be
specified in such law.
* * * * *
4
Appellate
jurisdiction of
Supreme
Court in
regard to
criminal
matters.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Vinod Kumar Boianapalli, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4687LS(S3)—01-03-2017.