     AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
                                                              Bill No. 36 of 2022
THE ESSENTIAL COMMODITIES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
SHRI ABDUL KHALEQUE, M.P.
A
BILL
 further to amend the Essential Commodities Act, 1955.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic
of India as follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Essential Commodities (Amendment)
Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title
and
commencement.
5

2. In section 2 of the Essential Commodities Act,1955. (hereinafter
referred to as the principal Act), after clause (b), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:–
“(ba) ‘menstrual hygiene products’ includes products used to catch
menstrual flow, such as:
(i) sanitary pads;
(ii) tampons; and
(iii) menstrual cups;.”
3. In the Schedule to the principal Act, after entry 8, the following entry
shall be inserted, namely:–
“(9) menstrual hygiene products.’’.
Amendment of
section 2.
Amendment of
the Schedule.
10 of 1955.
5
10
2

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Sanitary products are a critical hygiene need for all girls and women.
If listed under essential commodities, they will help keep control on the
production and easy availability of these products. Sanitary napkins and
several other hygiene products are not clearly listed under essential goods,
leading to supply issues across the country which clearly happened during
the corona virus lockdown. The State of Telangana and Karnataka had
listed sanitary napkins as an essential commodity on 25 March 2020, thus
allowing its uninterrupted supply and sale which was hampered by the
pandemic.
The Menstrual Hygiene Management National Guidelines, 2015 are
incompetent and lack implementation and monitoring and there are reports
that it is highly unfunded, the guidelines lack a concrete plan to address various
problems like supply, manufacture, price management and myths surrounding
menstruation.
The Scottish Parliament has passed a landmark Bill, the Period Products
(Free Provision) (Scotland) Bill, considering menstrual rights as important
for people’s dignity.
The Scotland aims to end period poverty by offering sanitary products
free of cost. This makes Scotland the first country in the world to do so which
shows the governance around sanitary hygiene for women is lagging behind
in India. It is found that affordability of sanitary pads is still a secondary
problem. After the twelve per cent GST has been removed, a pack of
10 sanitary napkins that costs an average of 100 rupees will cost around
88 rupees. However, considering seventy per cent. (Census, 2011) of India’s
population live in rural areas and depend on manual labour, seventy five per
cent. of whom survives on 33 rupees per day, the amount of 88 rupees for a
packet of sanitary napkins remain very high. Therefore, an amendment to the
Essential Commodities Act, 1955, by addition of sanitary products in the
essential commodities list so that a similar situation that happened during the
lockdown is not repeated again.
Hence this Bill.
   NEW DELHI;              ABDUL KHALEQUE
17 January, 2022
3

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE ESSENTIAL COMMODITIES ACT, 1955
(ACT NO. 10 OF 1955)
* * * * * *
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,–
[(ia) “Collector” includes an Additional Collector and such other
officer, not below the rank of Sub-Divisional Officer, as may be authorised
by the Collector to perform the functions and exercise the powers of the
Collector under this Act;]
(b) “food-crops” include crops of sugarcane;
[THE SCHEDULE]
(See section 2A)
ESSENTIAL COMMODITIES
(1) drugs
* * * * * *
[(8) mask (2ply & 3ply surgical masks, N95 masks) and hand sanitizers.]
* * * * * *
* * * * * *
Definitions.

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
 further to amend the Essential Commodities Act, 1955.
————
(Shri Abdul Khaleque, M.P .)