Short title and
extent.
THE  SPECIAL  EDUCATIONAL  FACILITIES  (FOR  CHILDREN OF
PARENTS  LIVING  BELOW  POVERTY  LINE)  BILL, 2011
BY
SHRI ARJUN MEGHWAL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for special educational facilities to the children of parents living below
poverty line and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as
 follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Special Educational Facilities (For Children of Parents
Living Below Poverty Line)  Act, 2011.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the State Government,
and in other cases, the Central Government;
Bill No. 36 of  2011
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
(b) "parents living below poverty line" means such parents whose income from
all sources is less than rupees ten thousand per mensem; and
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to provide to every child born of
parents living below poverty line, the following facilities, namely:—
(a) free eduction from school level to the post-graduate level including higher,
medical and technical education;
(b) free hostel facilities, uniform, meals and such other assistance and facilities
as are required for the proper education of children; and
(c) gainful employment to the child after he complete his education.
4. The appropriate Government shall provide scholarships upto a maximum of rupees
five hundred per mensem, in deserving cases, to the children of parents living below poverty
line while they are pursuing their education.
5. The appropriate Government shall reserve such percentage of seats of the total
number of seats, as may be prescribed, in all medical and technical colleges and institutions
of higher studies for children born of parents living below poverty line.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of  thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive aforesaid, both
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Facilities to
children born
of parents
living below
poverty line.
Scholarships.
Reservation
of seats in
medical and
technical
colleges for
children born
of parents
living below
poverty line.
Power to
make Rules.
5
10
15
20
25

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Nearly thirty-seven per cent. of the total population of our country lives below the
poverty line. Their income is meagre and they fight for their subsistence throughout their
lives. They have hand to mouth existence and cannot even think of getting elementary
education which may enable them to read and write. Since promotion of universal education
and establishment of classless and creedless society is one of the basic aims of our
Constitution, the Government at the national level as well as at the State level should make
provisions for free educational facilities and provide books, uniform, writing materials,
transportation and hostel facilities free of cost to the children of persons living below the
poverty line, that is to say, whose total family income is below ten thousand rupees per
month, so that they could get proper education and better job opportunities to raise their
standard of living. It will be a major step in eradicating illiteracy from the country. It will also
help such children to grow and compete with children of higher class.
Moreover, there are also children who are bright students but the economic condition
of their family is such that they are not able to meet their requirements such as books and
other stationery items. Keeping this in view, a provision has been made in the Bill to provide
bright students belonging to very poor families a scholarship of rupees five hundred per
mensem.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; ARJUN MEGHWAL
July 18, 2011.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for free education including medical and technical education,
etc. by the appropriate Government to children born of parents living below poverty line. It
also seeks to provide for facilities such as free hostel, uniform, meals etc. to such children.
Clause 4 provides that the appropriate government shall provide scholarship upto a maximum
of rupees five hundred per mensem in deserving cases, to such children. The Central
Government has to bear the expenditure in respect of Union territories in implementing the
provisions of the Bill. The respective State Government shall bear the expenditure in respect
of their State. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees ten thousand
crore is likely to be incurred per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees twenty thousand crore is also likely to be
incurred.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. These rules will relate to matters of detail only. The delegation of
legislative powers is, therefore, of a normal character.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for special educational facilities to the children of parents living below poverty
line and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Arjun Meghwal, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—586LS(S3)—01-08-2011.