Short title.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009
BY
SHRI HANSRAJ GANGARAMJI AHIR, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2009.
2. Article 130 of the Constitution shall be renumbered as clause (1) thereof and after
clause (1) as so renumbered, the following clause shall be added, namely:—
"(2) There shall be established a permanent bench of the Supreme Court at
Nagpur, consisting of such number of judges of the Supreme Court as the Chief
Justice of India may from time to time determine, but not less than nine in number, to
exercise the powers and jurisdiction for the time being vested in the Supreme Court
in respect of cases arising in the States of Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat,
Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh and Tamil Nadu and Union
territories of Andaman and Nicobar Islands and Puducherry.".
Bill No.  36  of 2009
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Amendment
of article 130.
5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Article 124 of the Constitution provides for the establishment and constitution of the
Supreme Court. The seat of the Supreme Court is in New Delhi and there is no bench of the
court in any other part of the country. Litigants from all parts of the country have to come to
Delhi in connection with their cases in the Supreme Court.
Delhi is the capital city located in North India. Litigants approaching the Supreme
Court from the States of Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Karnataka,
Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Puducherry and Andaman and Nicobar Islands have to
undergo a lot of hardships in terms of time and money due to long distance and a very high
cost of travel.  Moreover, there has been a constant demand for setting up of a division
bench of the Supreme Court in the central or southern part of the country.
Keeping in view the hardships being faced by the litigants coming from the Central
and the Southern India to Delhi and the demand of people of these regions, it will be
appropriate to set up a bench of the Supreme Court at Nagpur, which is in the central part of
India. Nagpur is well connected with all other parts of the country through road, rail and air.
As its location is ideally suited for the people of both central and southern India, the people
of these regions would be able to take advantage of it. Further, establishment of a permanent
bench of the Supreme Court at Nagpur would not only save the time and money of the
litigants but also help in speedy disposal of the cases. Therefore, there is an urgent need to
set up a permanent bench of the Supreme Court at Nagpur so that people in the central and
southern  States shall have easy access to justice in a convenient manner. The Bill accordingly
seeks to amend the Constitution with a view to establish a permanent bench of the
Supreme Court at Nagpur.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; HANSRAJ  GANGARAMJI  AHIR
June 22, 2009.
2

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for establishment of a permanent bench of the Supreme
Court at Nagpur. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees one crore per
annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore is also likely to be involved.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * *
130. The Supreme Court shall sit in Delhi or in such other place or places, as the Chief
Justice of India may, with the approval of the President, from time to time, appoint.
* * * * * *
Seat of
Supreme
Court.
4

LOK   SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Hansraj Gangaramji Ahir, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2457LS(S-5)—03.07.2009.