1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI KUNWAR PUSHPENDRA SINGH CHANDEL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2016.
2. In the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution,—
(a) the existing entries from 4 to 9 shall be re-numbered as entries 5 to 10,
respectively and before entry 5 as so renumbered, the following entry shall be inserted,
namely:—
“4. Bundeli.”; and
(b) the existing entries from 10 to 22 shall be renumbered as entries 12 to 24 and
before entry 12 as so renumbered, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:—
“11. Kumaoni.”.
Short title.
Bill No. 36 of  2016
Amendment of
the Eighth
Schedule.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Bundeli language has its own glorious history. The very mention of Bundeli emerges
a picture of such culture and region that does not show its reluctance to even sacrifice
one’s life. The ‘Alha-Udal’ drama of Bundelkhand region is world famous. Bundeli language
has been in use for official purposes for more than one hundred years and as per 2001
census nearly three crore people belonging to various States use this language. Bundeli
language is the fulcrum of identity and contact for these people.
Besides Bundeli, Kumaoni language too has its illustrious background. Kumaoni was
official language of Chandel rulers of Uttarakhand and even today it continued to be local
language in the region. In various States of the country, nearly 2.5 crore people use Kumaoni
in their day to day interaction. Kumaoni literature is fairly enriched and is frequently used in
public literature as well as in conventions.
Both the languages, that are historically and traditionally enriched ones, are being
subjected to gross neglect these days. Both of these languages run the risk of losing their
existence and call for assistance on the part of the Government. It is unavoidable and
desirable both. On having been included in the Eighth Schedule, the usage and popularity
of these languages shall spread all across.
Neither of these two languages has so far been in the scheme of examination being
conducted by the Union Public Service Commission. As a result students proficient in
these languages cannot use them in the examination. By including these two languages in
the Eighth Schedule, avenues of employment shall also be generated. Therefore, these two
languages call for inclusion in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution with immediate
effect in order that they may receive their due recognition.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KUNWAR PUSHPENDRA SINGH CHANDEL
February 9, 2016.

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
EIGHTH SCHEDULE
[Articles 344(1) and 351]
Languages
1. Assamese
2. Bengali
3. Bodo
4. Dogri
5. Gujarati
6. Hindi
7. Kannada
8. Kashmiri
9. Konkani
10. Maithili
11. Malayalam
12. Manipuri
13. Marathi
14. Nepali
15. Oriya
16. Punjabi
17. Sanskrit
18. Santhali
19. Sindhi
20. Tamil
21. Telugu
22. Urdu

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4261LS(S3)—26-02-2016.