THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT)  BILL, 2008
By
SHRI ANANTKUMAR HEGDE, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2008.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. In the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution,—
(i) In List II-State List, entry 21 shall be omitted.
(ii) In List III-Concurrent List, after entry 17B, the following new entries shall
be inserted, namely:—
“17C. Fisheries.
17D. Protection of marine biodiversity.”.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 36 of 2008
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Amendment
of the Seventh
Schedule.
5
10

STA TEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Fisheries constitute one of the important means of livelihood, especially for those
living in coastal regions. In coastal regions, fisheries not only constitute an important part in
the diet of the people but are source of income as well. But in the present economic scenario,
greed has overtaken this sector and with the entry of trading institutions in the sector, the
exploitation of fisheries is now going on at an alarming rate. The number of fish available is
on the decline. Fish are caught even during breeding season. Some States have banned the
operation of trawlers during breeding season, but it is not uniform. Fisheries being in State
List, all the States have different laws on the subject. And, at times these laws are made
without keeping in mind the best interests of fisheries but cater to interests of the companies
operating large trawlers. All this may have a bearing not only on our marine resources but
also on the right to livelihood of small fishermen. Moreover, the technique employed by large
trawlers is not sustainable for maintaining a healthy breeding and catching ratio. It is high
time the country took positive steps to protect its fisheries and marine resources.
Presently a number of systems exist for the protection of marine resources and marine
environment, but they are not only complex and confusing but also are costly and do not
provide a strategic approach to address the issue.
Inserting a new entry in the concurrent list of the Seventh Schedule to our Constitution
for the protection of marine biodiversity will go a long way in introducing a new system of
marine planning as well as giving the issue the importance it deserves. It will also help
bringing about uniformity in legislation regarding the use of fisheries, marine space and the
interaction between its uses. Therefore, it is necessary that we have a separate entry for
protection of marine biodiversity in our Constitution.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; ANANTKUMAR HEGDE
March 11, 2008.
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA.
PART XXII
SCHEDULES
SEVENTH  SCHEDULE
LIST II
* * * * * * *
21. Fisheries.
* * * * * * *
LIST III
* * * * * * *
17B. Protection of wild animals and birds.
* * * * * * *
3

LOK   SALOK   SABHABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Anantkumar Hegde, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—1034LS(S-5)—14.03.2008.