THE PERSONAL DATA PROTECTION BILL, 2019
——————
 ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
——————
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title and commencement.
2. Application of Act to processing of personal data.
3. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
OBLIGATIONS OF DATA FIDUCIARY
4. Prohibition of processing of personal data.
5. Limitation on purpose of processing of personal data.
6. Limitation on collection of personal data.
7. Requirement of notice for collection or processing of personal data.
8. Quality of personal data processed.
9. Restriction on retention of personal data.
10. Accountability of data fiduciary.
11. Consent necessary for processing of personal data.
CHAPTER  III
G
ROUNDS FOR PROCESSING OF PERSONAL DATA WITHOUT CONSENT
12. Grounds for processing of personal data without consent in certain cases.
13. Processing of personal data necessary for purposes related to employment, etc.
14. Processing of personal data for other reasonable purposes.
15. Categorisation of personal data as sensitive personal data.
CHAPTER IV
P
ERSONAL DATA AND SENSITIVE PERSONAL DA TA OF CHILDREN
16. Processing of personal data and sensitive personal data of children.
CHAPTER V
RIGHTS OF DA TA PRINCIPAL
17. Right to confirmation and access.
18. Right to correction and erasure.
19. Right to data portability.
Bill No. 373 of 2019
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
CLAUSES

(ii)
20. Right to be forgotten.
21. General conditions for the exercise of rights in this Chapter.
CHAPTER VI
TRANSPARENCY AND ACCOUNTABILITY MEASURES
22. Privacy by design policy.
23. Transparency in processing of personal data.
24. Security safeguards.
25. Reporting of personal data breach.
26. Classification of data fiduciaries as significant data fiduciaries.
27. Data protection impact assessment.
28. Maintenance of records.
29. Audit of policies and conduct of processing, etc.
30. Data protection officer.
31. Processing by entities other than data fiduciaries.
32. Grievance redressal by data fiduciary.
CHAPTER VII
R
ESTRICTION ON TRANSFER OF PERSONAL DATA OUTSIDE INDIA
33. Prohibition of processing of sensitive personal data and critical personal data outside
India.
34. Conditions for transfer of sensitive personal data and critical personal data.
CHAPTER VIII
EXEMPTIONS
35. Power  of  Central Government to exempt any agency of Government from application
of the Act.
36. Exemption of certain provisions for certain processing of personal data.
37. Power of Central Government to exempt certain data processors.
38. Exemption for research, archiving or statistical purposes.
39. Exemption for manual processing by small entities.
40. Sandbox for encouraging innovation, etc.
CHAPTER IX
D
ATA PROTECTION AUTHORITY OF INDIA
41. Establishment of Authority.
42. Composition and qualifications for appointment of Members.
43. Terms and conditions of appointment.
44. Removal of Chairperson or other Members.
45. Powers of Chairperson.
46. Meetings of Authority.
47. V acancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Authority.
48. Officers and other employees of Authority.
49. Powers and functions of Authority.
50. Codes of practice.
C
LAUSES

(iii)
51. Power of Authority to issue directions.
52. Power of Authority to call for information.
53. Power of Authority to conduct inquiry.
54. Action to be taken by Authority pursuant to an inquiry.
55. Search and seizure.
56. Co-ordination between Authority and other regulators or authorities.
CHAPTER X
P
ENALTIES AND COMPENSA TION
57. Penalties for contravening certain provisions of the Act.
58. Penalty for failure to comply with data principal requests under Chapter V .
59. Penalty for failure to furnish report, returns, information, etc.
60. Penalty for failure to comply with direction or order issued by Authority.
61. Penalty for contravention where no separate penalty has been provided.
62. Appointment of Adjudicating Officer.
63. Procedure for adjudication by Adjudicating Officer.
64. Compensation.
65. Compensation or penalties not to interfere with other punishment.
66. Recovery of amounts.
CHAPTER XI
A
PPELLATE TRIBUNAL
67. Establishment of Appellate Tribunal.
68. Qualifications, appointment, term, conditions of service of Members.
69. Vacancies.
70. Staff of Appellate Tribunal.
71. Distribution of business amongst Benches.
72. Appeals to Appellate Tribunal.
73. Procedure and powers of Appellate Tribunal.
74. Orders passed by Appellate Tribunal to be executable as a decree.
75. Appeal to Supreme Court.
76. Right to legal representation.
77. Civil court not to have jurisdiction.
CHAPTER XII
F
INANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
78. Grants by Central Government.
79. Data Protection Authority of India Funds.
80. Accounts and Audit.
81. Furnishing of returns, etc., to Central Government.
CHAPTER XIII
O
FFENCES
82. Re-identification and processing of de-identified personal data.
83. Offences to be cognizable and non-bailable.
CLAUSES

84. Offences by companies.
85. Offences by State.
CHAPTER XIV
MISCELLANEOUS
86. Power of Central Government to issue directions.
87. Members, etc., to be public servants.
88. Protection of action taken in good faith.
89. Exemption from tax on income.
90. Delegation.
91. Act to promote framing of policies for digital economy, etc.
92. Bar on processing certain forms of biometric data.
93. Power to make rules.
94. Power to make regulations.
95. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.
96. Overriding effect of this Act.
97. Power to remove difficulties.
98. Amendment of Act 21 of 2000.
THE SCHEDULE.
(iv)
C
LAUSES

THE PERSONAL DATA PROTECTION BILL, 2019
A
BILL
to provide for protection of the privacy of individuals relating to their personal data,
specify the flow and usage of personal data, create a relationship of trust between
persons and entities processing the personal data, protect the rights of individuals
whose personal data are processed, to create a framework for organisational and
technical measures in processing of data, laying down norms for social media
intermediary, cross-border transfer , accountability of entities processing personal
data, remedies for unauthorised and harmful processing, and to establish a Data
Protection Authority of India for the said purposes and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
W
HEREAS the right to privacy is a fundamental right and it is necessary to protect
personal data as an essential facet of informational privacy;
AND WHEREAS the growth of the digital economy has expanded the use of data as a
critical means of communication between persons;
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 373 of 2019

2
AND WHEREAS it is necessary to create a collective culture that fosters a free and fair
digital economy, respecting the informational privacy of individuals, and ensuring
empowerment, progress and innovation through digital governance and inclusion and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Personal Data Protection Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different provisions
of this Act and any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall
be construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
2. The provisions of this Act,—
(A) shall apply to—
(a) the processing of personal data where such data has been collected,
disclosed, shared or otherwise processed within the territory of India;
(b) the processing of personal data by the State, any Indian company, any
citizen of India or any person or body of persons incorporated or created under
Indian law;
(c) the processing of personal data by data fiduciaries or data processors
not present within the territory of India, if such processing is—
(i) in connection with any business carried on in India, or any
systematic activity of offering goods or services to data principals within
the territory of India; or
(ii) in connection with any activity which involves profiling of data
principals within the territory of India.
(B) shall not apply to the processing of anonymised data, other than the
anonymised data referred to in section 91.
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(1) "Adjudicating Officer" means the Adjudicating Officer appointed as such
under sub-section (1) of section 62;
(2)  "anonymisation" in relation to personal data, means such irreversible process
of transforming or converting personal data to a form in which a data principal cannot
be identified, which meets the standards of irreversibility specified by the Authority;
(3) "anonymised data" means data which has undergone the process of
anonymisation;
(4) "Appellate Tribunal" means the Tribunal established under sub-section (1)
or notified under sub-section (4) of section 67;
(5) "Authority" means the Data Protection Authority of India established under
sub-section (1) of section 41;
(6) "automated means" means any equipment capable of operating automatically
in response to instructions given for the purpose of processing data;
(7) "biometric data" means facial images, fingerprints, iris scans, or any other
similar personal data resulting from measurements or technical processing operations
Short title and
commencement.
Application of
Act to
processing of
personal data.
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
carried out on physical, physiological, or behavioural characteristics of a data principal,
which allow or confirm the unique identification of that natural person;
(8) "child" means a person who has not completed eighteen years of age;
(9) "code of practice" means a code of practice issued by the Authority under
section 50;
(10)   "consent" means the consent referred to in section 11;
(11) "data" includes a representation of information, facts, concepts, opinions
or instructions in a manner suitable for communication, interpretation or processing
by humans or by automated means;
(12)  "data auditor" means an independent data auditor referred to in section 29;
(13) "data fiduciary" means any person, including the State, a company, any
juristic entity or any individual who alone or in conjunction with others determines the
purpose and means of processing of personal data;
(14) "data principal" means the natural person to whom the personal data relates;
(15) "data processor" means any person, including the State, a company, any
juristic entity or any individual, who processes personal data on behalf of a data
fiduciary;
(16) "de-identification" means the process by which a data fiduciary or data
processor may remove, or mask identifiers from personal data, or replace them with
such other fictitious name or code that is unique to an individual but does not, on its
own, directly identify the data principal;
(17) "disaster" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( d) of
section 2 of the Disaster Management Act, 2005;
(18) "financial data" means any number or other personal data used to identify
an account opened by, or card or payment instrument issued by a financial institution
to a data principal or any personal data regarding the relationship between a financial
institution and a data principal including financial status and credit history;
(19) "genetic data" means personal data relating to the inherited or acquired
genetic characteristics of a natural person which give unique information about the
behavioural characteristics, physiology or the health of that natural person and which
result, in particular, from an analysis of a biological sample from the natural person in
question;
(20)  "harm" includes—
(i)  bodily or mental injury;
(ii) loss, distortion or theft of identity;
(iii) financial loss or loss of property;
(iv) loss of reputation or humiliation;
(v) loss of employment;
(vi) any discriminatory treatment;
(vii) any subjection to blackmail or extortion;
(viii) any denial or withdrawal of a service, benefit or good resulting from
an evaluative decision about the data principal;
(ix) any restriction placed or suffered directly or indirectly on speech,
movement or any other action arising out of a fear of being observed or surveilled;
or
53 of 2005.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(x) any observation or surveillance that is not reasonably expected by the
data principal;
(21) "health data" means the data related to the state of physical or mental
health of the data principal and includes records regarding the past, present or future
state of the health of such data principal, data collected in the course of registration
for, or provision of health services, data associating the data principal to the provision
of specific health services;
(22) "intra-group schemes" means the schemes approved by the Authority
under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 34;
(23) "in writing" includes any communication in electronic format as defined in
clause (r) of sub-section (1) of section  2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000;
(24) "journalistic purpose" means any activity intended towards the
dissemination through print, electronic or any other media of factual reports, analysis,
opinions, views or documentaries regarding—
(i)  news, recent or current events; or
(ii) any other information which the data fiduciary    believes the public, or
any significantly discernible class of the public, to have an interest in;
(25) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the
expression "notify" shall be construed accordingly;
(26) "official identifier" means any number, code, or other identifier, assigned to
a data principal under a law made by Parliament or any State Legislature which may be
used for the purpose of verifying the identity of a data principal;
(27)  "person" includes—
(i) an individual,
(ii) a Hindu undivided family,
(iii) a company,
(iv)  a firm,
(v) an association of persons or a body of individuals, whether incorporated
or not,
(vi) the State, and
(vii) every artificial juridical person, not falling within any of the preceding
sub-clauses;
(28) "personal data" means data about or relating to a natural person who is
directly or indirectly identifiable, having regard to any characteristic, trait, attribute or
any other feature of the identity of such natural person, whether online or offline, or
any combination of such features with any other information, and shall include any
inference drawn from such data for the purpose of profiling;
(29) "personal data breach" means any unauthorised or accidental disclosure,
acquisition, sharing, use, alteration, destruction of or loss of access to,  personal data
that compromises the confidentiality, integrity or availability of personal data to a data
principal;
(30) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(31) "processing" in relation to personal data, means an operation or set of
operations performed on personal data, and may include operations such as collection,
recording, organisation, structuring, storage, adaptation, alteration, retrieval, use,
alignment or combination, indexing, disclosure by transmission, dissemination or
otherwise making available, restriction, erasure or destruction;
21 of 2000.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
(32) "profiling" means any form of processing of personal data that analyses or
predicts aspects concerning the behaviour, attributes or interests of a data principal;
(33) "regulations" means the regulations made by the Authority under this Act;
(34) "re-identification" means the process by which a data fiduciary or data
processor may reverse a process of de-identification;
(35)  "Schedule" means the Schedule appended to this Act;
(36) "sensitive personal data" means such personal data, which may, reveal, be
related to, or constitute—
(i)  financial data;
(ii)  health data;
(iii) official identifier;
(iv) sex life;
(v)  sexual orientation;
(vi) biometric data;
(vii)  genetic data;
(viii)  transgender status;
(ix)  intersex status;
(x) caste or tribe;
(xi)  religious or political belief or affiliation; or
(xii) any other data categorised as sensitive personal data under section 15.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this clause, the expressions,—
(a) "intersex status" means the condition of a data principal who is—
(i) a combination of female or male;
(ii)  neither wholly female nor wholly male; or
(iii)  neither female nor male;
(b) "transgender status" means the condition of a data principal whose
sense of gender does not match with the gender assigned to that data principal
at birth, whether or not they have undergone sex reassignment surgery, hormone
therapy, laser therapy, or any other similar medical procedure;
(37) "significant data fiduciary" means a data fiduciary classified as such under
sub-section (1) of section 26;
(38) "significant harm" means harm that has an aggravated effect having regard
to the nature of the personal data being processed, the impact, continuity, persistence
or irreversibility of the harm;
(39) "State" means the State as defined under article 12 of the Constitution;
(40) "systematic activity" means any structured or organised activity that
involves an element of planning, method, continuity or persistence.
5
10
15
20
25
30
40

6
CHAPTER II
OBLIGATIONS OF DATA FIDUCIARY
4. No personal data shall be processed by any person, except for any specific, clear
and lawful purpose.
5. Every person processing personal data of a data principal shall process such personal
data—
(a) in a fair and reasonable manner and ensure the privacy of the data principal;
and
(b) for the purpose consented to by the data principal or which is incidental to
or connected with such purpose, and which the data principal would reasonably
expect that such personal data shall be used for, having regard to the purpose, and in
the context and circumstances in which the personal data was collected.
6. The personal data shall be collected only to the extent that is necessary for the
purposes of processing of such personal data.
7. (1) Every data fiduciary shall give to the data principal a notice, at the time of
collection of the personal data, or if the data is not collected from the data principal, as soon
as reasonably practicable, containing the following information, namely:—
(a) the purposes for which the personal data is to be processed;
(b) the nature and categories of personal data being collected;
(c)  the identity and contact details of the data fiduciary and the contact details
of the data protection officer, if applicable;
(d) the right of the data principal to withdraw his consent, and the procedure for
such withdrawal, if the personal data is intended to be processed on the basis of
consent;
(e) the basis for such processing, and the consequences of the failure to provide
such personal data, if the processing of the personal data is based on the grounds
specified in sections 12 to 14;
( f ) the source of such collection, if the personal data is not collected from the
data principal;
(g) the individuals or entities including other data fiduciaries or data processors,
with whom such personal data may be shared, if applicable;
(h) information regarding any cross-border transfer of the personal data that the
data fiduciary intends to carry out, if applicable;
(i) the period for which the personal data shall be retained in terms of section 9
or where such period is not known, the criteria for determining such period;
( j) the existence of and procedure for the exercise of rights mentioned in Chapter V
and any related contact details for the same;
(k) the procedure for grievance redressal under section 32;
(l) the existence of a right to file complaints to the Authority;
(m) where applicable, any rating in the form of a data trust score that may be
assigned to the data fiduciary under sub-section (5) of section 29; and
(n) any other information as may be specified by the regulations.
Prohibition of
processing of
personal data.
Limitation on
purpose of
processing of
personal data.
Limitation on
collection of
personal data.
Requirement
of notice for
collection or
processing of
personal data.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

7
(2) The notice referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall be clear, concise and easily
comprehensible to a reasonable person and in multiple languages where necessary and
practicable.
(3) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply where such notice substantially
prejudices the purpose of processing of personal data under section 12.
8. (1) The data fiduciary shall take necessary steps to ensure that the personal data
processed is complete, accurate, not misleading and updated, having regard to the purpose
for which it is processed.
(2) While taking any steps under sub-section (1), the data fiduciary shall have regard
to whether the personal data—
(a) is likely to be used to make a decision about the data principal;
(b) is likely to be disclosed to other individuals or entities including other data
fiduciaries or processors; or
(c) is kept in a form that distinguishes personal data based on facts from personal
data based on opinions or personal assessments.
(3) Where personal data is disclosed to any other individual or entity, including other
data fiduciary or processor, and the data fiduciary finds that such data does not comply with
the requirement of sub-section (1), the data fiduciary shall take reasonable steps to notify
such individual or entity of this fact.
9. (1) The data fiduciary shall not retain any personal data beyond the period necessary
to satisfy the purpose for which it is processed and shall delete the personal data at the end
of the processing.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the personal data may be
retained for a longer period if explicitly consented to by the data principal, or necessary to
comply with any obligation under any law for the time being in force.
(3) The data fiduciary shall undertake periodic review to determine whether it is
necessary to retain the personal data in its possession.
(4)  Where it is not necessary for personal data to be retained by the data fiduciary
under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), then, such personal data shall be deleted in such
manner as may be specified by regulations.
10. The data fiduciary shall be responsible for complying with the provisions of this
Act in respect of any processing undertaken by it or on its behalf.
11. (1) The personal data shall not be processed, except on the consent given by the
data principal at the commencement of its processing.
(2) The consent of the data principal shall not be valid, unless such consent is—
(a)  free, having regard to whether it complies with the standard specified under
section 14 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872;
(b) informed, having regard to whether the data principal has been provided
with the information required under section 7;
(c) specific, having regard to whether the data principal can determine the scope
of consent in respect of the purpose of processing;
(d) clear, having regard to whether it is indicated through an affirmative action
that is meaningful in a given context; and
(e) capable of being withdrawn, having regard to whether the ease of such
withdrawal is comparable to the ease with which consent may be given.
Restriction on
retention of
personal data.
Accountability
of data
fiduciary.
Consent
necessary for
processing of
personal data.
Quality of
personal data
processed.
9 of 1872.
5
10
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

8
(3) In addition to the provisions contained in sub-section (2), the consent of the data
principal in respect of processing of any sensitive personal data shall be explicitly obtained—
(a) after informing him the purpose of, or operation in, processing which is likely
to cause significant harm to the data principal;
(b) in clear terms without recourse to inference from conduct in a context; and
(c) after giving him the choice of separately consenting to the purposes of,
operations in, the use of different categories of, sensitive personal data relevant to
processing.
(4) The provision of any goods or services or the quality thereof, or the performance
of any contract, or the enjoyment of any legal right or claim, shall not be made conditional on
the consent to the processing of any personal data not necessary for that purpose.
(5) The burden of proof that the consent has been given by the data principal for
processing of the personal data under this section shall be on the data fiduciary.
(6) Where the data principal withdraws his consent from the processing of any personal
data without any valid reason, all legal consequences for the effects of such withdrawal
shall be borne by such data principal.
CHAPTER III
G
ROUNDS FOR PROCESSING OF PERSONAL DATA WITHOUT CONSENT
12. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 11, the personal data may be
processed if such processing is necessary,—
(a) for the performance of any function of the State authorised by law for—
(i) the provision of any service or benefit to the data principal from the
State; or
(ii) the issuance of any certification, licence or permit for any action or
activity of the data principal by the State;
(b) under any law for the time being in force made by the Parliament or any State
Legislature; or
(c)  for compliance with any order or judgment of any Court or Tribunal in India;
(d) to respond to any medical emergency involving a threat to the life or a severe
threat to the health of the data principal or any other individual;
(e) to undertake any measure to provide medical treatment or health services to
any individual during an epidemic, outbreak of disease or any other threat to public
health; or
(f) to undertake any measure to ensure safety of, or provide assistance or services
to, any individual during any disaster or any breakdown of public order.
13. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 11 and subject to sub-section
(2), any personal data, not being any sensitive personal data, may be processed, if such
processing is necessary for—
(a) recruitment or termination of employment of a data principal by the data
fiduciary;
(b) provision of any service to, or benefit sought by, the data principal who is an
employee of the data fiduciary;
Grounds for
processing of
personal data
without
consent in
certain cases.
Processing of
personal data
necessary for
purposes
related to
employment,
etc.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

9
(c) verifying the attendance of the data principal who is an employee of the data
fiduciary; or
(d) any other activity relating to the assessment of the performance of the data
principal who is an employee of the data fiduciary.
(2) Any personal data, not being sensitive personal data, may be processed under
sub-section (1), where the consent of the data principal is not appropriate having regard to
the employment relationship between the data fiduciary and the data principal, or would
involve a disproportionate effort on the part of the data fiduciary due to the nature of the
processing under the said sub-section.
14. (1) In addition to the grounds referred to under sections 12 and 13, the personal
data may be processed without obtaining consent under section 11, if such processing is
necessary for such reasonable purposes as may be specified by regulations, after taking
into consideration—
(a) the interest of the data fiduciary in processing for that purpose;
(b) whether the data fiduciary can reasonably be expected to obtain the consent
of the data principal;
(c)  any public interest in processing for that purpose;
(d)  the effect of the processing activity on the rights of the data principal; and
(e)  the reasonable expectations of the data principal having regard to the context
of the processing.
(2) For the purpose of sub-section ( 1), the expression "reasonable purposes" may
include—
(a) prevention and detection of any unlawful activity including fraud;
(b)  whistle blowing;
(c)  mergers and acquisitions;
(d)  network and information security;
(e)  credit scoring;
(f)  recovery of debt;
(g)  processing of publicly available personal data; and
(h)  the operation of search engines.
(3) Where the Authority specifies a reasonable purpose under sub-section ( 1), it
shall—
(a) lay down, by regulations, such safeguards as may be appropriate to ensure
the protection of the rights of data principals; and
(b) determine where the provision of notice under section 7 shall apply or not
apply having regard to the fact whether such provision shall substantially prejudice
the relevant reasonable purpose.
15. (1) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the Authority and the
sectoral regulator concerned, notify such categories of personal data as "sensitive personal
data", having regard to—
(a) the risk of significant harm that may be caused to the data principal by the
processing of such category of personal data;
(b) the expectation of confidentiality attached to such category of personal
data;
Processing of
personal data
for other
reasonable
purposes.
Categorisation
of personal
data as
sensitive
personal data.
5
10
15
20
25
30
40
45

10
(c) whether a significantly discernible class of data principals may suffer
significant harm from the processing of such category of personal data; and
(d) the adequacy of protection afforded by ordinary provisions applicable to
personal data.
(2) The Authority may specify, by regulations, the additional safeguards or restrictions
for the purposes of repeated, continuous or systematic collection of sensitive personal data
for profiling of such personal data.
CHAPTER IV
P
ERSONAL DA TA AND SENSITIVE PERSONAL DATA OF CHILDREN
16. (1) Every data fiduciary shall process personal data of a child in such manner that
protects the rights of, and is in the best interests of, the child.
(2) The data fiduciary shall, before processing of any personal data of a child, verify
his age and obtain the consent of his parent or guardian, in such manner as may be specified
by regulations.
(3) The manner for verification of the age of child under sub-section ( 2) shall be
specified by regulations, taking into consideration—
(a) the volume of personal data processed;
(b) the proportion of such personal data likely to be that of child;
(c) possibility of harm to child arising out of processing of personal data; and
(d)  such other factors as may be prescribed.
(4) The Authority shall, by regulations, classify any data fiduciary, as guardian data
fiduciary, who—
(a) operate commercial websites or online services directed at children; or
(b)  process large volumes of personal data of children.
(5) The guardian data fiduciary shall be barred from profiling, tracking or behaviouraly
monitoring of, or targeted advertising directed at, children and undertaking any other
processing of personal data that can cause significant harm to the child.
(6) The provisions of sub-section ( 5) shall apply in such modified form to the data
fiduciary offering counselling or child protection services to a child, as the Authority may by
regulations specify.
(7) A guardian data fiduciary providing exclusive counselling or child protection
services to a child shall not require to obtain the consent of parent or guardian of the child
under sub-section (2).
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, the expression "guardian data
fiduciary" means any data fiduciary classified as a guardian data fiduciary under
sub-section (4).
CHAPTER V
R
IGHTS OF DA TA PRINCIPAL
17. (1) The data principal shall have the right to obtain from the data fiduciary—
(a) confirmation whether the data fiduciary is processing or has processed
personal data of the data principal;
(b) the personal data of the data principal being processed or that has been
processed by the data fiduciary, or any summary thereof;
Processing of
personal data
and sensitive
personal data
of children.
Right to
confirmation
and access.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

11
(c) a brief summary of processing activities undertaken by the data fiduciary
with respect to the personal data of the data principal, including any information
provided in the notice under section 7in relation to such processing.
(2) The data fiduciary shall provide the information under sub-section (1) to the data
principal in a clear and concise manner that is easily comprehensible to a reasonable person.
(3) The data principal shall have the right to access in one place the identities of the
data fiduciaries with whom his personal data has been shared by any data fiduciary together
with the categories of personal data shared with them, in such manner as may be specified
by regulations.
18. (1)  The data principal shall where necessary, having regard to the purposes for
which personal data is being processed, subject to such conditions and in such manner as
may be specified by regulations, have the right to—
(a) the correction of inaccurate or misleading personal data;
(b) the completion of incomplete personal data;
(c) the updating of personal data that is out-of-date; and
(d) the erasure of personal data which is no longer necessary for the purpose for
which it was processed.
(2)  Where the data fiduciary receives a request under sub-section ( 1), and the data
fiduciary does not agree with such correction, completion, updation or erasure having regard
to the purposes of processing, such data fiduciary shall provide the data principal with
adequate justification in writing for rejecting the application.
(3) Where the data principal is not satisfied with the justification provided by the data
fiduciary under sub-section (2), the data principal may require that the data fiduciary take
reasonable steps to indicate, alongside the relevant personal data, that the same is disputed
by the data principal.
(4) Where the data fiduciary corrects, completes, updates or erases any personal data
in accordance with sub-section ( 1), such data fiduciary shall also take necessary steps to
notify all relevant entities or individuals to whom such personal data may have been disclosed
regarding the relevant correction, completion, updation or erasure, particularly where such
action may have an impact on the rights and interests of the data principal or on decisions
made regarding them.
19. (1) Where the processing has been carried out through automated means, the data
principal shall have the right to—
(a) receive the following personal data in a structured, commonly used and
machine-readable format—
(i) the personal data provided to the data fiduciary;
(ii) the data which has been generated in the course of provision of services
or use of goods by the data fiduciary; or
(iii) the data which forms part of any profile on the data principal, or which
the data fiduciary has otherwise obtained; and
(b) have the personal data referred to in clause (a) transferred to any other data
fiduciary in the format referred to in that clause.
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply where—
(a) processing is necessary for functions of the State or in compliance of law or
order of a court under section 12;
(b) compliance with the request in sub-section (1) would reveal a trade secret of
any data fiduciary or would not be technically feasible.
Right to
correction and
erasure.
Right to data
portability.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

12
20. (1) The data principal shall have the right to restrict or prevent the continuing
disclosure of his personal data by a data fiduciary where such disclosure—
(a) has served the purpose for which it was collected or is no longer necessary
for the purpose;
(b) was made with the consent of the data principal under section 11 and such
consent has since been withdrawn; or
(c) was made contrary to the provisions of this Act or any other law for the time
being in force.
(2) The rights under sub-section ( 1) may be enforced only on an order of the
Adjudicating Officer made on an application filed by the data principal, in such form and
manner as may be prescribed, on any of the grounds specified under clauses ( a), (b) or
clause (c) of that sub-section:
Provided that no order shall be made under this sub-section unless it is shown by the
data principal that his right or interest in preventing or restricting the continued disclosure
of his personal data overrides the right to freedom of speech and expression and the right to
information of any other citizen.
(3) The Adjudicating Officer shall, while making an order under sub-section (2), having
regard to—
(a) the sensitivity of the personal data;
(b)  the scale of disclosure and the degree of accessibility sought to be restricted
or prevented;
(c) the role of the data principal in public life;
(d) the relevance of the personal data to the public; and
(e) the nature of the disclosure and of the activities of the data fiduciary,
particularly whether the data fiduciary systematically facilitates access to personal
data and whether the activities shall be significantly impeded if disclosures of the
relevant nature were to be restricted or prevented.
(4) Where any person finds that personal data, the disclosure of which has been
restricted or prevented by an order of the Adjudicating Officer under sub-section (2), does
not satisfy the conditions referred to in that sub-section, he may apply for the review of that
order to the Adjudicating Officer in such manner as may be prescribed, and the Adjudicating
Officer shall review his order.
(5) Any person aggrieved by an order made under this section by the Adjudicating
Officer may prefer an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal.
21. (1) The data principal, for exercising any right under this Chapter, except the right
under section 20, shall make a request in writing to the data fiduciary either directly or
through a consent manager with the necessary information as regard to his identity, and the
data fiduciary shall acknowledge the receipt of such request within such period as may be
specified by regulations.
(2) For complying with the request made under sub-section (1), the data fiduciary may
charge such fee as may be specified by regulations:
Provided that no fee shall be required for any request in respect of rights referred to in
clause (a) or (b) of sub-section (1) of section 17 or section 18.
(3) The data fiduciary shall comply with the request under this Chapter and communicate
the same to the data principal, within such period as may be specified by regulations.
(4) Where any request made under this Chapter is refused by the data fiduciary, it shall
provide the data principal the reasons in writing for such refusal and shall inform the data
Right to be
forgotten.
General
conditions for
the exercise of
rights in this
Chapter.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

13
principal regarding the right to file a complaint with the Authority against the refusal, within
such period and in such manner as may be specified by regulations.
(5) The data fiduciary is not obliged to comply with any request under this Chapter
where such compliance shall harm the rights of any other data principal under this Act.
CHAPTER VI
TRANSPARENCY AND ACCOUNTABILITY MEASURES
22. (1) Every data fiduciary shall prepare a privacy by design policy, containing—
(a) the managerial, organisational, business practices and technical systems
designed to anticipate, identify and avoid harm to the data principal;
(b)  the obligations of data fiduciaries;
(c) the technology used in the processing of personal data is in accordance with
commercially accepted or certified standards;
(d) the legitimate interests of businesses including any innovation is achieved
without compromising privacy interests;
(e)  the protection of privacy throughout processing from the point of collection
to deletion of personal data;
(f)  the processing of personal data in a transparent manner; and
(g)  the interest of the data principal is accounted for at every stage of processing
of personal data.
(2) Subject to the regulations made by the Authority, the data fiduciary may submit its
privacy by design policy prepared under sub-section ( 1) to the Authority for certification
within such period and in such manner as may be specified by regulations.
(3) The Authority, or an officer authorised by it, shall certify the privacy by design
policy on being satisfied that it complies with the requirements of sub-section (1).
(4) The privacy by design policy certified under sub-section (3) shall be published on
the website of the data fiduciary and the Authority.
23. (1) Every data fiduciary shall take necessary steps to maintain transparency in
processing personal data and shall make the following information available in such form
and manner as may be specified by regulations—
(a) the categories of personal data generally collected and the manner of such
collection;
(b) the purposes for which personal data is generally processed;
(c)  any categories of personal data processed in exceptional situations or any
exceptional purposes of processing that create a risk of significant harm;
(d) the existence of and the procedure for exercise of rights of data principal
under Chapter V and any related contact details for the same;
(e) the right of data principal to file complaint against the data fiduciary to the
Authority;
(f)  where applicable, any rating in the form of a data trust score that may be
accorded to the data fiduciary under sub-section (5) of section 29;
(g) where applicable, information regarding cross-border transfers of personal
data that the data fiduciary generally carries out; and
(h) any other information as may be specified by regulations.
Privacy by
design policy.
Transparency
in processing
of personal
data.
5
10
15
20
25
30
40
35

14
(2)  The data fiduciary shall notify, from time to time, the important operations in the
processing of personal data related to the data principal in such manner as may be specified
by regulations.
(3) The data principal may give or withdraw his consent to the data fiduciary through
a consent manager.
(4) Where the data principal gives or withdraws consent to the data fiduciary through
a consent manager, such consent or its withdrawal shall be deemed to have been
communicated directly by the data principal.
(5) The consent manager under sub-section (3), shall be registered with the Authority
in such manner and subject to such technical, operational, financial and other conditions as
may be specified by regulations.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, a "consent manager" is a data fiduciary
which enables a data principal to gain, withdraw, review and manage his consent through an
accessible, transparent and interoperable platform.
24. (1) Every data fiduciary and the data processor shall, having regard to the nature,
scope and purpose of processing personal data, the risks associated with such processing,
and the likelihood and severity of the harm that may result from such processing, implement
necessary security safeguards, including—
(a) use of methods such as de-identification and encryption;
(b) steps necessary to protect the integrity of personal data; and
(c) steps necessary to prevent misuse, unauthorised access to, modification,
disclosure or destruction of personal data.
(2) Every data fiduciary and data processor shall undertake a review of its security
safeguards periodically in such manner as may be specified by regulations and take
appropriate measures accordingly.
25. (1) Every data fiduciary shall by notice inform the Authority about the breach of
any personal data processed by the data fiduciary where such breach is likely to cause harm
to any data principal.
(2) The notice referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall include the following particulars,
namely:—
(a) nature of personal data which is the subject-matter of the breach;
(b) number of data principals affected by the breach;
(c) possible consequences of the breach; and
(d) action being taken by the data fiduciary to remedy the breach.
(3) The notice referred to in sub-section (1) shall be made by the data fiduciary to the
Authority as soon as possible and within such period as may be specified by regulations,
following the breach after accounting for any period that may be required to adopt any
urgent measures to remedy the breach or mitigate any immediate harm.
(4) Where it is not possible to provide all the information specified in sub-section (2)
at the same time, the data fiduciary shall provide such information to the Authority in phases
without undue delay.
(5) Upon receipt of a notice, the Authority shall determine whether such breach should
be reported by the data fiduciary to the data principal, taking into account the severity of the
harm that may be caused to such data principal or whether some action is required on the
part of the data principal to mitigate such harm.
Reporting of
personal data
breach.
Security
safeguards.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

15
(6) The Authority may, in addition to requiring the data fiduciary to report the personal
data breach to the data principal under sub-section ( 5), direct the data fiduciary to take
appropriate remedial action as soon as possible and to conspicuously post the details of the
personal data breach on its website.
(7) The Authority may, in addition, also post the details of the personal data breach on
its website.
26. (1)  The Authority shall, having regard to the following factors, notify any data
fiduciary or class of data fiduciary as significant data fiduciary, namely:—
(a) volume of personal data processed;
(b)  sensitivity of personal data processed;
(c)  turnover of the data fiduciary;
(d)  risk of harm by processing by the data fiduciary;
(e)  use of new technologies for processing; and
(f)  any other factor causing harm from such processing.
(2) The data fiduciary or class of data fiduciary referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall
register itself with the Authority in such manner as may be specified by regulations.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in this Act, if the Authority is of the opinion that any
processing by any data fiduciary or class of data fiduciary carries a risk of significant harm
to any data principal, it may, by notification, apply all or any of the obligations specified in
sections 27 to 30 to such data fiduciary or class of data fiduciary as if it is a significant data
fiduciary.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, any social media intermediary,—
(i) with users above such threshold as may be notified by the Central
Government, in consultation with the Authority; and
(ii) whose actions have, or are likely to have a significant impact on electoral
democracy, security of the State, public order or the sovereignty and integrity of India,
shall be notified by the Central Government, in consultation with the Authority, as a significant
data fiduciary:
Provided that different thresholds may be notified for different classes of social media
intermediaries.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, a "social media intermediary" is
an intermediary who primarily or solely enables online interaction between two or more
users and allows them to create, upload, share, disseminate, modify or access information
using its services, but shall not include intermediaries which primarily,—
(a) enable commercial or business oriented transactions;
(b) provide access to the Internet;
(c) in the nature of search-engines, on-line encyclopedias, e-mail services or on-
line storage services.
27. (1) Where the significant data fiduciary intends to undertake any processing
involving new technologies or large scale profiling or use of sensitive personal data such as
genetic data or biometric data, or any other processing which carries a risk of significant
harm to data principals, such processing shall not be commenced unless the data fiduciary
has undertaken a data protection impact assessment in accordance with the provisions of
this section.
Classification
of data
fiduciaries as
significant
data
fiduciaries.
Data
protection
impact
assessment.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

16
(2) The Authority may, by regulations specify, such circumstances, or class of data
fiduciary, or processing operation where such data protection impact assessment shall be
mandatory, and also specify the instances where a data auditor under this Act shall be
engaged by the data fiduciary to undertake a data protection impact assessment.
(3) A data protection impact assessment shall, inter alia, contain—
(a) detailed description of the proposed processing operation, the purpose of
processing and the nature of personal data being processed;
(b)  assessment of the potential harm that may be caused to the data principals
whose personal data is proposed to be processed; and
(c) measures for managing, minimising, mitigating or removing such risk of harm.
(4)  Upon completion of the data protection impact assessment, the data protection
officer appointed under sub-section ( 1) of section 30, shall review the assessment and
submit the assessment with his finding to the Authority in such manner as may be specified
by regulations.
(5) On receipt of the assessment and its review, if the Authority has reason to believe
that the processing is likely to cause harm to the data principals, the Authority may direct the
data fiduciary to cease such processing or direct that such processing shall be subject to
such conditions as the Authority may deem fit.
28. (1) The significant data fiduciary shall maintain accurate and up-to-date records of
the following, in such form and manner as may be specified by regulations, namely:—
(a) important operations in the data life-cycle including collection, transfers,
and erasure of personal data to demonstrate compliance as required under section 10;
(b)  periodic review of security safeguards under section 24;
(c) data protection impact assessments under section 27; and
(d) any other aspect of processing as may be specified by regulations.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, this section shall also apply to
the State.
(3) Every social media intermediary which is notified as a significant data fiduciary
under sub-section (4) of section 26 shall enable the users who register their service from
India, or use their services in India, to voluntarily verify their accounts in such manner as
may be prescribed.
(4) Any user who voluntarily verifies his account shall be provided with such
demonstrable and visible mark of verification, which shall be visible to all users of the
service, in such manner as may be prescribed.
29. (1) The significant data fiduciary shall have its policies and the conduct of its
processing of personal data audited annually by an independent data auditor under this
Act.
(2) The data auditor shall evaluate the compliance of the data fiduciary with the
provisions of this Act, including—
(a) clarity and effectiveness of notices under section 7;
(b) effectiveness of measures adopted under section 22;
(c) transparency in relation to processing activities under section 23;
(d) security safeguards adopted pursuant to section 24;
(e) instances of personal data breach and response of the data fiduciary, including
the promptness of notice to the Authority under section 25;
Maintenance
of records.
Audit of
policies and
conduct of
processing,
etc.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

17
(f) timely implementation of processes and effective adherence to obligations
under  sub-section (3) of section 28; and
(g) any other matter as may be specified by regulations.
(3) The Authority shall specify, by regulations, the form and procedure for conducting
audits under this section.
(4) The Authority shall register in such manner, the persons with expertise in the area
of information technology, computer systems, data science, data protection or privacy,
possessing such qualifications, experience and eligibility having regard to factors such as
independence, integrity and ability, as it may be specified by regulations, as data auditors
under this Act.
(5) A data auditor may assign a rating in the form of a data trust score to the data
fiduciary pursuant to a data audit conducted under this section.
(6) The Authority shall, by regulations, specify the criteria for assigning a rating in the
form of a data trust score having regard to the factors mentioned in sub-section (2).
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where the Authority is of
the view that the data fiduciary is processing personal data in such manner that is likely to
cause harm to a data principal, the Authority may direct the data fiduciary to conduct an
audit and shall appoint a data auditor for that purpose.
30. (1) Every significant data fiduciary shall appoint a data protection officer possessing
such qualification and experience as may be specified by regulations for carrying out the
following functions—
(a) providing information and advice to the data fiduciary on matters relating to
fulfilling its obligations under this Act;
(b) monitoring personal data processing activities of the data fiduciary to ensure
that such processing does not violate the provisions of this Act;
(c) providing advice to the data fiduciary on carrying out the data protection
impact assessments, and carry out its review under sub-section (4) of section 27;
(d) providing advice to the data fiduciary on the development of internal
mechanisms to satisfy the principles specified under section 22;
(e) providing assistance to and co-operating with the Authority on matters of
compliance of the data fiduciary with the provisions under this Act;
(f)  act as the point of contact for the data principal for the purpose of grievances
redressal under section 32; and
(g) maintaining an inventory of records to be maintained by the data fiduciary
under section 28.
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall prevent the data fiduciary from assigning
any other function to the data protection officer, which it may consider necessary.
(3) The data protection officer appointed under sub-section (1) shall be based in India
and shall represent the data fiduciary under this Act.
31. (1) The data fiduciary shall not engage, appoint, use or involve a data processor to
process personal data on its behalf without a contract entered into by the data fiduciary and
such data processor.
(2) The data processor referred to in sub-section (1) shall not engage, appoint, use, or
involve another data processor in the processing on its behalf, except with the authorisation
of the data fiduciary and unless permitted in the contract referred to in sub-section (1).
Data
protection
officer.
Processing by
entities other
than data
fiduciaries.
5
10
15
20
25
30
40
35
45

18
(3) The data processor, and any employee of the data fiduciary or the data processor,
shall only process personal data in accordance with the instructions of the data fiduciary
and treat it confidential.
32. (1) Every data fiduciary shall have in place the procedure and effective mechanisms
to redress the grievances of data principals efficiently and in a speedy manner.
(2)  A data principal may make a complaint of contravention of any of the provisions of
this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder, which has caused or is likely to cause
harm to such data principal, to—
(a) the data protection officer, in case of a significant data fiduciary; or
(b) an officer designated for this purpose, in case of any other data fiduciary.
(3) A complaint made under sub-section (2) shall be resolved by the data fiduciary in
an expeditious manner and not later than thirty days from the date of receipt of the complaint
by such data fiduciary.
(4)  Where a complaint is not resolved within the period specified under sub-section (3),
or where the data principal is not satisfied with the manner in which the complaint is resolved,
or the data fiduciary has rejected the complaint, the data principal may file a complaint to the
Authority in such manner as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER VII
R
ESTRICTION ON TRANSFER OF PERSONAL DATA OUTSIDE INDIA
 33. (1) Subject to the conditions in sub-section (1) of section 34, the sensitive personal
data may be transferred outside India, but such sensitive personal data shall continue to be
stored in India.
(2) The critical personal data shall only be processed in India.
Explanation.—For the purposes of sub-section (2), the expression "critical personal
data" means such personal data as may be notified by the Central Government to be the
critical personal data.
34. (1) The sensitive personal data may only be transferred outside India for the
purpose of processing, when explicit consent is given by the data principal for such transfer,
and where—
(a) the transfer is made pursuant to a contract or intra-group scheme approved
by the Authority:
Provided that such contract or intra-group scheme shall not be approved, unless
it makes the provisions for—
(i) effective protection of the rights of the data principal under this Act,
including in relation to further transfer to any other person; and
(ii) liability of the data fiduciary for harm caused due to non-compliance
of the provisions of such contract or intra-group scheme by such transfer; or
(b) the Central Government, after consultation with the Authority, has allowed
the transfer to a country or, such entity or class of entity in a country or, an international
organisation on the basis of its finding that—
(i) such sensitive personal data shall be subject to an adequate level of
protection, having regard to the applicable laws and international agreements;
and
Grievance
redressal by
data fiduciary.
Prohibition on
processing of
sensitive
personal data
and critical
personal data
outside India
Conditions
for transfer of
sensitive
personal data
and critical
personal data.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

19
(ii) such transfer shall not prejudicially affect the enforcement of relevant
laws by authorities with appropriate jurisdiction:
Provided that any finding under this clause shall be reviewed periodically
in such manner as may be prescribed;
(c) the Authority has allowed transfer of any sensitive personal data or class of
sensitive personal data necessary for any specific purpose.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2) of section 33, any critical
personal data may be transferred outside India, only where such transfer  is—
(a) to a person or entity engaged in the provision of health services or emergency
services where such transfer is necessary for prompt action under section 12; or
(b) to a country or, any entity or class of entity in a country or, to an international
organisation, where the Central Government has deemed such transfer to be permissible
under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) and where such transfer in the opinion of the
Central Government does not prejudicially affect the security and strategic interest of
the State.
(3) Any transfer under clause (a) of sub-section (2) shall be notified to the Authority
within such period as may be specified by regulations.
CHAPTER VIII
E
XEMPTIONS
35. Where the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient,—
(i) in the interest of sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State,
friendly relations with foreign States, public order; or
(ii) for preventing incitement to the commission of any cognizable offence relating
to sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly relations with
foreign States, public order,
it may, by order, for reasons to be recorded in writing, direct that all or any of the provisions
of this Act shall not apply to any agency of the Government in respect of processing of such
personal data, as may be specified in the order subject to such procedure, safeguards and
oversight mechanism to be followed by the agency, as may be prescribed.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
(i) the term "cognizable offence" means the offence as defined in
clause (c) of section 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973;
(ii) the expression "processing of such personal data" includes sharing
by or sharing with such agency of the Government by any data fiduciary, data
processor or data principal.
36. The provisions of Chapter II except section 4, Chapters III to V , Chapter VI except
section 24, and Chapter VII shall not apply where—
(a) personal data is processed in the interests of prevention, detection,
investigation and prosecution of any offence or any other contravention of any law
for the time being in force;
Power of
Central
Government
to exempt
any agency of
Government
from
application of
Act.
2 of 1974.
Exemption of
certain
provisions for
certain
processing of
personal data.
5
10
15
20
25
30
40
35

20
(b) disclosure of personal data is necessary for enforcing any legal right or
claim, seeking any relief, defending any charge, opposing any claim, or obtaining any
legal advice from an advocate in any impending legal proceeding;
(c) processing of personal data by any court or tribunal in India is necessary for
the exercise of any judicial function;
(d) personal data is processed by a natural person for any personal or domestic
purpose, except where such processing involves disclosure to the public, or is
undertaken in connection with any professional or commercial activity; or
(e) processing of personal data is necessary for or relevant to a journalistic
purpose, by any person and is in compliance with any code of ethics issued by the
Press Council of India, or by any media self-regulatory organisation.
37. The Central Government may, by notification, exempt from the application of this
Act, the processing of personal data of data principals not within the territory of India,
pursuant to any contract entered into with any person outside the territory of India, including
any company incorporated outside the territory of India, by any data processor or any class
of data processors incorporated under Indian law.
38. Where the processing of personal data is necessary for research, archiving, or
statistical purposes, and the Authority is satisfied that—
(a) the compliance with the provisions of this Act shall disproportionately divert
resources from such purpose;
(b) the purposes of processing cannot be achieved if the personal data is
anonymised;
(c) the data fiduciary has carried out de-identification in accordance with the
code of practice specified under section 50 and the purpose of processing can be
achieved if the personal data is in de-identified form;
(d) the  personal data shall not be used to take any decision specific to or action
directed to the data principal; and
(e) the personal data shall not be processed in the manner that gives rise to a risk
of significant harm to the data principal,
it may, by notification, exempt such class of research, archiving, or statistical purposes from
the application of any of the provisions of this Act as may be specified by regulations.
39. (1) The provisions of sections 7, 8, 9, clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 17 and
sections 19 to 32 shall not apply where the processing of personal data by a small entity is
not automated.
(2)  For the purposes of sub-section (1), a "small entity" means such data fiduciary as
may be classified, by regulations, by Authority, having regard to—
(a) the turnover of data fiduciary in the preceding financial year;
(b) the purpose of collection of personal data for disclosure to any other
individuals or entities; and
(c) the volume of personal data processed by such data fiduciary in any one day
in the preceding twelve calendar months.
40. (1) The Authority shall, for the purposes of encouraging innovation in artificial
intelligence, machine-learning or any other emerging technology in public interest, create a
Sandbox.
Power of
Central
Government
to exempt
certain data
processors.
Exemption
for research,
archiving or
statistical
purposes.
Exemption
for manual
processing by
small entities.
Sandbox for
encouraging
innovation,
etc.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

21
(2) Any data fiduciary whose privacy by design policy is certified by the Authority
under sub-section (3) of section 22 shall be eligible to apply, in such manner as may be
specified by regulations, for inclusion in the Sandbox created under sub-section (1).
(3) Any data fiduciary applying for inclusion in the Sandbox under sub-section ( 2)
shall furnish the following information, namely:—
(a) the term for which it seeks to utilise the benefits of Sandbox, provided that
such term shall not exceed twelve months;
(b) the innovative use of technology and its beneficial uses;
(c) the data principals or categories of data principals participating under the
proposed processing; and
(d) any other information as may be specified by regulations.
(4) The Authority shall, while including any data fiduciary in the Sandbox, specify—
(a)  the term of the inclusion in the Sandbox, which may be renewed not more
than twice, subject to a total period of thirty-six months;
(b) the safeguards including terms and conditions in view of the obligations
under clause (c) including the requirement of consent of data principals participating
under any licensed activity, compensation to such data principals and penalties in
relation to such safeguards; and
(c) that the following obligations shall not apply or apply with modified form to
such data fiduciary, namely:—
(i) the obligation to specify clear and specific purposes under sections 4
and 5;
 (ii) limitation on collection of personal data under section 6; and
(iii) any other obligation to the extent, it is directly depending on the
obligations under sections 5 and 6; and
(iv) the restriction on retention of personal data under section 9.
CHAPTER IX
D
ATA PROTECTION AUTHORITY OF INDIA
41. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, establish, for the purposes of
this Act, an Authority to be called the Data Protection Authority of India.
(2) The Authority referred to in sub-section (1) shall be a body corporate by the name
aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power, subject to the
provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable,
and to contract and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.
(3) The head office of the Authority shall be at such place as may be prescribed.
(4) The Authority may, with the prior approval of the Central Government, establish its
offices at other places in India.
42. (1) The Authority shall consist of a Chairperson and not more than six whole-time
Members, of which one shall be a person having qualification and experience in law.
(2) The Chairperson and the Members of the Authority shall be appointed by the
Central Government on the recommendation made by a selection committee consisting of—
(a) the Cabinet Secretary, who shall be Chairperson of the selection committee;
(b) the Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry or Department
dealing with the Legal Affairs; and
Establishment
of Authority.
Composition
and
qualifications
for
appointment
of Members.
5
10
15
20
25
30
40
35
45

22
(c) the Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry or Department
dealing with the Electronics and Information Technology.
(3) The procedure to be followed by the Selection Committee for recommending the
names under sub-section (2) shall be such as may be prescribed.
(4) The Chairperson and the Members of the Authority shall be persons of ability,
integrity and standing, and shall have qualification and specialised knowledge and experience
of, and not less than ten years in the field of data protection, information technology, data
management, data science, data security, cyber and internet laws, public administration,
national security or related subjects.
(5) A vacancy caused to the office of the Chairperson or any other member of the
Authority shall be filled up within a period of three months from the date on which such
vacancy occurs.
43. (1) The Chairperson and the Members of the Authority shall be appointed for a
term of five years or till they attain the age of sixty-five years, whichever is earlier, and they
shall not be eligible for re-appointment.
(2)  The salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service
of the Chairperson and the Members of the Authority shall be such as may be prescribed.
(3)  The Chairperson and the Members shall not, during their term and for a period of
two years from the date on which they cease to hold office, accept—
(a) any employment either under the Central Government or under any State
Government; or
(b) any appointment, in any capacity whatsoever, with a significant data fiduciary.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), the Chairperson or a
Member of the Authority may—
(a) relinquish his office by giving in writing to the Central Government a notice
of not less than three months; or
(b) be removed from his office in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
44. (1) The Central Government may remove from office, the Chairperson or any
Member of the Authority who—
(a) has been adjudged as an insolvent;
(b) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a Chairperson or
member;
(c)  has been convicted of an offence, which in the opinion of the Central
Government, involves moral turpitude;
(d) has so abused their position as to render their continuation in office
detrimental to the public interest; or
(e) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially
their functions as a Chairperson or a member.
(2) No Chairperson or any member of the Authority shall be removed under clause (d)
or (e) of sub-section (1) unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
45. The Chairperson of the Authority shall have powers of general superintendence
and direction of the affairs of the Authority and shall also exercise all powers and do all such
acts and things which may be exercised or done by the Authority under this Act.
Terms and
conditions of
appointment.
Removal of
Chairperson or
other
Members.
Powers of
Chairperson.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

23
46. (1) The Chairperson and Members of the Authority shall meet at such times and
places and shall observe such rules and procedures in regard to transaction of business at
its meetings including quorum at such meetings, as may be prescribed.
(2) If, for any reason, the Chairperson is unable to attend any meeting of the Authority,
any other member chosen by the Members present at the meeting, shall preside the meeting.
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Authority shall be decided
by a majority of votes of the Members present and voting, and in the event of an equality of
votes, the Chairperson or in his absence, the member presiding, shall have the right to
exercise a second or casting vote.
(4) Any Member who has any direct or indirect pecuniary interest in any matter coming
up for consideration at a meeting of the Authority shall disclose the nature of his interest at
such meeting, which shall be recorded in the proceedings of the Authority and such member
shall not take part in any deliberation or decision of the Authority with respect to that matter.
47. No act or proceeding of the Authority shall be invalid merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy or defect in the constitution of the Authority;
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person as a Chairperson or member; or
(c)  any irregularity in the procedure of the Authority not affecting the merits of
the case.
48. (1) The Authority may appoint such officers, other employees, consultants and
experts as it may consider necessary for effectively discharging of its functions under this
Act.
(2) Any remuneration, salary or allowances, and other terms and conditions of service
of such officers, employees, consultants and experts shall be such as may be specified by
regulations.
49. (1) It shall be the duty of the Authority to protect the interests of data principals,
prevent any misuse of personal data, ensure compliance with the provisions of this Act, and
promote awareness about data protection.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing  and other functions under
this Act, the functions of the Authority shall include—
(a) monitoring and enforcing application of the provisions of this Act;
(b) taking prompt and appropriate action in response to personal data breach in
accordance with the provisions of this Act;
(c) maintaining a database on its website containing names of significant data
fiduciaries along with a rating in the form of a data trust score indicating compliance
with the obligations of this Act by such fiduciaries;
(d) examination of any data audit reports and taking any action pursuant thereto;
(e) issuance of a certificate of registration to data auditors and renewal, withdrawal,
suspension or cancellation thereof and maintaining a database of registered data
auditors and specifying the qualifications, code of conduct, practical training and
functions to be performed by such data auditors;
( f ) classification of data fiduciaries;
(g) monitoring cross-border transfer of personal data;
(h) specifying codes of practice;
Meetings of
Authority.
Vacancies,
etc., not to
invalidate
proceedings
of Authority.
Officers and
other
employees of
Authority.
Powers and
functions of
Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
40
35

24
(i)  promoting awareness and understanding of the risks, rules, safeguards and
rights in respect of protection of personal data amongst data fiduciaries and data
principals;
(j) monitoring technological developments and commercial practices that may
affect protection of personal data;
(k) promoting measures and undertaking research for innovation in the field of
protection of personal data;
(l) advising Central Government, State Government and any other authority on
measures required to be taken to promote protection of personal data and ensuring
consistency of application and enforcement of this Act;
(m) specifying fees and other charges for carrying out the purposes of this Act;
(n)  receiving and inquiring complaints under this Act; and
(o) performing such other functions as may be prescribed.
(3) Where, pursuant to the provisions of this Act, the Authority processes any personal
data, it shall be construed as the data fiduciary or the data processor in relation to such
personal data as applicable, and where the Authority comes into possession of any
information that is treated as confidential by the data fiduciary or data processor, it shall not
disclose such information unless required under any law to do so, or where it is required to
carry out its function under this section.
50. (1) The Authority shall, by regulations, specify codes of practice to promote good
practices of data protection and facilitate compliance with the obligations under this Act.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the Authority may approve
any code of practice submitted by an industry or trade association, an association
representing the interest of data principals, any sectoral regulator or statutory Authority, or
any departments or ministries of the Central or State Government.
(3) The Authority shall ensure transparency and compliance with the obligations of
data fiduciary and the rights of the data principal under this Act while specifying or approving
any code of practice under this section.
(4) A code of practice under sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2), shall not be issued
unless the Authority has made consultation with the sectoral regulators and other
stakeholders including the public and has followed such procedure as may be prescribed.
(5)  A code of practice issued under this section shall not derogate from the provisions
of this Act or any other law for the time being in force.
(6) The code of practice under this Act may include the following matters, namely:—
(a) requirements for notice under section 7 including any model forms or guidance
relating to notice;
(b) measures for ensuring quality of personal data processed under section 8;
(c) measures pertaining to the retention of personal data under section 9;
(d) manner for obtaining valid consent under section 11;
(e) processing of personal data under section 12;
(f) activities where processing of personal data may be undertaken under
section 14;
(g) processing of sensitive personal data under Chapter III;
(h) processing of personal data under any other ground for processing, including
processing of personal data of children and age-verification under this Act;
Codes of
practice.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

25
(i) exercise of any right by data principals under Chapter V;
(j)  the standards and means by which a data principal may avail the right to data
portability under section 19;
(k) transparency and accountability measures including the standards thereof
to be maintained by data fiduciaries and data processors under Chapter VI;
(l) standards for security safeguards to be maintained by data fiduciaries and
data processors under section 24;
(m)  methods of de-identification and anonymisation;
(n)  methods of destruction, deletion, or erasure of personal data where required
under this Act;
(o) appropriate action to be taken by the data fiduciary or data processor in
response to a personal data breach under section 25;
(p) manner in which data protection impact assessments may be carried out by
the data fiduciary or a class thereof under section 27;
(q) transfer of personal data outside India pursuant to section 34;
(r) processing of any personal data or sensitive personal data to carry out any
activity necessary for research, archiving or statistical purposes under section 38;
and
(s) any other matter which, in the view of the Authority, may be necessary to be
provided in the code of practice.
(7)  The Authority may review, modify or revoke a code of practice issued under this
section in such manner as may be prescribed.
51. (1) The Authority may, for the discharge of its functions under this Act, issue such
directions from time to time as it may consider necessary to any data fiduciary or data
processor who shall be bound to comply with such directions.
(2) No direction shall be issued under sub-section (1) unless the Authority has given
a reasonable opportunity of being heard to the data fiduciaries or data processor concerned.
(3) The Authority may, on a representation made to it or on its own motion, modify,
suspend, withdraw or cancel any direction issued under sub-section ( 1) and in doing so,
may impose such conditions as it deems fit, subject to which the modification, suspension,
withdrawal or cancellation shall have effect.
52. ( 1) Without prejudice to the other provisions of this Act, the Authority may
require a data fiduciary or data processor to provide such information as may be reasonably
required by it for discharging its functions under this Act.
(2)  If the Authority requires a data fiduciary or a data processor to provide any
information under sub-section (1), it shall provide a notice in writing to the data fiduciary or
the data processor stating the reasons for such requisition.
(3) The Authority shall, by regulations, specify the manner in which the data fiduciary
or data processor shall provide the information sought in sub-section ( 1), including the
designation of the officer or employee of the Authority who may seek such information, the
period within which such information is to be furnished and the form in which such information
may be provided.
53. (1) The Authority may, on its own or on a complaint received by it, inquire or cause
to be inquired, if it has reasonable grounds to believe that—
(a) the activities of the data fiduciary or data processor are being conducted in
a manner which is detrimental to the interest of data principals; or
Power of
Authority to
issue
directions.
Power of
Authority to
call for
information.
Power of
Authority to
conduct
inquiry.
5
10
15
20
25
30
40
35
45

26
(b) any data fiduciary or data processor has contravened any of the provisions
of this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder, or any direction of the Authority.
(2)  For the purposes of sub-section ( 1), the Authority shall, by an order in writing,
appoint one of its officers as an Inquiry Officer to inquire into the affairs of such data
fiduciary or data processor and to report to the Authority on any inquiry made.
(3) For the purpose of any inquiry under this section, the Inquiry Officer may, wherever
necessary, seek the assistance of any other person.
(4) The order referred to in sub-section ( 2) shall specify the reasons for the inquiry
and the scope of the inquiry and may be modified from time to time.
(5) Every officer, employee or other person acting under the direct authority of the
data fiduciary or the data processor, or a service provider, or a contractor, where services are
being obtained by or provided to the data fiduciary or data processor, as the case may be,
shall be bound to produce before the Inquiry Officer, all such books, registers, documents,
records and any data in their custody or power and to furnish to the Inquiry Officer any
statement and information relating to the affairs of the data fiduciary or data processor as the
Inquiry Officer may require within such time as the said Inquiry Officer may specify.
(6) The Inquiry Officer shall provide a notice in writing to the persons referred to in
sub-section (5) stating the reasons thereof and the relationship between the data fiduciary
and the Inquiry Officer.
(7) The Inquiry Officer may keep in its custody any books, registers, documents,
records and other data produced under sub-section ( 5) for six months and thereafter shall
return the same to the person by whom or on whose behalf such books, registers, documents,
record and data are produced, unless an approval to retain such books, registers, documents,
record and data for an additional period not exceeding three months has been obtained from
the Authority.
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
while exercising the powers under this section, the Authority or the Inquiry Officer, as the
case may be, shall have the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely—
(a) the discovery and production of books of account and other documents, at
such place and at such time as may be specified;
(b) summoning and enforcing the attendance of persons and examining them on
oath;
(c)  inspection of any book, document, register or record of any data fiduciary;
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents; and
(e)  any other matter which may be prescribed.
54. (1) On receipt of a report under sub-section (2) of section 53, the Authority may,
after giving such opportunity to the data fiduciary or data processor to make a representation
in connection with the report as the Authority deems reasonable, by an order in writing—
(a) issue a warning to the data fiduciary or data processor where the business or
activity is likely to violate the provisions of this Act;
(b) issue a reprimand to the data fiduciary or data processor where the business
or activity has violated the provisions of this Act;
(c)  require the data fiduciary or data processor to cease and desist from
committing or causing any violation of the provisions of this Act;
(d) require the data fiduciary or data processor to modify its business or activity
to bring it in compliance with the provisions of this Act;
5 of 1908.
Action to be
taken by
Authority
pursuant to an
inquiry.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

27
(e) temporarily suspend or discontinue business or activity of the data fiduciary
or data processor which is in contravention of the provisions of this Act;
(f) vary, suspend or cancel any registration granted by the Authority in case of
a significant data fiduciary;
(g) suspend or discontinue any cross-border flow of personal data; or
(h) require the data fiduciary or data processor to take any such action in respect
of any matter arising out of the report as the Authority may deems fit.
(2) A data fiduciary or data processor aggrieved by an order made under this section
may prefer an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal.
55. (1) Where in the course of inquiry under section 53, the Inquiry Officer has
reasonable ground to believe that any books, registers, documents, records or data belonging
to any person as mentioned therein, are likely to be tampered with, altered, mutilated,
manufactured, falsified or destroyed, the Inquiry Officer may make an application to such
designated court, as may be notified by the Central Government, for an order for the seizure
of such books, registers, documents and records.
(2)  The Inquiry Officer may require the services of any police officer or any officer of
the Central Government, or of both, to assist him for the purposes specified in
sub-section (1) and it shall be the duty of every such officer to comply with such requisition.
(3) After considering the application and hearing the Inquiry Officer, if necessary, the
designated court may, by order, authorise the Inquiry Officer—
(a) to enter, with such assistance, as may be required, the place or places where such
books, registers, documents and records are kept;
(b) to search that place or those places in the manner specified in the order; and
(c) to seize books, registers, documents and records it considers necessary for the
purposes of the inquiry.
(4)The Inquiry Officer shall keep in its custody the books, registers, documents and
records seized under this section for such period not later than the conclusion of the inquiry
as it considers necessary and thereafter shall return the same to the person, from whose
custody or power they were seized and inform the designated court of such return.
(5) Save as otherwise provided in this section, every search or seizure made under this
section shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 relating to searches or seizures made under that Code.
56. Where any action proposed to be taken by the Authority under this Act is such
that any other regulator or authority constituted under a law made by Parliament or the State
legislature may also have concurrent jurisdiction, the Authority shall consult such other
regulator or authority before taking such action and may also enter into a memorandum of
understanding with such other regulator or authority governing the coordination of such
actions.
CHAPTER X
P
ENALTIES AND COMPENSA TION
57. (1) Where the data fiduciary contravenes any of the following provisions,—
(a) obligation to take prompt and appropriate action in response to a data security
breach under section 25;
(b) failure to register with the Authority under sub-section (2) of section 26,
Search and
seizure.
2 of 1974.
Co-ordination
between
Authority and
other
regulators or
authorities.
Penalties for
contravening
certain
provisions of
the Act.
5
10
15
20
25
30
40
35

28
(c) obligation to undertake a data protection impact assessment by a significant
data fiduciary under section 27;
(d) obligation to conduct a data audit by a significant data fiduciary under
section 29;
(e) appointment of a data protection officer by a significant data fiduciary under
section 30,
it shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to five crore rupees or two per cent. of its total
worldwide turnover of the preceding financial year, whichever is higher;
(2) Where a data fiduciary contravenes any of the following provisions,—
(a) processing of personal data in violation of the provisions of Chapter II or
Chapter III;
(b)  processing of personal data of children in violation of the provisions of
Chapter IV;
(c) failure to adhere to security safeguards as per section 24; or
(d) transfer of personal data outside India in violation of the provisions of
Chapter VII,
it shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to fifteen crore rupees or four per cent. of its
total worldwide turnover of the preceding financial year, whichever is higher.
(3) For the purposes of this section,—
 ( a) the expression "total worldwide turnover" means the gross amount of
revenue recognised in the profit and loss account or any other equivalent statement,
as applicable, from the sale, supply or distribution of goods or services or on account
of services rendered, or both, and where such revenue is generated within India and
outside India.
(b) it is hereby clarified that total worldwide turnover in relation to a data fiduciary
is the total worldwide turnover of the data fiduciary and the total worldwide turnover
of any group entity of the data fiduciary where such turnover of a group entity arises
as a result of the processing activities of the data fiduciary, having regard to factors,
including—
(i) the alignment of the overall economic interests of the data fiduciary
and the group entity;
(ii)  the relationship between the data fiduciary and the group entity
specifically in relation to the processing activity undertaken by the data fiduciary;
and
(iii) the degree of control exercised by the group entity over the data
fiduciary or vice versa, as the case may be.
(c) where of any provisions referred to in this section has been contravened by
the State, the maximum penalty shall not exceed five crore rupees under
sub-section (1), and fifteen crore rupees under sub-section (2), respectively.
58. Where, any data fiduciary, without any reasonable explanation, fails to comply
with any request made by a data principal under Chapter V , such data fiduciary shall be liable
to a penalty of five thousand rupees for each day during which such default continues,
subject to a maximum of ten lakh rupees in case of significant data fiduciaries and five lakh
rupees in other cases.
Penalty for
failure to
comply with
data principal
requests under
Chapter V.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

29
59. If any data fiduciary, who is required under this Act, or the rules or regulations
made thereunder, to furnish any report, return or information to the Authority, fails to furnish
the same, then such data fiduciary shall be liable to penalty which shall be ten thousand
rupees for each day during which such default continues, subject to a maximum of twenty
lakh rupees in case of significant data fiduciaries and five lakh rupees in other cases.
60. If any data fiduciary or data processor fails to comply with any direction issued by
the Authority under section 51or order issued by the Authority under section 54, such data
fiduciary or data processor shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to twenty thousand
rupees for each day during which such default continues, subject to a maximum of two
crores in case of a data processor it may extend to five thousand rupees for each day during
which such default continues, subject to a maximum of fifty lakh rupees.
61.  Where any person fails to comply with any provision of this Act or the rules or
regulations made thereunder applicable to such person, for which no separate penalty has
been provided, then, such person shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to a maximum
of one crore rupees in case of significant data fiduciaries, and a maximum of  twenty five lakh
rupees in other cases.
62. (1) For the purpose of adjudging the penalties under sections 57 to 61or awarding
compensation under section 64, the Authority shall appoint such Adjudicating Officer as
may be prescribed.
(2)  The Central Government shall, having regard to the need to ensure the operational
segregation, independence, and neutrality of the adjudication under this Act, prescribe—
(a) number of Adjudicating Officers to be appointed under sub-section (1);
(b) manner and terms of appointment of Adjudicating Officers ensuring
independence of such officers;
(c) jurisdiction of Adjudicating Officers;
(d) other such requirements as the Central Government may deem fit.
(3) The Adjudicating Officers shall be persons of ability, integrity and standing, and
must have specialised knowledge of, and not less than seven years professional experience
in the fields of law, cyber and internet laws, information technology law and policy, data
protection and related subjects.
63. (1) No penalty shall be imposed under this Chapter, except after an inquiry made in
such manner as may be prescribed, and the data fiduciary or data processor or any person,
as the case may be, has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard:
Provided that no inquiry under this section shall be initiated except by a complaint
made by the Authority.
(2) While holding an inquiry, the Adjudicating Officer shall have the power to summon
and enforce the attendance of any person acquainted with the facts and circumstances of
the case to give evidence or to produce any document which, in the opinion of the
Adjudicating Officer, may be useful for or relevant to the subject matter of the inquiry.
(3) If, on the conclusion of such inquiry, the Adjudicating Officer is satisfied that the
person has failed to comply with the provisions of this Act or has caused harm to any data
principal as a result of any contravention  of the provisi ons of this Act, the Adjudicating
Officer may impose such penalty specified under relevant section.
(4) While deciding whether to impose a penalty under sub-section (3) and in determining
the quantum of penalty under sections 57 to 61, the Adjudicating Officer shall have due
regard to the following factors, namely:—
(a) nature, gravity and duration of violation taking into account the nature,
scope and purpose of processing concerned;
Penalty for
failure to
furnish report,
returns,
information,
etc.
Penalty for
failure to
comply with
direction or
order issued by
Authority.
Penalty for
contravention
where no
separate
penalty has
been provided.
Appointment
of
Adjudicating
Officer.
Procedure for
adjudication
by
Adjudicating
Officer.
5
10
15
20
25
30
40
35
45

30
(b) number of data principals affected, and the level of harm suffered by them;
(c)  intentional or negligent character of the violation;
(d) nature of personal data impacted by the violation;
(e) repetitive nature of the default;
(f) transparency and accountability measures implemented by the data fiduciary
or data processor including adherence to any relevant code of practice relating to
security safeguards;
(g) action taken by the data fiduciary or data processor to mitigate the harm
suffered by data principals; and
(h) any other aggravating or mitigating factors relevant to the circumstances of
the case, such as, the amount of disproportionate gain or unfair advantage, wherever
quantifiable, made as a result of the default.
(5) Any person aggrieved by an order under this section by the Adjudicating Officer
may prefer an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal.
64. (1) Any data principal who has suffered harm as a result of any violation of any
provision under this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder, by a data fiduciary or
a data processor, shall have the right to seek compensation from the data fiduciary or the
data processor, as the case may be.
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that a data processor
shall be liable only where it has acted outside or contrary to the instructions of the data
fiduciary pursuant to section 31, or where the data processor is found to have acted in a
negligent manner, or where the data processor has not incorporated adequate security
safeguards under section 24, or where it has violated any provisions of this Act expressly
applicable to it.
(2) The data principal may seek compensation under this section by making a complaint
to the Adjudicating Officer in such form and manner as may be prescribed.
(3) Where there are one or more data principals or any identifiable class of data
principals who have suffered harm as a result of any contravention by the same data fiduciary
or data processor, one complaint may be instituted on behalf of all such data principals
seeking compensation for the harm suffered.
(4) While deciding to award compensation and the amount of compensation under
this section, the Adjudicating Officer shall have regard to the following factors, namely:—
(a) nature, duration and extent of violation of the provisions of the Act, rules
prescribed, or regulations specified thereunder;
(b)  nature and extent of harm suffered by the data principal;
(c)  intentional or negligent character of the violation;
(d)  transparency and accountability measures implemented by the data fiduciary
or the data processor, as the case may be, including adherence to any relevant code of
practice relating to security safeguards;
(e) action taken by the data fiduciary or the data processor, as the case may be,
to mitigate the damage suffered by the data principal;
(f) previous history of any, or such, violation by the data fiduciary or the data
processor, as the case may be;
(g) whether the arrangement between the data fiduciary and data processor
contains adequate transparency and accountability measures to safeguard the personal
data being processed by the data processor on behalf of the data fiduciary;
Compensation.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

31
(h) any other aggravating or mitigating factor relevant to the circumstances of
the case, such as, the amount of disproportionate gain or unfair advantage, wherever
quantifiable, made as a result of the default.
(5) Where more than one data fiduciary or data processor, or both a data fiduciary and
a data processor are involved in the same processing activity and are found to have caused
harm to the data principal, then, each data fiduciary or data processor may be ordered to pay
the entire compensation for the harm to ensure effective and speedy compensation to the
data principal.
(6) Where a data fiduciary or a data processor has, in accordance with sub-section (5),
paid the entire amount of compensation for the harm suffered by the data principal, such
data fiduciary or data processor shall be entitled to claim from the other data fiduciaries or
data processors, as the case may be, that amount of compensation corresponding to their
part of responsibility for the harm caused.
(7) Any person aggrieved by an order made under this section by the Adjudicating
Officer may prefer an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal.
(8) The Central Government may prescribe the procedure for hearing of a complaint
under this section.
65. No compensation awarded, or penalty imposed, under this Act shall prevent the
award of compensation or imposition of any other penalty or punishment under this Act or
any other law for the time being in force.
66. (1) The amount of any penalty imposed or compensation awarded under this Act,
if not paid, may be recovered as if it were an arrear of land revenue.
(2) All sums realised by way of penalties under this Act shall be credited to the
Consolidated Fund of India.
CHAPTER XI
A
PPELLATE TRIBUNAL
67. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, establish an Appellate
Tribunal to—
(a) hear and dispose of any appeal from an order of the Adjudicating Officer
under sub-section (5) of section 20;
(b) hear and dispose of any appeal from an order of the Authority under
sub-section (2) of section 54;
(c) hear and dispose of any appeal from an order of the Adjudicating Officer
under sub-section (5) of section 63; and
(d) hear and dispose of any appeal from an order of an Adjudicating Officer
under sub-section (7) of section 64.
(2) The Appellate Tribunal shall consist of a Chairperson and not more than members
to be appointed.
(3) The Appellate Tribunal shall be established at such place or places, as the
Central Government may, in consultation with the Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal,
notify.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) to (3), where, in the opinion
of the Central Government, any existing body is competent to discharge the functions of the
Appellate Tribunal under this Act, then, the Central Government may notify such body to
act as the Appellate Tribunal under this Act.
Compensation
or penalties
not to
interfere with
other
punishment.
Recovery of
amounts.
Establishment
of Appellate
Tribunal.
5
10
15
20
25
30
40
35
45

32
68. (1) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Chairperson or a member
of the Appellate Tribunal unless he—
(a) in the case of Chairperson, is, or has been a Judge of the Supreme Court or
Chief Justice of a High Court;
(b) in the case of a member, has held the post of Secretary to the Government of
India or any equivalent post in the Central Government for a period of not less than
two years or a person who is well versed in the field of data protection, information
technology, data management, data science, data security, cyber and internet laws or
any related subject.
(2) The Central Government may prescribe the manner of appointment, term of office,
salaries and allowances, resignation, removal and the other terms and conditions of service
of the Chairperson and any member of the Appellate Tribunal.
69. If, for reason other than temporary absence, any vacancy occurs in the office of
the Chairperson or a member of the Appellate Tribunal, the Central Government shall appoint
another person in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules prescribed to fill
the vacancy and the proceedings may be continued before the Appellate Tribunal from the
stage at which the vacancy is filled.
70. (1) The Central Government shall provide the Appellate Tribunal with such officers
and employees as it may deem fit.
(2) The officers and employees of the Appellate Tribunal shall discharge their functions
under the general superintendence of its Chairperson.
(3) The salaries and allowances and other conditions of service of such officers and
employees of the Appellate Tribunal shall be such as may be prescribed.
71. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the jurisdiction of the Appellate Tribunal
may be exercised by Benches thereof, which shall be constituted by the Chairperson.
(2) Where Benches of the Appellate Tribunal are constituted under sub-section ( 1),
the Chairperson may, from time to time, by notification, make provisions as to the distribution
of the business of the Appellate Tribunal amongst the Benches, transfer of Members between
Benches, and also provide for the matters which may be dealt with by each bench.
(3) On the application of any of the parties and after notice to the parties, and after
hearing such of them as the Chairperson may desire to be heard, or on the Chairperson's own
motion without such notice, the Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal may transfer any
case pending before one Bench, for disposal, to any other Bench.
72. (1) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Authority, may prefer an appeal to
the Appellate Tribunal within a period of thirty days from the receipt of the order appealed
against, in such form, verified in such manner and be accompanied by such fee, as may be
prescribed:
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may entertain any appeal after the expiry of the
said period of thirty days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within
that period.
(2) On receipt of an appeal under this section, the Appellate Tribunal may, after
providing the parties to the dispute or appeal, an opportunity of being heard, pass such
orders thereon as it deems fit.
(3) The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every order made by it to the parties to
the dispute or the appeal and to the Authority, as the case may be.
Qualifications,
appointment,
term,
conditions of
service of
Members.
Vacancies.
Staff of
Appellate
Tribunal.
Distribution of
business
amongst
Benches.
Appeals to
Appellate
Tribunal.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

33
(4) The Appellate Tribunal may, for the purpose of examining the legality or propriety
or correctness, of any decision, or order of the Authority or Adjudicating Officer referred to
in the appeal preferred under this section, on its own motion or otherwise, call for the records
relevant to disposing of such appeal or application and make such orders as it thinks fit.
73. (1) The Appellate Tribunal shall not be bound by the procedure laid down by the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, but shall be guided by the principles of natural justice and,
subject to the other provisions of this Act, the Appellate Tribunal shall have powers to
regulate its own procedure.
(2) The Appellate Tribunal shall have, for the purposes of discharging its functions
under this Act, the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining his
on oath;
(b)  requiring the discovery and production of documents;
(c)  receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) subject to the provisions of section 123 and section 124 of the Indian Evidence
Act, 1872, requisitioning any public record or document or a copy of such record or
document, from any office;
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;
(f) reviewing its decisions;
(g) dismissing an application for default or deciding it, ex parte;
(h) setting aside any order of dismissal of any application for default or any
order passed by it, ex parte; and
(i) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(3) Every proceeding before the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be a judicial
proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purposes of section 196
of the Indian Penal Code and the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be a civil court for
the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
74. (1) An order passed by the Appellate Tribunal under this Act shall be executable
by the Appellate Tribunal as a decree of civil court, and for this purpose, the Appellate
Tribunal shall have all the powers of a civil court.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), the Appellate Tribunal
may transmit any order made by it to a civil court having local jurisdiction and such civil
court shall execute the order as if it were a decree made by that court.
75. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 or in
any other law, an appeal shall lie against any order of the Appellate Tribunal, not being an
interlocutory order, to the Supreme Court on any substantial question of law.
(2) No appeal shall lie against any decision or order made by the Appellate Tribunal
with the consent of the parties.
(3) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a period of ninety days
from the date of the decision or order appealed against:
Provided that the Supreme Court may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said
period of ninety days, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause
from preferring the appeal in time.
Procedure and
powers of
Appellate
Tribunal.
5 of 1908.
5 of 1908.
1 of 1872.
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.
Orders passed
by Appellate
Tribunal to
be executable
as a decree.
Appeal to
Supreme
Court.
5 of 1908.
5
10
15
20
25
30
40
35

34
76. The applicant or appellant may either appear in person or authorise one or more
legal practitioners or any of its officers to present his or its case before the Appellate
Tribunal.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, "legal practitioner" includes an
advocate, or an attorney and includes a pleader in practice.
77. No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceeding in respect
of any matter which the Appellate Tribunal is empowered by or under this Act to determine
and no injunction shall be granted by any court or other authority in respect of any action
taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or under this Act.
CHAPTER XII
F
INANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
78. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in
this behalf, make to the Authority grants of such sums of money as it may think fit for the
purposes of this Act.
79. (1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the Data Protection Authority
Fund to which the following shall be credited—
(a) all Government grants, fees and charges received by the Authority under
this Act; and
(b)  all sums received by the Authority from such other source as may be decided
upon by the Central Government.
 (2) The Data Protection Authority Fund shall be applied for meeting—
(i) the salaries, allowances and other remuneration of the Chairperson, Members,
officers, employees, consultants and experts appointed by the Authority; and
(ii)  the other expenses of the Authority in connection with the discharge of its
functions and for the purposes of this Act.
80. (1) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and
prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed in consultation
with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The accounts of the Authority shall be audited by the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India at such intervals as may be prescribed and any expenditure incurred
by him in connection with such audit shall be reimbursed to him by the Authority.
(3)  The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any other person appointed by
him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the Authority shall have the same rights
and privileges and authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India generally has in connection with the audit of the Government
accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts,
connected vouchers and other documents and papers, and to inspect any of the offices of
the Authority.
(4)  The accounts of the Authority as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General
of India or any other person appointed by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India in
this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually to the
Central Government and the Central Government shall cause the same to be laid before each
House of the Parliament.
81. (1) The Authority shall furnish to the Central Government at such time and in such
form and manner as may be prescribed or as the Central Government may direct, such returns
and statements (including statement on enforcement action taken) and such particulars in
regard to any proposed or existing programme for the promotion and development of
protection of personal data, as the Central Government from time to time, require.
Right to legal
representation.
Civil court not
to have
jurisdiction.
Grants by
Central
Government.
Data
Protection
Authority of
India Funds.
Accounts and
Audit.
Furnishing of
returns, etc.,
to Central
Government.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

35
(2) The Authority shall prepare once every year in such form and at such time as may
be prescribed, an annual report giving a summary of its activities during the previous year
and copies of the report shall be forwarded to the Central Government.
(3) A copy of the report prepared under sub-section (2) shall be laid, as soon as may
be after it is received, before each House of the Parliament.
(4)  A copy of the report prepared under sub-section (2) shall also be made publicly
available by the Authority.
CHAPTER XIII
O
FFENCES
82. (1) Any person who, knowingly or intentionally—
(a) re-identifies personal data which has been de-identified by a data fiduciary
or a data processor, as the case may be; or
(b) re-identifies and processes such personal data as mentioned in clause (a),
without the consent of such data fiduciary or data processor, then, such person shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years or with a fine which may
extend to two lakh rupees or both.
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section ( 1) shall render any such person liable to any
punishment under this section, if he proves that—
(a) the personal data belongs to the person charged with the offence under
sub-section (1); or
(b) the data principal whose personal data is in question has explicitly consented
to such re-identification or processing as per the provisions of this Act.
83. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,
an offence punishable under this Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable.
(2) No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act, save on a complaint
made by the Authority.
84. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every
person who, at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to,
the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly.
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section ( 1) shall render any such person liable to any
punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his
knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such
offence.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), where an offence under
this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been
committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of,
any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager,
secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section—
(a) "company" means any body corporate, and includes—
(i) a firm; and
Re-
identification
and processing
of de-
identified
personal data.
2 of 1974. Offences to
be cognizable
and non-
bailable.
Offences by
companies.
5
10
15
20
25
30
40
35

36
(ii) an association of persons or a body of individuals whether incorporated
or not.
(b) "director" in relation to—
(i) a firm, means a partner in the firm;
(ii) an association of persons or a body of individuals, means any member
controlling affairs thereof.
85. (1) Where it has been proved that an offence under this Act has been committed
by any department or authority or body of the State, by whatever name called, the head of
such department or authority or body shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall
be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section ( 1) shall render any such person liable to any
punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his
knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such
offence.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), where an offence under
this Act has been committed by a department of the Central or State Government, or any
authority of the State and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent
or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any officer, other than the
head of the department or authority, such officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of the
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
(4) Notwithstanding anything in this section, the provisions of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 relating to public servants shall continue to apply.
CHAPTER XIV
M
ISCELLANEOUS
86. (1) The Central Government may, from time to time, issue to the Authority such
directions as it may think necessary in the interest of the sovereignty and integrity of India,
the security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States or public order.
(2) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act, the Authority shall, in
exercise of its powers or the performance of its functions under this Act, be bound by such
directions on questions of policy as the Central Government may give in writing to it from
time to time:
Provided that the Authority shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity to
express its views before any direction is given under this sub-section.
(3) The decision of the Central Government whether a question is one of policy or not
shall be final.
87. The Chairperson, Members, officers and employees of the Authority and the
Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of
the provisions of this Act, to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the
Indian Penal Code.
88. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Authority or
its Chairperson, member, employee or officer for anything which is done in good faith or
intended to be done under this Act, or the rules prescribed, or the regulations specified
thereunder.
89. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Income Tax Act, 1961 or any other
enactment for the time being in force relating to tax on income, profits or gains, as the case
may be, the Authority shall not be liable to pay income tax or any other tax in respect of its
income, profits or gains derived.
Offences by
State.
2 of 1974.
Power of
Central
Government
to issue
directions.
Members, etc.,
to be public
servants.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Exemption
from tax on
income.
45 of 1860.
43 of 1961.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

37
90. The Authority may, by general or special order in writing delegate to any member
or officer of the Authority subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the order,
such of its powers and functions under this Act, except the powers under section 94, as it
may deem necessary.
91. (1) Nothing in this Act shall prevent the Central Government from framing of any
policy for the digital economy, including measures for its growth, security, integrity, prevention
of misuse, insofar as such policy do not govern personal data.
(2) The Central Government may, in consultation with the Authority, direct any data
fiduciary or data processor to provide any personal data anonymised or other non-personal
data to enable better targeting of delivery of services or formulation of evidence-based
policies by the Central Government, in such manner as may be prescribed.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, the expression "non-personal
data" means the data other than personal data.
(3)  The Central Government shall disclose annually the directions, made by it under
sub-section (2), in such form as may be prescribed.
92. No data fiduciary shall process such biometric data as may be notified by the
Central Government, unless such processing is permitted by law.
93. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry out the
provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) any other categories of sensitive personal data under section 15;
(b) other factors to be taken into consideration under clause ( d) of
sub-section (3) of section 16;
(c)  the form and manner in which an application may be made to exercise the
right under sub-section ( 2), and the manner of review of the order passed by the
Adjudicating Officer under sub-section (4) of section 20;
(d) the methods of voluntary identification to identify users of social media
under sub-section (3) and the identifying mark of verification of a voluntarily verified
user under sub-section (4) of section 28;
(e) the manner in which a complaint  may be filed under sub-section ( 4) of
section 32;
(f) the entity or class of entity in a country, or international organisations to
which transfers may be permitted under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 34;
(g) the place of head office of the Authority under sub-section (3) of section 41;
(h) procedure to be followed by the selection committee under sub-section (3)
of section 42;
(i) the salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson and the Members of the Authority under sub-section (2) of
section 43;
(j) the time and place for, and the rules and procedures in regard to, transaction
of business at the meetings of the Authority under sub-section ( 1) of section 46;
(k) other functions of the Authority under clause ( o) of sub-section ( 2) of
section 49;
Delegation.
Act to
promote
framing of
policies for
digital
economy, etc..
Bar on
processing
certain forms
of biometric
data.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
40
35

38
(l)  the procedure of issuance of a code of practice under sub-section ( 4), the
manner in which the Authority may review, modify or revoke a code of practice under
sub-section (7), of section 50;
(m) other matters under clause (e) of sub-section (8) of section 53, in respect of
which the Authority shall have powers;
(n) the number of Adjudicating Officers, manner and terms of their appointment,
their jurisdiction and other requirements under sub-section (2) of section 62;
(o) the manner in which the Adjudicating Officer shall conduct an inquiry under
sub-section (1) of section 63;
(p) the form and manner of making a complaint under sub-section (2), and the
procedure for hearing of a complaint under sub-section (8) of section 64;
(q) the manner of appointment, term of office, salaries and allowances, resignation,
removal and the other terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and any
member of the Appellate Tribunal under sub-section (2) of section 68;
(r) the procedure of filling of vacancies in the Appellate Tribunal under section 69;
(s)  the salaries and allowances and other conditions of service of the officers
and employees of the Appellate Tribunal under sub-section (3) of section 70;
(t) the form, manner and fee for filing an appeal or application, as the case may
be, with the Appellate Tribunal under sub-section (1) of section 72;
(u)  other matters under clause (i) of sub-section (2) of section 73 in respect of
powers of the Appellate Tribunal;
(v) the form of accounts, other relevant records and annual statement of accounts
under sub-section (1), the intervals at which the accounts of the Authority shall be
audited under sub-section (2) of section 80;
(w) the time in which and the form and manner in which the returns, statements,
and particulars are to be furnished to the Central Government under sub-section (1),
and annual report under sub-section (2) of section 81;
(x) the manner in which the Central Government may issue a direction, including
the specific purposes for which data is sought under sub-section (2) and the form of
disclosure of such directions under sub-section (3) of section 91; or
( y)  any other matter which is require to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect
of which provision is to be made, by rules.
94. (1) The Authority may, by notification, make regulations consistent with this Act
and the rules made thereunder to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) information required to be provided by the data fiduciary to the data principal
in its notice under clause (n) of sub-section (1) of section 7;
(b) manner in which the personal data retained by the data fiduciary must be
deleted under sub-section (4) of section 9;
(c) the safeguards for protecting the rights of data principals under
sub-section (3) of section 14;
(d) the additional safeguards or restrictions under sub-section (2) of section 15;
(e) the manner of obtaining consent of the parent or guardian of a child under
sub-section (2), the manner of verification of age of a child under sub-section ( 3),
Power to
make
regulations.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

39
application of provision in modified form to data fiduciaries offering counselling or
child protection services under sub-section (6) of section 16;
(f) the period within which a data fiduciary must acknowledge the receipt of
request under sub-section (1), the fee to be charged under sub-section (2), the period
within which request is to be complied with under sub-section (3), and the manner and
the period within which a data principal may file a complaint under sub-section (4) of
section 21;
(g) the manner for submission of privacy by design policy under sub-section (2)
of section 22;
(h) the manner and the technical, operation, financial and other conditions for
registration of the consent manager and its compliance under sub-section ( 5) of
section 23;
(i) the manner of registration of significant data fiduciaries under
sub-section (2) of section 26;
(j) the circumstances or classes of data fiduciaries or processing operations
where data protection impact assessments shall be mandatory and instances where
data auditor shall be appointed under sub-section (2), and the manner in which data
protection officer shall review the data protection impact assessment and submit to
the Authority under sub-section (4) of section 27;
(k) the form and manner for maintaining the records, and any other aspect of
processing for which records shall be maintained under sub-section (1) of section 28;
(l) the other factors to be taken into consideration under clause ( g) of
sub-section (2); the form and procedure for conducting audits under sub-section (3);
the manner of registration of auditors under sub-section ( 4); criteria on the basis of
which rating in the form of a data trust score may be assigned to a data fiduciary under
sub-section (6) of section 29;
(m) the qualification and experience of a data protection officer under
sub-section (1) of section 30;
(n) the period within which transfer of personal data shall be notified to the
Authority under sub-section (3) of section 34;
(o) the provisions of the Act and the class of research, archival or statistical
purposes which may be exempted under section 38;
(p) the remuneration, salary or allowances and other terms and conditions of
service of such officers, employees, consultants and experts under sub-section (2) of
section 48;
(q) the code of practice under sub-section (1) of section 50;
(r) the form and manner for providing information to the Authority by the data
fiduciary under sub-section (3) of section 52;
(s) any other matter which is required to be, or may be specified, or in respect of
which provision is to be or may be made by regulations.
95.  Every rule and regulation made under this Act and notification issued under
sub-section (4) of section 67 shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House
of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in
making any modification in the rule or regulation or notification or both Houses agree that the
rule or regulation or notification should not be made, the rule or regulation or notification shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of
anything previously done under that rule or regulation or notification.
Rules and
regulations to
be laid before
Parliament.
5
10
15
20
25
30
40
35
45
50

40
96. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of this Act shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith any other law for the time being in force or
any instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.
97. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of five
years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament.
98. The Information Technology Act, 2000 shall be amended in the manner specified in
the Schedule to this Act.
THE  SCHEDULE
(See section 98)
A
MENDMENTS TO THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000
(21 OF 2000)
1. Section 43A of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (hereafter in this Schedule
referred to as the principal Act) shall be omitted.
2. In section 87 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), clause (ob) shall be omitted.
Overriding
effect of this
Act.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Amendment
of Act 21 of
2000.
Amendment
of section 87.
Omission of
section 43A.
5
10
15
20

41
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 In the matter of Justice K.S. Puttaswami and another Vs. Union of India [WP 494 of
2012], a nine Judge Constitutional Bench of the Supreme Court, while delivering its judgment
on 24th August, 2017, declared "privacy" as a fundamental right under article 21 of the
Constitution. Subsequently, on 26th September, 2018, a five Judge Constitutional Bench of
the Supreme Court while delivering its final judgment in the above case impressed upon the
Government to bring out a robust data protection regime.
2. The Government on 31st July, 2017 constituted a "Committee of Experts on Data
Protection" chaired by Justice B.N. Srikrishna to examine the issues relating to data protection.
The said Committee examined the issues on data protection and submitted its Report on 27th
July, 2018. On the basis of the recommendations made in the said Report and the suggestions
received from various stakeholders, it is proposed to enact a legislation, namely, the Personal
Data Protection Bill, 2019.
3. The proposed Legislation seeks to bring a strong and robust data protection
framework for India and to set up an Authority for protecting personal data and empowering
the citizens' with rights relating to their personal data ensuring their fundamental right to
"privacy and protection of personal data".
4. The salient features of the Data Protection Bill, 2019, inter alia, are as under—
(i) to promote the concepts such as consent framework, purpose limitation,
storage limitation and the data minimisation;
(ii) to lay down obligations on entities collecting personal data (data fiduciary)
to collect only that data which is required for a specific purpose and with the express
consent of the individual (data principal);
(iii) to confer rights on the individual to obtain personal data, correct inaccurate
data, erase data, update the data, port the data to other fiduciaries and the right to
restrict or prevent the disclosure of personal data;
(iv) to establish an Authority to be called the "Data Protection Authority of
India" (the Authority) which shall consist of a Chairperson and not more than six
whole-time Members to be appointed by the Central Government;
(v) to provide that the Authority shall protect the interests of data principals,
prevent any misuse of personal data, ensure compliance with the provisions of the
proposed legislation and promote awareness about the data protection;
(vi) to specify a provision relating to "social media intermediary" whose actions
have significant impact on electoral democracy, security of the State, public order or
the sovereignty and integrity of India and to empower the Central Government, in
consultation with the Authority, to notify the said intermediary as a significant data
fiduciary;
(vii) to confer a "right of grievance" on data principal to make a complaint
against the grievance to the data fiduciary and if aggrieved by the decision of such
data fiduciary, he may approach the Authority;
(viii) to empower the Central Government to exempt any agency of Government
from application of the proposed Legislation;
(ix) to empower the Authority to specify the "code of practice" to promote good
practices of data protection and facilitate compliance with the obligations under this
legislation;

42
(x) to appoint the "Adjudicating Officer" for the purpose of adjudging the
penalties to be imposed and the compensation to be awarded under the provisions of
this legislation;
(xi) to establish an "Appellate Tribunal" to hear and dispose of any appeal from
an order of the Authority under clause 54 and the Adjudicating Officer under
clauses 63 and 64; and
(xii) to impose "fines and penalties" for contravention of the provisions of the
proposed legislation.
5. The Notes on Clauses explain in detail the various provisions contained in the Bill.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; RA VI SHANKAR PRASAD.
The 5th December, 2019.

43
Notes on Clauses
Clause 1.—This clause seeks to provide for short title and commencement of the Act.
Clause 2.—This clause seeks to clarify the application of the Act with regard to
personal data of Indians and save for clause 91 would not be applicable to processing of
anonymised data.
Clause 3.- This clause seeks to define certain expressions occurring in the Act.
 Clause 4.—This clause seeks to prohibit processing of personal data without any
specific, clear and lawful purpose.
Clause 5.—This clause seeks to limit the processing of personal data to the purpose
consented to by the data principal or which is incidental or connected thereto.
Clause 6.—This clause seeks to lay down limitation on collection of personal data
specifying that it should be only to the extent that is necessary.
Clause 7.—This clause seeks to lay down the requirement of notice for collection or
processing of personal data and lists the various types of information that should be contained
in the notice given to the data principal.
Clause 8.—This clause seeks to lay down that the data fiduciary should ensure the
quality of the personal data processed.
Clause 9.—This clause seeks to lay down restriction on retention of personal data
beyond what is necessary.
Clause 10.—This clause seeks to lay down the responsibility for complying with the
provisions of this Act on the data fiduciary.
Clause 11.—This clause seeks to expound the various aspects of consent which are
necessary for processing of personal data.
Clause 12.—This clause seeks to list out certain cases which provide for processing
of personal data without consent.
Clause 13.—This clause seeks to provide for processing of personal data necessary
for purposes related to employment.
Clause 14.—This clause seeks to provide for other reasonable purposes for which
personal data may be processed.
Clause 15.—This clause seeks to provide for categorisation of personal data as
sensitive personal data and lists out criteria for such categorisation.
Clause 16.—This clause seeks to provide for obligations on data fiduciaries who
processed personal data of children.
Clause 17.—This clause seeks to provide the data principal with the right to
confirmation and access to his personal data.
Clause 18.—This clause seeks to provide the data principal with a right to correct and
erase his personal data.
Clause 19.—This clause seeks to provide the data principal the right to port personal
data to any data fiduciary.
Clause 20.—This clause seeks to provide the data principal the right to be forgotten.
Clause 21.—This clause seeks to lay down the general conditions for the exercise of
the rights in clauses 17 to 20.

44
Clause 22.—This clause seeks to list out the constituents of privacy by design policy.
Clause 23.—This clause seeks to require transparency in processing of personal data
by requiring the fiduciary to inform the data principal and making information available.
Clause 24.—This clause seeks to require the data fiduciary to implement necessary
security safeguards.
Clause 25.—This clause seeks to require the data fiduciary to report to the Authority
about breach of any personal data.
Clause 26.—This clause seeks to provide for classification of certain data fiduciaries
as significant data fiduciaries including certain social media intermediaries.
Clause 27.—This clause seeks to require significant data fiduciaries to undertake data
protection impact assessment.
Clause 28.—This clause seeks to require significant data fiduciaries to maintain accurate
and up-to-date records, including requiring significant social media intermediaries to provide
for voluntary verification mechanism.
Clause 29.—This clause seeks to require significant data fiduciaries to have their
policies and conduct audited by data auditors.
Clause 30.—This clause seeks to require significant data fiduciaries to appoint a Data
Protection Officer.
Clause 31.—This clause seeks to require data fiduciaries to ensure a contract for
processing by other data processors.
Clause 32.—This clause seeks to require every data fiduciary to have a grievance
redressal mechanism.
Clause 33.—This clause seeks to prohibit processing of sensitive personal data and
critical personal data outside India.
Clause 34.—This clause seeks to list out conditions under which sensitive personal
data and critical personal data could be transferred outside India.
Clause 35.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to exempt any
agency of the Government from application of the Act.
Clause 36.—This clause seeks to provide for exemption of certain provisions of the
Act for certain processing of personal data.
Clause 37.—This clause seeks to clarify that the Government could exempt certain
data processors who are processing data of foreigners, from the application of this Act.
Clause 38.—This clause seeks to provide for exemption when personal data is
processed for research, archival or statistical purposes.
Clause 39.—This clause seeks to provide for exemption for small entities who are
engaged in manual processing of personal data.
Clause 40.—This clause seeks to provide for a Sandbox which can facilitate new ideas
and approaches without any regulatory violations.
Clause 41.—This clause seeks to establish a regulator namely the Data Protection
Authority of India (the Authority).
Clause 42—This clause seeks to lift the compositions and qualifications for
appointment of Chairperson and Members of the Authority and their method of selection.
Clause 43.—This clause seeks to list the terms and conditions of appointment for the
Chairperson and Members of the Authority.

45
Clause 44.—This clause seeks to list the conditions under which a Chairperson or
other Members of the Authority can be removed.
Clause 45.—This clause seeks to lay down that the powers of the Authority rests with
the Chairperson
Clause 46.—This clause seeks to provide for the matters relating to meetings of the
Authority.
Clause 47.—This clause seeks to provide that the proceedings of the Authority would
not be invalidated due to vacancy, procedural irregularity, etc.
Clause 48.—This clause seeks to empower the Authority to appoint officers and other
employees.
Clause 49.—This clause seeks to list the powers and functions of the Authority.
Clause 50.—This clause seeks to require the Authority to specify codes of practice to
promote good practices of data protection.
Clause 51.—This clause seeks to empower the Authority to issue directions to any
data fiduciary for the discharge of its functions.
Clause 52.—This clause seeks to empower the Authority to call for information from
any data fiduciary
Clause 53.—This clause seeks to empower the Authority to conduct an inquiry into
the affairs of a data fiduciary.
Clause 54.- This clause seeks to list out various actions that can be taken by the
Authority pursuant to an inquiry
Clause 55.—This clause seeks to empower the Inquiry Officer of the Authority to
order for search and seizure of documents, records, etc.
Clause 56.—This clause seeks to provide for coordination between the Authority and
other regulators.
Clause 57.—This clause seeks to list out penalties for contravening certain provisions
of the Act.
Clause 58.—This clause seeks to list out penalties for failure to comply with request
made by data principal.
Clause 59.—This clause seeks to list out penalty for failure of the data fiduciary to
furnish report, return, information to the Authority.
Clause 60.—This clause seeks to list out penalty for failure of the data fiduciary to
comply with direction or order issued by the Authority.
Clause 61.—This clause seeks to list out penalty for contravention of any provision
of this Act or rules or regulations made thereunder for which no separate penalty has been
provided.
Clause 62.—This clause seeks to provide for appointment of Adjudicating Officer for
adjudging penalties.
Clause 63.—This clause seeks to lay down the procedure for adjudication by
Adjudicating Officer.
Clause 64—This clause seeks to provide for data principal's right to seek compensation
from the data fiduciary in case of suffering harm.
Clause 65.—This clause seeks to ensure that compensation or penalties under this
Act would not interfere with any other penalty or punishment.

46
Clause 66.—This clause seeks to lay down that penalties or compensation awarded
under this Act may be recovered as arrear of land revenue.
Clause 67.—This clause seeks to lay down provisions relating to establishment of
Appellate Tribunal.
Clause 68.—This clause seeks to list out qualifications, appointment, term, conditions
of service of Chairperson and Members of Appellate Tribunal.
Clause 69.—This clause seeks to provide for filling up vacancies in the office of
Chairperson and Members of Appellate Tribunal.
Clause 70.—This clause seeks to provide for staffing of Appellate Tribunal.
Clause 71.—This clause seeks to provide for distribution of business to different
benches of the Appellate Tribunal.
Clause 72.—This clause seeks to provide for appeal to the Appellate Tribunal against
any decision of the Authority.
Clause 73.—This clause seeks to lay down the procedure and powers of the Appellate
Tribunal.
Clause 74.—This clause seeks to provide that the Appellate Tribunal shall have all the
powers of a civil court.
Clause 75.—This clause seeks to provide for an appeal to the Supreme Court against
any order of the Appellate Tribunal.
Clause 76.—This clause seeks to provide for the applicant or appellant to appear in
person or authorise legal representative.
Clause 77.—This clause seeks to lay down that no civil court would have jurisdiction
to entertain any suit on any matter which falls within the ambit of Appellate Tribunal.
Clause 78.—This clause seeks to provide for the Central Government to make grants
to the Authority.
Clause 79. —This clause seeks to provide for constitution of the Data Protection
Authority Fund.
Clause 80.—This clause seeks to require the Authority to maintain proper accounts
which are to be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
Clause 81.—This clause seeks to require the Authority to furnish returns, statements,
etc., to the Central Government.
Clause 82.—This clause seeks to list out punishment for the offence of reidentifying
of deidentified personal data.
Clause 83.—This clause seeks to lays out that offence in Clause 82 to be cognizable
and non-bailable.
Clause 84.—This clause seeks to list out provisions relating to commission of offence
by companies.
Clause 85.—This clause seeks to list out provisions relating to commission of offence
by any State Government or Central Government Department or agency.
Clause 86.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to issue directions
to the Authority.
Clause 87.—This clause seeks to deem Members, officers etc. of the Authority to be
public servants when acting pursuant to any provisions of the Act.
Clause 88.—This clause seeks to protect the Authority, Member, employee in case of
action done under this Act in good faith.

47
Clause 89.—This clause seeks to exempts Authority from tax on income in respect of
its income, profits.
Clause 90.—This clause seeks to empower the Authority to delegate its powers or
functions to any Member or officer.
Clause 91.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to frame policies
for digital economy in respect of non-personal data.
Clause 92.—This clause seeks to ban processing of certain forms of biometric data
unless permitted by law.
Clause 93.—This clause seeks to empowers the Central Government to make rules to
carry out the provisions of the Act.
Clause 94.—This clause seeks to empowers the Authority to make regulations
consistent with the Act and rules made there under.
Clause 95.—This clause seeks to require that rules and regulations made under this
Act are to be laid before the Parliament.
Clause 96.—This clause seeks to provide for the overriding effect of this Act
notwithstanding anything inconsistent with any other law.
Clause 97.—This clause seeks to provide for power of Central Government to remove
difficulties.
Clause 98.—This clause seeks to provide for related amendments to the Informations
Technology Act, 2000.

48
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Sub-clause (2) of clause 43 provides for the payment of salaries and allowances to
the Chairperson, Members of the Authority.
2. Sub-clause (2) of clause 48 provides for the payment of salaries and allowances
to the officers and employees of the Authority.
3. Sub-clause (2) of clause 68 provides for the payment of salaries and allowances
to the Chairperson and Members of the Appellate Tribunal.
4. Sub-clause (3) of clause 70 provides for the payment of salaries and allowances
to the officers and employees of the Appellate Tribunal.
5. For the aforesaid provisions, it would involve an expenditure of (recurring or
non-recurring) one hundred crore rupees from the Consolidated Fund of India.

49
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 93 of the Personal Data Protection Bill 2019 seeks to empower the
Central Government to make rules for—(a) categorization of sensitive personal data under
section 15; (b) verification of the age of child under sub-section  (3) of section (3); (c) the
form and manner in which an application to enforce the right to be forgotten can be exercised
under sub-section  (2) of section 20 and the manner of review of order passed by the
Adjudicating Officer under sub-section  (4) of section 20; ( d) the methods of voluntary
identification to identify users of social media under sub-section (3) and the identifying mark
of verification of a voluntarily verified user under sub-section  (4) of section 28; ( e) the
manner in which a complaint regarding grievance redressal may be filed under sub-section
(4) of section 32 ; (f) the entity or class of entity in a country, or international organisations
to which transfers may be permitted under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 34; (g) the
place of head office of the Authority under sub-section (3) of section 41; (h) procedure to be
followed by the Selection Committee under sub-section (3) of section 42; (i) the salaries and
allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and the
Members of the Authority under sub-section (2) of section 43; (j) the procedure for conducting
any inquiry under sub-section (2)
 of section 44; (k) the time and place for, and the rules and
procedures in regard to, transaction of business at the meetings of the Authority under
sub-section (1) of section 46; ( l) other functions of the Authority under clause ( o) of
sub-section (2) of section 49; ( m) the procedure of issuance of a code of practice under
sub-section (4), the manner in which the Authority may review, modify or revoke a code of
practice under sub-section ( 7), of section 50; ( n) other matters under clause ( e) of
sub-section (8) of section 53 in respect of which the Authority shall have powers; ( o) the
number of Adjudicating Officers, manner and terms of their appointment, their jurisdiction
and other requirements under sub-section  (2) of section 62; ( p) the manner in which the
Adjudicating Officer shall conduct an inquiry under sub-section  (1) of section 63; (q) the
form and manner of making a complaint under sub-section (2), and the procedure for hearing
of a complaint under sub-section (8) of section 64; (r) the manner of appointment, term of
office, salaries and allowances, resignation, removal and the other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson and any member of the Appellate Tribunal under sub-section (2)
of section 68; (s) the procedure of filling of vacancies in the Appellate Tribunal under section
69; (t) the salaries and allowances and other conditions of service of the officers and employees
of the Appellate Tribunal under sub-section (3) of section 70; (u) the form, manner and fee for
filing an appeal or application, as the case may be, with the Appellate Tribunal under
sub-section (1) of section 72; (v) other matters under clause (i) of sub-section (2
) of section
73 in respect of powers of the Appellate Tribunal; (w) the form of accounts, other relevant
records and annual statement of accounts under sub-section (1), the intervals at which the
accounts of the Authority shall be audited under sub-section (2) of section 80; (x) the time in
which and the form and manner in which the returns, statements, and particulars are to be
furnished to the Central Government under sub-section  (1) and annual report under
sub-section (2) of section 81; (y) the manner in which the Central Government may issue a
direction, including the specific purposes for which data is sought under sub-section (2) and
the form of disclosure of such directions under sub-section (3) of section 91; (z) any other
matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of which provision is to be
made, by rules.
2. Clause 94 of the Bill empowers the Authority, with the previous approval of the
Central Government, by notification, to make regulations consistent with the provisions of
the Act and the rules made thereunder to provide for—(a) information required to be provided
by the data fiduciary to the data principal in its notice under clause (n) of sub-section (1) of
section 7; ( b) manner in which the personal data retained by the data fiduciary must be
deleted under sub-section (4) of section 9; (c) the safeguards for protecting the rights of data

50
principals under sub-section (3) of section 14; (d) the additional safeguards or restrictions
under sub-section (2) of section 15; ( e) the manner of obtaining consent of the parent or
guardian of a child under sub-section (2), the manner of verification of age of a child under
sub-section ( 3), application of provision in modified form to data fiduciaries offering
counselling or child protection services under sub-section (6) of section 16; (f) the period
within which a data fiduciary must acknowledge the receipt of request under sub-section
(1), the fee to be charged under sub-section ( 2), the period within which request is to be
complied with under sub-section ( 3), and the manner and the period within which a data
principal may file a complaint under sub-section  (4) of section 21; ( g) the manner for
submission of privacy by design policy under sub-section (2) of section 22; (h) the manner
and the technical, operation, financial and other conditions for registration of the consent
manager and its compliance under sub-section (5) of section 23; (i) the manner of registration
of significant data fiduciaries under sub-section (2) of section 26;  (j) the circumstances or
classes of data fiduciaries or processing operations where data protection impact assessments
shall be mandatory and instances where data auditor shall be appointed under sub-section (2),
and the manner in which data protection officer shall review the data protection impact
assessment and submit to the Authority under sub-section  (4) of section 27; ( k) the form
and manner for maintaining the records, and any other aspect of processing for which
records shall be maintained under sub-section (1) of section 28; (l) the other factors to be
taken into consideration under clause ( g) of sub-section ( 2); the form and procedure for
conducting audits under sub-section ( 3); the manner of registration of auditors under
sub-section (4
); criteria on the basis of which rating in the form of a data trust score may be
assigned to a data fiduciary under sub-section ( 6) of section 29; ( m) the qualification and
experience of a data protection officer under sub-section  (1) of section 30; ( n) the period
within which transfer of personal data shall be notified to the Authority under sub-section (3)
of section 34; (o) the provisions of the Act and the class of research, archival or statistical
purposes which may be exempted under section 38; (p) the remuneration, salary or allowances
and other terms and conditions of service of such officers, employees, consultants and
experts under sub-section (2) of section 48; (q) the code of practice under sub-section (1) of
section 50;  (r) the form and manner for providing information to the Authority by the data
fiduciary under sub-section (3) of section 52; and (s) any other matter which is required to
be, or may be specified, or in respect of which provision is to be or may be made by regulations.
3. The matters in respect of which the aforementioned rules and regulations may be
made are matters of procedure and administrative detail, and as such, it is not practicable to
provide for them in the proposed Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore,
of a normal character.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000
(21 OF 2000)
* * * * * *
43A. Where a body corporate, possessing, dealing or handling any sensitive personal
data or information in a computer resource which it owns, controls or operates, is negligent
in implementing and maintaining reasonable security practices and procedures and thereby
causes wrongful loss or wrongful gain to any person, such body corporate shall be liable to
pay damages by way of compensation to the person so affected.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
(i) "body corporate" means any company and includes a firm, sole proprietorship
or other association of individuals engaged in commercial or professional activities;
(ii) "reasonable security practices and procedures" means security practices
and procedures designed to protect such information from unauthorised access,
damage, use, modification, disclosure or impairment, as may be specified in an agreement
between the parties or as may be specified in any law for the time being in force and in
the absence of such agreement or any law, such reasonable security practices and
procedures, as may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with
such professional bodies or associations as it may deem fit;
(iii) "sensitive personal data or information" means such personal information
as may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with such professional
bodies or associations as it may deem fit.
* * * * * *
87. (1) * * * * * *
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
* * * * * *
(ob) the reasonable security practices and procedures and sensitive personal
data or information under section 43A;
* * * * * *
Compensation
for failure to
protect data.
Power of
Central
Government
to make rules.
51

MGIPMRND—4173LS(S3)—06-12-2019.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for protection of the privacy of individuals relating to their personal data, specify
the flow and usage of personal data, create a relationship of trust between persons and
entities processing the personal data, protect the rights of individuals whose personal
data are processed, to create a framework for organisational and technical measures in
processing of data, laying down norms for social media intermediary, cross-border transfer,
accountability of entities processing personal data, remedies for unauthorised and harmful
processing, and to establish a Data Protection Authority of India for the said purposes
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad, Minister of Law and Justice, Communications and
Electronics and Information Technology)