THE MAINTENANCE AND WELFARE OF PARENTS AND SENIOR
CITIZENS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
A
BILL
further to amend the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior
Citizens (Amendment) Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007 (hereinafter
referred to as the principal Act), for the long line, the following long line shall be substituted,
namely:—
Short title
and
Commencement.
Amendment of
long line.
56 of 2007.
Bill No. 374 of 2019
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
"An Act to give effect to the provisions for the welfare of parents and senior
citizens as guaranteed and recognised under the Constitution by providing for the
maintenance and welfare of parents and senior citizens, ensuring their overall physical
and mental well-being, establishment, management and regulation of institutions for
senior citizens and services therefor and for other matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto;
3. In section 2 of the principal Act,—
(i) for clauses (a) and (b), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:—
'(a) "children", in relation to a parent or a senior citizen, means his son or
daughter, whether biological, adoptive or step-child and includes his son-in-law,
daughter-in-law, grandson, grand-daughter and the legal guardian of minor
children, if any;
(aa) "Code" means the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973;
(ab) "Conciliation Officer" means the person referred to in
sub-section (6) of section 6;
(ac) "local body" means the Municipality as defined in clause (e) of
article 243P of the Constitution or, as the case may be, the Panchayat as
defined in clause (d) of article 243 thereof;
(b) "maintenance" includes provision for food, clothing, housing, safety
and security, medical attendance, healthcare and treatment necessary to lead a
life of dignity;';
(ii) after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
'(ba) "Maintenance Officer" means an officer designated as such by the
State Government under sub-section (1) of section 18;';
(iii) after clause (c), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(ca) "Multi-Service Day Care Centre for Senior Citizens'' means an
institution registered as such under sub-section (2) of section 19, established or
maintained by the Government or a local body or an organisation for providing
day-care facilities, including healthcare, peer interaction, recreation and
entertainment to senior citizens;
(cb) "Nodal Officer for Senior Citizens" means a police officer designated
as such by the State Government under sub-section (2) of section 22;
(cc)"organisation" includes any voluntary or private or non-Governmental
organisation or a society or trust registered under any law for the time being in
force;';
(iv) for clauses (d) and (e), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:—
'(d) "parent" means father or mother, whether biological, adoptive or
step-parent and includes father-in-law, mother-in-law and grandparents, whether
or not a senior citizen;
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;';
(v) in clause (g), for the words "citizen who is not a minor and is", the words
"citizen, including a minor through his legal guardian, who is" shall be
substituted;
(vi) after clause (h), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
'(ha) "Senior Citizens' Care Home" means an institution registered as such
under sub-section (2) of section 19, established or maintained by the Government
Amendment
of section 2.
2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
or a local body or an organisation for providing residential facilities to senior
citizens for their care and welfare;';
(vii) for clause (k), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
'(k) "welfare" means provision for food, clothing, housing, safety and
security, medical attendance, healthcare, treatment, recreation and other amenities
necessary for the physical and mental well being of parents and senior citizens.'.
4. For section 4 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
"4. (1) A parent or a senior citizen who is unable to maintain himself to lead a life
of dignity from his own earning, including earning from any property owned by him,
and is either not maintained by his children or relatives or is neglected by them, shall
be entitled to make an application for maintenance under section 5.
(2) The obligation of the children to maintain a parent extends to such needs of
the parent as are necessary for him to lead a life of dignity.
(3) The obligation of a relative to maintain a childless senior citizen extends to
such needs of the senior citizen as are necessary for him to lead a life of dignity
provided such relative has sufficient means to do so and is either in possession of, or
shall inherit, the property of such senior citizen after his death:
Provided that where more than one relative is in possession of, or shall inherit,
the property of a childless senior citizen, the obligation of such relatives shall be in
proportion in which they are in possession of, or shall inherit, the property.’’
5. In section 5 of the principal Act, for sub-sections ( 1) to ( 5), the following
sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:—
"(1) An application for maintenance under section 4 may be made to the Tribunal
in person or by registered post or online or by any other means, by—
(a) a parent or senior citizen, as the case may be, against one or more
children as defined in clause (a) of section 2; or
(b) a childless senior citizen, against one or more relatives as defined in
clause (g) of section 2,
and if such parent or senior citizen is incapable so to do, he may authorise any other
person or organisation to make such application on his behalf or the Tribunal may also
take suo motu cognizance of such matter.
(2) On receipt of an application for maintenance under sub-section ( 1), the
Tribunal may, after giving notice of the application to the children or relative, as the
case may be, and after giving the parties an opportunity of being heard, hold an
inquiry for determining the maintenance in accordance with the provisions of
section 6.
(3) During the pendency of the proceeding for maintenance, the Tribunal may,
by order, direct the children or relative to pay such monthly allowance towards the
interim maintenance of such parent or senior citizen, as may be determined by it from
time to time.
(4) Every application under sub-section (1) shall be disposed of by the Tribunal
within a period of ninety days from the date of receipt of such application:
 Provided that in case of senior citizens who are eighty years or above, such
application shall be disposed of within a period of sixty days:
Substitution
of new
section for
section 4.
Maintenance
of parents and
senior
citizens.
Amendment
of section 5.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
 Provided further that in exceptional circumstances and for reasons to be re-
corded in writing, the Tribunal may extend such period only once for a maximum
period of thirty days.
(5) Where an application under sub-section ( 1) is filed against one or more
children or relatives, such children or relative may implead any other person who is
liable to maintain the parent or senior citizen, as the case may be.".
6. In section 6 of the principal Act,—
(i) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
"(1) The proceedings referred to in section 5 may be taken against the
children or relatives in the district where—
(a) the parent or senior citizen resides or has last resided; or
(b) any of the children or relatives reside.";
(ii) in sub-section (3), for the words and figures "as provided under the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973", the words "as provided under the Code" shall be substituted;
(iii) in sub-section (4),—
 ( a) in the opening portion, for the words "an order for payment of
maintenance is proposed to be made", the words and figure "the application
under section 5 has been filed" shall be substituted;
 (b) in the proviso, for the words "an order for payment of maintenance
is proposed to be made is", the words, brackets and figure "process has been
issued under sub-section ( 2), are" shall be substituted;
(iv) for sub-section (6), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
"(6) The Tribunal may, for assisting and persuading the parties to arrive at
amicable settlement, refer the proceedings under section 5 to a Conciliation
Officer, nominated by the Tribunal in such manner as may be prescribed, and
such Conciliation Officer shall submit his findings within fifteen days from the
date of his nomination and in case of any amicable settlement, the Tribunal shall
pass an order to that effect.".
7. In section 7 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), for the words "order for
maintenance", the words "application filed" shall be substituted.
8. In section 8 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the words and figures "the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973", the words "the Code" shall be substituted.
9.  For section 9 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
"9. (1) The Tribunal may, on being satisfied of the neglect or refusal on part of
the children or the relative, as the case may be, to maintain a parent or senior citizen
who is unable to maintain himself to lead a life of dignity, pass an order for maintenance
directing such children or relative to provide such monthly allowance, other resources
and care for the maintenance of the parent or senior citizen, as it may, from time to time,
determine.
(2) While determining the maintenance, the Tribunal may take into consideration
the standard of living of the parent or senior citizen and the earnings of such parent or
senior citizen and of the children or relative.
(3) The order for maintenance shall be enforceable from the date of such order
or, if so ordered by the Tribunal, from the date of the application.
Amendment
of section 6.
2 of 1974.
Amendment
of section 7.
Amendment
of section 8.
Substitution of
new section
for section 9.
2 of 1974.
Order for
maintenance.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

5
(4) A copy of the order for maintenance shall be—
 (i) made available free of cost to the parent or senior citizen, as the case
may be;
(ii) posted on the Notice Board of the Tribunal;
(iii) made available online on the website of the concerned Department of
the State; and
(iv) provided to the Maintenance Officer.
(5) Where an order for maintenance is made against more than one person, the
death of one of them shall not affect the liability of the others to continue providing
the maintenance.".
10. In section 10 of the principal Act, for sub-section ( 1), the following sub-section
shall be substituted, namely:—
"(1) On proof of misrepresentation or mistake of fact or any change in the
circumstances of the parent or senior citizen receiving maintenance under section 9,
the Tribunal may make such alteration in the order for maintenance, as it deems fit.".
11. In section 11 of the principal Act,—
 (i) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
"(1) An order for maintenance may be enforced by the Tribunal in any
place where the person against whom it is made resides, on being satisfied as to
the identity of the parties and non-compliance of such order.";
 ( ii) in sub-section ( 2), for the words and figures, "Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 and shall be executed in the manner prescribed for the execution of
such order by that Code", the words "the Code and shall be executed in the manner
prescribed by the Code for the execution of such order" shall be substituted;
(iii) after sub-section (2), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:—
"(3) If the children or relative against whom an order for maintenance is
passed under section 9 fails to comply with such order without sufficient cause,
the Tribunal may, for every breach of the order, issue a warrant for levying the
amount due in the manner provided for levying fines:
 Provided that no warrant shall be issued for the recovery of any amount
due under this section unless application is made by the parent or the senior
citizen to the Tribunal to levy such amount.
(4) If the children or relatives, as the case may be, fails to pay the fine
levied under sub-section (3), the Tribunal may sentence him to imprisonment
for a term which may extend to one month or until the payment is made, whichever
is earlier.".
12.  In section 12 of the principal Act, the following provisos shall be inserted,
namely:—
"Provided that where any application for maintenance under Chapter IX of the
Code is pending before any Court prior to the date of commencement of the Maintenance
and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens (Amendment) Act, 2019, the Court may, on
the request of the parent or senior citizen, allow withdrawal of such application and
such parent or senior citizen shall be entitled to file an application for maintenance
before the Tribunal under this Act:
 Provided further that such application filed before the Tribunal shall be deemed
to have been filed from the date when such application was filed before the Court.".
Amendment
of section 10.
Amendment
of section 11.
2 of 1974.
Amendment
of section 12.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
13. In section 13 of the principal Act, for the words "within thirty days", the words
"within fifteen days" shall be substituted.
14. In section 16 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section (1),—
 (a) in the opening portion, after the words "senior citizen or a parent", the
words "or any of the children or relatives" shall be inserted;
(b) in the first proviso, after the word "parent", the words "senior citizen"
shall be inserted;
(ii) in sub-section (6), after the words "receipt of an appeal", the words "and in
exceptional circumstances and for reasons to be recorded in writing, within a further
period of thirty days" shall be inserted.
15. In section 18 of the principal Act,—
(i) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
"(1) The State Government shall designate an officer in the rank of District
Social Welfare Officer or an officer of equivalent rank from any related Department
of the State or the Block level Officer or the Tehsildar as Maintenance Officer for
the purposes of this Act.";
(ii) in sub-section (2), for the words "shall represent a parent", the words "may
represent a parent or a senior citizen" shall be substituted;
(iii) after sub-section (2), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:—
"(3) It shall be the duty of the Maintenance Officer to ensure that the
order for maintenance passed under section 9 is complied with, and in case of its
non-compliance, he may take such steps as may be necessary for the compliance
of such order.
(4) The Maintenance Officer shall be a point of contact for the parent or
senior citizen to liaison and co-ordinate with them.".
16. In the principal Act, for the heading of CHAPTER III, the following heading shall
be substituted, namely:—
"E
STABLISHMENT  AND M ANAGEMENT  OF S ENIOR  C ITIZENS ' C ARE H OMES  AND
MULTI-SERVICE DAY CARE CENTRES FOR SENIOR CITIZENS".
17. For section 19 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
"19. (1) The Government or an organisation may establish or maintain Senior
Citizens' Care Homes for providing residential facilities for the care of senior citizens or
Multi-Service Day Care Centre for Senior Citizens for providing day care facilities for
senior citizens.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, all such institutions established and maintained as Senior Citizens' Care Homes
or as Multi-Service Day Care Centre for Senior Citizens shall be registered with the
Registration Authority referred to in sub-section (3).
(3) The State Government shall designate a Registration Authority for registration
of institutions under this Act in such manner as may be prescribed.
Amendment
of section 13.
Amendment
of section 16.
Amendment
of section 18.
Amendment of
heading of
CHAPTER III.
Substitution of
new section
for section 19.
Senior
Citizens' Care
Homes and
Multi-Service
Day Care
Centre for
Senior
Citizens.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

7
(4) Every institution registered under this Act shall provide necessary amenities
specified under sub-section ( 5) and if it fails to do so, the State Government may
cancel or withhold registration of such institution, after following such procedure as
may be prescribed.
(5) The Central Government shall prescribe minimum standards for establishment
and maintenance of Senior Citizens’ Care Homes and Multi-Service Day Care Centres
and for the food, infrastructure, medical facilities, recreation, staff, safety and security
and such other matters as may be necessary.
(6) The State Government shall designate such authority, as it deems fit, as the
Regulatory Authority to monitor the functioning of the institutions registered under
this Act through regular inspections or social audit to ensure that the Minimum
Standards are adhered to.".
18.  In the principal Act, in the heading of CHAPTER IV , for the word "MEDICAL", the
word "HEALTHCARE" shall be substituted.
19. For section 20 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be substituted,
namely:—
"20. The Government shall ensure that,—
(i) all hospitals, whether fully or partially funded by the Government or
private healthcare institutions, provide beds for senior citizens as far as
possible;
(ii) separate queues are earmarked for senior citizens in all healthcare and
allied institutions;
(iii) facilities for treatment of chronic, terminal and degenerative diseases
are expanded for senior citizens;
(iv) research and development in geriatric sciences is undertaken;
(v) facilities are earmarked for geriatric patients in every district hospital
duly headed by a medical officer with experience in geriatric care and other
objectives and outcomes of National and State level programmes for geriatric
healthcare are monitored and achieved;
(vi) necessary measures are taken to provide barrier-free access for senior
citizens in all healthcare and allied institutions.
20A. (1) The Government or an organisation may provide homecare services for
such senior citizens who suffer from difficulties in performing activities of daily life
due to any physical or mental impairment.
(2) The institutions providing such homecare services shall engage trained and
certified attendants or caregivers for the senior citizens as per their needs.
(3) Institutions providing training, certification and homecare services shall be
registered as service provider with the Registration Authority referred to in section (3)
of section 19.".
20. In the principal Act, for the heading of CHAPTER V , the following heading shall be
substituted, namely:—
"P
ROTECTION OF LIFE AND PROPERTY OF SENIOR CITIZENS AND OTHER WELFARE MEASURES".
21. In section 21 of the principal Act, for clauses (i), (ii) and (iii), the following clauses
shall be substituted, namely:—
"(i) the provisions of the Act and measures for the well-being of senior citizens
are given wide publicity through various means;
Amendment of
heading of
CHAPTER IV.
Substitution of
new sections
20 and 20A
for section 20.
Healthcare for
senior
citizens.
Homecare
services for
senior
citizens.
Amendment
of heading of
CHAPTER V .
Amendment
of section 21.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

8
(ii) the officers of the Central Government and of  the State Government, including
the members of Civil Defence Corps and Home Guards, police officers and members of
judicial service are given periodic sensitisation and awareness training on the
provisions of this Act and the issues relating thereto.".
22. After section 21 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"21A. (1) The State Government shall prepare and implement a comprehensive
action plan for the welfare of senior citizens including for protection of their life and
property.
(2) The State Government shall take all measure to ensure effective co-ordination
between the services provided by the concerned Ministries or Departments,
non-Governmental organisations and other stakeholders to address the issues relating
to the welfare of the senior citizens and that periodical review of the same is conducted.".
23. In section 22 of the principal Act, for sub-section (2), the following sub-sections
shall be inserted, namely:—
"(2) In every police station, at least one officer, not below the rank of Assistant
Sub-Inspector possessing aptitude, appropriate training and orientation shall be
designated as the Nodal Officer for senior citizens to deal with issues relating to
parents and senior citizens.
(3) The State Government shall constitute a Special Police Unit for senior citizens
in each district to co-ordinate the functions of police in respect of parents and senior
citizens and such Unit shall be headed by a police officer not below the rank of Deputy
Superintendent of Police and consist of the Nodal Officers for senior citizens designated
under sub-section (2) and two social workers having experience of working in the field
of senior citizens, of whom one shall preferably be a woman.".
24. In section 23 of the principal Act, for the words "senior citizen", wherever they
occur, the words "parent or senior citizen" shall be substituted.
25. After section 23 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"23A. (1) The Central Government and the State Government shall take suitable
measures to create more accessible and age-friendly environment, transportation,
information and communications and other public facilities including separate queues
for senior citizens.
(2) The State Government shall establish and maintain helpline for safety and
security of senior citizens having one common number across the nation and it shall
be linked to healthcare facilities, police department and other related agencies.
(3) The Government may undertake welfare measures for the benefit of senior
citizens and any benefit for elderly persons made available by the Government or
semi-Government or organisation shall also be available to senior citizens who are
sixty years and above:
Provided that the provisions of this section shall not have any effect on any
benefits extended by the Government or semi-Government or organisations to any
person below sixty years.".
26. For section 24 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
‘24. Whoever, having the care or protection of a parent or senior citizen,
intentionally abuses or abandons such parent or senior citizen, shall be punishable
Insertion of
new section
21A.
Action plan
for senior
citizens.
Amendment
of section 22.
Amendment
of section 23.
Insertion of
new section
23A.
Other welfare
measures for
senior
citizens.
Substitution of
new section
for section 24.
Abuses and
abandonement
of senior
citizen.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

9
with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three months, but which may
extend to six months or with fine up to ten thousand rupees or with both.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the term "abuse" includes
physical abuse, verbal and emotional abuse and economic abuse, neglect and
abandonment causing assault, injury, physical or mental suffering.".
27. After section 28 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted,
namely:—
"28A. The details of the institutions registered under sub-section ( 3) of
section 19 or, as the case may be, under sub-section (3) of section 20A shall be made
available by the State Government by placing it on the website of concerned Department
of that State.
28B. The institutions registered under sub-section (3) of section 20A shall be
accredited for quality of services by accreditation agencies authorised under any law
for the time being in force.".
28. For section 29 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
"29. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be
necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two
years from the date of the commencement of the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents
and Senior Citizens (Amendment) Act, 2019.
(2) Every order made under sub-section (1) shall, as soon as may be after it is
made, be laid before each House of Parliament.".
29. In section 32 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided that the Central Government may frame model rules in respect
of all or any of the matters with respect to which the State Government is required
to make rules and where any such model rules have been framed in respect of
any such matter, they shall apply to the State mutatis mutandis until the rules in
respect of that matter are made by the State Government and while making any
such rules, they conform to such model rules.";
(b) in sub-section (2),—
(i) for clause (a), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:—
"(a) the manner of nominating Conciliation Officer under
sub-section (6) of section 6;
 (aa) the manner of holding inquiry under section 5 subject to such
rules as may be prescribed under sub-section (1) of section 8;";
(ii) after clause (d), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
"(da) the manner of designating Registration Authority under
sub-section (3) of section 19;
 (db) the procedure for cancellation or withholding of registration
of institutions under sub-section (4) of section 19;
Insertion of
new sections
28A and 28B.
Obligation of
State
Government
to place
details of
registered
institutions on
website.
Accreditation
of
institutions.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Amendment
of section 32.
Substitution of
new section
for section 29.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

10
(dc) the minimum standards for the establishment and maintenance
of Senior Citizens' Care Homes and Multi-Service Day Care Centres and
for the food, infrastructure, medical facilities, recreation, staff, safety and
security and other matters under sub-section (5) of section 19;".

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007 was enacted
on 29th December, 2007 to ensure need based maintenance for parents and senior citizens
and their welfare. It's been more than a decade now that the Act is in place, serving the
needy parents and senior citizens, with the active co-operation of the State Governments
and Union territory Administrations.
2. However, with the gradual breakdown of joint family system in the society, number
of cases of neglect, crime, exploitation and abandonment of parents and senior citizens are
in the rise. Various High Courts have also issued orders directing the Government to review
provisions of the Act.
3. After examining various provisions of the Act, the Group of Secretaries have made
recommendations to extend all the benefits to senior citizens of uniform age, to enhance
maintenance amount for senior citizens and standardisation of homecare services. Besides,
petitions and representations have been received from individuals and institutions
requesting to make certain modifications in the Act, including to bring daughter-in-law and
son-in-law within the ambit of  the definition of  'children', to provide punishment for abuse
of parents and senior citizens. It is, therefore, decided to revise various provisions of the
said Act and to incorporate new provisions therein to make the Act more comprehensive
and helpful to the greying population.
4. The Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens (Amendment)
Bill, 2019 seeks to —
(a) expand the scope of the Act by modifying the definitions of  'children',
'parents', 'maintenance', 'welfare' and 'senior citizens', to enable parents and senior
citizens to lead a life of dignity;
(b) enlarge the mode of submission of application for maintenance by the parents
or senior citizens;
(c) provide for expeditious disposal of maintenance applications with special
preference to the applications of senior citizens above eighty years of age, so as to
enable parents or senior citizens to receive necessary relief;
(d) remove the upper limit of rupees ten thousand as monthly maintenance
amount that may be awarded by the Tribunal;
(e) extend the right to file appeal to children and relatives also who are aggrieved
by the order of the Maintenance Tribunal, if they continue to pay the maintenance
amount as ordered  by the Maintenance Tribunal;
(f) provide for registration of Senior Citizens’ Care Homes, Multi-Service Day
Care Centre for Senior Citizens and Institutions providing Homecare Services for
Senior Citizens and their minimum standards;
(g) constitute Special Police Unit for Senior Citizens in each district and appoint
Nodal Officers for Senior Citizens in every Police Station;
(h) maintain Helpline for senior citizens; and
(i) provide stringent punishment to those who abuse or abandon parents or
senior citizens.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW DELHI; THAAW ARCHAND  GEHLOT.
The  6th December, 2019.
11

Notes on clauses
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for definitions of certain expressions including "chil-
dren", "maintenance", "parent", etc.
Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to substitute a new section for section 4 which provides for
maintenance of parents and senior citizens and obligation of children and relatives to maintain
them.
Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to amend section 5 to expand the mode of filing application
before the Tribunal for maintenance.
Clause 6 of the Bill seeks to amend section 6 inter alia to empower the Tribunal to
refer the proceedings to the Conciliation Officers.
Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to amend section 7 to substitute the words 'order for
maintenance' with the words 'application filed'.
Clause 8 of the Bill seeks to amend section 8 to substitute the words 'the Code' with
the words 'the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973'.
Clause 9 of the Bill proposes to substitute a new section for section 9 which provides
manner of determining maintenance by the Tribunal.
Clause 10 of the Bill seeks to substitute sub-section ( 1) of section 10 to provide for
making alteration in the order for maintenance passed by the Tribunal.
Clause 11 of the Bill seeks to amend section 11 to provide for the enforcement of order
of maintenance.
Clause 12 of the Bill seeks to amend section 12 so as to insert a proviso therein to
enable the parent or senior citizen to withdraw the application pending before any court and
to file the same before the Tribunal and such application shall be deemed to have been filed
from the date when such application was filed before the court.
Clause 13 of the Bill seeks to amend section 13 to substitute the words 'within fifteen
days' with the words 'within thirty days'.
Clause 14 of the Bill seeks to amend section 16 to enable the children or relatives of
parent or senior citizens to file appeal against the order of the Tribunal.
Clause 15 of the Bill seeks to amend section 18 to provide for appointment of the
Maintenance Officer.
Clause 16 of the Bill seeks to amend heading of chapter III as 'Establishment and
Management of Senior Citizens’ Care Homes and Multi Service day Care Centres for Senior
Citizens.
Clause 17 of the Bill seeks to substitute section 19 with a new section to provide for
setting up and management of Senior Citizens’ Care Homes and Multi Service day Care
Centres for Senior Citizens’.
Clause 18 of the Bill seeks to amend heading of chapter IV to substitute the word
'Medical' with the word 'Healthcare'.
Clause 19 of the Bill seeks to substitute section 20 with a new section to provide for
the healthcare of senior citizens and for homecare services for senior citizens.
Clause 20 of the Bill seeks to amend heading of Chapter V as 'Protection of Life and
Property of senior citizens and other welfare measures'.
12

13
Clause 21 of the Bill seeks to amend section 21 to provide for giving wide publicity to
the provisions of the Act and measures for the well-being of the senior citizens and also to
sensitise the officers of the Central Government and the State Government.
Clause 22 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 21A to provide for Action Plan for
Senior Citizens.
Clause 23 of the Bill seeks to amend section 22 to provide for designation of Nodal
Officer for senior citizens to deal with issues relating to parents and senior citizens in every
police stations and to constitute a Special Police Unit for senior citizens in each district to
coordinate the functions of police in respect of parents and senior citizens.
Clause 24 of the Bill seeks to amend section 23 to substitute the words 'senior citizens',
wherever they occur, with the words 'parent or senior citizen'.
Clause 25 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 23A to provide for other welfare
measures for senior citizens.
Clause 26 of the Bill seeks to substitute section 24 with a new section to provide
punishment for the abuse or abandonment of the senior citizen.
Clause 27 of the Bill seeks to insert new sections 28A and 28B to provide for obligation
of State Governments to place details of registered institutions on website and accreditation
of institutions, respectively.
Clause 28 of the Bill seeks to substitute a new section for section 29 to provide for
power to remove difficulties.
Clause 29 of the Bill seeks to amend section 32 to empower the Central Government to
frame model rules and to empower the State Government to make rules in respect of certain
matters.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 17 of the Bill seeks to substitute a new section for section 19 which provides
for establishment or maintenance of Senior Citizens'  Care Homes for providing residential
facilities for the care of senior citizens or Multi-Service Day Care Centre for Senior Citizens
for providing day care facilities for senior citizens.
Clause 19 of the Bill seeks to substitute new sections 20 and 20A for section 20 section
20A provides for provisioning of homecare services to senior citizens who suffer from
difficulties in performing activities of daily life due to any physical or mental impairment.
Clause 25 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 23A which provides for creating
more accessible and age-friendly environment, transportation, information and
communications and other public facilities for senior citizens and for establishing and
maintaining Helpline for safety and security of senior citizens.
Since these provisions will be implemented in a phased manner mostly by the State
Government, it is not possible at this stage to estimate the full financial burden likely to be
incurred. Further, there would be no additional requirement of fund from the Consolidated
Fund of India at present. The Bill does not involve any other recurring or non-recurring
expenditure.
14

15
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Sub-clause (a) of clause 29 of the Bill seeks to insert a provisons in sub-section (1) of
section 32 to empower the Central Government to frame model rules in respect of all or any
of the matters with respect to which the State Government is required to make rules and
where any such model rules have been framed in respect of any such matter, they shall apply
to the State mutatis mutandis until the rules in respect of that matter are made by the State
Government and while making any such rules, they conform to such model rules.
Sub-clause (b) of clause 29 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (2) of section 32 to
empower the State Government to make rules to provide for (i) the manner of nominating
Conciliation Officer under sub-section ( 6) of section 6; ( ii) the manner of designating
Registration Authority under sub-section (3) of section 19; (iii) the procedure for cancellation
or withholding of registration of institutions under sub-section ( 4) of section 19; ( iv) the
minimum standards for the establishment and maintenance of Senior Citizens' Care Homes
and Multi-Service Day Care Centres for senior  citizens for the food, infrastructure, medical
facilities, recreation, staff, safety and security and other matters under sub-section ( 5) of
section 19.
The matters in respect of which rules may be made are generally matters of procedure
and administrative details and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The
delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE MAINTENANCE AND WELFARE OF PARENTS AND
SENIOR CITIZENS ACT, 2007
(56 OF 2007)
An Act to provide for more effective provisions for the maintenance  and welfare of
parents and senior citizens guaranteed and  recognised under the Constitution and for
matters  connected therewith or incidental thereto.
* * * * *
2. (1) In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "children" includes son, daughter, grandson and  grand-daughter but does
not include a minor;
(b) "maintenance" includes provisions for food,  clothing, residence and medical
attendance and treatment;
* * * * *
(d) "parent" means father or mother whether biological,  adoptive or step father
or step mother, as the case may be,  whether or not the father or the mother is a senior
citizen;
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made by the  State Government
under this Act;
* * * * *
(g) "relative" means any legal heir of the childless  senior citizen who is not a
minor and is in possession of or  would inherit his property after his death;
* * * * *
(k) "welfare" means provision for food, healthcare,  recreation centres and other
amenities necessary for the senior  citizens.
* * * * *
CHAPTER II
M
AINTENANCE OF PARENTS AND SENIOR CITIZENS
4. (1) A senior citizen including parent who is unable to maintain himself from his own
earning or out of the property owned by him, shall be entitled to make an application under
section 5 in case of—
(i) parent or grand-parent, against one or more of his  children not being a minor;
(ii) a childless senior citizen, against such of his relative  referred to in clause (g)
of section 2.
(2) The obligation of the children or relative, as the case may be, to maintain a senior
citizen extends to the needs of such citizen so that senior citizen may lead a normal life.
(3) The obligation of the children to maintain his or her parent extends to the needs of
such parent either father or mother or both, as the case may be, so that such parent may lead
a normal life.
(4) Any person being a relative of a senior citizen and having sufficient means shall
maintain such senior citizen provided he is in possession of the property of such citizen or
he would inherit the property of such senior citizen:
16
Definitions.
Maintenance
of parents and
senior
citizens.

17
Provided that where more than one relatives are entitled to inherit the property of a
senior citizen, the maintenance shall be payable by such relative in the proportion in which
they would inherit his property.
5. (1) An application for maintenance under section 4, may be made—
(a) by a senior citizen or a parent, as the case may be; or
(b) if he is incapable, by any other person or  organisation authorised by him; or
(c) the Tribunal may take cognizance suo motu.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section "organisation" means any voluntary
association registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 or any other law for the
time being in force.
(2) The Tribunal may, during the pendency of the proceeding regarding monthly
allowance for the maintenance under this section, order such children or relative to make a
monthly allowance for the interim maintenance of such senior citizen including parent and to
pay the same to such senior citizen including parent as the Tribunal may from time to time
direct.
(3) On receipt of an application for maintenance under sub-section ( 1), after giving
notice of the application to the children or relative and after giving the parties an opportunity
of being heard, hold an inquiry for determining the amount of maintenance.
(4) An application filed under sub-section ( 2), for the monthly allowance for the
maintenance and expenses for proceeding shall be disposed of within ninety days from the
date of the service of notice of the application to such person:
Provided that the Tribunal may extend the said period, once for a maximum period of
thirty days in exceptional circumstances for reasons to be recorded in writing.
* * * * *
6. (1) The proceedings under section 5 may be taken against any children or relative in
any district—
(a) where he resides or last resided; or
(b) where children or relative resides.
* * * * *
(3) For securing the attendance of children or relative the Tribunal shall have the
power of a Judicial Magistrate of first class as provided under the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973.
(4) All evidence to such proceedings shall be taken in the presence of the children or
relative against whom an order for payment of maintenance is proposed to be made, and
shall be recorded in the manner prescribed for summons cases:
Provided that if the Tribunal is satisfied that the children or relative against whom an
order for payment of maintenance is proposed to be made is wilfully avoiding service, or
wilfully neglecting to attend the Tribunal, the Tribunal may proceed to hear and determine
the case ex parte.
* * * * *
(6) The Tribunal before hearing an application under section 5 may, refer the same to
a Conciliation Officer and such Conciliation Officer shall submit his findings within one
month and if amicable settlement has been arrived at, the Tribunal shall pass an order to that
effect.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section "Conciliation Officer" means any
person or representative of an organisation referred to in Explanation to sub-section (1) of
Application
for
maintenance.
21 of 1860.
Jurisdiction
and
procedure.
2 of 1974.

18
section 5 or the Maintenance Officers designated by the State Government under
sub-section (1) of section 18 or any other person nominated by the Tribunal for this purpose.
7. (1) The State Government shall within a period of six months from the date of the
commencement of this Act, by notification in Official Gazette, constitute for each Sub-division
one or more Tribunals as may be specified in the notification for the purpose of adjudicating
and deciding upon the order for maintenance under section 5.
* * * * *
8. (1) * * * * *
(2) The Tribunal shall have all the powers of a Civil Court for the purpose of taking
evidence on oath and of enforcing the attendance of witnesses and of compelling the
discovery and production of documents and material objects and for such other purposes
as may be prescribed; and the Tribunal shall be deemed to be a Civil Court for all the
purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
* * * * *
9. (1) If children or relatives, as the case may be, neglect or refuse to maintain a senior
citizen being unable to maintain himself, the Tribunal may, on being satisfied of such neglect
or refusal, order such children or relatives to make a monthly allowance at such monthly rate
for the maintenance of such senior citizen, as the Tribunal may deem fit and to pay the same
to such senior citizen as the Tribunal may, from time to time, direct.
(2) The maximum maintenance allowance which may be ordered by such Tribunal shall
be such as may be prescribed by the State Government which shall not exceed ten thousand
rupees per month.
10. (1) On proof of misrepresentation or mistake of fact or a change in the circumstances
of any person, receiving a monthly allowance under section 9, for the maintenance ordered
under that section to pay a monthly allowance for the maintenance, the Tribunal may make
such alteration, as it thinks fit, in the allowance for the maintenance.
* * * * *
11. (1) A copy of the order of maintenance and including the order regarding expenses
of proceedings, as the case may be, shall be given without payment of any fee to the senior
citizen or to parent, as the case may be, in whose favour it is made and such order may be
enforced by any Tribunal in any place where the person against whom it is made, such
Tribunal on being satisfied as to the identity of the parties and the non-payment of the
allowance, or as the case may be, expenses, due.
(2) A maintenance order made under this Act shall have the same force and effect as an
order passed under Chapter IX of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and shall be executed
in the manner prescribed for the execution of such order by that Code.
* * * * *
13. When an order is made under this Chapter, the children or relative who is required
to pay any amount in terms of such order shall within thirty days of the date of announcing
the order by the Tribunal, deposit the entire amount ordered in such manner as the Tribunal
may direct.
* * * * *
16. (1) Any senior citizen or a parent, as the case may be, aggrieved by an order of a
Tribunal may, within sixty days from the date of the order, prefer an appeal to the Appellate
Tribunal:
Constitution
of
Maintenance
Tribunal.
Summary
procedure in
case of
inquiry.
2 of 1974.
Order for
maintenance.
Alteration in
allowance.
Enforcement
of order of
maintenance.
2 of 1974.
Deposit of
maintenance
amount.
Appeals.

19
Provided that on appeal, the children or relative who is required to pay any amount in
terms of such maintenance order shall continue to pay to such parent the amount so ordered,
in the manner directed by the Appellate Tribunal:
Provided further that the Appellate Tribunal may, entertain the appeal after the expiry
of the said period of sixty days, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient
cause from preferring the appeal in time.
* * * * *
(6) The Appellate Tribunal shall make an endeavour to pronounce its order in writing
within one month of the receipt of an appeal.
* * * * *
18. (1) The State Government shall designate the District Social Welfare or an officer
not below the rank of a District Social Welfare Officer, by whatever name called as
Maintenance Officer.
(2) The Maintenance Officer referred to in sub-section (1), shall represent a parent if
he so desires, during the proceedings of the Tribunal, or the Appellate Tribunal, as the case
may be.
* * * * *
CHAPTER III
E
STABLISHMENT OF OLDAGE HOMES
19. (1) The State Government may establish and maintain such number of oldage
homes at accessible places, as it may deem necessary, in a phased manner, beginning with at
least one in each district to accommodate in such homes a minimum of one hundred fifty
senior citizens who are indigent.
(2)The State Government may, prescribe a scheme for management of oldage homes,
including the standards and various types of services to be provided by them which are
necessary for medical care and means of entertainment to the inhabitants of such homes.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, "indigent" means any senior citizen
who is not having sufficient means, as determined by the State Government, from time to
time, to maintain himself.
CHAPTER IV
P
ROVISIONS FOR MEDICAL CARE OF SENIOR CITIZEN
20. The State Government shall ensure that,—
(i) the Government hospitals or hospitals funded fully or  partially by the
Government shall provide beds for all senior  citizens as far as possible;
(ii) separate queues be arranged for senior citizens;
(iii) facility for treatment of chronic, terminal and degenerative diseases is
expanded for senior citizens;
(iv) research activities for chronic elderly diseases and  ageing expanded;
(v) there are earmarked facilities for geriatric patients in  every district hospital
dully headed by a medical officer with  experience in geriatric care.
CHAPTER V
PROTECTION OF LIFE AND PROPERTY OF SENIOR CITIZEN
21. The State Government shall, take all measures to ensure that—
(i) the provisions of this Act are given wide publicity  through public media
including the television, radio and the  print, at regular intervals;
(ii) the Central Government and State Government  Officers, including the police
officers and the members of the  judicial service, are given periodic sensitisation and
awareness  training on the issues relating to this Act;
Maintenance
Officer.
Establishment
of oldage
homes.
Medical
support for
senior
citizens.
Measures for
publicity,
awareness,
etc., for
welfare of
senior
citizens.

20
(iii) effective co-ordination between the services  provided by the concerned
Ministries or Departments dealing  with law, home affairs, health and welfare, to address
the issues  relating to the welfare of the senior citizens and periodical  review of the
same is conducted.
* * * * *
23. ( 1) Where any senior citizen who, after the commencement of this Act, has
transferred by way of gift or otherwise, his property, subject to the condition that the
transferee shall provide the basic amenities and basic physical needs to the transferor and
such transferee refuses or fails to provide such amenities and physical needs, the said
transfer of property shall be deemed to have been made by fraud or coercion or under undue
influence and shall at the option of the transferor be declared void by the Tribunal.
(2) Where any senior citizen has a right to receive maintenance out of an estate and
such estate or part thereof is transferred, the right to receive maintenance may be enforced
against the transferee if the transferee has notice of the right, or if the transfer is gratuitous;
but not against the transferee for consideration and without notice of right.
(3) If, any senior citizen is incapable of enforcing the rights under sub-sections ( 1)
and ( 2), action may be taken on his behalf by any of the organisation referred to in
Explanation to sub-section (1) of section 5.
CHAPTER VI
O
FFENCES AND PROCEDURE FOR TRIAL
24. Whoever, having the care or protection of senior citizen leaves, such senior citizen
in any place with the intention of wholly abandoning such senior citizen, shall be punishable
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three months or fine
which may extend to five thousand rupees or with both.
* * * * *
29. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the State
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from
the date of the commencement of this Act.
* * * * *
32. (1) * * * * *
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide
for—
(a) the manner of holding inquiry under section 5  subject to such rules as may
be prescribed under sub-section (1)  of section 8;
* * * * *
Transfer of
property to be
void in certain
circumstances.
Exposure and
abandonment
of senior
citizen.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power of
State
Government
to make rules.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007.
————
(Shri Thaawarchand Gehlot, Minister of Social Justice and Empowerment)
MGIPMRND—4172LS(S3)—06-12-2019.