Bill No. 37 61 1992
THE SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE BOARD OF INDIA BILL, 1992

ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Defimitions.
CHAPTER II
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE Boarp or Innis
3, Establishment and incorporation of Board,
4, Management of the Board.
5. Term of office and conditions of service of Chairman and mem-
bers of the Board. 2
6. Removal of member from office. ;
7. Meetings.
8. Vacancies, etc. not, to invalidate proceedings of Board.
9. Officers and employees of the Board.
CHAPTER III
TRANSWER OF ASSETS, LIABILITIES, 870५ OF THE EXISTING SucuRITIES AND
Excuance Boarp To THE Boary

40. Transfer of assets, liabilities, ete., of existing Securities and Ex-
change Board to the Board. . .

CHAPTER IV
Powers AND FUNCTIONS or THE Boanp
11, Functions of Board. ‘
CHAPTER V

REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE

12. Regisiration of stock-brokers, sub-brokers, share transfer agents,
ete. |]

@

ss
To-Be INTuoDUCED In Lok SazHa ©



. am (i)
CHAPTER VI
FINANCE, ACCOUNT AND AUDIT
CLauses
13. Grants by the Central Government,
14 Fund. : i
oe 19, Accounts and audit. }
CHAPTER, VIL
MiscELLangous
16. Power of Central Government to issue directions.
17. Power of Central Government, to supersede the Board.
18. Returns and reports.
19. Delegation.
20, Appeals.

21, Savings,

22, Members, officers and employees of the Board to be public
servants, हु : ‘

23. Protection of action taken in good faith.
24, Penalty, ! :
| 25, Exemption from tax on wealth and income.
26. Cognizance of offences by courts,
27. Offences by companies. — ‘ i
28. Powen to exempt. | : है
29. Power to make rules.
30. Power to make regulations. ‘

31. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.

32. Application of other laws not barred. !
i 33. Amendment’ of certain enactments. :

34, Power to remove difficulties, : i
i 35, Repeal and saving.

| THE SCHEDULE



है Bill No. 37 of 1092
THE SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE BOARD OF INDIA BILL, 1992 ‘
A न हे
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a Board to protect the interests of
investors in securites and to promote the development of, and to

regulate, the securities market and for matiers connected. therewith
or incidental thereto.

Br it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-third Year of the Republic
of India Act, 1992, : :

CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY

5 1, (1) This Act may be called the Securities and Exchange Board of
India Act, 1992. रा |

(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 30th day of

January, 1992. i

10 2. (2) In this Act, unless tha context otherwise. requires,

(०) “Board” means the Securities and Exchange Board of India
established under section 3; we ce

Short

tile,

extent
and com-
mence- |
ment, |

Defini.
tions,



Estab-
lishment
aad incor.
Roration
of Board.

Manage-
ment of
the Hoard,

2

(0) “Chairman” means the Chairman of the Board;

(०) “existing Securities and Exchange Board” means the Secu
rities and Exchange Board of India constituted under the Resolution
of the Government of India in the Department of Economic Affairs
No, 1(44)SE/86, dated the 12th day of April, 1988;

(d) “Fund” means the Fund constituted under section 14;

(९) “amember” means a member of the Board and includes the
Chairman;

(f) “notification” means a notification published in the Official

Gazette; i

(9) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this
Act; है है

(h) “regulations” means the Tegulations made by the Board
under this Act: ‘

(i) “securities” has the meaning assigned to it in section 2 of
the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956,

(2) Words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but
defined in the Capital Issues (Control) Act, 1947, or the Securities Con-
tracts (Regulation) Act, 1956, shall have the meanings respectively
assigned to them in, those Acts.

CHAPTER II

EsrarLisuMENT oF THE SECURITIES ‘AND Excuaner Boarp or Inpia

3. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by
notification, appoint, there shall Ba established, ‘for ‘tha purposes 67 “this
Act, a Board by the name of the ‘Securities arid Excharigé Board’ of India.

पु oe ‘ .

(2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having
perpetual succession and a common seal, with power subject to the pro-
visions of . this Act, to. acquire, hold , and dispose of property, both
movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the said name,
sue or be sued.

(3) The head office of the Board’ shall ‘he at Bombay,

(4) The Board may establish offices at other places in India,

4. (1) The Board shall consist of the following members, namely; —

(a) a Chairman;

(b)_two members from amongst the officials of the Ministries
of the Central Government dealing with Finance and Law;

(९०) one member frogs: amongst the officials of the Reserve Bank
of India constituted under section 3 ‘of the Reserve Bank of India
Act, 1934; . ae .

10

15

20

25

30

35

42 of 1956,

29 of 1947,
42 of 1956,



w

S

th

30

35

40

(d) two other members, a
to be appointed by the Central Government.

(2) The general superintendence, direction and management of the
affairs of the Board shall vest in a Board of members, which may exercise
all powers and do all acts and things which may be exercised or done by
the Board,

(3) Save 88 otherwise determined by regulations, the Chairman shall
also have powers of general superintendence and direction of the affairs
of the Board and may also exercise all powers and do all acts and things

which may be exercised or done by that Board, ;

(4) The Chairman and members referred to in clauses (a) and (d)
of sub-section (1) shall be appointed by the Central Government and
the members referred to in clauses (b) and (९) of that sub-section shall

be nominated by the Central Government and the Reserve Bani of India
respectively. .

(5) The Chairman and the other members referred to in clauses (a)
and (d) of sub-section (1) shall be persons of ability, integrity and standing’
who have shown capacity in dealing with problems relating to securities
market or have special knowledge or experience of law, finance, econo-
mies, accountancy, administration or in any other discipline which, in
the opinion of the Central Government, shall be useful to the Board.

5. (1) The term of office and other conditions of service of the Chair-
man and the members referred to in clause (d) of sub-section (1) of
section 4 shall be such as may be prescribed.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the
Central Government shall have the right to terminate the services of
the Chairman or a member appoitted under clause (d) of sub-section
(1) of section 4, at any time before the expiry of the period prescribed
under sub-section (1), by givirig him notice of not less than three months
in writing or three months’ salary and allowances in lieu thereof, and the
Chairman or a member, as the case may be, shall also have the right to
relinquish his office, at any time before the expiry of the period prescri-
bed under sub-section (7), by giving to the Central Government notice
of not less than three months in writing.

6. (1) The Central Government shall remove a member from office
if he—~

(a) is, or at any time has been, adjudicated as insolvent;

(b) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent
court;

(९०) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of
the Central Government, involves a moral turpitude;

(d) is appointed as a divéctor of a company;

(e) has, in the opinion of the Central Government
position as to render his continuation in office detr:
public interest ;

» 80 abused his
‘imental to the

be
bore. ७

Term: og
office and
conditions
of servicg
of Chair-
man and
members
of the

Board,

Removal of
member
from office,



Provided that no member shall be removed under this clause unless
he has been glven a reasonable Opportunity of being heard in the matter,

Meetings, 7, (7) The Board shall meet at such times and places, and shall observe such
rules of procedure in regard to the fansaction of business at its meetings
(including quorum at such meetings) ag may be provided by regulations,

us

(2) The Chairman or, if for any reason, he is unable to attend a meeting
of the Board, any other member chosen by the members Present ftom amongst
themselves at the meeting shall preside at the meeting,

(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Board shalt
be decided! by a majority yotes of the members present and Voting, and, in the 10
event of an equality of votes, the Chairman, or in his absence, the person
presiding, shall have a Second or casting vote,

Vacancies, 8. No act or Ptoceeding of the Board shall be invalid merely by reason of a
ete, not हि . ee

to invali- (4) any vacancy in, ot any defect in the constitution of, the Board;

date pro- or 15

ceedings of . हे |

Board (6) any defect in the appointment of a Person acting as a member

of the Board; or

(c) any itregularity in the procedure of the Board not affecting the
merits of the case,

Officers 9. (1) The Board may appoint such other officers and employees as it 20

aud em- considers necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under this

ployees Act,

of the °

Board. (2) The term and other conditions of service of officers and employees of
the Board appointed under sub-section (2) shall be as may be determined
by regulations, 25

CHAPTER गा

TRANSFER OF ASSETS, LIABILITIES, ETC., OF THR EXISTING SECURITIES AND
Excuaner Boarp to THE Boarp

‘Transfer 10, (1) On ang from the date of establishment of the Board,—

of assets, oe we : .

liabilities, (a) any reference to the existing Securities and Exchange Board jn 30

ete, of any law other than this Act or iu any contract or otier instrument shall

sean be deemed as a reference to the Board;

ecurities

and (b) all properties and assets, movable and immovable, of, or belong-

Exchange ing to, the existing Securities and Exchange Board, shall vest in the

oar Board; ts 35

[0 the डे

Board, (c) all rights ang liabilities of the existing Securities and Exchange
Board shal! be transferred to, and be the rights and liabilities of, the
Board;

(a) without prejudice to the Provisions of clause (०), all debis, obli.
gations and liabilities incurred, all contracts entered into and all matters 40
and things engaged to be done by, with or for the existing Secutities and
Exchange Board immediately before that date, for or in connection with
the purpose of the said existing Board shall he deemed to have been
incurred, entered into, or engaged to be done by, with or, for, the Board;



5

{e) all sums of money due to the existing Securities and Exchange
Board immediately before that date shall be deemed to be due to the Board;

(/) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or which could

have been instituied by or against the existing Securities and Exchange

5 Board immediately before that date may be continued or may be instituted
by or against the Board; and

(g) every employee holding any office under the existing Securities
and Exchange Board immediately before that date shall hold his office
in the Board by the same tenure and upon the same terms and conditions

10 of service as respects remuneration, leave, provident fund, retirement and
other terminal benefits as he would have held such office if the Board
had not been established and shall continue fo do so as an employee of
the Board or until the expiry. of the period of six months from that date
if such employee opts not to be the employee of the Board within such

15 period,

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained jn the Industrial Disputes Act,
1947, or in any other law for the time being in force, absorption of any
employee by the Board in its regular service under this section shall not
entitle such employee to any compensation under that Act or other
20 law and no such claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or

other authority. हा

fot [947,

CHAPTER IV
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE Boarp

11. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, it shall be the duty of the Functions
25 Board to protect thé interests of investors in secutities and to promote the de- of Board,
velopment of, and to regulate the securities market, by such measures as it
thinks fit.

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the
measures referred to therein may provide for—

30 (@) segulating the business in stock exchanges aad aay other securities
markets; .

(5) registering and regulating the working of stock brokers, sub-
brokers, share transfer agents, bankers to an issue, trustees of trust deeds,
registrars to ag issue, merchant bankers, underwriters, portfolio managers,

35 investment advisers and such other intermediaries who may be assdciated
with securities markets in any manner;

(c) registering and regulating the working of collective investment
schemes, including mutual funds;

(व) promoting and regulating self-regulatory organisations;

——

40 (e) probibiliag fraudulent and unfair trade practices relating to
securities markets;

(0 promoting. investors’ education and training of intermediaries of
securities markets;

(g) prohibiting insider trading in securities;



Registra-

tion of
stock-
brokers,
sub.
brokers,
share
transfer
agents,
ete,

Grants
by the
Central
Governs

ment.

6

(h) regulating substantial acquisition of shares and take-over of
companies;

@ calling for information from, undertaking inspection, conducting
inquiries and audils of the stock exchanges and intermediaries and self-
regulatory organisations in the securities market;

(/) performing such functions and exercising such powers under the
provisions of the Capital Issues (Control) Act, 1947 and the Securities
Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956, as may be delegated to it by the Ceniral
Government;

(k) levying fees or other charges for carrying oul the purpose of
this section;

(1) sonducting research for the above purposes;

(m) performing such other functions as may be prescribed.

CHAPTER V
REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE

42, (1) No stock-broker, sub-broker, share transfer agent, banker to an
issue, trustee of trust deed, registrar to an issue, merchant banker, underwriter,
portfolio manager, investment adviser and such other intermediary who may be
associated with securities market shall buy, sell or deal in securities except
under, and in accordance with, the conditions of a certificate of registration

obtained from the Board in accordance with the rules made under this ’

Act:

Provided that a person buying er selling securities or otherwise dealing with
the securities market as a shock-broker, sub-broker, share transfer agent, banker
to an issue, trustee of trust deed, registrar to an issue, merchant banker,
underwriter, portfolio manager, investment adviser and such other intermediary
who may be associated with securities market immediately before the establish
ment of the Board for which no registration certificate was necessary prior to
such establishment, may continue to do so for a period of three months from
such establishment or. if he has made an application for such registration within
fhe said period of three months, till the disposal of such application.

(2) Every application for registration shall be in such manner and on
payment of such fees as may be determined by regulations.

(3) The Board may, by order, suspead or cancel a cettificate of regis~
tration in such manner as may be determined by regulations:

Provided that no order under this sub-section shall be made unless the
person concerned has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.

~ CHAPTER Vi पु
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT

13. The Central Government may, after the appropriation made by
Parliament by Jaw in this behalf, make ta the Board grants of such swms
of money as that Government may think fit for being utifised for the
purposes of this Act.

15

20

25

30

35

40



44. (7) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the Securities and
Bxchange Board of India General Fund and there shall be credited thereto—

(4) all grants, fees and charges received by the Board under this
Act; and

5 (4) ail sums received by the Board from such other sources as may
be decided upon by the Central Government,

(2) The Fund shall be applied for meeting—

(2) the salaries, allowances and other remuneration of the members,
officers and other employees of the Board;

10 (6). the expenses of the Board im the discharge of its functions under
section 11;

(c) the expenses on objects and for purposes authorised by this
Act. .

15. (1) The Board shall maintain ‘proper accounts and other relevant records

15 and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed

by the Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-
‘General of India.

(2) The accounts of the Board shall be audited by the Comptroller and

Auditor-General of India at such intervals as May ‘be specified by him and any

20 expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the
Board to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.

the audit of the. Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right
to demand the production of ‘books, accounts, connected vouchers and -other
documents and papers: and to inspect any of the: offices of the Board.

(4) The accounts of the Board as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-

30 Generat of India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf together

with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Central

‘Government and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before each
House of Parliament.

CHAPTER VII
35 Miscetianzous

16, (1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act,
the Board shall; in exercise of its powers or the performance of its
functions under this Act, be bound by such directions on ques-
tions of policy as the Centra] Government may give in writing to it from

40 time to time:

Provided that the Board shall, as far as practicable, be given an op-
portunity to express its views before any direction is given under this
sub-section,

(2) The decision of the Central Government whether a question is
45 ene of policy or not shall be fina '

Fund

Accounts
and audit,

Power of
Central
Govern.
ment to
issue
directions,



Power of 47, (1) If at any time the Central Government is of opinion—
Central +

Govern- (a) that on account of grave emergency, the Board is unable to
ment to discharge the functions and duties imposed on it by or under the

supersede provisions of this Act; or
the

Board. (b) that the Board has persistently made default in complying 5
with any direction issued by the Central Government under this
Act or in the discharge of the functions and duties imposed
on it by or under the provisions of this Act and asa result of
such default the financial position of the Board or the administra-

tion of the Board has deteriorated; or 10

(2) that circumstances exist which vender it necessary in the
a public interest so to do,
Fe

the Central Government may, by notification, supersede the Board for
such period, not exceeding six months, as may be specified in the, noti-
fication. हे

(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-section (1)
superseding the Board—

(@} all the members shall, as from the date of supersession, va-
cate their offices as such;

(8) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under
the provisions of this Act, be exercised or discharged by or on
behalf of the Board, shail until the Board is reconstituted under
sub-section (3), be exercised and discharged by such person or
persons as the Central Government may direct; and

(c) all property owned or controlled by the Board shall, until

the Board is reconstituted under sub-section (8), vest in the Central
Government. 1 ॥

20

25

(3) On the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the
notification issued under sub-section (1), the Central Government ‘may
reconstitute the Board by a fresh appointment and in such case any
person or persons who vacated their offices under clause (a) of stb-section
(2), shall not be deemed disqualified for appointment:

Provided that the Central Government may, at any time, before the

expiration of the period of supersession, take action under this  sub-
section. :

30

धर 35

(4) The Central Government shall eause a notification issued under’
sub-section (1) and a full report of any action taken under this section
and the circumstances leading to such action to be laid before each
House of Parliament at the earliest.

Returns 18. (1) The Board shall furnish to the Central Government at such 40

and time and in such form and manner ag may be prescribed or as the

Teports, Central Government may direct, such returns and statements and such
particulars in régard to any proposed or existing programme for the
promotion and development of the securities market, as the Central
Government may, from time to time, Tequire. 45.

(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), the
Board shall, within sixty days after the end of each financial year, sub-
mit to the Central Government a report in such form, as may be pres-
cribed, giving a true and full account of its activities, policy and pro-
grammes during the previous financial year, पु 50:



ot 1961.

0[1957. 4

जे

(3) A copy of the report received under sub-section (2) shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament.

39, The Board may, by general or special order in writing delegate to

any member, officer of the Board or any other person subject to such condi-

5 tions, if any, as may be specified in the order, such of its powers and

functions under this Act (except the powers under section 29) as it may
deem necessary.

20. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Board made under
this Act, or the rules or regulations made thereunder may prefer an appeal
10 to the Central Government within such time as may be prescribed.

(2) No appeal shall be admitted if it is Preferted after the expiry of the
period prescribed therefor:

Provided that an appeal may be admitted after the expiry of the petiod
prescribed therefor if the appellant satisfies the Central Government that he

15 had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within the prescribed
period. .

(3) Every appeal made under this section shall be made in such form and
shall be accompanied by a copy of the order appealed against and by such fees
as may be presctibed,

20 (4) The -procedure for disposing of an appeal shall be such as may be
prescribed:

Provided that before disposing of an appeal, the appellant shall be given
a reasonable opportunity of being heard,

21, Nothing in this Act shall exempt any person ‘from any suit or

25 other proceedings which might, apart from this Act, be brought against .
him,

22. All members, officers and other employees of the Board shall be
deemed, when acting or purporting to act in putsuance of any of the provisions
of this Act, to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of

30 the Indian Penal Code.

23. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the
Central Government or any officer of the Central Government on any
member, officer or other employee of the Board for anything which is in good
faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules or regula-

35 tions made thereunder. '

24, Whoever contravenes ot attempts to contravene or abets the con-
travention of the provisions of this Act or of any rules or regulations made
thereunder, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.

0 25. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Wealth-tax Act, 1957, the
- Income-tax Act, 1961 or any other enactment for the time being in force
telating to tax on wealth, income, profits or gains—

(a) the Board;

Delega~
tion.

Appeals,

Savings.

Members,
officers
and em-
ployees
of the
Board to
be public
servants,
Protec-
tion, of
action
taken i
good
faith.

Penalty.

Exemp-
hon from
taX on
wealth
and
income,



Cogni-
zarce of
offences

by courts,

Offences
‘by com-
panies,

Power to
exempt.

Fewer to
make
rules,

10

(b) the existing Securities and Exc

‘hange Board from the date of its
constitution to the date of establishme:

nt of the Board,
shall not be liable to pay wealth-tax, income-tax or
of their wealth, income, ptofits or gains derived,

26. (7) No comt shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under 5
this Act-or any mies oy regulations made thereunder, saye on a complaint
made by the Board with the previous sanction of the Central Government,

(2) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial
Magistrate of the first class shall try any offence punishable under this

any other tax in respect

Act, हि : be 10
27. (7) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed

‘was in charge of, and was responsible
of the business of the company,
to be guilty of the offence and
punished accordingly:

to, the company’ for the conduct
as well as the company, shall be deemed
shall be liable to be proceeded against and 15

Provided that nothing contained in this sub-
person liable to any punishment provided. in this Act, if-he proves
that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence,

section shall render any such

20
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained
offence under this Act has been committe:
Proved that the offence has been committed
of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager,
secretary, or other officer of the company, such director, Manager, secretary or 25

other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be Jiabte

to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation—Fox the Purposes of this section,—

in sub-section (7, where an
d by a company and it is
with the consent or connivanee,

(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a frm or
other association of individuals; and

(4) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm,

28. If the Centrat Government is of the opinion that itis necessaty or ex-
pedient so to do in public interest, it may, by order published in the Official
Gazette, exempt any ‘person or class of persons buying or selling securities or
otherwise dealing with the securitics market from the operation of the provisions
of sub-section (1) of section 12,

30

35

29. (1) The Central Government may, be notification, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of.this Act.

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
power, such rules may provide for all or any ‘of the following matters, 40
namely:— .

(@) the terms of office and other conditions of service of the Chair-

man and the members under sub-section (1) of section 5;

(b) the additional functions that may be performed by the Board
under section 11; 45

(c) the conditions subject to which xegistration certificate is to be
issued under sub-section (1) of section 12;



uv

| (व) the manner in which the accounts of the Board shall be main-
tained under séction 15;

(2) the form and the manner in which returns and report to be made
to the Central Government under section 18;

3 (/) any other matter which is to be, or may be, preseribed, or in

respect of which provision is to be, or may be, made by rules.

30, (1) The Board may, with the previous approval of the Central Go-
vernment, by notification, make regulations consistent with this Act and the
xules made thereunder to carty out th9 purposes of this Act.

10 (2) in particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, such regulations may provide ‘or all or any of the following mat-
ters, namely: —

(a) the times and places of meetings of the Board and the procedure
to be followed at such meetings under sub-section (1) of section 7 includ
15 ing quorum necessary for the transaction of business;

(6) the term and other conditions of service of officers aud emplo-
yees of the Board under sub-section (2) of section 9;

(c) the amount of fee to be paid for registration certificate and man-
ner of suspension or cancellation of registration certificate under sub-sec-
20 tions (2) and (3) df section 12,

31. Every rule and every regulation made under this Act shall be
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament,
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry

25 of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions afore-
said, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation
or both Houses agree that the mile or regulation should not be made, the
tule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or

30 annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule or regulation.

32, The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in
derogation of, the provisions of any other law for the time being in force.

33. The enactments specified in Parts I and वी of the Schedule to this
45 Act shall be amended in the manner specified therein and such amend-
ments shall take effect on the date of establishment of the Board.

34, (1) It any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this

Act, the Central Government may, by order, published in the Official

‘Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this
40 Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty:

Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry.
of five years from the commencement of this Act,

Power to
make
reguia-
tions.

Rules and
regula~
tions to
be laid
before
Parlia-
ment,

Applica-
tion of
other
laws nat
barred.

Amend-
ment of
certain
enact-
menis,

Power to
remove
diffi-
culties,



12

(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.

Repeal 35, (1) The Securities and Exchange Board of India Ordinance, 199%, Ord.
and ‘bis hereby repealed. i Sof 1992.
saving,

(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken 5
under the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken un-
der the corresponding provisions of this Act.



10

15

20

25

30

35

fo

45

THE SCHEDULE
(See section 33)

AMENDMENT OF CERTAIN ENACTMENTS
PART T

AMENDMENTS To THE CariTar Issues (ConrRoL) Act, 1947
(29 oF 1947)
Im section 10, for “to that Government” stbstitute “to that Government or
ihe Securities and Exchange Board of India”.
PART वा
AMENDMENTS TO THE SECURITIES CONTRACTS (REGULATION) ACT, 1956
(42 oF 1956)

1. Section 2, in clause (1), for sub-clause (ii), substitute the following: —

“(ii) Government securities;
(ia) such other instruments as may be declared by the Central Go-
vernment to be securities; and”.

2. Section 6,—

(2) in sub-section (1) for “Central Government”, substitute ‘Secu-
rities and Exchange Board of India”;

(i) in sub-section (2), for “by the Central Government”, substitute
“by the Securities and Exchange Board of India”;

(ii) in sub-section (3) for “Central Government” wherever it occurs,
substitute “Securities and Exchange Boatd of India”;

3. Section 9, for “Central Government” wherever it ocows, substitute
“Securities and Exchange Board of India”;

4, Section 10, for “Central Government” wherever it occurs, substitute
“Securities and Exchange Board of India”;

5. Section 17, in sub-section (1) for “licence granted by the Central Go-
yernment”, substitute “licence granted by the Securities and Exchange Board of
India”;

6. Section 21, for “Centrat Government”, substitute “Securities and Ex-
change Board of India”;

7. Section 22A, in sub-section (3), for clause (9), substitute the follow-
ingi—

“(b) that the transfer of the securities is in contravention of any
jaw or rules made thereunder or any administrative instructions or condi-
tions of listing agreement laid down in pursuance of stich laws or rules;”;
8. In sub-section (2) of section 23, for “Central Government under

section 21 or section 22”, substitute “Securities and Exchange Board of
India under section 21 or the Central Government under section 22”;

9, After section 29, insert the following:—

“99A. The Central Government may, by order published in the
Official Gazette, direct that the powers exercisable by it under any
provision of this Act shall, in relation to such matters and subject to
such conditions, if any as may be specified in the order, be exercisable
also by the Securities and Exchange Board of India.”.

13

Power to
delegate.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) was established in
1988 through a Government, Resolution to promote orderly and healthy
growth of fhe securities market and ‘for investors’ protection SEBI has
been monitoring the activities of stock exchanges, mutual funds and
merchant bankers, etc., fo achieve these goals.

The capital market has witnessed tremendous growth in recent times,
characterised particularly by the increasing participation of the public.
Investors’ confidence in the capital market can be sustained largely by
ensuring investors’ protection, With this end in view, Government decided
to vest SEBI immediately with satutory powers required to deal effective+
ly with all matters relating to capital market. As Parliament was not in
session, and there was an urgent need to instil a sense of confidence in the
public in the growth and stability of the capital market, the President
promulgated the Securities and Exchange Board of India Ordinance, 1992
(No. 5 of.1992) on the. 30th January, 1992.

3. The Bill seeks to replace the aforesaid Ordinance.

New [गाए MANMOHAN SINGH.

The 24th February, 1992. 1

PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 117 AND 274 |
OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 4

[Copy of letter No. 1(44) |SE86, dated the 25th February, 1992 from Dr.
Manmokian Singh, Minister of Finance to the Secretary-General, Lok
Sabha.] |

The President having been informed of the subject matter of the
proposed Bill to provide for the establishment of a Board to protact the
interests of. investors in, securities and to promote the development of,
and to regulate jthe securities market and for matters connected therewith |
or incidental thereto, recommends under Clause (1) of article 117 and
article 274 of the Constitution for. introduction and under Clause (3) of {
atticle-117 thereof for consideration, of the above Bill in Lock Sabha. i



Notes on clauses

Clouse 2 seeks to define certain words and expressions used in the
Bill

Clouse 3 provides for the establishment of a body corporate by the
name ot Securities and Exchange Board of India with head quarters at
Eomhay.

Clause 4 provides ‘for the constitution of the Board of members con-
sisting of a Chairman, two whole-time members to be appointed by the
Government and two members to be nominated by the Central
Government and one member by the Reserve Bank of India.

Clause § makes provisions relating to the term of office and other
conditions of service of the Chairrnan and members appointed by the
Central Government.

Clause 6 provides for the contingencies in which the Central Govern-
ment may remove a member from office.

Clause 7 makes provisions regarding meetings of the Board.

Clause 8 lays down that any vacancy or’ defect or irregularity ‘in the
constitution of the Board shall not invalidate proceedings of the Board.

Clause 9 provides for the appointment of officers and employees of
the Board and the terms and conditions of their service,

Clause 10 provides for transfer of assets and liabilities of the
existing Securities and Exchange Board to the Boarg. It further provides
for the transfer of employees of the existing Securities and Exchange
Board to the Board.

Clause 11 provides for the powers and functions of the Board with a
view to protect the interest of investors in securities and to promote the
development of and to regulate the securities market.

Clause 12 provides for the Board to register stock brokers, sub-brokers,
share transfer agents and other intermediaries associated with securities
market with the exceptions that ihe existing stock brokers, sub-brokers,
etc., may buy, sell or otherwise deal with the securities market without
registration for a period of three months from the date of establishment
of the Board.

Clause 13 provides for making of grants by the Central Government to
the Board to be utilised for the purposes of the Bill.

15



: * 16

Clause 14 provides for the constitution of the Securities and Exchange
‘Board of India General Fund. 1६ further provides that the grants, fees,
charges and other sums received by the Board should be credited thereto
and all its payments should be made there from.

Clause 15 provides for usual provisions regarding maintenance of
proper accounts and other relevant records by the Board as may be
prescribed by the Central Government, The accounts of the Board should
pe audited and certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of
India which would be laid before the Parliament by the Central
Government.

Clause 16 confers on the Central Government the power to issue

directions to the Board.

Clause 17 confers on the Central Government the power to supersede
the Board. The Central Government through a notification can super-
sede the Board for a period not exceeding 6 months if it is satisfied that
on account of grave emergency, the Board is unable ६० discharge its
duties or that the Board has persistently made defaulis in complying
with the directions of the Central Government.

4 Clause 18 provides for the Central Government to call for returns
and statements from the Board in regard to matters provided for in the
Bill.

Clause 19 provides for the delegations of certain powers of the
Board.

| Clause 20 provides for a person aggrieved by an order made by the
Board to appeal to the Central Government,

Clause 21 saves the suit or proceedings which might be brought
against any person under any other law.

Clause 22 specifies that the members, officers and other employees
of the Board shall be deemed to pe public servants,

Clause 23 provides or usual provision relating to the protection of
action taken in good faith.

Clause 24 provides for penalty for contravention of the provisions
of the Bill or any rules or regulations made thereunder,

Clause 25 provides the Board with cxemptions from tax on wealth
and income.

Clause 26 lays down that 2 court should take cognizance of offences
punishab'e under the provisions of the Bill or any rules or regulations
made thereunder on a complaint made by the Board with the previous
sanction of the Central Government. पर

Clause 27 provides that any offace committed by a company and
punishable under the Bill would cover the persons in charge of company.



7
Clause 28 confers on the Central Government in public interest, the

power to exempt any person dealing, with securities market irom the
operation of ihe provisions of sub-clause (1) of clause 19 of the Bil.

Clause 29 confers on the Central Government, the power to make
rules for carrying out the provisions of the Bill.

Clause 30 empowers the oard io make regulations with the previous
approval of the Central Government consistent with the Bill.

Clause 31 lays down that the rules and regulations made under the
Bill would be Jaid before the Parliament.

Clause 32 provides that the provisions of the Bill are not. in deroga~
tion of the provisions of any other law for the time being in force.

Clause 33 provides for amendments of enactments specified in the
Schedule.

Clause 34 seeks to ermpower the Central Government to remove any
difficulty which may arise in giving effect to the provisions of the Bill.

Clause 25 of the Bill seeks to yepeal the Securities and Exchange
Board of India Ordinance, 1992 and save actions taken thereunder as if
taken under the corresponding provisions of ‘the Bill.



FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 13 of the Bill contains a provision unazr which the Centra
Government may make grants to the Board
Grants will be made after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf. It is not possible at this stage to visualise the nature and

quantum of expenditure which may be involved in the creation and
operation of the Fund.

as may be deemed necessary.



MEMORANDUM REGARD! DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clatise 29 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make
cules regarding: —

(i) the term of office and other conditions of service of the
Chairman and the members under sub-clause (1) of clause 5;

Gi) the additional functions that may be performed, by the
Board under clause 11; +

(iii) the conditions subject to which registration certificate is
[00 be issued under sub-clause (1) of clause 12;

(iv) the manner in which the accounts of the Board shall be
maintained under clause 15;

(v) the form and the manner in which returns and report are
to be made to the Central Government under clause 18;

(vi) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed or
in respect of which provision is to be made by rules.

2, Clause 30 empowers the Board, with the prior approval of the
Central Government, to make regulations regarding:—

6) the times and places of meetings of the Board and the pro-
cedure to be followed at such meetings under sub-clause (1) of
clause 7 including quorum necessary for the transaction of business.

(ii) the terms and other conditions of service of officers and
employees of the Board under sub-clause (2) of clause 3;

(iii) the amount of fee to be paid for registration certificate and
manner of suspension or cancellation of registration certificate under
sub-clauses (2) and (3) of clause 12,

3. The matter with respect to which rules or regulations may be made
under the aforesaid provisions are matters of procedure and detail. The
delegation of legislative power contained in such provisions is, therefore,

of a normal character. ,

19



MEMORANDUM EXPLAINING THE MODIFICATIONS CONTAINED
IN THE BILL TO REPLACE THE SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE
BOARD OF INDIA ORDINANCE, 1992

The Securities and Exchange Board of India Bill 1992 which seeks
to repeal and replace the Securities and Exchange Board of India Ordi-
nance, 1992 proposes to make certain modifications of drafting nature in
sub-clause (2) of clause 2, sub-clause (2) and (3) of clause 7 and sub-
clause (2) of clause 27. The modifications are clarificatory in nature



ANNEXURE
Extract rrom tae (शा, Issuzs (Cowrrot) Acr, 1947
(29 or 1947)
x * * *

10. The Central Government May by order direct that any poweror Power
duty which by or under any of the preceding provisions of this Act is to dele-
conferred or imposed upon the Central Government shall, in such cir- gate

cumstances and under such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the function.
direction, be exercised or discharged by any officer subordinate to that
Government
¥ * ® *
Exmacts rrom Tri Securitias Contracts (REGULATION) Act, 1956
(42 or 1956)
* * 2 * ®
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Defini-
tions
* कर * * ®
(h) “securities” include—
* # * * +
(४) Government securities; and
कर * * * Ey
6. (1) Every recognised stock exchange shall furnish to the Central Power of
Government such periodical returns relating to its affairs as may be Genttel
prescribed. ment fo
call for

(2) Every recognised. stock exchange and every member thereof shall periodi.
maintain and preserve for such periods not exceeding five years such cal
pooks of account, and other documents as the Central Government, after "eturns
consultation with the stock exchange concerned, may prescribe in the ing aie
interest of the trade or in the public interest, and such books of account, 4, yo

and other documents shall be subject to inspection at all reasonable times made
by the Central Government.
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-sections (1)

at



2

ond (2), the Contral Government, if it is satisfied that it is in the interest
of the trade or in the public interest so io do, may, by order in writing —

such information or explanation relating to the
hange ov of the member in relation to the
Central Government may require: or

(8) appoint one or more persons to make an inquiry in the pres-
cribed manner in relation to the affairs of the governing body of a
stock exchange or the affairs of any of the members of the stock
exchange in relation to the stock exchange and submit a report of the
result. of such inquiry to the Central Government within’ such time
as may be specified in the order or, in the case of an inquiry’ in re-
lation to the affairs of any of. the members of a stock exchange, direct
the governing body to make the inquiry and submit its report to. the
Central Government.

* = * * *

Power of 9. (1) Any recognised stock exchange may, subject to the previous
Yecognis. approval of the Central Government, make bye-laws for the regulation

ea किम and control of contracts.

ges to (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
we going power, such bye-laws may provide for—

laws. (@) the opening and closing of markets and the regulation of the

hours of trade;

(b) a clearing house for the periodical settlement of contracts
and differences thereunder, the delivery of and payment for securi-
ties, the passing on of delivery orders and the regulation and mainte.
nance of such clearing house;

(०) the submission to the Central! Government by the clearing
house as soon as may be after each periodical settlement of all or
any of the following particulars as the Central Government yay,
from time to time, require, namely: —

0)! the total number of each category of security carried
over from one settlement period to another;

{#) the total number of each category of security, contracts
in respect of which have been squared up during the course of
each settlement period; i |

(iit) the total number of each category of security actually
delivered at each clearing;

(4) the. publication by the clearing house of all or any of the
particulars submitted to the Central Government under clause (c)
subject to the directions, if any, issued by the Central Government
in this behalf; a पर

(९) the regulation or prohibition of blank transfers;

(f) the number and classes of contracts in respect of which set-
tlements shall be made or differences paid through the clearing
house;

|



23

(9) the regulation, or prohibition of budlas ov carry-over
facilities;

(h) the fixing, altering or postponing of days for settlements;

(®, the determination and declaration of market rates, including
the opening, closing, highest and lowest vates for securities;

(j) the terms, conditions and incidents of contracts, including
the prescription of margin requirements, if any, and conditions re.
lating thereto, and the forms of contracts in writing;

(k) the regulation of the entering into, making, performance,
yeseission and termination, of contracts including contracts between
members or between 2 member and his constituent or between a
member and a person who is not a member, and the consequences of
default or insolvency on the pari of a séller or buyer or intermediary,
the consequences of a breach or omission by a seller or buyer, and
thé responsibility of members who are not parties to such contracts;

(1) the regulation of tarevani business including the placing of
limitations thereon;

(m) the listing of securities on, the stock exchange, the inclusion
of any security for the purpose of dealings and the suspension or
withdrawal of any such securities, and the suspension or prohibition
of trading in any specified securities.

(n) the method and procedure for the setilement of claims or
disputes, including settlement by arbitration;

(०) the levy and recovery of ‘fees, fines and penalties,

(0) the regulation of the course of business between parties to
contracts in any capacity;

(व) the fixing of a seale of brokerage and other charges,

(7) the making, comparing, settling and closing of bargains;

(s) the emergencies in trade which may arise, whether as a result
of pool or syndicated operations or cornering or otherwise, and the
exercise of powers in such emergencies, including the power to fix
maximum and minimum prices for securities;

(i) the regulation of dealings by members for their own account;
(७) the separation of the functions of jobbers and brokers;

(v) the limitations on the volume of trade done by any indivi-
dual member in exceptional circumstances;

(w) the obligation of members to supply such information or
explanation and to produce such documents relating to the business
as the governing body may require.

(3) The bye-laws made under this section may—

(a) specify the bye-laws the contravention of which shall make
a contract entered into otherwise than in accordance with the bye-
laws void under sub-section (1) of section 14:



Power
96 Cen-
tral
Govern-
ment to
make
or
amend
bye:
laws
of re.
cognised.
stock
ex.
changes.

24

{b) provide that the contravention of any of the bye-laws shall
vender the member concerned Nable to one or more of the
following punishments, namely: —

i) fine; : |
(0 ‘expulsion from membership;
(iii) suspension from membership for a specified period;

{iv) any other penalty of a like nature not involving the
payment of money

(4) Any bye-laws made under this section shall be subject to such
conditions in regard: to previous publication as may be prescribed, and,
when approved by the Central Government, shall be published in the
Gazette of India and also in the Official Gazette of the State in which
the principal office of the recognised stock dxchange is situate, and shall
have effect as from -the date of its publication in the Gazette of India:

Provided that if the Central Government is satisfied in any case that
m the interest of the trade or in the public interest any bye-laws should
be made immediately, it may, by order in writing specifying the reasons
therefor, dispense with the condition of previous ‘publication,

10. (7) The Central Government may, either on a request in writing
received by it in this behalf from the governing body’ of a recognised
stock exchange or on its own motion, if it is satisfied sfter consultation
with the governing body of tha stock exchange that it is necessary or
expedient so to do and after recording its reasons for so doing, make
bye-laws for all or any of the matters specified in section 9 on amend
any bye-laws made by such stock exchange under that section,

(2) Where in pursuance of this section any bye-laws have been made
or amended, the bye-laws so made or amended shall be published in the
Gazette of India and also in the Official Gazetie of the State in which
the principal office of the recognised stock exchangd is situate, and on
the publication thereof in the Gazette of India, the bye-laws so made
or amended shall have effect as if they had been made or amended by
the recognised stock exchange concerned.

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, where the
governing body of a recognised stock axchange objects to any bye-laws
made or amended under this section by the Central Government on its
own ‘motion, it may, within .six months or the publication thereof in
the Gazette of India under sub-section (2), apply to the Central Govern-
ment for revision thereof, and the Central Government may, after giv-
ing an opportunity to the soverning body of the stock exchange to be
heard in the matter, revise the bye-laws so made or amended, and where
any bye-laws so made or amenddd are revised as a result of any action
taken under this sub-section, the bye-laws so revised shall be published
and shall become effective as provided in, sub-section (2).

(4) The making or the amendment or revision of any bye-laws under
this section shall in all cases he subject to the condition of previous
publication:



Fe. Wot 1956.

३ of 1956.

25

Provided that if the Central Government is satisfied in any case that
jn the interest of the trade or in the public interest any pye-laws should
pe made, amended or revised iromediately, it may, by order in weiting
specifying the reasons therefor, dispense with the condition of previous
publication,

a % oo * «

47. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3) and to the other
provisions contained in this Act, no person shall carry on or purport to
carry on, whether on his own behalf or on behalf of any other person,
the business of dealing in securities in any State or area to which section
13 has not been declared to apply and to which the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare this section to apply.
except under the authority of a licence granted by the Central Govern-
ment in this behalf.

a os * oe *
Lasting or SECURITIES BY PuBLic COMPANIES

21, Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time
being in force, if the Central Government is of opinion, having regard
to the nature of this securities issued by any public company as defined
in the Companies Act, 1986, or to the dealings in them, that it is necessary
or expedient in the interest of the trade or in the public interest so to
do, it may require the company, after giving it an opportunity of being
heard in the maiter, to comply with such requirements as may ba pres-
eribed with respect to the listing of its securities on any. recognised
stock exchange.

* * * ve TBS

228. (1) कर * * a

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in its articles or in section
89 or section 111 of the Companies Act, 1956, but subject to the other
provisions of this section, a company may refuse to register the transfer
of any of its securities in the name of the transferee on any one or more
of the following grounds and on no other ground, namely: —

Ea श्र * पु हु

(b) that the transfer of the security is in contravention of any

law;
* * & * *
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE vate
23. (1) * के * *

(2) Any person who enters into any contract in contravention of the
provisions contained in section 16 or who fails to comply with the orders
of the Central Government under section 21 67 section 22 shall, on con-
viction, be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand
rupees.

* * * हि *

Liven:
sing

of deal-
ars in
securities
in cer
tain
areas.

Power

to com~
pel
Listing

of securi-.
ties by
public
compa:
nies.

Free
transfer-
ability
and regis-
tration.

of trans-
fers

of listed
securities
of compa-
nics.

Penalties.



LOK SABHA

a
a
i!
A
BILL E
to provide for the establishment of a Board to protect the interests of
investors in securities and to promote the development of, and to
regulate, the securities market and for waiters connected therewith
or incidental thereto, i

(Dr. Manmohan Singh, Minister of Finance.)