To n INTRODUCED IN LoK SABJiA 
BiD No. 37 of INS 
-----,-THE DELHI LAND REFORMS (AMENDMENT) 
. BILL, 1965 
BILL 
further to amend the Delhi Land Reforms Act, 1954. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixteenth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Delhi Land Reforms (Amend- m.t~tle 
ment) Act 1965. I· and com.. , menc:e-
S (2) Sections 23 and 24 shall be deemed to have come into force ment. 
on the seventh day of April, 1958; and the rest of this Act lhall 
come into force at once. 1 
Z. In clause (b) of section 6 of the Delhi Land Reforms Act,.Amencl-
Delhi Act 1954 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for the word and ::t Of 
8 of 19M 10 figures "section 36", the words, figures and letter ··section 36 or lec- one. 
tion 65A" shall be substituted. 

Amend-
ment OIl 
lIeetlon S3 
Amend-
mentof 
leCtion 36. 
Amend-
mental 
aeetion 38. 
3. Section 33 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered as sub· 
section (1) thereof and after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, 
. the following 'Sub-section and Ezptanation shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall preclude S 
the transfer of land by a Bhumidhar who holds less than eight 
standard acres of land, if such transfer is of the entire land 
held by him: I 
Provided that such Bhumidhar may transfer apart of such 
land to any. religious or charitable ~nstitution or other persoD 10 
referred to in sub-section (1). 
Expla1l4tion.-For the purposes of this section, a r~gious 
or charitable institution shall mean an institution established for 
a religious purpose or a charitable purpose, as the case may be.". 
4. In section 36 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1) ,-
(4) in clause (f), the word "or" at the end shall be omit-
ted; I . 10,. 
(b) clause (g) shall be re-Iettered as clause (h), and be-
fore the clause as so re-Iettered, the following clause shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(g) dependent for assistance in agricultural opera-
tions on a person serving in the armed forces of the Union 
and certified by the Deputy Commissioner to be 80 depen-
dent; or"; I 
30 
(c) in the proviso, f~r the words, brackets and letters, 35 
"clauses (a) to (g) ", the words, brackets and letters "clauses 
(a) to (h)" shall be substituted. 
5. In section 38 of the principal Act, for the word and figures 
"section 46", the word and figures "section 42" shall be substituted. 
8. For section 40 of the principal Act, the following section shall 30 
Substiftu- be substituted, nalllely: - I' 
tiono new 
HCtfQDf~r 
teet~40. 
Exc:han. "40. (1) Subject to the .provisions of section 33, a Bhumi-
dhar may exchange lands held by him as such-
(a) for lands held by any other Bhumidhar as such, or 
(b) for lands for the time being vested in a Gaon], 
Sabha or local authority or in Government: 
Provided that no such exchange shall be made except with 
the permission of the Deputy Commissioner, who will re-
fuse permission i1 the dUference between the area of the land 

'~."'''.-' - _ .. -. -~.\'.. "",.:.~. 3 
given in exchange and of the land received in exchange in terma 
of . standard acres is more than ten per cent. of the area in 
standard acres of the land which is smaller in area. 
(2) Where the Deputy Commissioner permits exchange, he 
5 shall also order the relevant annual register to be corrected 
accordingly. 
(3) On exchange made in accordance with sub-section (1), 
the parties to such exchange shall have the same rights in the 
land received in exchange as they had in the land given in ex-
10 change.". I 
7. In section 42 of the principal Act,- .Amend-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the word and figures "secti~n :e~~~a. 
33", the words "this Chapter by a Bhumidhar or Asami", for 
the words "the transferee" in the first place where they occur, 
IS the words "the transferee and every person who may have 
obtained possession of such holding or part" and for the words 
"Gaon Sabha,", the words "Gaon Sabha or the landholder, as 
. the case may be," shall respectively be substituted; 
(b) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be 
20 substituted, namely: - ! 
"(3) Notwlthstandilll anything contained in sub-sec-
tion (1), the'RevenUe Assistant a)so may. on receiving In· 
formation or Oft his own motion, take action to eject the 
transferee adn every person who may have obtained possess-
25 Ion as aforesaid. after following such procedure as may 'be 
prescribed.". . 
8. In sub-section (2) of, section 45 of the principal Act, for the !:'.::r-
words, brackets, letter and ftgures "from the operation of clause lMICtion e. 
(b) of section 33", the words, brackets and figures "under the pro-
30 viso to sub-section (1) of section 33" shall be substituted. 
Omission 9. Section 46 of the principal Act shall be omitted. of aectlcm 
48. 
'I! 
10. In section 47 of the principal Act, for the word.. and ftgures Amend-
"in a suit under section 46", the words and ftgures "under section 42" =.'7. 
shall be substituted. 
1DIerti0D 35 11. After section 65 of the principal Act, the following section ofD8WJeC-
shall be inserted, namely: - tloD 8SA . 
• 1-
"65A. (1) Where on the basis of any Information received by ~: 
bim 01" otherwise the Deputy Commissioner bas reason to believe where 
that any land IDeluded In the holdine of • Bhumldhar or AsamJ Bhumldhar 
-~--

wAlaD· 
lav_ 
land UD-
cultivated. 
• 
.... s .. t· beeD 1IHd for two coDleCutive qricultural yean tm. 
mediately preeediac for a ,1UpOIe eODDeeted with apiculture, 
hortieultue or animal husbandry which includes piac:ieulture or 
poultry fal'lDiDC, he may, UDless the,'lud Des within the belt 
referred to iD seetion Z3 or ualeu I8IlctiOD UDder that seetiOD h.. , 
been obtained in resped thereof, by notiee ref(1Iire-
'(i) 'the Bhumidhar to appear and show ealllle why the 
IaDd may not be let oat for any such pUJ'POM .. aforesai" 
to any persoD; 
(U) the Asami to appear and '6ow eaase why his interest 10 
may not be extiD,mshed and the 1and restored to the· Bhaml-
dhar Or the Gaon Sa'hha, as the eue may be. ... 
(2) The notice under sub-section (1) shall state the grounda 
for believing that the land has Dot been used for any purpose 
referred to in that sub-section and such other particulars as I, 
may be prescribed. I 
(3) H the Bhumidhar or the Asami .ppears and satisfies 
the Deputy Comniissioner-
fa) that "the land .... used fora purpose connected 
with agriculture, horticulture or animal husbandry 'which ~ 
includes pisciculture" and, poultry farming during the. period 
memtiODed in sub-sectlon (1); 
(b) tmtt he had suftle1ent cause for not UIin, It .. 
afonsaid; or I 
(c) that he shall, within one year next following the 2, 
date of "serviee of the notice UDder sittHleetion (1), use the 
larid for any' sueh purpose as ,afoi'esatd unless in the mean 
time the land is included within any 'be'it "refetTed to In sec-
tion 23 or the use of the land for industrial purposes is sanc-
tioned under that section, 30 
the Deputy Commissioner shall, in a case falling under clause 
<a) or clause (tb), discharge the notice forthwith and in a case 
. falling under clause <c), postpone further proceedings to a date 
one 1.ear after the date of servtce of the saJd notice. 

(4) On the date Axed under sub-section (3) or any oth. 
date to which the proceedings may be adjourned, the Deputy 
COmmissioner, if he is satisfied that the land has been used for 
any such purpose as aforesaid during the said period of one year 
5 or that the land has been included within the belt referred to 
In section 23 or that sanction as aforesaid has been obtained 
In respect thereof, discharge the notice or if he is not so latls-
fled, unless for reasons to be recorded in writing he allows 
further time, he shall- I 
10 (i) if the land is that of the Bhumidhar, lease it on be-
half of the Bhumidhar to any person for a period of five 
years in such manner and on such terms and conditions as 
may be prescribed; [ 
(ii) if the land is that of the Asami of the Bhumidbar, 
r, terminate the lease and restore the land to the Bhumidhar 
·su.bject to the condition that the Bhumidhar shall under-
take ~ cultivate the land within six months from the date 
it is restored to him; and if the Bhumidhar does not give 
such undertaking or fails, after giving such undertaking, 
to cultivate the land within the said period, the Deputy 
Commissioner may lease the land on behalf of the Bhumi-
dhar, to any person fortl8 period of five years in such man-
ner and on such terms. and conditions as may be prescribed; 
and I 
a, (iii) if the land is that of the A3ami of a Gaon Sabha, 
terminate the lease and restore the land to the Gaon Sabha: 
Provided that the restoration of the land of the Asami 
under this 'Sub-section shall be without prejudice to any right 
ot the Bhumidhar or Gaon Sabha, as the case may be, to recover 
)0 any rent due from the Asami. 
(5) If the Bbumidhar or Assami appears in response to the 
notice under sub-section (t) but does not undertake to Use the 
land as provided in clause (c) of sub-section (3), or if the Bhu-
midhar or Asami does not appear in response to such notice and 
35 . the· Deputy Commissioner, after such inquiry as he may con-
sider necessary, is satisfied that the Bhumidhar or Asami has 
failed to use the land as aforesaid during the period referred 
to in sub-section (1), he shall, unless for reasons to be recarded 
in writing he decides to aischar~e the notice, take action under 
40 clause (i) or clause (ft) or, as the case may be, clause (iii) of 
sub-seetion (4). 

6 
(6) On the exp~ of the period of any lease of land under 
sulHection (4) or sub-section (5), if the Deputy Commissioner, 
after making such inquiry as he thinks fit, is satisfted-
(a) that the land has been properly cultivated, he may 
declare the lessee to be Bhumidhar in respect of such land S 
subject to the payment by him to the original Bhumidhar 
of compensation equal to twenty times the land revenue 
then payablle for such land either in one lump sum or in 
such instalments together with interest 86 may be prescrib-
ed and upon such declaration the interest of the original r• 
Bhumfdhar shall be extinguished; 
(b) that the land has not been properly cultivated by 
the lessee, the Deputy Commissioner shall terminate the 
lease and may lease the land on behalf of the Bhumidhar, to 
another person for a period of five years in such manner IS 
and on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed and 
on the expiry of the period of such lease, the prOvisions of 
this sub-section shall apply: 
Provided that nd'lease shall be terminated unless the lessee 
has been given a reasonable opportunity of being, heard. Je 
(7) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to • 
Bhumidhar to whom the provisions of section 65 apply.". 
~~~- 12. In section 67 of the principal Act, after clause (b), the tol-
section 67. lowing clause shall be inserted, namely:-
• fI (bb) when a ~laration in respect of such holding or part ~S 
is made under claus~ (a) of sub-section (6) of section 85A,". 
Amend- 13. In section 68t of the principal Act. eiter clauSe (d), the tol-
ment of lowing clause shall be inserted, namely:-aectlon 68. 
U (dd) where his lease is terminated under clause (Ii) or 
clause (iii) of sub-section (4), or clause (Ib) of 5Ub-section 30 
(6), of section 65A,". 

5 
10 
10 
35 
7 
1 •. In section 75 of the principal Act,- Amend-
(4) in section (1)- ment at 
(i) clause (a> shall be re-Iettered as clause (aa> and section 75. 
before the clause as so re-Iettered, the following clause 
shall be inserted, namely:-
.. (a> persons in the armed forces of the Union and 
the dependents of such of those persons as are killed in 
action, special preference being given In the case of 
persons decorated for gallantry,"; 
(ii) in the first proviso, for the word, brackets and 
letter "clau&e._(a)", the word, brackets and letters "clause 
(aa)" end for the word and figures "section 84", the words, 
brackets and figures "sub-section (1) of section 84" shall 
respectively be substituted; 
(b) for sub-aection (2), the following sub-sections Ihall be 
substituted, ngmely: - I 
(2) The Deputy Commissioner may, on his own motiOn, 
and shall, on the application of any person aepieved by an 
urder of the Gaon Sabha passed under sub-section (1), en· 
quire in the prescribed manner and if he is _tided that 
the Gaon Sabha has acted with substantial irreplarity or 
otherwise than in. accordance with the provisions of this 
Act, he may cancel such order. 
(3) Where the Deputy Commissioner cancels an order 
relating to admission of a person as Bhumidhar or Asami. 
the right, title and interest of such person or any person 
claiming through him shall cease in the land to which the 
order relates and shall revert to the Gaon Sabha and any per-
son holding or retaining possession of such land after such 
cancellation shall be deemed to be a trespasser in respect of 
such land and shall be liable to ejectment in the manner 
prescribed." . 
, 15. In section 76 of th~ principal Act, for the figures and word "46, Amend-
81, 86 and 87", the figures, letter and word "81, 85, 86, 86A and meDtit of7S . ~c ~ . 87" shall be substItuted. 
16. Section 77 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered as sub- Amend. 
section (1) thereof and,- ment of 
lection 7'1. 
(a) in clause (8) of sub-section (1) as so re-numbered,for ~.~:.:::"~: 
the word and figures "sections 46", the word and figures "section 
42" shall be substituted; 

g 
(b) after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, tAe following 
sub-aection shall be inserted, namely:-
"(2) NotwithatandiDc aaytbhaa coataiDediD lub-seetioa 
(1), a Bhumidhar refened to in da1lle (f) of Iub-seetion (1) 
of section 36 may, on retirem.ent or disehaqe from the armed 
forces of the Union or on ~ seat on Betlerve, within aD. ' 
months of such retirement or disebaqre or of his beu.. MIlt 
on Reserve, apply to the Deputy CommiuiODer for ejectment 
of the Asami of ~is land, and the Deputy Commissioner 1D87, 
after notice to the Asami and subject to such eonditiOJlS as 10 
he may think fit to impose, cause peel_slon of the land to 
be delivered to such Bhumidhar as SOOIl as possible or, 
where there are standiq crops on such Iancl, within one 
month of the harvestin, of such crops.". 
Amend. 117. In section 80 of the principal Act, for the word and figures I, 
ment of "section 77", the words, brackets and figures ··sub-section (1) of 
IeCtJon 80. section 77" shall be substituted. 
Amend. 
mentof 
section 81. 
Amend-
mentot 
section 84. 
18. Section 81 of the principal Act shall be re-num,ben!d as sub-
section (1) thereof and-
(a) in sub-section (1) as so re-numbrred, for the word 20 
"damage", the word "damages" shall be substituted; 
(b) after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the fdllowing 
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(2) Notwithstandin, anything contained in sub-section 
(1), the Revenue Assistant also may, on receivinc informa- 2, 
tion or on his own motion, eject the Bhumidhar or Asami, as 
the case may be, and also recover the damages referred to 
in sub-section (1), after follow in, such procedure as may be 
prescribed." . 
19. Section 84 of th~ principal Act shall lfe re-numbered as sub- 30 
section (1) thereof, and after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the 
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
.. (2) Where any person against whom a decree for ejectment 
from any land has been executed in pursuance of a suit under 
sub-sectioll (1) re-enters or attempts to re-enter upon such land 3' 
.otherwise than under authority of law, he Shall be presumed to 
have done so with intent to intimidate or annoy the person in 
possession or the Gaon Sabha, as the case may be, within the 
. "meanmg "of section 441" of the Indian Penul Code.". 4D of lHO. 

, 
10. In section 85 of the principal Act,- Amad-
(a) in clause (iii), for the word and figures "section 84", the =~ II. 
words, brackets and figures "sub-section (1) of section 84" shall 
be substituted; 
(b) the following provisos shall be Inserted at the end, 
namely:-
"Provided that if in the revenue records of the fasll year 
endin·g on the 30th June, 1954, the land referred to in clause 
(iii) was not included in the holding of the person taking or 
10 - ... .,..... . revlining possession or his predecessor-In-interest, or was 
not recorded as being in the cultivation of such person or his 
predecessor-In-interest, then, notwithstanding th~ expiry of 
the aforesaid period of limitation for such suIt or decree, the 
suit may be filed or the decree obtained in such suit may be 
15 executed within a period of three years from the date of 
passing of the Delhi Land Reform~ (Amendment) Act, 1965: 
Provided further that the benefit of the extension of the 
period of limitation under the preceding proviso shan not 
be availed of in any case where a person who has become a 
20 Bhumidhar in respect of any land under clause (iii) bu 
15 transferred such land to another person for valuable eoDSi-
deration before the lOth May, 1965.". 
21. After section 86 of the principal Act, the following HeCtion shall 
be inserted, namely:-
Inaertlon 
of Dew 
aectioD 
88A. 
"86A. N.oiwithstanding anything contained in sections 84, 85 BJeetmeDt 
and 86, the Revenue Assistant also may, on receiving informatIon by Reva-
or on his own nwtion, eject any person who is liable to be ejected Due~­
from any land on a suit of the Gaon Sabha under any of those tant Of. 
sections, after fonowing such procedure as may be prescribed.". :=ytnl 
'land 
without 
title. 
~o 22. In section 138 of the principal Act, the second proviso shall be Amend.. 
omitted. IDeDt of 
HCt1GB 
138. 
23. In section 150 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2). the Amend. 
Jo.1lowing sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:- meatot Iee_ 
-(3) U the whol'!! of a Gaon Sabha area ceases to be included 180. 
3 ~ in rural 8n)88 U deijrwi ~ the Pal4i Mn*ipal Carparatton Ad., 
_~"3. 
___ ---""II 

10 
1957, by virtue of a notification under secUon 507 of that Act, the 6601l857. 
Gaon Sabha constituted for that area shall thereupon ' stand 
dissolved and on such dissolution-I 
(a) all properties, movable and immovable, and an in-
terests of whatsoever nature and kind therein, including S 
moneys held in Gaon Sabha Area Fund, vested in the Gaon 
Sabha immediately before such dissolution, shall, with all 
richts of whatsoever description, used, enjoyed Or possessed 
by such Gaon Sabha, vest in the Central Government; 
(b) all duties, obligations and liabilities incurred, all con- 10 
tracts entered illt.o and all matters and thinp engaced to be 
done by. with or for the Gaon Sabha before such dissolution 
shall be deemed to have been incurred, entered into or 
enrared to be done with or for the Central Government; 
(c) all rates, taxes, cesses, fees, rents and other charres 15 
due to the Gaon Sabha immediately before such dissolution 
shall be deemed to be due to the Central Government; 
(d) all suits, prosecutions and other legal prol"eedings 
instituted or which might have been instituted by or arainst 
the Gaon Sabha may be continued or instituted by or apinst 20 
the Union of India: 
(e) the provisions of this Act shall apply in relation to 
lands in such Gaon Sabha area, not beinr lands vested in the 
Central Government under clause (a), subject to the modifica-
tion that references therein to Gaon Sabha and Gaon Pan- 25 
chayat shall be construed as references to the Central Gov-
ernment; 
(f) notwithstanding anything contained in clause' (b) of 
sub-section (2) of section 1, the provisions of sections 84, 85. 
86, 86A and 87 and any other provision of this Act relating 30 
to ejectment of persons shall apply in relation to lands 
vested in the Central Government und.~r cla,,~e (n) subject 
to the modification that references therein to Gaon Sabha 
and Gaon Panchayat shall be construed as referenl"es to the 
Central Govemment. 35 
(4) If only a portion of a Gaon Sabha area ceases to be in-
. eluded in rural areas as aforesaid, the jurisdiction of the Gaon 
Sabha constituted for that area shall cease in respect. of that 
portion and upon such cesses, the provisions of clauses (a) to 
(f) of sub-section (3) shall apply to that portion as if the Gaon 40 
-Sabha ,had been constituted for that portion alone and 'dissolved, 
subject to such incidental and consequential orders' as the Chief 
COl;J}lni~8io~r may deem necessary t.o makf",- . 
t' . 

DelhiAet 
lof 1855. 
3 of 1908. 
Delhi Act 
3 of 1955. 
s 
10 
it ~73 
(5) If the size of a Gaon Sabha area is reduced as ~. result ot 
a portion thereof ceasing to be included in rural areas as afore-
said and the Chief Commissioner is of the opinion that the size 
of the Gaon Sabha area is n~t sufficiently large to be under the 
jurisdiction of a separate Gaon Sabha, he may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, declare that such Gaon Sabha area shaU, 
from a date to be specified in the notification, cease to be a 
separate Gaon Sabha area and the Gaon Sabha constituted there-
for shall stand dissolved and may direct that the said area shall 
be included in one' or more adjoining Gaon Sabha areas, and 
thereupon, the provisions of section 3 of the Delhi Panchayat Raj 
Act, 1954, shall, so far as may be, apply.". 
24. Section 154 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered as sub- Amend-
section (1) thereof and . after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the ment or 
15 following sub-section shall be inserted~ namely:- section 154. 
20 
"(2) Where any land which is vested in the Central Govern-
ment under sub-section (3) or sub-section (4) of section 150, is 
held immediately before such vestine by an Asami of a Gaon 
Sabha, then, notwithstandin, anything contained in clause (b) 
of sub-section (2) of section 1, and SO lonl' as it is held by luch 
Asami, the provisions of this Act shall continue to apply to sucla 
land object to the modification that all referenc~s therein to. 
Gaon Sabha and Gaon Panchayat shall in relation to such land 
be construed as references to the Central Govenuneat.". 
25 25. After section 161 of the principal Act, the following sections Insertion 
shall be inserted, namely:- Of new .ections 
3S 
ISLA and 
181B. 
"161A. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Govern. 
Civil Procedure, 1908, or any other law for the time being in :~z;!: 'be 
force,- impleaded 
Nt certain 
-..... (a) no suit or other proceeding under sub-section (2) of suits by or 
section 36 of the Delhi Panchayat Raj Act, 1154, shaU, after a.ainat 
the date of passin, of the Delhi Land Reforms (Amendment) Gaon 
Act, 1965, be instituted or, as the ease may be, continued in Sabhu. 
any eivil or revenue court· unless the Union of India has 
been added as a plaintiff or defendant according as the case 
is by or against the Gaon Sabha; 
(b) no such suit or other proceeding shall be decided on 
the admission by the Pradhan or any representative of thct 
Gaon Sallha with respect to the ,right or title of any p~D 

CartaID 
deere. 
and order. 
to beset 
ulde. 
b 
to the-property in dispute, whether made on his own motion 
or on the authority of a resolution of the Gaon Panchayat 
unless such admission has b~en authorised in writing by the 
D~rector of Panchayats, Delhi, or 'by such other officer as the 
Chief Commissioner may specify in this behalf. , 
161B. (1) Where in any suit or proceedinc before aDy civil or 
revenue court filed UDder sub-sectioD (2) of sectioD 36 of the 
Delhi Panchayat Raj Act, 1954, the ownership of aDy land has 
becD decided in favour of any persoD other than the GaoD Sabha 
before the date of passing of the Delhi Land Reforms (Amend. 10 
meDt) Act, 1965, theD, notwithstandinC any thin, contained in 
clause (b) of sub-sectioD (2) of sectioD 1 or iD any other law for 
the time being in force, such decree or order shaU, on an appli-
catiOD made by the GovernmeDt of India within twclve mODths 
from that date or withiD such further period as the court may, for IS 
sufticieDt cause, allow, be set aside if iD the reveDue records of the 
fasll year ending OD the 30th June, 1954, such land was not _-
eluded in the holding of the person in whose favour the decree or 
order was passed or his predecessor-in-interest, or was Dot record .. 
ed as being in the cultivation of such person or his predecessor-in .. 20 
interest. 
(2) 0. the setting aside of any decree or order in any suit or ' 
proceeding by or against the Gaon Sabha under sub-section (1), 
such suit or proceediDg shall be tried Or heard ~resh with the 
Union of India added as a party.", 2S 
Delhi Act 
a of 19G5. 

s 10 IS 20 
Am-ndmmt 
26. 
In 
Schcdu~e 
I to 
the 
principal 
Act 
,-
e( 
S*"uIc. 
1. 
(a) 
in 
column 
6, 
for 
the 
woreis 
"Fifteen 
aDDSS", 
wherever 
th~, 
occur, 
the 
letter. 
and 
figare. 
"Rs. 
I. 
ZSP." 
.haD 
be 
.ubstitutc.d; 
(b) 
for 
the 
entries 
·against 
Serial 
NO.9, 
the 
following 
shall 
be 
substituted, 
namely:-
I 
a 
3 
.. 
, 
o 
7 
8 
.fa 
(i) 
Suit' 
for 
eJectment 
of 
None 
transferee 
UDder 
1Ub-
-9 
None 
AI 
in 
the 
Coun 
R~enuc 
AIIis-
Deputy 
Com-
FeCI 
Act, 
tant. 
lIlis.ion~. 
acc:tion. 
(J}. 
1870· 
(ii) 
Procecdinp 
for 
ett'ct-
Do. 
ment 
of 
tranSferee 
under 
Do. 
NU 
Do.-
Do. 
IUb-section 
0). 
(e) 
Serial 
No. 
10 
and 
the 
entries 
relating 
thereto 
shall 
be 
emitted; 
(d) 
after 
Serial 
~o. 
13 
and 
the 
entries 
relatina 
thereto. 
the 
following 
shall 
be 
inserted. 
namely:-
I 
-a 
3 
.. 
S 
6 
7 
• 
., 
13A 
6SA 
(I) 
Proc:ecdinp 
for 
kaina 
00.-
Do. 
ND 
Deputy 
Com-
ChIef 
Com-
land 
on 
behalf 
of 
Bbumi-
miuioDer. 
millioDcr. 
dbar 
under 
clause 
(i) 
.. 
clause 
(i.) 
of 
IUb-lec:tioG 
~t 
.. 
imder 
IUb-IccdoD 
9 
; 1 • mil.ioner 
i" 
the 
cue 
01 
Bhumidbu only. Do." 
; 
9 
M· ... ~ '" 

.. ~ 
&. 
, 3 , .. , 6 7 8 9 
(ll) Procecdinp for termi- None None] Nil Deputy Com- Chief Com-
oatiDI the lease UDder miuioner. miaaioDu. 
clauee (u) or dauee (m) 
of IUb-IcctioD t> ~ under Iub-section ). 
(ill) proceedlop for de- Do. Do., Do. Do. Do. 
cIaring the lcsace to be 
Bhumidbar and oztin-
gu.iahiDI the intelelt c4 
the original Bbumidbar 
under clauae (a) of tub-
aection (6). 
(IY) Proceedings for termi- Do. Do. Do. Do .. : Do. t •• .. , 
IlItion of lease and for 
freah lease of IaDd under 
clauIe (b) of .ub-section 
(6). 
(.) for Serial No. IS atf the entries relating thereto, thclo11owing shall be substituted, namely: 
I 3 3 of S 6 7 8 9 
"I, 75 (i) Application for cancel- Six month. From the dale Re. I.2SP. Deputy Com- Chief Com.. 
lation of order of GaOD of order of mia.ioner. miAioDCI'. 
Sabba reIatinI to admit-
lion of a penon to land. 
GaoD Sabha. 
Do. Wbcnthe Nil 1>0·1 Do., ". 
Deputy .. , 
CommiaioDal fint mew of -
the irrquIK 
allotment. 
(I) ~t Serial No. 16, for the entries in columns 6,7 and 8, the entries "Ra. 1.2SP.", "Revenue Assistant" and 
-Deputy COlrmissioncr", and for the figures, brackets end letters "n(a)", "7'](b)", "77(C)" and "7?(d)", wherever they 
«cur, the figures, bracket. and letters "77(J)(a)", "77(J)(b)", "77(J)(C)" and "77(JXd)" shalJ respectively be substituted. 
~ 
~ 
, 
10 
IS 
r-
30 
2S 
30·-

5 
10 
~S 
:2C) 
-2S 
30 
3' 
(f) after Serial NJ. 16 and the entries relating thereto, the following shall be inserted, namely :-
I ~ 3 4 S 6 7 II 
"1M 77(2) Application by member of Six months From the date Ri. 1.2iP. Deputy 
armed for ees of the Union of retirement Commissioner. 
for ejectment .f Asami. or diJcbarge 
or of being 
sent on Re-
serve. 
(h) for Serial No. 17 and the entries relating thereto, the following shall be substnuted, namely :-
I 
"17 
J 3 4 S 6 7 8 
81 (i) S'Ht for ejectment of Three years 
Bh\1J!lidbar or Asami and 
for aamages under sub-
section (I). 
(ii) Proceedings under sub-
teCtion (%). 
Three yean 
or one year 
from the 
date oC pas-
sing of the 
Delhi Land 
Reforms 
(Amendment) 
AI::t, I96S, 
whichever 
period ex-
pires later. 
From the date As in the Court 
of unlawful Fees Act, 
'. use of the 1870. 
land. 
Do. Nil 
Revenue 
AllistaDt. 
Do. 
Deputy 
ComnailSiooer .• 
Do. 
I , 
9 
It • . 
It. 
I 
fa1 against Serial No. 18, for the entry in column 6, the entry "As in the Coun Fees Act, 1870" shall be substituted; 
u) after Serial No. 19 and the entries relating thereto, the following shall be i.nset:ted, namely:-
I 
. fIC,9A 
2 3 .. , 6 7· • 
'S Suit for efcc:tment of • Three yean From the date Do. Do. Do. 
perIOD refelled to in of pauma of 
tile fint promo. the Delhi 
Laud Re-
formJ 
(/uncndmcat) 
N:.t. 1965. 
9 .f. 
I 
... 
\A 
.. 
"' 

CA) after Serial No. 20 and the entries relating thereto, the following shall be inserted, namely :-
~ ~ 3 
" , 6 7 8 9 
~A 85A. Proceediq. for ejectment Same as that Same as that Nil RCftDUe Deputy N. , 
of penona occupying land provided for provided for Alliltanto Commigfoner. 
without. tide. • suit under • luit under S lICCtion 84, section 84, 
8, or 86, .. 8t or 86, .. 
the case may t ec:uemay 
be. be. 
(I) against Serial No. 21, for the entry in column 6, the entry "As in the Court Fees Act, 1870" ahall be 10 
wbstltuted. 
~ cP 
... 0. 

17 
27. NotwIthstanding any -judgment, decree or older of any Court, Validation 
anything done or any action taken by the Deputy Commissioner, of actlon 
Oelhi, before the date of passing of this Act in pursuance of any taken by --
notification under section 161 of the principal Act in the discharge of Dec putJi . omma.. J any dutIes or the exercise of any powers or the performance of .toner on 
any functions of the Gaon Sabha or Gaon Panchayat under the prin- behalf of 
cipal Act in relation to any land vested in the Central Government Gaon 
under sub-section (3) or sub-section (4) of section 150 of the prinCipal Sabhu. 
Act as amended by this Act shall be deemed to have been validly 
10 and lawfully done or taken on behalf of the Central Government and 
accordingly if before the said date-
I, 
-
(a) any suit or proceedin, is pendine in aay eOUl't to which 
the Deputy Commissioner and the GaoD Sabha are a party, the 
Union of India shall be deemed to be lubstituted therefor in that 
suit or proceeding; and 
_ (b) where any suit or proceedin, has been dismissed on the 
ground that the Deputy Commissioner and the Gaon Sabha had 
no locus standi to file such luit or proceedine, it shall be restored 
and continued with the Union of India as havinl been 
substituted u a party. 

STATEMENT OF oBJECTS AND REAsoNS 
The Delhi Land Reforms Act, 1954, came into force on the 20th 
July 1954. In the course of implementation of this Act, certain defi-
ciencies in the law have come to notice. The common lands in the 
rural areas were vested in the Gaon Sabhas under section 154 of that 
Act. The Gaon Sabhas are responsible for managing and controlling 
such lands and. in particular. to take steps for removal of encroach-
ments over those lands. Under sections 42, 46 and 81 of the Act, 
they are also charged with the responsibility of securing the eject-
ment of persons who acquire . lands by transfers in contravention of 
Chapter m of the Act or who divert agricultural lands far non-agri-
culturai purposes. A number of GaolTSabhas have. however, failed 
to effectively discharge these functions. A large number of en.-
croachments on Gaon Sabha lan~ and transfers in contravention of 
the law have come to notice. It has, therefore, become necessary to 
invest the revenue authorities also with necessary powers to supple-
ment the eftorts of the Gaon Sabhas in removing encroachments on 
Gaon Sabha lands and ejecting persons who violate the law. 
In a number of cases the Gaon Sabhas have suftered losses on ac-
count of admission by the Pradbans or other ofBce-beuers of Paneha-
yats of incorrect claims made by unauthorised occupants of Gaon 
Sabha lands in suits brought under section 36 of the Delhi Panchayat 
Raj Act, 1954. It is necessary to devise 11.dequate measures to retrieve 
such properties and. to prevent such losses in future~ 
After the commencement of the De!hi Municipal Corporation Act, 
1957, a number of villages which were under the jurisdiction of Gaon 
Sabhas have been urbanised and the Delhi Panchayat Raj Act, 1954, 
has ceased to apply in these areas. However, the Gaon Sabhas being 
corporate bodies continue to exist in these areas even though they 
have no panchayat functions. 'nlere is no provision in the existing 
law to wind up these bodies in the urbanised areas but as an interim 
measure, the management of their properties in those areas has been 
entrusted to the Deputy Commissioner. It is necessary to make pro-
visions for winding up the Gaon Sabhas in urbanised areas and for 
the disposal of their assets and liabilities. 
The Bill seeks to give effect to the objects mentioned above and 
also makes provision for certain other matters. The provisions at the 
Bill are explained in detail in the notes on clauses. 
NEW DELHI; G. L. NANnA. 
The 30th April, 1965. 
:18 

PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. F. 3fll/64-UTL, dated the 4th May, 1965 from 
Shri Jai Sukh La! Hathi, Minister of State in the M.lniatry of Home 
Mairs to the Secretary, Lok Sabha.] 
The President having been informed of the BUbject matter of the 
Bill further to amend the Delhi Land Reforms Act, 1954 (Delh1 Act 
8 of 1954), recommends, under clauses (1) and (3) of article 117 
of the Constitution, the introduction and consideration of the lAid 
Bill in the Lok Sabha during its current Session. 

Nota Oft cZausa 
Clause I.-The need for giving retrospective effect to clauses 23 
and 24 of the Bill has been explained against those clauses. 
Clause 2.-This makes a change consequent on the introduction 
of fA new section by clause 11. 
Clause 3.-Under section 33 of the principal Act, transfer of land 
by a Bhumidhar by sale, gift or otherwise is prohibited except in 
certain circumstances, if the resalt of such transfer is to leave him 
with less than eight standard acres~ This clause makes it dear that 
if the land already held is less than eight standard acres the restric-
tion shall operate only in regard to transfer of portions of such land 
but not the entire land. 
Clause 4.-Under section 36 of the principal Act, a Bhumidhar who 
is serving in the Armed Forces of the Union can lease the land to a 
tenant. When persons who have been assisting their old parents or 
relatives in agricultural operations join the Armed Forces, such 
parents and relatives are put to diftlculties because they cannot lease 
the land under the existing law if the land held by them is eight 
8talfdard acres or more. In some cases this acts as a dis-incentive to 
able-bodied persons joining the Armed Forces. This clause seeks to 
remove this difficulty by enabling persons depending for assistance 
in agricultural operations on those joining the Armed Forces to lease 
the land to tenants. 
Clause 5.-This dause makes an amendment which is consequen-
tial to clauses 7 and 9. 
Clause S.-Difficulties are often experienced in constructing roads, 
irrigation channels and other works of public utility in the rural areas 
on account of the reluctance of the Bhumidhars to part with the 
land required for the purpose and because the acquisition proceed-
ats are time-consuming. However they may be inclined to part 
with the land required for such purposes if they are providect with 
some other land in exchange. Section 40 of the principal Act stands 
in any way of such exchange in the case of. lands belonging to Gaon 
Sabhas and other authorities. This clause seeks to remove this 
difticulty. 
Clauses 7, 9 and 10.-Under sections 42 and 46 of the principal Act, 
if a Bhumidhar or an Asami transfers the land in contravention of 
section 33 or any other nrovision of Chapter m of the Act, the Gaon 
20 

21 
Sabba may file a Iult for ejectment of the transferee. On such 
ejectment, the Gaon Sabha Is entitled to tak~ possession of the land 
under section 72 of the principal Act. Section 42 has been ampUfted 
to cover the provisions of section 46 which has, therefore, been omit-
ted by clause 9. Clause 10 makes a consequential change. To s~ 
plement the efforts of the Gaon Sabhas to secure ejectment of per-
sons who violate the provisions of the law relating to transfers, 
clause 7 seeks to confer powers on the Revenue Ac:sistant also to 
take action to eject such persons. An appeal from the orders 01. the 
Revenue Assistant win lie to the Deputy Commissioner and in the 
case of Bhumidhars a second appeal will lie to the Chief Commis-
sioner. Clause 26(b) of the Bill makes provision in this behalf. 
Clause 8.-This makes a change consequentUd to clau!iJe 3. 
Clauses 11, 12 and 13.-In view of the need for Increased food pro-
duetion it is necessary to ensure that no cultivable land is left un-
cultivated. New section 65A proposed in clause 11 provides that 
the Deputy Commissioner may. if the land is left uncultivated for two 
years or more and sufficient cause is not shown for keepin~ the land 
uncultivated, lease such land to any person for a period of ftve years. 
On the expiry of that ~od, Bhumidhari right mav. if the land Is 
properly cultivated, be conferred on the lessee. If the land is left 
uncultivated by an Asami, his rights would be extinguished and the 
Bhumidhar would be required to bring the land. under cultivation 
within six months. If he fails to do so, it would be open to the Deputy 
Commissioner to lease out the land on behalf of the Bhumidhar. 
An appeal will lie to the Chief Commissioner from the decision 
of the Deputy Commissioner. Provision to this effect has been made 
fn clause 26(d) of the BUt 
Clauses 12 and 13 make consequential amendments in section 67 
and 68 of the principal Act. 
ClatUe 14.-To facilitate re-settlement of ex-servicemen, this clause 
confers on members of the Armed Forces and dependents of such 
members killed in action, the highest priority In tlle matter of aDot-
ment of vacant or other lands available with the Gaon Sabhas and 
provides for special preference being given in the case of persons 
decorated for gallantry. . 
The power to aU()t Gaon Sabha land rests with the Gaan Babbs. 
themselves. In order to ensure that this power is not misused. ft 
has been provided in this clause that the Deputy CommissioD«!r 
may, if he is satisfietl that the Gaon Sabha has acted with substan-
tial f1"regularfty or otherwise than in accordance with the Act, can-
cel the order nf allotment. If any person retains possession of the 

-land even after such cancellation, he shall be liable to be ejected. 
An appeal from the order of the Deputy Commissioner will lie to 
the Chief Commissioner. Provision in this behalf has been made ill 
clause 26 (e) of the Bill. . - -
Clause 15.-This clause makes certain changes which are con-
.eque~tial to clauses 7, 9, 20 and 21 of the Bill. 
Clause 16.-Under section 36, a Bhumidhar who is a member of 
the Armed Forces can lease his land but can recover possession 
thereof on retum to civil life, only by a suit under section 77 (c) (U). 
In order to enable such persons to take to their normal vocation 
as expeditiously as possible, claUse 16 provides that such a person 
if he needs the land immediately may, instead of filing a suit. 
apply to the Deputy Commissioner for ejectment of the tenant and 
that the Deputy Commissioner may eject the tenant after giving 
notice. If there is any crop standing on the land at that time, the 
ejectment will be effected within one month of harvesting that 
crop. 
Clause 17.-This clause makes a consequential amendment. 
Clause 18.-Under section 81, the Gaon &bha has to ftle a Illit 
for ejecting of a person who diverts unauthorised by agricultural 
land for non-agricultural purposes. The amendment proposed 
~imu1taneously empowers the Revenue Assistant to eject such per-
sons so as to supplement the effort of the Gaon Sabhas. In such 
cases, an appeal will lie to the Deputy Commissioner as provided in 
clause 26 (h) of the Bill. 
Clau!e 19.-Under section 84, a person who is illegally occupy-
ing the land of the Gaon Sabha, can be ejected on a suit of the 
Gaon Sabha and the same process has to be repeated if 
he re-enters the land after ejectment. To effectively prevent re-
peated encroachments by the same persons, it is necessary to pro-
vide that if a person who is onCe ejected by a suit re-enters the land. 
he would be liable to punishment. Accordingly, this clause pro-
_ vides that the person re-entering or attempting to re-enter the land 
from which he was once ejected sr.oll be presumed to have done so 
with intent to intimidate or annoy the person in possession or the 
Gaon Sabha within the meaning of section 441 'of the Indian Penal 
Code.· 
Cla:u8e 20.-Under section 84 of the Act read with S. No. 19 of 
the First Schedule to the principal Act, a suit for ejectment can be 
filed under that section within three years from the 1st July fol-
lowing the date of illegal occupation of Gaon Sabha lands. In most 

' .. 
23 
of the cases of encroachment which have co~e to notice, this period 
is over and due to the inaction of the Gaon Sabhas the land is still 
in the possession of the illegal occupants. This clause, therefore, 
provides for ejectment suits being filed by the Gaon Sabhas in such 
cases within three years from the date of passing of this Bill. How-
ever, where the persons had acquired transferable rights in such 
lands by virtue of the existing provisions of section 85 and trans-
ferred the land for valuable consideration before the date of intro-
duction of this Bill, this remedy cannot be availed of. This posi-
tion has been made clear in this clause. 
Clause 21.-New section 86A proposed. this clause gives con-
current powers to the Revenue Assistant to make an order for eject-
ment of the trespassers where the Gaon Sabha can'file a suit for eject-
ment under section 84 or 85 or 86. As provided in clause 26 (k) of the 
Bill, appeals from the orders of the Revenue Assistant will lie to the 
Deputy Commissioner. 
, Clause 22.-Under section 138 of the Act, a person can be arrested 
or detained ii he has defaulted in the payment of any arrear of land 
revenue. There are several other kinds of Government dues 
arrears of which are recoverable as arrears of land revenue but the 
second proviso to this clause imposes a ban on detention for the re-
covery of such other arrears. This is creatin, diftlculty in recover-
ing other Government dues. This clause, therefore, seeks to omit 
, the second proviso. 
Clause 23.-This clause contains the necessary pro\'isions fOI 
winding up the Geon Sabhas in areas which have been or may here-
after be urbanised. In certain cases, where the area left with a 
Gaon Sabha, after urbanisation of the rest of its area is too small, it 
would be necessary to merge the Gaon Sabha with the adjoining 
Gaon . Sabha. Provision has therefore been made in this clause to· 
provide for these contingencies also. As urbanisation had taken 
place under the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act,' 1957, clause 1 (2) 
of. the Bill seeks to gi't'e retrospective e1fect-tb this clause from the 
date of commencement of the relevant provisions of that Act. 
Clause 24.-Under clause 23, all the Gaon Sabha lands in urban 
areas will vest in the Government and under section 1 (2) (b) of the 
Delhi Land Reforms Act, 1954, these lands will go out of the purview 
of that Act. However, some of the lands may still be with Asamfs 
of the Gaon Sabhas. In order to protect their interests, this clause 
seeks to amend section 154 to provide that so long as any such land is 
held by an Asami, the Delhi Land Reforms Act, 1954 will continue to 

apply to such land notwithstanding the fact that it has become Gov-
ernment land. This clause is also proposed to be given retrospective 
eff~_c~ for the _r~'¥J~n.s_ mentioned .gaimt clause 23. 
ClaU8e 25.-In order to deal with the problem created by the ad-
mission of incorrect claims made by unauthorised occupants of Gaoa 
Sabba 18nds in suits brought under section 36 of the Delhi Paneha-
yat Raj Act, 1954, new section 161B proposed in this clause empow-
ers Government to apply' to the court for setting aside the decree or 
order within twelve months of the date of passing of this Bill. This 
power will he available only in those cases where there is priflL4 
facie evidence that the land concerned was not included in the hold-
ing of such occupant in the 'revenue records for the year ending on 
the 30th June 1954. When the decree or order is set aside, the suit 
or proceeding is to be tried afresh after adding Government as a 
party. New section 161A proposed in this clause provides two 
StBfeguards for the future, namely, that in suits under section 36 of 
the Delhi Panchayat Raj Act, 1954, Government shall be a party and 
the admission made by Pradhan or any respresentative of the GaoD 
Sabha shall not be taken into account unless it is authorised by the 
Director of Panchayats or any officer authorised in this behalf. 
Clause 26.-Certain provisions of this clause have already been ex-
plained in the notes on earlier clauses. Other amendments sought 
to be made by this clause are of a consequbtial nature except that 
the opportunity has been availed of to fix the court fee in certain 
cases at Rs. 1: 25 which is the minimum rate now prevailing in the 
territory, as against the rate of fifteen annas prescribed in the First 
Schedule to the Act. 
Clause 27.-& stated.in the.Statement of Objects and ReuODB, fn 
th~ urbanised areas the Deputy Commissioner. bas been entrusted 
with the task of managing the Gaon Sabha properties. In pursu-
ance of this power, he has taken such action as the Gaon Sabha 
could have taken and has also filed ejectment suits. As these pro-
perties will vest iil qovernment retrospectively, his actions are sought 
to be validated as having been taken on 'Bihalf of the . Government 
There have been a few instances where suits filed by the Deputy 
Commissioner for possession of Gaon _ Sabha lands were dismissed on 
the groUIid tl18t he had no locus standi.. This clause seeks to have 
such suits restored and continued. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clauses 7, 18 and 21 of the Bill cOllfer powers on the Revenue 
Aasistant to take action to eject 
(a) persons who have taken possession of lands throuah 
transfer in contravention of the provisions of Chapter III of the 
principal Act; 
, (b) persons who use agricult"ral lands for non-a,ncultural 
purpoaesj and 
(c) persons who have encroached upon Gaon Sabha lands. 
2. Under new section 16~B proposed in clause 25 of the Bill, the 
Government will be empowered to apply for the setting aside. of 
certain decrees and orders in suits and proceedings relating to own-
ership of lands where the Gaon Sabhas were a party to such suits 
and prcx:eedings and the matter was . decided against thOle bodies. 
Also under new section 161A proposed in the same clause and under 
clause 27 of the Bill, the Government of India would be made a 
party to suits and proceedings mentioned in those clauses. 
3. Under clause 23 of the Bill the Gaan Sabha lands and other 
assets of the Gaon Sabha in the urbanised areas will vest in the Gov-
ernment. The liabilities of these bodies will also devolve on the 
Government. In addition, the Government will have to institute 
suits, prosecutions and other legal proceedings or continue those 
instituted or which might have been instituted by Gaon Sabhas In 
these areas. It is estimated that the lands held by the Gaon Sabhas 
in the urbanised areas are about 2,500 acres valued at about Rs. 185 
Iakhs. The other assets of these bodies would be about Rs. 58,000. 
·rheir liabilities are very negligible. 
4. The Bill also seeks to confer additional duties on the Deputy 
Commissioner-
(a) under clause 11 in regard to lands left uncultivated: 
(b) under clause 14 in regard to irregular allotment of lands . 
made by the Gaon Sabhas; and 
. (c) under clause 16 in the matter of ejecting Asamis of 
ex-service personnel. 

26 
S. The extra work involved in effecting ejectments in pursuance 
of the powers sought to be conferred on the Revenue Assistant and 
Deputy Commissioner and in managing the Gaon Sabha propertjes 
which would vest in the Central Government and in conducting the 
litigation would be carried on with th'e help of the existing staff of 
the Revenue Department of the Delhi Administration to the extent 
possible. However, some additional staff may be necessary at the 
initial stages to deal with the large backlog of cases of transfers in 
contravention of the provisions of Chapter III of the principal Act, 
encroachments upon Gaon Sabha lands and the large volume of' 
litigation which may have to be attended to. So far, about 2,843 
c., of iUegal transfers and 5,271 cases of encroachmeats' on Gaon 
Sabha lands have come to notice. About 3,300 cases may have to be 
contested under clauses 23, 25 and 27 of the Bill. It is estimated that 
an expenditure of Rs: 71,000 may have to be incurred on additional 
estabUshment. The cost of litigation may be about Rs. 3'5 lakhs. 
There win be some recurring expenditure on ,litigation in cases 
which may arise in future. It is not possible to estimate precisely 
the extent of such expenditure. The revenue which the Gaon SabhR~ 
used to reaUse from the lands in urbanised areas will accrue to Gov-
ernment by- virtue 'of clause 24. This is estimated to be RI. 2,500 
per annum. 
6. ProvisioD8 of olause 26 in so far as they raise the .te of court 
fees from 15 annas to Rs. l' 25 in certain cases will yield so!,"e extra 
revenue. It iii, however, not possible to precisely estimate the amount 
of this incre .... 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
New 'sub-section (3) of section 42, inserted by clause 7 of the Bill, 
provides that the procedure to be followed by the Revenue Assistant 
for ejeetment of the transferee and every person Who may have .tJb-
tained possession under sub-section (1) of that section shall be bl 
accotdaDce with rules made under the Act. Similarly pro~n Us 
been made in clauses 14, 18 and 21 that'the procedUre for ejectm., 
under sections 75, 81 and 86A shall be in accordance with rwes made 
under the Act. ' Clause 11 iBaerb new section GSA which provides that 
the particulars in .the nptice to be issued under luiHection (1) ot. 
that section, the terms and conditions' in··the lease'· to be 'effected 
by the Deputy Commissioner 'and the manner of payment' of com-
pensation to the original Bhumidhar shall be as per rules made 
under the Act. New sub-section (2) of section 75 proposed in cla~e 
14 provides that the manner of enquiry by the' Deputy COmDUS-
sioner shall be regulated by rules made under the Act. The mat-
ters in respect of which rules are to be made thus relate to pro-
cedure and the delegation of legislative power i8 therefore of a 
normal character. 
.' , 

ANNEXURE 
EXTBACTS JI'ROM TH.E DELHI LAND RuoRMS Ar::r, 1954 
(8 OF 1954) 
• • • • • • Allu" '.' Every person belonging to any of the followinl classes ahall 
be aD Asami aDd shall have all the rights mel be subject to all ~ 
UabUities conferred or imposed upon an Asami by or under tbla 
Act, namely-
... , . 
Leuebya 
disable.\ 
person. 
• • • • • • 
(b) every person who, in accordance with the provis1cma 
of section 38, becomes a lessee of land comprised in the tenure 
of a Bhumidhar referred to in that section; 
• • • • • 
36. (1) A Bhumiclhar who is-
• • • • • 
(1) in the armed forces of the Indian Union; or 
(g) under detention or imprisonment; 
• 
• 
_ may let the whole or any part of his holding: ,. 
FaUure to 
teIiIter 
theleue 
under 
section 3'1. 
Provided that in the case of a holding held joinUy by more 
persons than one where but one or more of them, but Dot all, are 
subject to the disabilities mentioned in clauses (a) to (g), the 
person or persons may let out his or their share in the boldine . 
• • • • • • 
38. A lease which fails merely to comply with the provisions 
of section 37 shall not, for purposes of section 48, be deemed to be 
a transfer made in contravention of the provisions of this Act. 
• • • • • • 
Ex.ebante. • 40. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 33, a Bhumidhar 
may exchange with any other Bhumidhar lands held by them as 
such in the same revenue village. 
(2) On exchange made in accordance with sub-section (1), 
they shall have the same rights in the land so recpived in e][chanp 
as they had in the land given in exchange. 
• • • • • • 

-42. (1) Where 8 tranafer of any holding or part thereof baa Traftlfer 
DeeD made in contravention of the provisions of section 33, the in contra-
transferee shaU, notwithstanding anything in any law, be liable ven~on ot 
to ejectment trom such holding or part on -the suit of the Gaon section 33. 
Sabha, 'Which shall thereupon become vacant land; but nothina in 
this section mall prejudice the right of the trauferor to realize 
the whole or portion of the price remaining unpaid, or the right 
of. a~y other perSOD other than the transferee to proceed apinat 
such .holding or l~d in enforcement 01 any claim thereto . 
• • • • • • 
(3) Where the Gaon Sabha fails to file a suit under lub-sec:tion 
(1), the Revenue Assistant may on receiving information or on his " 'or 
own motion take action to eject th~ transferee . 
• • • • • 
45. (1) • ... ... • , Tranafer 
made in 
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply to any transfer which contra-
has been exempted by the Chief Commissioner from the operation vention Of 
of clause (b) of section 33. thia 
" , Chapter 
"to be void. 
~. Where a Bhumidhar or Asami has made any transfer in con- COIlle-
. ~. ~ 
travention of the provisions of this Chapter, the transferee and every quenc. 
person who' may have thus obtained possession of the whole or part of void 
of th eholding shall be liable to ejectment on the suit of the GilOD transfen. 
Sabha or the landholder, as the case may be. 
47. Upon ejectment in a suit under section 46, all the rights a~d' ~0DIe­
interests of the Bhuinidhar or Asami in the holding or in any quences of 
improvements made therein or to get compensation for such improve- ejectment . under sec-
ments shall be extinguished tion 48 .• 
• • • • • 
75. (1) • • • • Order of 
prefer4!ric:e 
Provided that the land allotted to a co-operative fann under In admit_ 
clause (a) shall, if the registration of such fann ia cancelled within tiq 
two years of the allotment, revert upon such cancellation to . the PersODI 
Gaon Sabha, and any person holding or retaining pols.sion of luch t~n.d 
land shall be deemed to be a person occupying it withou:t title liable !euons 
to ejectment under clause (b) of section 84: . 73 and n. 
• • • • • • 
(2) Any person ag&rieved by an order of the Gaon Sabha passed 
under lub-iection (1) may ftle an objection before the Revenue 

Bhwni-
dhar not 
liable to 
ejectment. 
Ejectment 
ofAami. 
Collle-
quenceof 
ejectment 
under sec-
tion''r7~ . 
f' 
Auistant, who Ihall hear and decide the· lime in' tuc:b manner as 
,may be prescribed. 
"H. Ejectment (Bhumidhar a'r&d' A.ami) 
71. Subject to the provisions of sections 33, 42, 46, 81, 86 and 87, 
DO Bhumidhar shall be· liable to ejectment. 
.' ' 
, 77.: An Asami shan be liable to ejectment from his holclina OIl . 
the suit of the land-holder or Gaon Sabha, as the cue may be, on 
the following grounds only-
(a) those mentioned in sedions 46, 69, '14 or 81, 
• • • • • • 
80. Where an Asami has beenejeeted from his lrolding OD the 
ground mentioned in clause (c) (i) of section 77, the land~holder 
shan not grant a lease thereof to any person within 2 years of the 
date of ejectment. 
Ejectment ,8L A Bhumidhar or an Asami shall be liable to ejectment on. the 
for:e of, suit of the Gaon Sabha or the land-holder, as the case may be, for 
~:tr!.en. using land for any purpose other than a purpose connected with 
tion of the agriculture, horticulture or animal husbandry, which includes pilei-
provisiDnl culture aJld p()t,Utry farming, and also to pay damage equivalent to 
of thi~ the cost ,Of. works which may 'be required to renderWthe land. capable 
Act. of ~ for the ~ purposes. 
Failure to 
file suit 
~Dder 
section 
84 otto 
exeCute 
decree 
obtained 
there-
under. 
ArreItand 
detention, 
, , 
• .. • • 
85. H a suit is not brought under section 84 or a decree obtained 
in. any such. suit is ,not executed within the periQd of limitation 
provided for the ~g of the suitor the execution of the decree,' the 
~n taking or retai,ning po~ession shall-
• • '. • 
(iii) in any case to which the provisions of clause (b) of' 
section 84 apply, become a Bhumidhar or Asami as if he had 
been admitted to the possession of the land 5, the Gaon Sabha. 
• • • 
' . 
138.· • • • 
ProVided further that no person shan be liable to arreat. or, de-
tention for an arrear ~ther than an arrear in respect of a boldin, 
of which he is the Bhumidhar. 
• • • • • • 

ScHBDULE I 
Section 185 
De.cription of suit· Period of Time from which period Proper Court of Court of 
Sl. Scction of the Act application and Other limitation begins . Coun Pees oriainal 
No. proceedinp . jurisdic- 1St znd 
I z 
• 
9 ~ 
10 -t6 
• IS 75 . . 
16 71(a) read with scc-
tioa6t. 
rnb) read with Iee-
tioo 6(aXi) and (10. 
3 .. 
• Suit for ejectment I None 
of Bhumidhar. 
; 
Suit for ejectment Do. 
. of • Bhumidhar 
01' Asami. 
• 
Ob~D ~t .Sm 
tbe order of Gaon months. 
Sabba reIatiDa to 
admission. 
5 
• None 
Do. 
• Prom the date of order. 
of GtIOn SabhL 
Suit for' ejectment 
of Awni. 
One year Prom the date of ex-
tiDction of the . hts 
of Bhwnidhar na or 
Aumi. 
<..). 
Do .. ] Do. 
& 
From the commence-
IIICDt of tbia. ACt 
whCle &be C8\UC of 
acdaD arose UDder 
scctiocl n(b) before 
tion AppeU Ap~ 
6 7 
• As in the Revenue 
Court Pees Alsis-
Act, 1870. tanto 
Do. 
Fifteen 
aniiIa. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
• Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
8 9 
• 
~ Chief Commissioner • 
lionet. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Chief Commissioner 
ill case of Bhumi-
dhar only . 
• 
.,. ... 
F- . 
.I 

71(b) 
re8d 
with 
sec-
tion6(IXlii). 77(1)(i) 
ra4 
wilh 
teCtion 
6(b) 
aad 
(d). 
77(c) 
(il) 
ra4 
with 
teetion 
6(b) 
and 
(d). 
77(d) 
17 
8t 
II 
h 
• 
21 
I';' 
• 
the 
date 
of 
com-
mencement 
of 
this 
Act 
aDd 
in 
an 
otbU 
cases 
from 
the 
date 
on 
which 
the 
Quae 
of 
action 
arose. 
00. 
None 
None. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Dil. 
Two 
yean 
From 
the 
date 
of 
deter-
Do. 
Suit 
for 
eie;:tnaent 
of 
an 
Asami 
OQ 
the 
ground 
of 
an 
un-
sapsfied 
decrtt 
of 
arrea" 
of 
rent. 
Suit 
for 
ejectment 
of 
a 
Bhumidhar 
or 
Asami 
and 
fM 
damqeI 
for 
usiDI 
Iaod 
in 
CODtraV'ell-
don 
of 
the 
provi-
lions 
of 
the 
M.. 
Suit 
for 
injunction 
M 
for 
the 
repair 
of 
the 
waste 
M 
dama&e 
QIIIed 
to 
the 
hold-
ida. 
• 
Three years. three yean. 00. 
Suit 
for 
ejectment 
Do. 
of 
person 
from 
lands 
of 
public 
uti-
lity 
. 
• 
mination. of 
disability. 
The 
date 
of 
final 
dec-
tee 
in 
the 
casco 
From 
the 
date 
of 
un-
lawful 
usc 
of 
the 
land. 
From 
the 
dati 
the 
damaae 
is 
done 
or 
the 
waste 
bqinl 
.. 
:£ 
As 
in 
the 
Court 
Fees 
Act, 
1870. 
A, 
in 
the 
Court 
Fees 
Act, 
1870. 
Do. 
• 
• 
From 
the 
date 
of 
Do. 
• 
coostitution 
0( 
Ci80n 
Panc:bayal 
under 
ICC-
lion 
lSI. 
• 
~ -
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
~ 
ItcYcnuc 
Deputy 
Auis-
Com-
tant. 
missioner. 
Do. 
Do. 
• 
• 
Do. 
Do. 
Chief 
Commissioner. 
• 
• 

Lolt SABH! 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Delhi Land Rcfonns Act, 1954. 
(Shri Gul.ari1al N anda, 
Minister 0/ Home Affairs.) 