8m No. 31 01 1955 
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE" 
PEOPLE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1955 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 

5 
10 
IS 
20 
Bill No. 37 of 1955 
THE REPRE.SENTATION OF THE PEOPLE 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1955 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
turther to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1950, and to 
make certain consequential amendments in the GovemTnent of 
Part C States Act, 195!. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixth Year of the Republic of 
Inn ia as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called 
(Amendment) Act, 1955. 
the Represenhtio:l 'Jf the People Short title 
and CCJlft. 
mencement 
l2) It shall come into force on the 1st day of January, 1956. 
Z. In section 2 of the Representation of the People Act, 1950Afen~:lt 
(hereafter in this Act referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section~. 8 on 
(1),-
(a) in clause (b), for the words and figure "by order made 
under section 9", the words "by law" shall be substituted; 
(b) in clause (cc), for the words "Council of States", the 
words lCelectoral college" shall be substituted; 
(c) in tlause (f), for the words and figure "by section 6 or 
by order made thereunder", the words "by h\w" shall be substi-
tuted; 
(d) after clause (h), the following clause shall be added at 
the end, namely:-
"(i) 'State Government', in relation to a Part C State, 
means the Lieutenant·Governor or Chief Commissioner 
thereof." 
3. In section 3A of 
omitted. 
the principal Act, sub-section (2) shall be Amendment 
of section 
,9A. 

Omiaaion of 
aection S. 
Omiuion of 
section 8. 
2 
t. Section 5 of the principal Act shall be omitte<l. 
5. Section 8 of the principal Act shall be omitted. 
~en~t 6. In section 9 of the principal Act, in clause (a), after the words 
teCbon 9· "each State", the words "specified in the Second Schedule" shall be 
inserted. S 
Insertion of 7. After Part II of the principal Act, the following Parts shall 
i:~ P:J be inserted, namely: _ . . i 
II-B. 
Chief electo-
ral officen. 
Electoral re-
,iltraUon 
Ofticm. 
AIIi.taut el-
ectOral reP-tration offic-
er .. 
"PART II-A 
OFFICERS 
13A. (1) There shall be for each State a chief electoral officer 10 
who shall be such officer of Government as th~ El~ction Commis-
sion may, in consultation with that Government, designate 
or nominate in this behalf. 
(2) Subject to the superintendence, direction and control of 
the Election Commission, the chief electoral officer shall super- IS 
vise the preparation and revision of all electoral rolls in the 
S'tate under this Act. 
l3B. (1) The electoral roll for each parli&mentary c.onstitu-
ency, assembly constituency, electoral college constituency and 
council constituency shall be prepared and revised by an elec- 20 
toral registration officer who ihall be such officer of Govern-
ment or of a local authority as the Election Commission may, in 
consultation with the Government of the State in which the 
constituency is situated, designate or nominate in this behalf. 
(2) An electoral registration officer may, subject to any 25 
prescribed restrictions, employ such persons as he thinks fit for 
the preparation and revision of the electQral roll for the 
constituency. ; 
13C. (1) The Election Commission may appoint one or more 
persons as assistant electoral registration officers to assist any 30 
electoral registration officer in the performance of his functions. 
(2) Every assistant electoral registration oftk-er shall" 
. Jubject to the control of the electoral registration officer, be' 
competent to perform all or any of the functions of the electoral 
registration officer. ,35 

3 
PART II-B 
ELtCOOltAL ROLLS FOR PARLIAMENTARY CONSTITt1INCI£S 
13D. The electoral roll for every parliamentary constituency Blcc:toral roil 
shall consist of the electoral rolls of 80 much of all the assembly for ... ~lia-men_ .. COD-
S constituencies or, as the case may be, electoral college constitu- ltituendet. 
encif>s as aie comprised within that parliamentary constituency; 
and it shall not be necessary to prepare or revise separately the 
electoral roll for any such parliamentary constituency." 
8. In Part III of the principal Act, for the heading, the following Substitu~ 
10 heading shall be substituted, namely:- :,nr:r ~e -
heading of 
IS 
"F.LECTOftAL nOLLS FOR ASSEMBLY AND ELECTORAL COLLEGE 'Part In. 
CONSTITUENCIES" • 
9. For section 14 of the principal Act, the following section shall !;bstitudon 
be substituted, namely: - tioD ~ :: 
don 140 
"14. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,- Definitions. 
(a) 'constituency' means an assembly constituency or an 
electoral college constituency; 
(b) 'qualifying date', in relation to the preparation or 
revision of every electoral roll under this Part, means the 
1st day of March of the year in which it is so prepared or 
revised." 
10. In section 17 of the principal Act, after the word 'consti- Amendment 
tuency', the words 'in the same State' shall be inserted. of'ieCdoa 17· 
11. For section 19 of the principal Act, the following section shall Substitution 
25 be substituted, namely: - ~~nn;: :-
30 
35 
"19. Subject to the foregoing provisions of this 
person who, on the qualifying date-
P t tion 19· ar , every ConditiOD. of 
(a) is not less than 21 years of age,' and 
(b) is ordinarily resident in a constituency, 
shall be entitled to be registered in the electoral roll for that 
constituency." 
12. In section 20 of the principal Act,-
re.istration. 
(a) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be Amendment 
substituted, namely: - _ of IeCtioa 20. 
"(3) A member of the armed forces of the Union shall 
be deemed to be ordinarily resident on any date in the 

4 
eonstituency in which, but for his service in the ah1\ed 
forces, he would have been ordinarily resident on that date."; 
(b) in sub-section (4), the words "during any period or" 
and the words "during that period or" shall be omitted; 
(c) in sub-section (5), the words "during any period ar" shall S 
be omitted; 
(d) in sub-section (6), the words "during any period" and 
the words "during that period" shall be omitted; and 
(e) sub-section (7) shall be omitted. 
SufbatitutioD 13. For sections 21 to 25 of the principal Act, the following sections 10 o DeW lec- . tions for shall be substituted, namely:-
lections 21 
to 25. 
- PreparatJGn 
and lWisiuD 
of elec:tore1 
roU .. 
Correctfoa of 
entries in el· 
ectoral rollL 
"21. (1) The electoral roll for each constitut!ncy shall be 
prepared in the prescribed manner by referen~e to the qualifying 
date and shall come into force immediately upon its final publi-
cation in accordance with the rules made under this Act. IS 
(2) The said electoral roll shall thereafter be revised in 
every subsequent year in the prescribed manner by reference to 
the qualifying date: 
Provided that if for any reason the electoral roll is not 
revised in any year the validity or continued operation of the 20 
electoral roll shall not thereby be affected: 
Provided further that it shall not be necessary to revise in 
the year 1956 the electoral roll for any assembly constituency 
provided by order made under section 9 of this Act or sub-section 
(2) of section 4 of the Government of Part C States Act, 1951.' 25 
(3.) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), 
the Election Commission may at any time, for reasons to be 
recorded, direct a special revision of the electoral roll for any 
constituency or part of a constituency in such manner as it may 
think fit: 
Provided that subject to the other provisions of this Act, 
the electoral roll for the constituency, as in force at the time 
of tht! issue of any such direction, shall continue to be in force 
until the completion of the sp,ecial revision so directed. 
30 
22. (1) The electoral registration officer for a constituency, 35 
on application made to him for the correction of an existing 
entry in the electoral roll of the constituency, shall, if he is 
satisfied after such inquiry as he thinks fit, that the entry relates 
XLIX of 
ItSI. 

5 
to the applicant and is erroneous or defective ill any particular, 
amend the entry accordjngly. 
(2) Any person whose name is entered in the electoral roll 
of a constituency may apply to the erectoral registration officer 
S for transposing the entry to another place in the same electoral 
roil and if the electoral registratic;1D officer, after making such 
enquiry as he thinks fit, is satisfied that the applicant is entitled 
LO have his name shown in that other place, he shall amend the 
electoral roll accordingly. 
10 23. (1) Any person whose name is not included in the IDduuOD of 
electoral roll of a constituency may apply in the manner herein-:.... in 
IS 
after provided for the inclusion of his name in that roll. rolla. 
(2) Where an application under sub-section (1} is made at 
Ilny time after the issue of a notification ~alling upon that consti-
tuency or the parliamentary constituency within which that 
con~tituency is comprised, to elect a member or members and 
before the completion of that election, it shall be made to the 
chief electoral officer; and in any other case, it shall be made 
to the electoral registration officer of that constituency. 
20 (3} The chief electoral officer or, as the case may be, the 
electoral registration officer shall, if satisfied that the applicant 
is entitled to be registered in the electoral roll, direct his name 
to be inclu~d therein: 
Provided that if the applicant is registered in the electoral 
25 roll of any other constituency in the same State, the chief 
electoral officer or, as the case may be, tbe electoral registration 
officer shall inform the electoral registration officer of that 
constituency and that officer shall on receipt of the information 
strike off the applicant's name from that electoral toll. 
30 (4) Where an application made under this section is rejected 
an appeal shall lie to the Election Commission within -.h time 
and in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(5) Every application al1d appeal under t1,is section shall be 
accompanied by the prescribed fee which shall in no case be 
35 refunded." 
• 
1«. In Part IV of the principal Act, for the heading, the follow- Subatitutioa 
ing heading shall be substituted, namely: - f!an;: !b~ 
beadtl!f of 
Part lV. 
IIELECTORAL ROLLS FOR COt1NCIL CONSTITt1J:NCn:s". 

6 
~!6. of U. Sectio~ 26 of the principal Act shall be omi~ted. 
Amendment 16. In section 27 of the principal A.ct,-
of aectioo 27' 
• 
(a) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(2) For the purpose of elections to the Legislative S 
Council of a State in any local authorities' constituency-
(a) the electorate shall consist of members of such 
local authorities exercising jurisdiction in any place or 
area within the limits of that constituency as are speci-
fied in relation to that State in the Fourth Schedule; 10 
(b) every member of a local authority within a local 
authorities' constituency shall be entitled to be registered 
in the electoral roll for that constituency; 
(c) the electoral registration officer for every 
local authorities' constituency shall maintain in his IS 
office in the prescribed manner and form the electoral 
roll for that constituency corrected up-to-date; 
(d) in order to enable the electoral registration 
officer to maintain the electoral roll corrected up-to-date 
the chief executive officer of every local authority (by ~ 
whatever designation such officer may be known) shall 
immediately inform the electoral registration officer 
about every change in the membership of that local 
authority; and the electoral registration officer shall, on 
receipt of the information, strike off from the electoral 2S 
roll the names of persons who have ceased to be, and in· 
elude therein the names of persons who have become 
members of that local authority; and 
(e) the provisions of sections 15, 16, 18, 22 and 23 
shall apply in relation to local authorities' constituencies 30 
as they apply in relation to assembly constituencies."; 
(b) for sub-section (4), the following sub-sectlon shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(4) The provisions of sections 15, 16, 18, 21 [excludinl( 
the second proviso to sub-section (2)], 22 and 23 shall apply 3S 
in relation to graduates' constituencies an'd teachers' constitu· 
encies as they apply in relation to assembly constituencies."; 
(e) in sub-section (5), clause (a) shall be omitted, and clauses 
(b) and (c) shall be re-lettered respectively as clauses (a) and (b); 

1 , '. 
(d) tor sub-section (6), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
U(6) For the purposes of sub-sections (4) and (5) the 
qualifying date shall be the 1st day of January ~f the year 
, in which the electoral roll is prepared or revised." 
U. In section 27A of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), the Amen""'-' 
0( 1CCti~ words "or group of States" and the proviso shall be omitted. 27A. 
18. In sections 27B and 27C of the principal Act, for the words Ameadmmt 
"Council of States constituencies" wherever: they occur, the words ~B=~C;C. 
10 "electoral college constituencies" sqall be substituted. 
19. Section 27F of the principal Act shall be omitted. OmIJlio.a of 
acction 27F. 
20. In section 27H of the principal Act, the words uor group of AmendmeDt 
States" shall be omitted. of IeCtJoD 27H. 
21. In section 28 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for clause Amendment 
'1 (h), the following clause shall be substituted, namely: - of lCction 28. 
U(h) the revision of electoral rollsj". 
22. For section 29 of the principal Act, the following section shall SubstitutioD 
be substituted, namely: - :on'fbr-:;' 
dOD 29. 
U29. Every local authority in a State shall, when so requested Staft'of local 
30 by the chief electoral officer of the State make available to any :tho,!~: to 
electoral registration officer such staff as may be necessary for aVIU e. 
the perfol'Il\ance of any duties in connection with the prepara-
tion and revision of electoral rolls." 
23. In the Fourth Schedule to the principal Act,- Amendment 
oCtbeFourlh 
I, (a) under the sub-heading "Bihar", for item u5. The Patna Schedule. 
Administration Committee", the following item shall be substitut-
ed, namely:-
u5. The Patna Municipal Corporation."j and 
(b) under the sub-heading "Madras", in item 4, for the words 
30 "Major Panchayats", the words and figure uClass I Panchayats" 
shall be substituted. 

8 
~mUai,~ U. The Sixth and Seventh Schedules to the principal Act shall 
aa'd ScveDth be omitted. 
Sc:bedulel. 
ConIequen-
tl8l aineod-
mcoliiD the 
GoYemment 
oCPartC 
Sisla AJ:t. 1951• . 
S. In the Govemment of Part C States Act, 1951,-
(a) in section 2,-
(i) in sub-section (1), in clause· (b), for the words, S 
brackets and figures "by order made under sub-section (2) of 
section 4", the words "by law" shall be substituted; 
(ii) sutHection (2) shall be omitted; 
(b) ill section 4, sub-6ection (1) shall be omitted; 
(c) section 6 shaH be omitted; 
(d) the First and Second Schedules shall be omitted. 

9 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The proposals in this Bill for the amendment of the Representa-
tion of the People Act, 1950, have been fonnulated in the light of 
the e>cperience gained by the Election Commission as well as the 
Government in the working of the Act during the last five years. The 
changes proposed are explained below:-
Clause 2.-The parliamentary constituencies provided under 
section 6 and the assembly constituencies provided under section 9 
of the Act will continue in force only until the dissolution of the 
House of the People or the Legislative Assembly of the. State. But 
after such dissolution new parliamentary and assembly constituencies 
as formed by the Delimitation Commission will come into force. 
It is accordingly proposed to amend the definitions of "Parliamentary 
constituency" and "Assembly constituency" in such a way as to 
cover both the existing constituencies and the new constituencies. 
The name "Council of States constituency" is misleading. It is 
not a constituency for the election of a member to the Council of 
States, but a constituency for electing to an electoral college in 
Kutch, Manipur or Tripura. Hence it is proposed to change the 
name to "electoral college constituency". 
The proposed definition of "State Government" is intended to 
facilitate the administration of the Act in Part C States. 
Clauses 3 and 24.-ln view of the amendments made in articles 
341 and 342 of the Constitution by the Constitution (First Amend-
ment) Act, 1951, sub-section (2) of section 3-A of the Act and the 
Sixth and· Seventh Schedules to that Act are superfiuous. The 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in relation· to each of the 
Part C States have already been listed by Orders of the President. 
It is. accordingly, proposed to omit sub-section (2) of section 3-A 
as well as the Sixth and Seventh Schedules. 
Clauses 4 and 5.-Sections 5 and 8 of the Act appear to be super-
fluous. Under articles 81 and 170 read with article 325 of the Cons-
titution, there cannot be any constituency for the House of th~ 
People or the Legislative Assembly of the State other than a terri-
torial constituency as provided by law. It is, therefore, proposed 
to omit these two sections. 
Clause 6.-The amendment proposed in this clause is consequen-
tial upon the proposed integration of tbe election provisions of the 

10 . 
Government of Part C States Act with the provisions 01 the Repre-
sentation of the People Acts. 
Clau.ses 7, 8 and 9.-By clause 7 it is proposed to insert two new 
Parts in the Act, namely, P..art II-A and Part II-B. In Part II-A, it 
is proposed to make provision for the administrative machinery for 
the preparation and revision of the electoral rolls, namely, the 
chief electoral officer, electoral registration officers and assistant 
electoral registration officers. 
Parts III and IV of the Act contain provisions for the preparation 
of electoral rolls in all the States. The scheme is that in every 
State there are separate rolls for parliamentary constituencies and 
for assembly constituencies despite the fact that each parliamen-
tary constituency consists of an integral number of assembly con-
stituencies. An electoral registration officer has to be appointed 
for each parliamentary constituency as well as for each of the 
assembly constituencies comprised in that parliamentary constituency. 
The electoral rolls have to be formally published, both at the time 
of preliminary publication and at the time of final publication, for 
each one of these parliamentary and assembly constituencies 
separately. This leads to unnecessary duplication of work and 
expenditure which could be easily avoided by making the electoral 
roU for an assembly constituency the unit and providing that the 
electoral roll for a parliamentary constituency shall consist of the 
appropriate number of component units merely put together. 
In the three Part C States of Kutch, Manipur and Tripura where 
there are no Legislative Assemblies there are what are known as 
Council of States constituencies (proposed to be re-named electoral 
college constituencies) for the purpose of electing 30 members to an 
electoral college. Each of these three States has at present two 
parliamentary constituencies each of which comprises 15 electoral 
college constituencies. In these States the electoral roll for an elec-
toral college constituency should be the unit and the electoral roll 
for a parliamentary constituency should consist of 15 of these compo-
nent electoral rolls put together. 
It is accordingly proposed to provide in the new Part II-B that 
the electoral roll of every parliamentary constituency shall consist 
of electoral roll of so much of all the assembly constituencies or, as 
the case may be, electoral college constituencies as are comprised 
within that parliamentary constituency and it shall not be necessal'J' 
to prepare or revise separately the electoral roll of any parliamentary 
constituency; Part TIl will be limited to the preparation and revision 
pf electoral rolls for assembly and electoral college constituencies by 
amending the definition of constituency in section 14. 

II 
Clause l1.-8ection 19 of the Act lays down two conditions for 
registration in any constituency, namely, (a) the person should have 
been ordinarily resident in the constituency for not less than 180 
days during the preceding calendar year, and (b) he should not 
Aave been less than 21 years of age on the 1st of March of the year 
in which the roll is prepared or revised. In practice, however, 
owing to paucity of staff it has not been possible to make anything 
like a thorough inquiry on the first point, and the authorities res-
ponsible for the annual revision of the electoral rolls have mostly 
been content with ascertaining whether the elector ordinarily resides 
in the constituency at the time of revision. There seems no great 
advantage in finding out whether an elector has been resident in a 
constituency for any particular period. It is therefore proposed in 
clause 11 of the Bill that the law should be simplified by relating 
"ordinary residence" to the "qualifying date" rather than to any 
"qualifying period". 
Clause 12.-8ub-section (3) of section 20 of the Act distinguishes 
between members of the armed forces who live in "a barrack, build-
ing or place belonging to or provided by the Government" and 
those who are permitted to live in private quarters. These latter ate 
comparatively very few. It is desirable to have a uniform rule for 
all members of the armed forces in order to avoid any discrimina-
tion and also to facilitate the administrative work which this provi-
·sion throws on the various headquarters. It is therefore proposed 
that the sub-section should be simplified as in clause 12 of the Bill. 
The amendments proposed in sub-clauses (b), (c) and (d) are 
consequential upon the proposed omission of all references to 'the 
qualifying period' in relation to 'ordinary residence'. Sub-section 
(7) of section 20 of the Act is now spent and is proposed to be 
omitted. "' 
Clause 13.-8ection 23 of the Act requires that the electoral roll 
for each constituency shall be 'prepared' every year in the prescrib-
ed manner with reference to the qualifying date. In view of the 
enormous size of the rolls and the expense incurred in the prepara-
tion of the first electoral rolls the Election Commission has decided 
not to attempt anything like a completely fresh preparation of the 
rolls every year except in a few localities. A house to house inquiry 
and re-writing of the rolls every year will be unduly expensive and 
almost impracticable. All that is feasible is an annual revision 
rather than actual preparation of the rolls and it is accordingly pro-
posed that the provisions of existing section 23 of the Act should 

12 
be amended so as to provide for both preparation as well as revi-
sion of the electoral roll with reference to the qualifying date. It 
is also proposed that a specific provision sAould be made in the 
section itself relating to the coming into force of the rolls. 
Since general elections to the House of the People and the State 
Legislative Assemblies (except three) are due in the beginning of 
1957, it would not be worth while revising the electoral rolls for the 
existing parliamentary and assembly constituencies during the year 
1956. The Election Commission would in that year be preparing 
the rolls for the new constituencies as formed by the Delimitation 
Commission. Hence the second proviso to the new section 21 (2). 
At present there is no provision in the Act for the inclusion of 
names in electoral rolls. Such a provision is important enough to 
find a place in the Act itself and this is done in the new section 23. 
~cept when an election has been announced in the constituency, the 
application for inclusion in the electoral roll will lie to the electoral 
registration officer. During the period when an' election is in progress 
the application will lie only to the chief electoral officer of the State. 
It is also proposed to provide for an appeal to the Election Commis-
sion from an order rejecting an application for inclusion of names. 
Clause 16.-Under section 27 of the Act, the qualifying date in 
the ~sc of the electoral roll of a council constituency is the 1st of 
April of the year in which the roll is prepared. In the case of 
election by a local authorities' constituency this may give rise to 
an anomaly because the names of persons who have ceased to be 
members of local authorities at the time of biennial elections to 
the Legislative Council of a State may continue in the electoral 
rolls and it may not be possible to register in the electoral rolls 
the names of persons who are members of local authorities at the 
time of such biennial elections. There is hardly any necessity for 
a qualifying date for the preparation and revision of electoral rolls 
of local authorities' constituencies. It is accordingly proposed to 
provide for the maintenance of electoral rolls of local authorities' 
CORl'ltituencies up-to-date so that at the time of biennial elections to 
Legislative Councils only members (and not ex-members) of local 
authorities may exercise their franchise. 
Clausp. 19.-As it is proposed to include in Part III of the Act, 
provisions relating to electoral rolls of electoral college constituen-
eies. section 27-F will not be necessary. 
Clause 22.-Jt is desirable that the staff of local authorities 
should be made available to electoral registration officers for 
work in connection with the preparation and revision of, electoral 

l~ 
1'ol1s as they are now Made available to :Returning Officers under 
section 159 of the 1951-Act for work in connection with elections. 
For this purpose a new section is proposed. 
Clause 23.-The old Patna City Municipality and the P~tna Ad-
ministration Committee have merged into the Patna MuniCipal 
Corporation established under the Patna Municipal Corporation Act. 
"Major Panchayats" in Madras are now known as "Class I Pancha-
yats". Hence this amendment. 
Clause 25.-The amendments proposed in this clause are conse-
quential upOn the proposal to integrate the election provisions of 
the Government of P.art C States Act, 1951 with the provisions of 
the Representation of the People Acts. 
H. V. PATASKAR. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 28th July, 1955. 

Definitions. 
ANNEXURE 
.,':Jt"-·i: .. '" , 
,EXTRAC,TS FROM THE REPRESENTATION O~ THE PEoPLE A~, lSAW 
(No. XLIII of 1950) 
• • • • • • 
Z. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise ,requires,-
• . . • • * • 
(b) "~ssembly constituency" means a constituency provided 
by order made under section 9 for the purpose of elections to 
the Legislative Assembly of a State, 
• • • • • • 
(cc) "Council of States constituency" means a constituency 
provided by order made under section 27~ for the purpose of 
election of members to the electoral college for any Part C 
State specified in the first column of the Fifth Schedule; 
• • • • • • 
(f) "Parliamentary constitueney" means a constituency pro-
vided by section 6 or by order made thereunder for the purpose 
of elections to the House of the People; 
• • • • • ", 
RelcrvatiOD 3A. (1) Of the seats in the House of the People allotted under 
~:ate if seclion 3 to each of the States of Delhi, Himachal Pradesh and 
the P'!~l~ Vindhya Pradesh, one shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes; 
f~r ~~d~ and of the seats so allotted to each of the States of Manipur and 
§cbeduled Vindhya Pradesh, one shall be reserved for the Scheduled Tribes. 
~bes~CC~ (2) For the purposes of this Act, the castes specified in the Sixth 
Sra",... Schedule shall be the Scheduled Castes in relation to the Part C 
State under which they are so specified, and the tribes specified in .. the Sev~nth Schedule shall be the Scheduled Tribes in relation to 
the Part C State under which they are so specified. 
• • • • • • 
ParUamen- i. For the purpose of elections to the House of the People, there 
=:.~i. shall be the consti~uencies as provided by section 6 or by order ~ade 
thereunder, and no other constituencies. 
Alsembly 
COft.tiluen 
cles. 
• • • • • • 
•. For the purpose of elections to a Legislative Assembly, there 
shall be the constituencies provided by order under section 9, and no 
other constituencies. . 

IS 
9. & soon as may be, after the ~ommeneement of this Aa~t the ,oclimltation . . of Alsembly 
PresIdent shaU, by order, determIne- conltitucn-
(a) the constituencies into which each State shall be divid- ciCI. 
ed for 'the purpose of elections to the Legislative Assembly of 
that State; 
· . . . ... ... 
PART III 
REGISTRATION OF PARLIAMENTARY ELECTORS 
• • • • • 
.,' ... 
I • ';' 
14. In this Part, '~constituency" means a 'Parliamentary constitu- Definition. 
ency. ; 
• • . , • • • 
n. No person shall be entitled to be registered' in the electoral No pcno.n 
. to be rellS-roll for more than one constituency. tcredinmore 
• • • • • • than onc consUwcn-
f:Y. 
19. Subject to the foregoing provisions of thiS Part, every person Conditionl 
who- :' . o.f reaistra-
. Uon. 
(a) has been ordinarily resident in a constituency for not 
less than 180 days during the qualifying period, and 
(b) was not less than 21 years . of age on the qualifying 
date, 
shall be entitled to be registered in the electoral roll for that .con-
stituency.' " 
ZO. (1) 
... • • • 
lit .. 
(3) A member of the Armed Forces of the Union while living in 
any barrack, building or place belonging to, or provided by, the 
Government shall not be deemed to be ordinarily resident in the 
constituency within which such barrack, building or place is situate, 
but shall be deemed to be ordinarily resident during any period or 
on any date in the constituency in which, but for his service in the 
Armed Forces, he would have been ordinarily resident during that 
period or on that date. 
(4) Any perSon holding any office in. Indi~ declared by the Pre-
sident in consultation with the Election Commission to be an office 
to which the provisions of this sub-section apply, or any pE'rson who 
is employed under the Government of India in, a post outside India, 
shall be deemed to De ,ordinarily resident during any periap or on 
Ilny date in the constituency in which., but for the holding of any 
Meaning 01 
"ordinarily 
}clident" • 

16 
weh offiee or employmeftt, he would have been ordinarily resident 
during that period or on that date. 
(5) The statement of any such person as is referred to in sub-
section (3) or sub-section (4) made in the prescribed form and veri-
fied in the prescribed manner, that but for his service in the Armed 
Forces or but for his holding any such office or being employed in 
any such post as is referred to in sltb-section (4) he would have 
been ordinarily resident in a specified place during any period or 
on any date, shall, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, be 
conclusive evidence of that fact. 
(6) The wife of any such person as is referred to in sub-section 
(3) or sub-section (4) shall, if she be ordinarily residing with such 
person during any period, be deemed to be ordinarily resident dur-
ing that perioo in the constituency specified by such person under 
sub-section (5). 
(7) For the purpose of the electoral rolls first prepared under 
this Act, ·a person who is a citizen of India and has migrated from 
the territory of Pakistan into the territory of India before the 25th 
day of July, 1949, on account of disturbances or fear of disturbances 
in his former place of residence shall be deemed to have been 
ordinarily resident during any period or on any date in the consti-
tuency in which he was resident on the said day or, if any other 
constituency is specified by him in this behalf in the prescribed 
form and manner, in that other constituency, 
~ali!~~ of 21. For the purpose of this Part, the qualifying 
qu ·/in. 'l'f' 'od 
date and the 
date" and qua 1 ymg pen -
"q~ifyjna 
period". (a) in the case of electoral rolls first prepared under this 
Act, shall be the 1st day of March, 1950, and the period begin-
ning on the 1st day of April, 1947 and ending on the 31st day of 
December, 1949, respectively; and 
(b) in the case of every electoral roll subsequently pre-
pared under this Act, shall be the 1st day of March of the year 
in which it is prepared, and the year immediately preceding 
thar year, respectively. 
Hlectom Re- U. (1) The electoral roll for each constituency shall be prepared 
p"ration by an Electoral Registration Officer, who shall be suCh officer of Officers. 
Government 01' of a local authority as the Election Commission may, 
in consultation with the Government of the State in which the con-
stituency is situated, designate or -nominate in this ,behalf. 
(2) An Electoral Registration Officer may, subject to any pres-
cribed restrictions, . employ such persons as he thinks fit in the 
preparation or the electoral roll for the constituency. 

I' !!A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing S~jai P~ 
provisions of this Part the first electoral rolls under this Act shall ::;/ds W;~ 
be prepared in relation to such areas (referred to in this Act as electoral 
'electoral units') in each State as the Election Commission may, rolls dfirat . prepare un-
m consultation with the Government of that State, direct. der the Act. 
(2) An electoral roll prepared under sub-section (1) shall be pub-
lished in such manner and at such places as may be prescribed by 
reference to the electoral units for which the roll has been prepared 
for the purpose of inviting claims for inclusion in, or objection to, 
such roll. 
(3) For the purpose of the preparation of electoral rolls under 
sub-section (1) and the claims and objections referred to in sub-
section (2), the provisions of sections 15, 17, 18, 19, 20 and 22 shall 
have effect as if for any reference to a constituency in the said sec-
tions there were substituted a reference to an electoral unit. . 
(4) After the constijuencies in a State have been determined 
under Part II and after the claims and objections in respect of the 
electoral rolls for all the electoral units or parts thereof comprised 
in a constituency so determined have been disposed of in accord-
ance with the rules made in that behalf under section 28 and such 
electoral rolls have been altered in accordance with the decisions 
given on such claims and objections, the electoral rolls for all such 
electoral units and parts thereof so altered shall be repUblished in 
the manner prescribed as the electoral roll for such constituency 
and shall, on such republication, be deemed to be the electoral 
roll prepared under this Act for that constituency. 
23. The electoral roll for each constituency shall be prepared Annual pre-
every year in the prescribed manner by reference to the qualifying ~e:!~~ of 
date: roU. 
Provided that it shall not be necessary to prepare any roll during 
the year 1951. 
24. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the electoral roll Period of 
for any constituency first prepared under this Act shall come into operation of 
f . di t I 't fin I bli ti . electoral orce lmme a e y upon I s a pu ca on 10 accordance with rolls. 
the rules made under this Act and shall remain in force until the 
30th day of September, 1952; and every electoral roll subsequently 
prepared under this Act shall come into force on the 1st day of 
October next after the qualifying date by reference to which that 
roll is prepared and shall remain in force until the 30th day of Sep-
tember next following. 
(2) If for any reason, the electoral roll for any constituency or 
part of a constituency is in any year not finally published in the 

18 
prescribed manner before the 1st day of October, then, until the 
day on which it is so published, the electoral roll in force imIne. 
diately before the said 1st day of October shall continue in force 
as the electoral roll for that constituency, or, as the case may be, 
that part of the constituency. 
Revision or 
correctioQ of 
electoral 
25. Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 23 and 24,-
(a) the Election Commission may at any time, for reasons 
to be recorded in writing, direct the revision in the prescribed 
manner of the electoral roll of any constituency or part of a 
constituency, and when a list containing any additions to, omis-
sions from or alteration in, the electoral roll as a result of such 
revision has been finally published in the prescribed numner, 
the electoral roll shall be deemed to have been revised accord-
ingly; 
rolls in s pe-
cial cases. 
(b) the Electoral- Registration Officer for a constituency, on 
application made to him for the correction of an existing entry 
in the electoral roll of the constituency for the time being in 
force shall, if he is satisfied after such inquiry as he thinks fit 
that the entry relates to the applicant and is erroneou~ or defec-
tive in any particular, amend, or cause the roll to be amended, 
accordingly. 
PART IV 
REGISTRATION OF ELECTORS FOR STATE Ll:GISUTURIS 
'r~arati°l 26. The provisions of sections 15 to 25 (including the special pro-
~lf. To~1s- visions co~tained in section 22A) shall apply in relation to Assemb-
atillCmblY • con- ly constituencies as they apply in relation to Parliamentary consti-tuenCles. t . 
Preparatilm 
of electoral 
roll. for 
Council con-
, • tituenciet. 
uencles. 
27. (1) 
.* • • • • 
(2) For' the purpose of elections to the Legislative Council of a 
State in any local authorities' constituency, the electorate shall 
consist of members such local authorities exercising jurisdiction in 
any place or area within the limits of that constituency as are 
specified in relation to that State in the Fourth Schedule . 
• • * • • 
. (4) The provisions of sections IS, 16, 18, 20, ~2, 23 (excluding the 
proviso), 24 and 25 shall apply in relation to Council constituencies 
as they apply in relation to Parliamentary constituencies. 

IP 
(5) Subject to the foregoing provisions of this section,-
(a) every person who on the qualifying date, was a mem-
ber of any such local authority within a local authorities' con-
stituency as is referred to in sub-section (2) shall be entitled 
to be registered in the electoral roll for that constituency; 
• • • • • 
(6) For the purpose of this section, the qualifying date in the 
case of every electoral roll shall be the 1st day of April of the year 
in which the roll is prepared. 
PART IVA 
MANNER OF FILLING SEATS IN THE COUNCIL OF STATE'S TO BE FILLED BY 
REPRESENTATIVES OF PART C STATES 
27A. (1) For the purpose of filling any seat or seats in the Constitution 
Council of States allotted to any Part C State or group of such :ll:~~tora~r 
States in the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution there shall be an the filling of 
electoral college for each such State or group of States: ~~n~il ~f 
Provided that for the purppse of filling the' seat allotted to the !~tes p allo~ 
States of Ajmer and Coorg or to the States of Manipur and Tri- Stat~~ art 
pura, there shall be an Electoral College for each of the said States. 
• • • • • 2m. For the purpose of election of members to the electoral ~O~cil of 
. college for any State specified in the fix:st column of the Fifth sti~~ci:~­
Schedule there shall be the constituencies provided by order under 
section 27C and no other constituencies. 
27C. As soon as may be after the commencement of this Act, the Delimitation 
President shall by erder determine- . ~f CS':: 
(a) the constituencies into which each State specified in :nstituen. 
the first column of the Fifth Schedule shall be divided for the CI. 
purpose of election of members to the electoral college for 
such State; 
(b) the extent of each constituency; and 
(c) the number of seats allotted to each constituencies. 
• • • • • 
Z7F. (1) For the purpose of election of members to the electoral Electoral 
11 f S fied ' h fi . rolls for co ege or any tate speci In t erst column of the Fifth Council of 
Schedule there shall be an electoral roll for every Council of States S~ates .ron-. S stituenclCS constituency in that tate. 
(2) So much of the roll or rolls for any Parliamentary constitu-
ency or constituencies for the time being in force under Part III 
as relate to the areas comprised within a Council of States consti-
tuency shall be deemed to be the electoral roll for th at Council of 
States constituency. 
• • • • • 

M~nner of 2'70. Save as otherwise provided in section 271 the seat or seats 
~~~n ~~e in the Council of States allotted to any Part C State or group of 
Council of such States in the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution shall be 
~~t:~ ~c filled by a person or persons elected by the members of the 
States. electoral college for such State or group of States in accordance 
Power to 
make rules. 
with the system of proportional representation by means of the 
single transferable vote. 
28. (1) 
• • • • • 
• • 
PART V 
GENERAL 
• • • 
(2) In particular and without prejudice· to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the follow-
ing matters, namely:-
• • • • • ,. 
(h) the revision or correction of an electoral roll under 
section 25 and the final publication of the list referred to in 
that section; 
• • • • • 
Validation 29. All things done, and all steps taken, before the commence-
~~~~u~onfo ment of this Act with a view to facilitating the provisional prepa-
the com- ration of electoral rolls for the purpose of elections to the House 
:re:he~t of the People or to the Legislatures of States· shall, in so far as 
they are in conformity with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to 
have been done or taken under this Act as if it was in force at the 
time such ttlings were done or such steps were taken. 
• • • • • • 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE 
[See section 27 (2)] 
• • • • • • 
BIHAR 
• • • • • • 
5. The Patna Administration Committee. 
• • • • • • 
MADRAS 
• • • • • • 
4. Major Panchayats, that is to say, Panchayats notified by the 
State Government in the Offici,al Gazette as Panchayats which 
exercise jurisd.iction over an area containing a population of not 
less than five thousand and whose income for the financial year 
immediately preceding the date of the notification was not less 
than ten thousand rupees. 
• • • • • 

EXTRACTS FROM THE GOVERNMENT OF PART C STATIS At:r, 1951 
(No. XLIX of 1951) 
• • • • • 
2. (1) In thjs Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
, • • • • • 
(b) "Assembly constituency" means a constituency provid-
ed by order made under sub-section (2) of section 4 for the 
purpose of elections to the Legislative Assembly of a State; 
• • • • • 
(2) For the purposes of this Act, the castes specified in the First 
Schedule shall be the Scheduled Castes in relation to the Part C 
State under which they are so specified, and the tribes specified in 
the Second Schedule shall be the Scheduled Tribes in relation to 
the Part C State under which they are so specified. 
• • • • • 
IlIterprc fa .. 
dOG • 
4. (1) For the purpose of elections to the Legislative Assembly DclimitadQll 
of a State, there shall be constituencies as provided by order made of COIlItitla-
under sub-section (2) and no other constituencies:. eadc •• 
• • • • • 
6. (1) For the purpose of elections to the Legislative Assembly Electoral 
of a State, there shall be an electoral roll for every Assembly A:m~ 
constituency. ! ~dtucD-
• CICI. 
(2) So much of the roll or rolls for any Parliamentary constitu-
ency or constituencies for the time being in force under Part m of 
the Representation of the People Act, 1950 (XLIII of 1950), as relate 
to the areas comprised within an Assembly constituency shall be 
deemed to be the electoral roll for that Assembly Constituency • 
• • • • • 

. , 
LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Representafon of the People Act, 1950 
and to make certain consequential amendments in the 
Government of Part C States Act, 1951 . 
(Shri H. V. Pataska" 
Minis1er in the Ministry of Lar1J~) 
ttPNn-LAO- $31 t.S-29-1-Ss-t .150 
~ .. 