BILL No. 37 OF 1990 
THE FINANCE BILL, 1990 
(AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 

THE FlNANCE BlLL, 1990 
ARRANGEMENI OF CLAUSES 
CHAPIER I 
PRELIMINARV 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title and commencement. 
CHAPIER II 
RATES OF INCOME· TAX 
2. Income-tax .. 
CHAPIER III 
DIRECT TAXES 
Income-tax 
'I1Ie PIn_ Bill, 1110 
(Aa Introduced In Lok &'bha) 
CorrIgenda 
1, Atpeg.16,-
<a> for Hnes 12 to 16, fNd '(ii) in section 246, in sub-sectlon (2) , in clause (e), after the word 
figure. and Iett.r"section 271 B", the word., figures and letters "or section 271 BB" ahall be 
In .. rted;'; 
(b) In lin. 28, for "WOrd" ,I!tad "words", 
:!, At page 48, In the first column, in lin. 2 from bottom, liter "sub-section < 1 )", insen "of" 
3, At page 49, in the second column, in line 3 from bottom, "'"A1umium", rtHId "Aluminium", 
4. At page 51, In the first column, in line 28, (or "Sectlon-, read "Clause", 
~3·. 'A'~~ndment of sectiOnct~'IUoLn' for section BaM. 
Substitution of new se 
24. Amendment of section BOR. 
25. Amendment of section BaRR. 
26. Amendment of section BaRRA. 
27. Amendment of Cha~ter VIII. 
2B. Amendment of sectIOn 115-1 
29. Amendment of section 11 SJ. 
30. Amendment of section 119. 
31. Amendment of section 139. 
32. Amendment of section 139A. 
33. Amendment of section 142. 
34. Amendment of section 143. 
35. Amendment of section 145. 
3~. Amendment of section 151 . 
~. Insertion of new section 194F. 
39'. Amendment of section 246. 

THE FINANCE BILL, 1990 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title and commencement. 
CHAPTER II 
RATES OF INCOME-TAX 
2. Income-tax .. 
CHAPTER III 
DIRECT TAXES 
.~ . Income-tax • . t 3. Amendment of section 2. 
l' 4. Amendment of section 10. 
5. Amendment of section 28. 
6. Amendment of section 32A. 
7. Amendment of section 32AB. 
~ 8. Amendment of section 33A. ; ", 9. Amendment of section 34. , 
,',' 
10. Amendment of section 35CCB. / 
~ 11. Amendment of section 439. 1 12. Amendment of section 44AC. ,t 
" .~ 
13. Amendment of section 45. ~ 
~1 14. Amendment of section 80CCA. 
i 
15. Insertion of new section 80CCB. 
16 . Insertion of new section 8000. . . 
17. Amendment of section 80GGA. 
I 
18. Amendment of section 80HH. 
19. Amendment of section 80HHA 
20. Amendment of section 80HHC, 
21. Amendment of section 80HHO. 
22. Amendment of section 80-1. 
23. Amendment of section 80L. 
24. Substitution of new section for section 80M. 
25. Amendment of section 80A. 
26. Amendment of section 80RA. 
27. Amendment of section 80RRA. 
28. Amendment of Chapter VIII. 
29. Amendment of section 115-1 
30. Amendment of section 115J. 
31. Amendment of section 119. 
32. Amendment of section 139. 
33. Amendment of section 139A. 
34. Amendment of section 142. 
35. Amendment of section 143. 
36. Amendment of section 145. 
37. Amendment of section 151. 
38. Insertion of new section 194F. 
39. Amendment of section 246. 

CLAUSES 
40. Amendment of section 268. 
41. Insertion of new section 271 BB. 
42. Amendment of section 271C. 
43. Amendment of section 271 D. 
44. Amendment of sedion 271 E. 
45. Amendment of section 275A. 
46. Omission of Chapter XXII-B. 
47. Amendment of section 288. 
48. Consequential amendments. 
49. Amendment of section 2. 
SO. Amendment of section 5. 
51. Amendment of section 10. 
52. Amendment of section 16. 
53. Amendment of section 17. 
54. Insertion of new section 35EEE. 
55. Amendment of section 35K. 
56. Amendment of Schedule III. 
57. Amendment of section 9. 
58. Amendment of section 15. 
59. Amendment of section 16. 
60. Amendment of Act 52 of 1962. 
61. Amendment of Act 51 of 1975. 
62. Auxiliary duties of customs. 
63. Amendment 01 Act 1 01 1944. 
64. Amendment of Act 5 01 198Q. 
65. Special duties of excise. 
66. Amendment of Act 58 of 1957. 
67. Amendment of Act 40 of 1978. 
68. Repeal of Act 12 of 1953. 
69. Amendment of Act 13 of 1989. 
70. Amendment of Act 6 of 1898. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE. 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE. 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE. 
(ii) 
Wealth-tax 
Gift-tax 
CHAPTER IV 
INDIRECT TAXES 
Customs 
Excise 
CHAPTER V 
INLAND AIR TRAVEL TAX 
CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS 
• 

5 
AS IfTRODUCED .. LOK 8A8HA 
ON 11TH MARCH, 1110. 
811 No. 37 Of 1110 
THE FINANCE BILL, 1990 
A 
Bill 
to give effect to the financial proposals of the Central Governt1lBnt for the 
financial year 1990-91. 
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-fim Vear of the Republic of India as '0110 .. :-
CHAPTER I 
PREUMINARY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Finance Act, 1990. 
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, sections 2 to 59 shall be deemed to have come into force 
on the 1st day of April, 1990. 
CHAPTER II 
RATES OF INCOME-TAX 
SharI lilt nI 
CDIIIIaIl» 
IIIInl 
2. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3), for the assessment year Inc:orrMHu. 
10 commencing on the 1 st day of April, 1990, income-tax shall be charged at the rate, specified in Part lof 
the First Schedule and shall be increased,-
(a) in the cases to which Paragraphs A. B. C and 0 of that Part apply. by a surcharge for purposes 
of the Union; and 
(b) in the cases to which Paragraph E of that Part applies, by a surcharge, 
15 calculated in each case in the manner provided therein. 
(2) In the cases to which Sub-Paragraph I or Sub-Paragraph II of Paragraph A of Part I of the Flm 
Schedule applies, where the assessee has, in the previous year, any net agricuhural income exceeding 
six hundred rupees, in addition to total income, and the total income exceeds,-
(i) in a case to which the said Sub-Paragraph I applies, eighteen thousand rupees, and 
20 (ii) in a case to which the said Sub-Paragraph II applies, twelve thousand rupees, 
then,-
(a) the net agricultural income shall be taken into account, in the manner provided In clause (b) 
[that is to say, as if the net agricultural income were comprised in the total income after,-
(i) in a case to which the said Sub-Paragraph I applies, the first eighteen thousand rupees, 
1!5 and 
(ii) in a case to which the said Sub-Paragraph II applies, the first twelve thousand rupe", 
of the total income but without being liable to tax), only for the purpose of· charging income·tax in 
resped of the total income; and 
(b) the income-tax chargeable shall be calculated as follows:-
I) (i) the total income and the net agricultural Income shall be aggregated and the amount of 
income-tax shall be determined in respect of the aggregate income at the rates specified In Sub-
Paragraph lor, as the case may be, Sub-Paragraph II of the said Paragraph A, as If such 
aggregate income were the total income; 
(ii) the net agricultural income shall be increasad,-
(A) in a case to which the said Sub-Paragraph I appUes, by a sum of eight .. n thousand 
rupees; and 
(8) in a case to which the said Sub-Paragraph II applies, by a sum of twelve thousand 
rupees, 

2 
and the amount of Income-tax shall be d.ermlned In reapec:t of the net agricultural Income .. 80 
increased at the rat .. specified in Sub-Paracv-Ph lor ... the cue may be. Sub-Paragraph" of 
the IIid Paragraph A. .. If the net agricultural Income .. 80 Increased were the total Income; 
(II) the amount of income-tax determined in accordance with sub-dau .. (I) Ihall be reduced 
~ the amount of Income-tax determined In accordance with.IUb-claU" (/I) and the lum 10 5 
antvecI at lhaH be the Income-tax in reaped of the total income: 
Provided that the amount of income-tax 80 arrived at Iha/I, In the case of every person having a total 
income exCMdlng fifty thouIBnd rupees, be incrNHd ~ a surcharge for purpoaes of the Union 
calculated at the rate of eight per cent. of such income-tax and the sum 80 arrived at shall be the Income-
tax in reaped of the total income. 10 
(3) In cues to which the provisions of Chapter XII or Chapter XII-A or sub-section (1A) of section 
161 or section 1640r section 164A or section 16780f the Income-tax Ad, 1961 (hereinafter referred to 
as the Income-tax Act) apply, the tax chargeable shall be determined as provided in that Chapter or that 
section, and with reference to the rates Impoaecl by sub-sectlon (1) or the rates as specified In 'that 
Chapter or section, as the case may be: 
Provided that In respect of any incomfl chargeable to tax under section 115B or section 11588 of the 
Income-tax Act, the Income-tax computed under section 11 SB or section 11 SBB shall be increased by a 
surcharge for purposes of the Union calculated at the rate of eight per cent. of such income-tax, 
(4) In cas" in which tax has to be deducted under sections 193, 194. 194A. 1948. 19488, 1940 
15 
and 195 of the Income-tax Act at the rates in force, the deduction shall be made at the rates specified in 20 
Part " of the First Schedule and shall be increased,-
(a) in the cases to which the provisi9ns of sub-item (a) of item 1 of that Part apply, by a surcharge 
for purposes of the Union; and 
(b) In the cases to which the provisions of SUb-item (8) of item 2 of that Part apply. by a 
surcharge, 25 
calculated In each case in the manner provided therein. 
(5) In cases in which tax has to be deducted under section 194C of the Income-tax Act, the 
deduction shall be made at the rates specified in that section and shall be increased by a surcharge for 
purposes of the Union calculated at the rate of eight per cent. of such deduction, 
(6) In cases In which tax has to be collected under section lO6C of thelneome-tax Act, the collection 30 
shall be made at the rate specified in that section and shall be Increased by a surcharge for purposes of 
the Union calculated at the rate of eight per cent. of such collection. 
(7) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (8), in cases in which income-tax has to be calculated 
under the first proviso to sub-section (5) of section 132 of the Income-tax Act or charged under sub-
section (4) ofsection 172 or sub-section (2)ofsection 174 or section 175 or sub-section (2) of section 35 
176 of the said Act or deducted under section 192 of the said Act from income chargeable under the 
head -Salaries-or in which the "advance tax" payable under Chapter XVII-C of the said Act has to be 
computed, althe rate or rates in force, such income-tax or, as the case may be, "advancatax" shall be 80 
ca~lated, charged, deducted or computed at the rate or rates specified In Part III of the First Schedule 
~d such tax as reduced by the rebate of income-tax calculated under Chapter VIII-A shall be 40 Increased,-
(a) in t~e cases to which Paragraphs A, 8, C and 0 of that Part apply, by a surcharge for purrv'llses of the UnIOn; and ..-. 
(b) in the cases to which Paragraph E of that Part applies, by a surcharge, 
calculated in each case in the manner provided therein: 
Provided that in cases to whic~ the provisions of Chapter XII or Chapter XII-A or sub-section (1 A) of 
section 161 or section 164 or section 164A or section 1678 of the Income tax Act apply " d shall be co uted ith f h -, a vance tax· mp w re erence tot e rates imposed by this sub-section orthe rates as specified' tha Chapter or section, as the case may be: In t 
45 
Provided f~rther that in ~.spect of any income c~argeable to tax under section 11 SB of the Income- 50 
tax Act, the adva~e t~ computed under the farst proviso shall be increased by a .urcha e for' 
PUrpoHl of the UnIOn c::alculated at the rate of eight per cent. of such "advance tax., rg 
sl~ In the ~se8 to which Sub-Paragraph lor Sub-Paragraph II of Paragraph A of Part III of th F 
Incom:~ a:~i~~:~s~~:~~:~: I~ ~~=~ =~~! ~ vi~ue of any prOvision ~~ ;~s~ 
rear, In luchnd thottler pel ~iod. any net agricultural income exceeding six hun~~peot:~:~~~~:rteovtlOotUaSI 55 Income a e tota Income exceeds.- ' 
(i) in a case to which the said Sub-Paragraph I applies twenty two th and , ' - ous rupees, and 
(/I) In a case to which the said Sub-Paragraph II applies, twelve thousand rupee., 
43 of 1!1161. 

3 
then, In calculating Incom.tax under the first proviso to sub-s8ctlon (5)at section 132 at the Income-tax 
Ad or In charging Income-tax under .ub-sectlon (2) of section 174 or section 175 or sUb-section (2) of 
.ectlon 178 of the said Act or in computing the -advance tax- payable under Chapter XVII-C of the said 
Ad, at the rate or rate. in force,-
5 (a) the net agricultural Income shall be taken Into account, in the manner provided In clause (b) 
10 
15 
20 
25 
[that is to say, as If the net agricultural income were comprised in the total income after,-
(I) in a case to which the said Sub-Paragraph I applies, the first twenty-two thousand rupees, 
and 
(iI) in a case to which the said Sub-Paragraph II applies, the first twelve thousand rupees, 
at the total income but without being liable to tax], only for the purpose of calculating, charging or 
computing auch incom.tax or, as the cue may be, -aance tax- in respect at the total Income; 
and 
(b) such Income-tax or, as the case may be, -advance tax- shall be so calculated, charged or 
computed as follows:-
(I) the total income and the net agricultural income shall be aggregated and the amount of 
income-tax or -advance tax- shall be determined in respect at the aggregate income at the rate. 
specified in Sub-Paragraph lor, as the case may be, Sub-Paragraph II of the said Paragraph A, as 
If such aggregate income were the total Income; 
(6) the net agricultural income shall be increased,-
(A) in a case to which the said Sub-Paragraph I applies, by a sum of twenty-two thousand 
rupees; and 
(8) in a case to which the said Sub-Paragraph II applies, by a sum of twelve thousand 
rupees, 
and the amount of income-tax or -advance tax- shall be determined in respect of the net 
agricultural income as 80 increased at the rates specified in the aaid Sub-Paragraph lor, .. the 
case may be, the said Sub-Paragraph II as if the net agricultural Income as 10 increased were the 
total income; 
(iii) the amount of income-tax or -advance tax-determined in accordance with aub-dause (I) 
shall be reduced by the amount of income-tax or, as theC8Se may be, -advance tax-determined in 
30 accordance with sub-clause (II) and the sum so arrived at shall be the income-tax or, as the case 
may be, -advance tax- in respect of the total income: 
Provided that the amount of income-tax or -advance tax~ 80 arrived at shall, in the case of every 
person having a total income exceeding seventy-five thousand rupees, be increased by a surcharge for 
purposes of the Union calculated at the rate of eight per cent. of such income-~or, as the case may be, 
35 -advance tax- and the sum 10 arrived at shall be the income-tax or, as the case may be, -advance tax- in 
respect of the total income. 
eo 
(9) For the purposes of this section and the First Schedule,-
(a) -company in which the publk: are substantially interested-means a company within the 
meaning of clause (18) at section 2 of the Income-tax Ad, and includes a subsidiary of such 
company if the whole of the share capital at auch subsidiary company has been held by the parent 
company or by Its nomin .. s throughout the previous year; 
(b) -domestk: company-means an Indian company, or any other company which, in respect of 
Its Income liable to income-tax underthelncome-tax Act forthe ..... sment YHrcommencing on the 
1 It day of April, 1990, has made the prescribed arrangements forthe declaration and payment within 
India at the dividends Qncluding dividends on preference shares) payable out of such income in 
accordance with the provisions of sedlon 191 of the Act; 
(e) -insurance commistlon- means any remuneration or reward, whether by way of commission 
or otherwise, for soliciting or procuring Insurance bualness (Including business relating to the 
continuance, renewal or revival of policies at insurance); 
(d) -Investment company" mean. a company whose gross total inoome (as defined in MCtIon 
80B of thelncome-lax Ad) consists mainly of Income which is chargeable under the he~s -income 
from house property-, -CapItal galns- and -Income from other sources-or at Income by way of 
Interest on securlllel; 
(e) -net agrlculturallncome-, in rel.lon to a peraon, means the total amount at agria,lIturai 
Income, from what8V8r source derived, of that person computed In accordance with the rules 
contained in Part IV of the FIrst Schedule; 
(f) "taX-fr .. security" means any security of the Central Government Issued or declared to be 
Incom .... tr .. , or any aealrity of a State Govemment Issued incom.'" fr .. , the inoome-tax 
whereon is payable by the State Government; 
(g) ,rading company" means a company whose busi"... consists mainly in dealing in goods or 
men::hMd1le manufllCtuNd, produced or prooeaMd by a person OCher than ItMd CIOft'IPMY and 
whoM Income altrIMlble to sUClh bulineu Included in Its groll tDtaIlncome (_cWJned In-=tton 
lOB or the .lOOfM-ta Act) is not less than _-one per cent. of the amount or euch un- _I 
1ncoIM; 

of teCtion 2. 
AmMICiment 
oll.etlon 10. 
4 
h all other words and expre .. lons used in this section or in the Fi~ Schedule but not defined in 
th~ :u~HCtion and defined In thelncom ... tax Ad ahall have the meanings rnpectlvely assigned to 
them In that Ad. 
CHAPTER \II 
DIRECT TAXES 
Income-we 
5 
3. In section 2 oj the Income-tax Ad.-
(i) in dauae (24).-
(a) after aub-c\ause (v). the following sutK:laU~ shall be InS8~ed and shall be deemed to have 10 
been Inserted with effect from the 1 st day of April, 1962. namely.-
"(va) any sum chargeable to Income-tax under clause (iiia) 01 section 28;"; 
(b) for the existing clause (va). the following dauses sh~1I be substitut~ and shall be deemed to 
have been substituted with effect from the 1st day of April. 1967. namely.-
• (vb) any sum chargeable to income-tax under clause (fiib) of section 28; 
(ve) the value of any benefit or perquisite taxable under dause (iv) of section 28;·; 
(e) after sutK:lause (ve), the following sutK:lause shall be inse~ and shall be deemed to 
have been inserted with effect from the 1st day of April, 1972, namely.-
15 
"(vd) any sum chargeable to income-tax under clause (iiic) of section 28;·; 
(II) in clause (40), for the word and figures ·section 143·, the words, brackets and fig~res ·su.b-
section (3) of section 143·'shall be substituted and shall be deemed to have been substituted with 20 
effect from the 1st day of April, 1989; 
(iii) clause (42C) [as Inserted by clause (if) of section 2 of the Direct Tax Laws (Second 
Amendment) kt, 1989) shall be omitted. 
4. In section 10 of the Income-tax kt, in clause (15),-
(I) In sutH:lause (iV), In item (I), after the words "State Government·, the words ·or a public sector 25 
company· shall be inserted with affect from the 1 st day of April, 1991; 
(II) after sutK:lause (Iv), the following sutK:lause shall be inserted and shall be deemed to have 
been inserted with effect from the 1 st day of April, 1989, namaly:-
"M interest on .securities held by the Registrar, Supreme Court, in Reserve Bank's SGL Acx:ount 
No. SUDH 048;·. 30 
36 of 1989. 
Amendment of 5. In section 28 01 the Income-tax Ad,-18CIIon28, 
'(a) aft.,. clause (Iii), the following clause shall be Inserted and shall be deemed to have been 
InHrted with effect from the 1st day of April. 1962. namely:-
"(ilia) profits on Iftle of allc:ence granted under thelmporta (Control) Order. 1955. made under the 
Imports and Exports (Control) kt, 1947;·; 35 18 of 1I~.7. 
(b) aft.,. cIau .. (ilia), the following clause shall be in .. rted and shall be deemed to have been 
InHrted with effect from the 1st day of April, 1967, namely:-
"(II") cash assistance (by whatever name called) received or receivable by any person against 
exports under any scheme 01 the Government of India;·; 
(e) after c1aull (lib), the following clau .. shall be inserted and shan be deemed to have been .0 
inHrted with effect from the 1st day of April, 1972. namely:-
"(iiic) any duty 01 customs or excise re-pald or re-paylble u drawback to any person against 
exports under the CullOms and Central Excise Duti .. Drawback Rules, 1971 ; •. 
Ai-.dMnt of •• In section 32A of the Income-tax Ad,-..... 32A. 
(I) In aub-Hctlon (4), In clau .. (11), in the opening portion, for the worda ,he previous y.ar in 45 
respect 01 which the deduction Is to be allowed·. the words. brackets and figure "any previous year In 
respect of which the deduction laID be allowed under sub-section (3) or any earlier previous year 
(being a pt'avioua y .. r not earler than the year In which the ship or aircraft wu acquired or the 
machinery or plant wu Installed or the ship, aircraft. machinery or plant was first put to UH)· than be 
subatltuted and shall be deemed ID have been lUbltltuted with effect from the 1 at .c ... of &...u 5) 
1878; -, ,.,...", 
(I) s~sectIon (9) shall be omitted and shan be deemed to have been omitted with effect from the 
1. day of April. 1876. 
"~\of 7. In Mellon 32A8ofthe Income-t_/d, In sub-MCllon (1), aft.thafiratpnMto, thefolowi"" -'1., 1IdIon_. shall be Inaened, MmaIy:- ........... 
• "PtcMded further that no suc:tt deduction Itt .. be dIMed In relation to the ...... ment y .. r 

1 011956. 
63 011951. 
1011956. 
5 
oommenc:ing on the 1st day 01 April. 1991. or any subsequent assessment year.". 
8. In Hdion 33A of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (1). for the proviso, the following provilOI shall Amendment of 
be 8Ubatituted, namely:- 18CIion33A. 
·Provided that no deduction under clause (i) s!lall be allowed unless the planting has commenced 
5 after the 31st day 01 March, 1965. and been completed before the 1st day 01 April, 1990: 
Provided further that no deduction shall be allowed under clause (il) unless the planting has 
oommenced after the 31st day of March, 1965, and been completed before the 1st day of April 
1870.". ' 
I. In section 34 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (3), in clause (a),- Amendment of 
10 (i) for the words ,he relevant previous year", the words, brackets and figure "any previous year In I8CIion 34. 
respect of which the deduction is to be allowed under sub-section (2) of that section or any earlier 
previous year (being a previous year not earlier than the year In which the ship was acquired or the 
machinery or plant was installed or the ship, machinery or plant was first put to use)" shall be 
substituted and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from the 1 st day of April, 
15 1862; 
(0) the Explallation shall be omitted and shall be deemed to have been omitted with effect from the 
1st day of April, 1962. 
10. In section 35CCB of the Income-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of April, 1991,-
(i) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-
3) "(1) Where an assessee incurs any e>.penditure by way of payment of any sum-
25 
35 
(a) tp an association or institution, which has as its object the undertaking of any programme 
of conservation of natural resources or of afforestation, to be used for carrying out any 
programme of conservation of natural resources or afforestation approved by the prescribed 
authority; or 
(b) to such fund for afforestation as may be notified by the Central Government, 
the assessee shall, subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), be allowed a deduction of the 
amount of such expenditure incurred during the previous year."; 
(ii) in sub-section (2). in the opening portion, atterthe words "deduction under", the words, brackets 
and letter "clause (a) or shall be inserted. 
11. In section 43B of the Income-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of April, 1991,-
(a) in clause (d), after the words "any public financial institution", the words "or a State financial 
corporation or a State industrial investment corporation" shall be inserted; 
(b) for Explanation 4, the following Explanation shall be substituted, namely:-
'Explanation4.-for the purposes of this section,-
(a) "public financial institution" shan have the meaning assigned to It in section 4A of the 
Companies Act, 1956; 
(b) ·State financial corporation" means a financial corporation established under section 3 or 
section 3A or an institution notified under section 46 of the State Financial Corporations Ad, 
1951; 
«> (c) ·State industrial investment corporation" means a Government company within the 
meaning of section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956, engaged in the business of providing Iong-
term finance for industrial projects and approved by the Central Government underclau88 (viii) of 
sub-section (1) of section 36.'. 
Amendment of aec:::tion as. 
12. In section 44AC of the Income-tax Ad, with effect from the 1 st day of April, 1991,- ~ 
45 
(a) In sub-section (1). in clause (a). the following Explanlllion shall be inserted at the end, 
namely:-
'Explanation.-for the purposes 01 this clause, "purchase price" means any amount (by 
whatever name called) paid or payable by the buyer to obtain the goods referred to In this clause, but 
shall not include the amount paid or payable by him towards the bid money In an auction, or, as the 
ease may be, the highest accepted offer in case of tender or any other mode;'; 
(b) in the EXpMnation, after the word 1irm", the words "or co-<»peratlve IIOCiety" 'hall be 
In .. rted. 
t· 
13. In section 45 of the Income·tax Act, after sub-section (5) and the Explanation thereto, the ~tOf 
following sUb-aection shall be inserted with effect from the 1 st day of April, 1991, namely:-
55 '(6) NOtwithstanding anything contained In sub-section (1). the difference between the repurch ... 
prtc. of the units referred to In sub-section (2) of section 80CCB and the c.p/Ial value of suctt unite 
,hall be deemed to be the capital gains arising 10 the ........ In the previous year In which such 
repurch ... tak .. pi .. or the pian referred to In that aection Is terminated and ,hall be IDed 
8CCOrdingly . 

6 
Explwlation. -for the purposes of this lub-t~ion, ·capit~1 value of such. unltaw me~, ."y amount 
invested by the ..... se. in the units r.ferred to In sub-sectIOn (2) of ,ectiOn IOCCB .. 
14. In section aocCA of the Income-tax Ad, with effect from the 1 It day of AprIl, 1991,-
(a) In lub-sec::tion (1). for the proviso, the following proviso shall be .ubstituted, namely:-
'Provided that In reiation to- . 
(. ) the assessmenty.ars commencing on the 1 at day of April, 1989 and the 1. day of April, 
19~, this sub-section shall have effect as if for the words "twenty thousand rupe.,w, the word. 
"thirty thousand rupees· had been substituted; 
5 
(b) the aslessment year commencing on the 1 st day of April, 1991 8Ild ,ubHque~t 
...... ment years, this sub-section shall have .ffect as H forthe WOrdl "tw.nty thousand rupees, 10 
the words "forty thousand rupees" had been substituted.'; 
(b) aft.r .ub-section (2), and before Explanation I, the following sub-.ection .hall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of this Ad, ~h~re a partition has . 
taken place among the members of a Hindu undivided family or Wher~ an asSOCiatIOn ~ ~l'IOns has 15 
been dissolved after a deduction has been allowed und.r sub-sectIOn (1). the proVIsIOns of sub-
section (2) shall apply as if the person in receipt of income referred to therein is the assel ... :. 
InIIrtIan of n. 15. After section SOCCA of the Income-tax Ad, the following section shall be inserted with effect from 
-*",IOCCB the11t day or April, 1991, namely:-
lnMr1Ionof 
IWWI8CtIon 
8000. 
DeducIIon In 
fMI!8Ct of medcelnat-
merit, etc., of 
t.idIoIppecl 
....... 
"8OCCB. (1) Where an assessee, being-
fa} an individual, or 
(b) a Hindu undivided family, or 
(c) an association of persons or a body of individuals consisting, in either case, only of husband 
and wife governed by the system of community of property in force in the State of Goa and the Union 
20 
territories of Oadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and ~iu, 25 , 
h .. acquired in the previous year, out of his income chargeable to tax, units of any Mutual Fund 
specified under clause (230) of section 10 or of the Unit Trust of India established underth. Unit Trust 
of India Act, 1963, under any plan formulated in accordance with such sch.m. as the Central 
Governm.nt may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this baha" (hereafter In this section 
referred to as the Equity Unked Savings Scheme), he shall, in accordance with, and subject to, the 30 
provision. of this section, be allowed a deduction in the computation of his total income of so much of the 
amount invested as does not exceed the amount of ten thousand rupees in the previous y.ar. 
(2) Where any amount invested by the assessee in the units issued under a plan formulated under 
the Equity Linked Savings Scheme in respect of which a deduction has been allowed under sub-section 
(1) is returned to him in whOle or in part either by way of repurchase of such units or on the termination of 35 
the plan, by the Fund or the Trust, ae the case may be, in any previous year, it shall be d •• med to be the 
income of the assessee of that previous year and chargeable to tax accordingly. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of this Ad., where a partition has taken 
place among the members of a Hindu undivided family or where an association of persons has been 
dissolved after a deduction 'has been allowed under sub-section (1), the provisions of sub-section (2) <40 
shall apply as If the person in receipt of income referred to therein is the assesse8.~. 
1 S. In the 'Income-tax Ad, after section 800, the following section shall be inserted with effect from the 
1st day of April, 1991, namely:-
"SOOO. (1) Where an assess_ who is resident in India, being an individual or a Hindu undivided 
family has, during the previous year, incurred any expenditure for the medical treatment (Including 
nursing), treining and rehabilitation of a person who- 45 
(a) is a reiative of the Individual or, as the case may be, is a member olthe Hindu undivided family 
and is not de~dent on any person other than such individual or Hindu undivided family for hi • 
• upport or maintenance, and . 
(b) is suffering from a permanent physical disability (Including blindness) or Is subject to mental 110 
retardation, being a permanent physical disability or m.ntal retardation specified In the rule. made In 
this behalf by the Board, which is certified by a physician, a surgeon, an ocuHst or a paychlatrllt .. the 
case may be, working i~ a Government hospital or a Governm.nt dispensary, and which hU the 
effect of reducing considerably such person's capacity for normal work or engaging in a gainful 
.mpIoyment or ocx:upation, 
the ..... thall, in aocordance with and subject to the provi.ions of this l8Ction be allowed &5 
deduction of a sum of abc thousand rupees .. reduced by an amount equal to the income' If any 01 uc: 
~ (herufter In this I8dion reterrad to .. handicapped dependent) in respect ~ the -. 
52 of 1963. 

5 
7 
Provided that where the ... esaee has, during the previous y.ar, Incurred .xpendlture on more 
than one handicapped depend.nt, the deduction .hall be allowed only with reference to one such 
hanc:licapped depend.nt as may be chosen by the ......... 
(2) Nothing contained In this section shall apply if I a case, where the ........ '. total income In 
respect of the previous year as computed before making any deduction under this section exceeds 
sixty thousand rupee.:. 
17. In section 80GGA of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (2), with effect hom the 1 at day of April, Am ... G ... 1t 
1991,- of I8CIIIon IOGGA. 
10 
(i) in clause (e), after the words "natural resources·, at both the places where they occur, the words 
·or of afforestation· shall be inserted; 
(ii) after clause (e), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:-
"fcc) any sum paid by the assessee in the previous year to such fund for afforeatation as Is 
notified by the Central Government under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 35CCB;·. 
18. In section 80HH of the Income-tax AD.,- Amellen ... 
• of MGIIon 15 (a) in SUb-section (2), in clause (I), after the words, figures and letters 'hl31 .. day of December, IOHH. 
1970·, the words, figures and letters "but before the 1 st day of April, 1990· shall be inHrted; 
(b) in sub-section (3), In clause (i), after the words, figures and letters ,he 31 st day of DlCIITIber, 
1970·, the words, figufes and letters "but before the 1 st day of April, 1990" shall be inserted. 
19.1n section 80HHA of the Income-tax Act, in s'Jb-section (2), in clause (i), aftef the words, figures Amendn .. 1t 
20 and letters ,he 30th day of September, 19n·, the words, figures and letters "but before the 1st day of ~~ 
April, 1990· shall be inserted. 
20. In section 80HHC of the Income-tax Act,-
(a) in sub-section (2), in dause (a),-
(i) for the word "receivable", the words "received in, or brought into, India" shaD be aub8tltuted 
25 with effect from the 1 st day of April, 1991; 
(ii) after the word "assessee", the brackets and words ·(other than the supporting 
manufacturer)· shall be inserted and shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from the 1 st 
day of April, 1989; 
(iii) after the words ·convertible foreign exchange", the words and brackets·, within a period of 
30 six months from the end of the previous year or, where the Chief Commissioner or Commission.r II 
satisfied (for reasons to be recorded in writing) that the assessee is, for reasons beyond his control, 
unable to do 90 within the said period of six months, within such further period as the Chief 
Commissioner or Commissionef may allow in this behalf" shall be inserted with effect from the 1st 
day of April, 1991; 
35 (b) .1or sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be substituted with effect from the 1st day of 
April, 1991, name!y:-
'(3) For the purposes of sub-section (1), profits derived from the export of goods or merchandi .. 
out of India shall be the amount which bears to the profits of the busin.ss (as computed und.r the 
head ·Profits and gains of business or profession" the same proportion as the export turnov.r bears 
40 to the total turnover of the business carried on by the assessee. '; 
45 
50 
(e) in the Explanation, with effect from the 1 st day of April, 1991,-
(i) in clause (b),-
(1) for the word ·receivable", the words ", received in, or brought into, India- shall be 
substituted; 
(2) atter the words "foreign exchange", the words, brackets and figure Min accordance with 
clause (a) of sub-section (2)" shall be inserted; 
(ii) after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:-
'(bb) 'otal turnover· shall not include any sum referred to in clauses (ilia), (lib) n (lie) of 
section 28;'; 
(ill) in dause (d), for the words "manufacturing goods·, the words and brackets "manufacturing 
(including processing) goods· shall be substituted. 
21. In section 80HHD of the Income-tax Act, with effect from the 1 st day of April, 1991,-
Amela-It 
of MCIIon 
8OHHC. 
AmelIdment 
of 8IdIon 
ra) in sub-section (2), for the words "by the assess~ in conv~rtible f~elgn exchange·, the words ICHIO. 
and brackets "In, or brought Into, India by the assess .. In convertible foreign exchange within aperiod 
of six months from the end of the previous year or, where the Chief Commissioner or Commlsslon.r It 
ntltfild (for reasons to be recorded In writing) that the asseas .. la, for r.asons beyond~1t control, 
un.tlle to do so within the said period of lix morjhs, within such further period • the Chief 
Commluloner or Commlslloner may allow In this behalf" shall be substituted; 

Amendment of 
I8OIion~1. 
8 
(b) for 1\I~.edion (3), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-
'(3) For the pUrpoa88 of sutHectlon (1), profits d.rived from s.rvices provided to foreign 
tourists shan be the amount which bears to the profits of the bus~n'8s (as com~ed und~the hMd 
"Profits and gains of business or prof.ssionj the same prOportion as the receipts specified in sub-
section (2) bear to the total receipts of the business carried on by the u ....... '. 6 
22. In section 80-1 of the Incom.-tax Act,-
(a) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted, nam.ly:-
'(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), In r.lation to any profits and gains 
d.riYedby an ass ..... from-
(i) an industrial undertaking which begins to manufactur. or produce articles or things or to 10 
operate its cold storage plant or plants; or 
(1/) a ship which is first brought into use; or 
(ill) the business of a hotel which starts functioning, 
on or aft.r the 1 st day of April, 1990, th.re shall, in accordance with and subject to the provisions of 
this section,be allowed in computing the total income of the assessee, a deduction from such profits 16 
and gains of an amount equal to twenty-fiva per cent thereof: 
Provided that in the case of an assessee, being a company , the provisions of this sub-s.ction shall 
have effect in relation to profits and gains d.rived from an industrial undertaking or a ship or the 
business of a hotel as if for the words "twenty-five per cent.·. the words ''thirty per ~ent." had been 
substituted.'; 2D 
(b) in sub-section (2), in clause (iii), for the words "nine years", the words '10urteen years" shall be 
substituted ; 
(e) in sub-section (3), in clause (iii), for the words "nine years", the words "fourteen years" shall be 
substituted; 
(d) in sub-section (4), in clause (iv), for the words, figures and letters ''before the 1 st day of April, 25 
1990", the words, figures and letters "before the 1 st day of April, 1995" shall be substituted; 
(e) in sub-section (5), att.r the second proviso, the following provisos shall be inserted. 
nam.Iy:-
'Provided that in the case of-
(;) an industrial undertaking which begins to manufacture or produce articles or things or to 30 
operata its cold storage plant or plants; or 
(Ii) a ship which is first brought into use; or 
(iii) the business of a hotel which starts functioning, 
on or after the 1 st day of April, 1990, provisions of this SUb-section shall have effect as if for the words 
"seven assessment years·, the words "nine assessmant years" had been substituted: 36 
Provided aiso that In the case of an assessee, being a co-operative society, deriving profits and 
gains from an industrial undertaking or a ship or a hotel referred to in the third proviso, the provisions 
of that proviso shall have effect as n for the words "nine assessment years', the words "eleven 
assessment years" had been substituted.'. 
~dment of 23. In section SOL of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (1). the following Explanation shall be 40 
18CIion80L. inserted at the end, namely:-
'Explanation.-Forthe purposes of this sub-section, the expression "security· means a Government 
ucurlty as defined in clause (2) of section 2 of the Public Debt Act, 1944.'. 
=''= ~ '!4.. For section 80M ofthe Income-tax Act, the following section shall be substituted, with effect from the 
I8CIion 80M. 11t day of April, 1991, namely:- 45 
~ in '80M. (1) Where th~ gross total income of a dom~stic company, in any previous y.ar, includes any 
~l8r- income by way of dividends from another ~m.stlC company, there shall, in accordance with and 
== subject to the provisions of this section, be allowed. in computing the total income of such domestic 
. company, a deduction of an amount equal to,-
(I) in t~e case of a'sCheduled bank or a public financial institution, sixty per cent. of the income by 50 
way of dIVidends from another domestic company; 
(ii) in the case of ~h.r dom~stic companies. so much of the amount of Income by way of 
dividends referred to 10 clause (i) as does not exceed the amount of dividend distributed by such 
domestic company on or before the due date. 
(2) Where any deduction, in respect of the amount of dividend distributed by the dome.tIc 55 
company. hu been allowed under clause (i) of aub-Mction (1) in any previous year, no deduction 
.haII be allowed In respect of such amount in any other previous year. . 
• 
18 of 1944. 

23 of 1965. 
3801 1959. 
50t 1970. 
40 of 1980. 
20f 1834. 
1 ot 1956. 
46 of 1973. 
7 of 1947. 
46 of 1973. 
5 
10 
9 
(3) Where the dividend dl8trbuted II In IMpect of any period oomprIMd In the previoUi year ending 
on the 31 at day of March, 1 ggo, no deduction shan be allowd In ....".et 01 such dividend. 
Exp/anation.-For the purtJoaea of thll section, the expmalon.-
(i) "scheduled bank-means the State Bank do India constituted under the State Bank of india Act, 
1955, • subsidiary bank .s defined in the State Bank of India (Subeldlary Banks) Act, 1959, a 
corresponding new bank constituted under section 3 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and 
Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970, or under section 3 of the Banking Companlee (Acquisition and 
Transfer of Undertakings) ltd., 1980, or any other bank included in the Second Schedule to the 
Reserve Bank of India Act. 1934 and which Is a domestic company; 
(n) "public financial Institution" shall have the meaning assigned to It in section ~ of the 
Companies Act, 1958; 
(IU) "due date-means the date for furnishing the return of income under sub-section (1) of section 
139.'. 
25. In section BOA of the Income-tax Act, with effect from the 1 at day of AprIl, 1991,- Amendment 
15 (a) for the words "allowed a deduction from such remuneration of an amount equal to fifty per cent. ~18Ction 
thereof, in computing the total income of the individual:", the words and figures "allowed, In computing . 
the total income of the individual, a deduction from such remuneration of an amount equal to,-
(i) fifty per cent. of the remuneration; or 
(Ii) seventy-five per cent. of such remuneration as is brought into India by, or on behaN of, the 
Z> assessee in accordance with the Foreig" Exchange Regulation Ad, 1973, and any rules made 
thereunder, 
whichever is higher: shall be substituted; 
(b) the proviso shall be omitted. 
26. In section SORR of the Income-tax Act, for the words and figures "and such income Is received In, or Amendment 
25 brought into,lndla by him or on his behalf in accordance with the Foreign Exchange Regulation Ad, 1947, ofl8dion 
and any rules made thereunder, there shall be allowed a deduction from such Income of an amount equal lORA. 
to twenty-five per cent. of t~e income so received or brought, in computing the total Income of the 
individual·, the words and figures "there shall be allowed, in computing the total income of the individual, a 
deduction from such income of an amount equal to,-
:J) (i) fifty per cent. of the income; or 
(ii) seventy-five per cent. of such income as is brought into Ind~ by, or on behalf of, the assessee in 
aooordance with the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973 and any rules made thereunder, 
whichever is higher· shall be substituted with effect from the 1 st day of April, 1991. 
27. In section 80RRA of the Income·tax Act, in sub-section (1), the proviso shall be omitted with effect Amendment 
35 from the 1 st day of April, 1991. ~ 
28. In the Income-tax Act, in Chapter VIII, with effect from the 1 st day of April, 1991,-
(a) for the heading, the following heading shall be SUbstituted, namely:-
"REBATES AND RELIEFS"; 
(b) before section 89. the following sub-headings and sections shall be inserted, namely:-
Amendment 
of Chapllllr 
VIII. 
40 ~.- Rebate of income-tax 
45 
50 
55 
87. (1) In computing the amount of income-tax on the total Income of an assessee with which he Is Rebal8lD be 
chargeable for any assessment year, there shall be allowed from the amount of Income"tax (as .,,~ in 
computed before allowing the deductions under this Chapter), in accordance with and subject to the = 
provisions of sections 88 and 88A, the deductions specified In those sections. . 
(2) The aggregate amount of the deductions under section 88 or section 88A shall not, in any 
ease, exceed the amount of income-tax (as computed before allowing the deductions under this 
Chapter) on the total income of the assessee with which he Is chargeable for any assessment 
year. 
88. (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, an assess .. , being- Rebale'On Mfa 
. " Insurance 
(a) an individual, or pnII11ia. 
(b) a Hindu undivided family, or ~» 
(e) an association of persons or a body of individuals consisting, In either case, only of fund, etc 
husband and wife governed by the system of community of property in force in the State of Goa 
and the Union territories of Dadra and Nagar Havel! and Daman and Diu, 
shall be entitled to a deduction, from the amount of Income-tax (as computed before allowing the 
deductions under this Chapter) on his total income with which he Is chargeable for any assessment 
year, of an amount equal to twenty per cent. of the aggregate ofthesums referred to in 
sub-section (2). 

10 
(2) The tum. r.erred 10 in .ub-l8dion (1) shall be any .um. paid or deposited in the previous 
year by the ........ out of his income chargeable to tlX-
(I) to effect or to keep in force an In.urance on the life of persons apeclfied In sub-sectlon 
(4); 
(I/) to effect or to keep in force a contract for a d.erred annuity, ~ being an annuity pI~ 6 
r.erred to in clau. (/I) of si&HClion (1) of section SOCCA, on the life of perwans specified In 
lutHection (4): 
Provided that such contract does not contain a provision for the exercise by the Insured of an 
option to r80live a cash payment in lieu of the payment of the annuity;. 
(III) by way of deduction from the salary payable by or on behalf of the Government to any 10 
individual being a sum deducted in accordance with the conditions of his service, for the purpo .. 
of securing to him a deferred annuity or making provision for his wife or children, In 10 far as the 
sum 10 deducted does not exceed one-fifth of the salary; 
(Iv) • a contrbJtion by an individual to any provident fund to which the Provident Funds Ad, 
1925 applies; 16 HI of 1925. 
M as a contrbution to any provident fund set up by the Central Govemment and notified by it In 
this behalln the Official Gazette, where such contribution is to an account standing In the name of 
any person specified in sub-section (4); 
(vi) as a contribution by an employee to a recognised provident fund; 
(vii) as a contribution by an employ .. to an approved superannuation fund; 
(viR) In _ ten-year account or a fifteen-year account under the Post Office Savings Bank 
(Cumulative Time Deposits) Rules, 1959, as amended from time to time, where such sums are 
deposited In an account standing in the name of the persons specified in slJb-section (4); 
(Ix) as SUbscription to any such security of the Central Government as that Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf; 25 
(x) as .ubscrlption to the National Savings Certificates (VI Issue) and National Savings 
Certificates (VII laaus) iaaued under the Government Savings pertificates Act, 1959; 46011959. 
(xl) as subscription to any such savings certificate as defin4d in clause (e) of section 2 of the 
Govemment Savings Certificates Act, 1959, as the Central Govemment may, by notification in the 46 01 1959. 
Official Gazette, specify in this behalf; 30 
(xII) as a contrbution, by any person specified in sub-section (4), for participation in the Unit-
Hnked Insurance Plan, 1971 (hereafter in this section referred to as the Unit-linked Insurance 
Plan) d .. med to have been made under sub-clause (a) of clause (8) of section 19 of the Unit 
Truat of india Ad. 1963; 
(xlH) U acontrbution by an individualfor participation in any such unit-linked insurance plan of 35 
the L1C Mutual Fund notified under clause (230) of section 10, as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf; 
52 of 1963. 
(xlv) as .ubacription to any such deposit scheme of the National Housing Bank established 
under section 3 of the National Housing Bank Act, 1987 (hereafter in this section referred to as the 53 of 1987. 
National Housing Bank), as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette 40 
I Ip8Cify In this behal; , 
(xv) for the purposes of purchase or construction of a residential house property the 
construction of which Is completed after the 31 st day of March, 1987, and the income from which is 
\ chargeable to tlX under the head "Income from house property" (or which would if It had not been 
used for the ........... own residence, have been chargeable to tlX under that head), where 45 
.uch payment. are mllde towards or by way of-
(a) any IMtaiment or part payment of the amount due under any self-financing or other 
ICheme of any deveiopment authority, housing board or other authority engaged In the 
corwtruction and sa. of house property on ownership basis; or 
(b) Inf Instalment or part payment of the amount due to any company or co-operatlve 50 
eocIeIy of which the ........ Is a shareholder or member toward. the cost of the hou .. 
ptOpIfty a1loaed to him; or 
(c) repayment of the amount borrowed by the ....... from-
(1) the Central Government or any Stille Govemment. or 
(2) ." bMk, including • co-operatlve bank. or 
(3) the Ue Insurance CorporatIon. or 
(4) the Nadonal HousIng Bank, or 
(lJ ." public COfTII*Y formed and ;.gilt.ad In India with the main object of CMyIng 
on the bUeInea of providing Iond-term finance for conttrucdon or pun:hue 01 houses In 
56 

11 
India for residential purpo ... which is approved for the purposes of clause (vIH) of sub-
section (1) of section 38, or 
(6) any company In which the public are substantially int .... ated or any CCH)f)8ratlve 
society, whfre such company or co-opemtive society is engaged in the business of 
15 financing the construction of houses, or 
(7) the assess88's employer where such employer is a public company or a public: 
sector company or a university established by law or a college affiliated to such university or 
a local authority; 
(d) stamp duty, registration fe. and other expenses for the purpose of transfer of such 
10 house property to the ass8lS88, 
but shall not include any payment towarda or by way of-
(A) the admission fee, cost of share and initial deposit which a shareholder of a company or 
a member of a co-operatlve society has to pay for becoming such shareholder or member; 
or 
15 (8) the cost of the land, except where the consideration for the purchase of the house 
property is a composite amount and the cost of the land alone cannot be separately 
ascertained; or 
(e) the cost of any addition or alteration to, or renovation or repair of, the hew .. property 
which Is carried out after the issue of the completion certificate in respect of the house property 
20 by the authority competent to issue such certificate or after the house property or any part 
thereof has either been occupied by the assessee or any other person on his behaH or been let 
out; or 
(D) any expenditure in respect of which deduction is allowable under the provisions of 
section 24. 
25 (3) The provisions of sub-section (2) shall apply only to 80 much of any premium or other 
payment made on a policy other than a contract for a deferred annuity as is not in exC888 of ten per 
cent. of the actual capital sum assured. 
Exp/anation.---4n calculating any such capital sum, no account shall be taken-
(i) of the value of any premiums agreed to be retumed, or 
(ii) of any benefit by way of bonus or otherwise over and above the sum actually assured, 
which is to be or may be received under the policy by a~y person. 
(4) The persons referred to in sub-section (2) shall be the following, namely:-
(a) for the purposes of clause (I) of that sub-section,-
(i) in the case of an individual, the individual, the wife or husband and any child of such 
35 individual, and 
45 
(ii) in any other case, any member of the Hindu undivided family or association of persona 
or body of individuals and any child of any of the members of such association or body; 
(b) for the purposes of clause (ii) of that sub-aection,-
(I) in the case of an individual, the individual, the wife or husband and any child of such 
individual, and 
(ii) in the case of an association of persons or body of individuals, any member and any 
child of any of the members of such association or body; 
(e) for the purposes of clauses Mand (viii) of that sub-section,-
(i) in the case of an individual, such individual; 
(ii) in the case of a Hindu undivided family, any member of the family; 
(1/1) in the case of an association of persons or body of individuals, such association or 
body; 
(d) for the purposes of clause (xilJ of that sub-section,-
(i) in the case of an individual, such individual; 
(ii) in the case of an association of persons or body of individuals, anyone member of such 
association or body. 
(5) Where the aggregate of any sums specified in clause (xv) of sub-section (2) exceeds an 
amount of ten thousand rupees, a deduCtion under sub-sectlon (1) shall be allowed with reference 
to so much of the aggregate as does not exceed an amount of ten thousand rupees. 
(8) The deduction from the amount of Inoom.tax under sub-section (1) shall not exceed-

Reba. In 
respec:tof 
Inwstment 
In certain 
new ....... 
or units. 
12 
(I) In the case of an individual. being an author. playwright. artist. mUilclan,1ICtQr or IPOItlman 
(including an athlete). fourteen thousand rupees; 
(il) in any other case. ten thousand rupees. 
(7) Where, in any previous year, an assesse.-
(/) terminates his contract of insurance referred to in clause (/) of sub-sedion (2), bV notice to 5 
that effect or where the contract ceases to be in force bV reason of failure to pay any premium, bV 
not reviving contract of insurance, before premiums have been paid for two years; or 
(il) terminates his participation in any unlt·linked insurance plan referred to in dau .. (x/I) or 
clause (xiii) of sub-section (2), by notice to that effect or where he ceases to participate bV rauon 
of failure to pay any contribution, by not reviving his participation, before contributions in respecI of 10 
such participation have been paid for five years; or 
(III) transfers the house property referred to in clause (xv) of sub-section (2) before the expiry 
of five years from the end of the financial year in which possession of such property is obtained by 
him, or receives back, whether by way of refund or otherwise, any sum specified in that 
clause, 15 
then,-
(a) no deduction shall be allowed to the assessee under sub-section (1) with refefence to any 
of the sums, referred to In clauses (i). (xii), (xlii) and (xv) of sub-section (2). paid in such previous 
year; and 
(b) the aggregate amount of the deductions of income-tax so allowed in respect of the previous 20 
year or years preceding such previous year, shall be deemed to be tax payable by the assessee In 
the assessment year relevant to such previous year and shall be added to the tax on the total 
income of the assessee with which he is chargeable for such assessment year. 
(S) In this section,-
(i) ·contribution" to any fund shall not include any sums in repayment of Io~n; 
(ii) "insurance" shall includ.-
(a) a policy of insurance on the life of an individual or the spouse or the child of such 
individual or a member of a Hindu undivided family securing the payment of specified sum on 
the stipulated date of maturity, if such person is alive on such date notwithstanding that the 
policy of insurance provides only for the return of premiums paid (with or without any interest 30 
thereon) in the event of such person dying before the s~id stipulated date; 
(b) a policy of insurance effected by an individual or a member of a Hindu undivided family 
for the benefit of a minor with the object of enabling the minor, atter he has attained majority to 
secure insurance on his own life by adopting the policy and on his being alive on a date (after 
such adoption) specified in the policy In this behalf; 35 
(Iii) "Life Insurance Corporation" means the Life Insurance Corporation of India established 
under the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956; 31011956. 
(iv) ·public company· shall have the same meaning as in section 3 of the Companies Ad. 
1956; , 1 of 1956. 
(v) ·securlty" means a Government security as defined in clause (2) of section 2 of the PubUc «) 
Debt Act, 1944; 18 of 1944. 
(~;) 'ransfer" shall be deemed to include also the transactions referred to In clause (I) of 
sectIOn 269UA. 
88A. (1) Where .m assessee being-
(a) an individual; or 
(b) a Hindu undivided family; or 
(c) an a~iation of persons or a body of individuals consisting, In either case, only of 
husband a~ wife governed by the system 01 community of property in force in the State of Goa 
and the UnIOn territories of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu 
has acquired, in the previous year, out of his income chargeable to tax ~ , . , 
(I) equity shar .. forming part of any eligible issue of capital; or 
150 
(ii) units issued under a~y schem~ of any Mutual Fund specified under clause (23D) of section 
10 or ofthe UnitT rust oflndla, estabhshed under section 3 ofthe Unit Trust of Indi Act 1963 if he 
.mou~ o~ subscription to such units is subscribed, within a period of six months ~rom 'the ~s! of 
~ubecription under .uch acherne, only to eligible issue of capital, 515 
he shall be entitled to a deduction, from 1he amount of income·tax (as computed before allow! th 
deductions under this Chapter) on his total Income with which he is chargeable tor any ...... ~~ 
=~ .. ~ amount equal to twenty per cent. of the cost of such share. or units· to auc:h 
, 
'.7 n 
520t 1963. 

1 of 1956. 
1 of 1956. 
1 of 1956. 
13 
Provided that the amount of IUblcrtptlon to luch unb rMY be 1UbIcJrMd, tor a period not 
exceeding lix months from the cIoN of .ublcripllon under any 1Cheme...r.n.d to In eIauu (I) In 
.uch securities 01 the Central Governm.nt, _ may be I!ppI'OV8d ~ the Board In this behalf: 
Provided further that no deduction .hall be allowed In r8lp8Ct ~ unblelU8d under any schem. 
5 referred to in clause (ii) where the aubecrlptlon under luch ICherM cIoIeI after the 30th day of 
Sept.mber, 1990. 
Exp/MJlllion.-Whera In any previoUi y.ar, the ....... .,.. 8Dqulred MY .".,.. or un" 
ref.rred to in this lUb-section and h .. , within a period of abc monIha from the end ~ that prevtoUi 
y.ar paid tha whole or a part of the amount, If eny, r.maInIng unpaid on such .her .. or unill, the 
10 amount 80 paid shall be d .. med to have been paid by the ........ towards the cost of such shara 
or units in the previous year. 
(2) Where the aggregate cost to the ........ of th.sh ..... or units referred to In .utHectlon 
(1) which are acquired by him in the prevlou. y.ar .xCHef. twenty..flve thousand NpMI, the 
deduction under that sub-section shall be allowed only with raterenee to IUCh of those shares or 
15 units (being shares or units the aggregate cost whereof to the ....... does not exceed twenty~ 
fiva thousand rupees) as are specified by him In this beh ... 
(3) For tha purposes of this section, -eligble issue of capItar means an laue of equity .ha,.. 
which satisfies the following conditions, namely:-
(a) the Issue is made by a public company formed and registered In India and th.ISlueI. 
2D wholly and axclusively for the purpos.s of carrying on the bulln ... of-
(i) construction, manufacture or production of any article or thing, not being an article or 
thing specified in the list In tha Eleventh Schedule; or 
(ii) providing long-term finance for construction or purchase of house. in India for 
rasidential purposes: 
2S Provided that in the case of a public company carrying on the busln ... referred to In this 
sub~lause, such company is approved by the Central Government for the purpo ... of this 
section; or 
(iii) a hospital; or 
(iv) a hotel approved by the prescribed authority; or 
(v) operation of ships; 
(b) the issue is an issue of capital made by the company for the first time: 
Provided that this clause shall not apply In the cue of an illue of equity .ha,.. made by a 
public company formed and registered in India with the main object of carrying on the bu.iness of 
operation of ships; 
35 (e) the shares forming part of the issue are offer8CI for .ub8Ctl»t1on to the public and such offer 
40 
45 
56 
for subscription is mada by the company bafore the 1st day of April, 1991; 
(d) such other conditions as may ba prescribed: 
Provided that in the case of a company which had originally been incorporated .. a private 
company but has become a public company under the provisions of the Campan," Act, 1956, an 
issue of equity shares made by It forthe first tim. after It h .. beoome a publlccompeny shall not be 
regarded as an eligible issue of capital, H-
(I) such company had declared, diatrbuted or paid any dividend when It was a private 
company; or 
(ii) any of the shares forming part of such ISlue is offer8CI for ~Ion at a 
premium. 
Explanation 1.-If any question arise. as to wh.th.r any luu. of equity ahar .. would 
constitute an eligible issue of capital forthe purpol8l of this I8dIon, the qu .. tion .hall be referred 
to the Central Government whose deciaion thereon shall be final. 
Explanation 2.-In this sub-section and sub-section (4), "public company-.hall have the 
meaning assigned to it In section 3 of the Campan," Ad, 1956. 
(4) The deduction under sub-section (1) shall noI be allowed un.SI the ........ has-
(i) subscribed to the shares in pursuance of an offer for subscription to the public made by the 
public company or in pursuance of a reservation or an option In his favour by reason of his being • 
promoter of the company; or 
(ii) purchased the shares from a person who is specified as an underwriter in respect of the 
issue of such shares in pursuance of clause 11 of Part I of Schedule" to the Companl .. Act. 1956 
and who has acquired such shares by viMe of his obligation .. such underwriter. 
(5) If any equity shares or units, with reference to the cost of which a deduction is allowed 

14 
under sub-seCtion (1). art sold or otherwise trantterred by ~~~ ass ..... to any pereon at any 
time within a period of three years from the date of their acquISitIOn. the ag~regate amo~nt of the 
deduc:tIoM of income-tax so allowed in respect of such equity shares or units In the prevIOUS y.ar 
or years preceding the prevlo~s year in which such sale or transfer has taken place. shall be 
deemed to be tax payable by the assesseeforthe usessment year relevant to such prevlou~ year 5 
and shall be added to the amount of lnoome-tax on thl total Income of the ISsessHwlth which hi 
is chargeable for such assessment year. 
Explanation.-A person shall be treated as having acqul~ any share~ or units on the date on 
which his name is entered In relation to those shares or units in the reglst~r of mtm~ of the 
company or in the relevant records of any Mutual Fund 01' Unit Trust of india, referred to In sub- 10 
section (1). 
(6) Where a deduction is claimed and allowed under sub-section (1) with reference to the coat 
of any equity shares. the cost of such shares shall not be taken into account for the purposes of 
section ME. 
B.-Relief for income-tax', 15 
Amendment of 29 In section 115-1 of the Income-tax Ad, for the words and figures "to the Assessing Officer his retum 
section 115-1. of in~me for that assessment year under section 139 together with a declarat~ in writing to,the effect·~ 
the words and figures ·hls retum of income for that assessment year under sectIOn 139 declanng therein 
shall be SUbstituted. 
Amendment of 30. In section 115J of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (1), after the words. figures and letters "on or 20 
section 115J. after the 1 stdayof April, 1988·, the words, figures and letters "but before the 1 stdayof April, 1991· shall be 
Inserted. 
Amendment of 31. In section 119 of the Income-tax Ad, in sub-section (2), in clause (a),-
88Otion 119. 
Amendment of 
section 139. 
(i) before the figures "143'. the figures "139,' shall be inserted; 
(ii) after the figures "210,', the figures and letters "234A. 234B,' shall be inserted. 
32. In section 139 of the Income-tax Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), in the Explanation. in clause (b). in sub-clause (i), after the words "to be so 
audited', the words, figures and letters· or where the report of an accountant is required to be furnished 
under section 80HHC or section 8OHHO' shall be inserted with effect from the 1st day of April, 
2S 
1991; 30 
(b) in sub-section (10). in the proviso, for clause (b), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"(b) a return of a firm or a partner of a firm;'. 
Amendmenlol 33. In section 139A of the Income·tax Act, for sub'section (2), the following sub-section shall be 
section 139A. substituted, namely:- 35 
"(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1). every person not falling under that sub-
section, but-
(i) carrying on any business whose total sales, tumover or gross receipts are or is Ukely to 
exceed fifty thousand rupees in any previous yea~; or 
(ii) who is required to furnish a return of income under sUb-section (4A) of section 139, ..0 
and who has not been allotted any permanent account number, shaU, within such time as may be 
prescribed, apply to the Assessing Officer for the allotment of a permanent account number,'. 
Amendment 01 34. In section 142 01 the Income-tax Ad. in sub-section (1). in clause (i), for the words 'before the end 
Mdion 142. of the relevant assessment year", the words, brackets and figures "within the time allowed under sub-
section (1) of section 139' shall be SUbstituted. 45 
Amend/nentof 35. In I8Cllon 143 of the Income-tax Act, after sub-section (1A). the following sub-section shall be 
aec:tion 143. in .. rted and ,hall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from the 1st day of April, 1989, 
namely :-
-(18) Where an ........ furnlsheu r.vised retum unde ... ub-uc:tlon (6) of MCtion 139 after the 
issue of an I.ntimatlon, or the grant of f8fund, if any, under aub-aection (1) of this section, the provisions 50 
of sub-Sec:tIOM (1) and (1A) of this HCtlon shan apply In relation to luch revised return and-
(/) the Intimation already .. nt for any income-tax, additional income-tax or inter.t ahan be 
amended on the baslsrof the said revised retum and where any amount payabteby way of income-
tax, additional income-tax or Interest apeclfled in the said Intimation has already been paid by the 
........ then, H any auch amendment has the effect of- 55 
(a) . enhancing the amount already paid, the intimation amended under this dause shall be 
sent to the ........ apecHylng the exce .. amount payable by him and such Intimation shall be 
d-.mtd to be a notice of demand iaued under lICtion 158 and aU the provisions ofthla Act shall 
IIppIy accordingly; 

4011988. 
15 
(b) reducing the amount already paid. the e __ amount paid "'all be refunded to the 
........ ; 
(11) the amount of the ,.rund *-tidy granted Ihd be enhanced or reduced on the baIIl of the 
Hid revised l'8turn and wh .. 1he amount aI refund already granted Ia-
5 (a) enhanced. only the exce .. amount of refund due to the ISM .... ahan be paid to him; 
(b) reduced. the exena amount 10 refunded Ihall be deemed to be the tax payable by the 
........ and an intimation shaD be Hnt to 1M ........ epecIfying the amount 10 payable. and 
such intimation shaH be deemed to be a notiOI aI demand luued under section 158 and all the 
provisions of this Ad shaH apply .:cordIngly: 
10 Provided that an ......... who has furnished a revised return under aub-aection (5) of HCtlon 139 
after the service upon him of the Intimation under sub-aection (1) of this section, shall be liable to pay 
additional income-tax in relation to the adjustments made under the first proviso to clause (a) of sub-
section (1) and specHled in the Hid Intimation, whether or not he has made the said adjustments In the 
,..vlaed return". 
15 36. In section 145 of the Income-tax Ad. In aub-MCtion (1). atter the second proviso [as inserted by Amelldm~nt 
section 52 of the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act. 1987). the following proviso shaJl be Inserted and ~~. HCtion 
shall be deemed to have been in .. rted with effect from the 1 st day of AprH. 1 as9. namely:-
-Provided also that nothing contained In this SUb-section shall preclude an .... s ... from being 
charged to income-tax in resped of any interest on securities received by him in a previous year H such 
20 interest had not been charged to income-tax for sny eartier previous year.-. 
37. In section 151 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (1). for the words -except by an Assessing ~t 
Officer of the rank of Assistant Commissioner or Deputy Commissioner-. the words -by an AsMSslng ~~1 l8dion 
Officer. who is below the rank of Assistant Commissioner. unless the Deputy Commissioner is satisfied on . . 
the reasons recorded by such Ass .. sing Officer that it is a fit cue for the iuue of such notice-ahall be 
25 SUbstituted. 
30 
38. After section 194E of the Income-tax ~ the following section shall be in_rted with effect from the InHrtlon . 01 
1st day of April, 1991, namely:- ;':F.18Ction 
"194F. The person responsible for paying to any person any amount referred to in sub-aectlon (2) of Payments on 
section BOCCa shall, atthe tlmeof paymentthereof, deduct income-tax thereon althe rateottwenty per =~ .. of 
cent. ". 01 uni"- bY. Mutual Fuoo 
or Unit Trust of India. 
39. In section 246 of the Income-tax Act.- Amendment 
(a) in sub-section (1), in clau .. (I). in sub-clause (ii). the words. figures and letters -section 271 C, ~!.s. section 
section 271 D. section 271 E,· shall be omitted; 
(b) in SUb-section (2). after caluse (e). the following clause shall be inserted, namely:-
35 "(H) an order made by a Deputy Commissioner imposing a penalty under section 271 C. section 
271 D or section 271 E;-. 
40. In section 268 of the Income-tax Act. after the words "an appeal". the words 'or an application-shall ~t 
be inserted. ~. section 
41. After section 271 B of the Income-tax Act, the following section shall be Inserted. namely:- Insertion 01 
new section 271BB. 
40 "271 BB. Whoever fails to subscribe any amount of subscription to the units Issued under any FailUf8. \0 
scheme referred to in sub-section (1) of section 88A to the eligible issue of capital under that sub- ~s~l;i: 
section within the period of six months specified therein, may be directed by the Deputy Commissioner ~ 01 
to pay. by way of penalty. a sum equal to twenty per cent. of such amount... . 
42. Section 271 C of the Income-tax Ad. shall be renumbered as sub-section (1) thereof and after sub- ~o!, 
45 section (1) as 10 renumbered. the following sub-section shall be inserted. namely:- ~71C. 
-(2) Any penalty Impoaable under sub-section (1) shall be Imposed by the Deputy 
Commissioner ... 
43. Section 271 D of the Income-tax AJJt stiall be renumbered as sub-section (1) thereof and after sub- ~~ 
section (1) as so renumbered. the following sub-section shall be Inserted, namely:- 2710. 
50 "(2) Any penalty imposable under sub-section (1) shall be impos~ by the Deputy 
Commissioner.". 
44. Section 271 E of the Income-tax Act shall be renumbered as sub-section (1) thereof and after sub- ~o!, 
section (1) as 80 renumbered, the following sub-aec:tion shall be inserted. namely:- 271 E. 
-(2) Any penalty imposable under sutHection (1) shall be Imposed by the Deputy 
55 Commissioner". 

16 
Amendrneolo' 41. In MCtion 275A of thelncome-tax Ad, .rthe words "referred to in", the words, br~eta and figure 
IICIIon 276A. ,he second proviso to sub-section (1) or" shall be inserted. 
0mI1Iion 01 41..(1} No tax credit certlficate granted under HCtion 280Z or section 280ZC an.1I be produced befo,. 
CIhIDIIr the Aleelslng Officer after the 31 atdllyof March, 1991 forthepurpoaesofsub-MCtion (6) ofNCtion 280Z 
XXII-B. or, II the oeM may be, sub-section (4) of section 280ZC. 15 
(2) Save as otherwiM provided in sub-section (1), Chapter XXII-B shall be omitted. 
AmeIlOMnlO' 47. In section 288 of the·tncome-tax Ad, in sul).,section (4), in clause (b). after the words "on him undar", 
aoIIon288. the words. brIIckets lind flguree "clause (II) of sub-saction (1) of" shaH be inserted. 
~ 48.. The following amendments (being amendments of a consequential nature) shall be made In the 
........... Jncome.tu Act,n.mefy:- 10 
(l) MCtIon 80C shall be omitted with effect from the 1 st day of April, 1991; 
(Ii) In IICtion 246,-
(.) In sub-section (1), in clause (Q, In sub-clause (ii), after the word, figures and letter "section 
2718:. the word, figures and letters "8ec:tlon 27188," shall be inserted; 
(b) In sub-section (2), in clause (e), after the word, figures and letter "section 271 B", the words, 15 
figures and letters "or section 271 BB" shall be Inserted; 
(iii) In section 2738, aft ... the word, figures and letter ·section 271 B,", the word, figures and lettars 
"section 27188," shall be Inserted; 
(Iv) In the Eleventh Schedule, for the words, figures, letter and brackets "and section 8OJ(~·, the 
words, figures, letters and brackets ", section 80.1(4) and section 88A(3)(a)(~" shall be substituted. 20 
Wealth-tax 
Amelldmefttof .1. In section 2 of the Wealth-tax Act, 1957 (hereinafter referred to as the Woahh-tax Ad), in clause 27 of 1M7. 
-*'2. (ob), for the word and figures ·section 16·, the words, brackets and figures "SUb-section (3) or sub-
.action (6) of section 16" shall be substituted and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect 
from the 1 st day of April, 1989. 25 
~ntof 50. In section 5 of the Weahh-tax Act, in sub-section (1), in clause (xxviic), with effect from the 1 st day 
. of AprIl,1991,-
(i) after the word "State Government", the words ·or i:l public sector company· shall be 
Inserted; 
(Ii) the folloWing Explanation shall be inserted at the end, namely:-
'Ex~tion.-For the purposes of this clause, ·public sector company· means any corporation 
establIshed by or under any Central, State or Provincial Ad. or a Government company as defined in 
section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956;'. 
30 
~Of 51_ In section 10 of the Wealth-tax Ad, in SUb-section (2), in clause (a), for the figures "16, 17", the 
. figures 8nd letter·14, 15, 16, 17, 178," shall be substituted. 35 
Amendment of 52. In section 16 of the Wealth-tax Act,-...... '8. 
(a). after sub-~ection (1 A), the following sub-section shall be inserted and shall be deemed to have 
been Inserted with effect from the 1 st day of April, 1989, namely:-
. ."(18) Where an assesse8 fu~nishes a revised return under section 15 after the issue of an 
tntl~ation, or the grant of re!und, If. any, under sub-section (1) of this section, the provisions of sub- 40 
sectIOns (1) and (1A) of thIS sectIOn shall apply in relation to such revised return and-
(I) the intimation already sent for any weahh-tax, additional weahh-tax or interest shall be 
amend~ on 1M basis of the ~id revised return and where any amount payable by way of wealth-
tax, addhlOnal W~8Ith-tax or Interest specified in the said intimation has already been Id by the 
........ th.n, if any such amendment has the effed 01- pa 
46 (a) enhancing the amou~ .Ire~ paid, the intimation amended under this clause shall be 
:-"'tothe asses ... speclfytngthe excess amount payable by him and such intimation shall be 
.. med to ~ a notice of demand Issued under section 30 and all the provisions of this Act h II apply accordingly; 8 a 
(bJ redUC;ing the amount already paid, the excess amount paid shall be refund .... to t"'-
........ ; ON , .. &0 
(II) the amount of the r.fund already granted shall be enhanced or reduced on the basis 
aaId revised return and where the amount of refund already granted is- of the 
(a) enhanced, only the excess amount of refund due to the assessee shall be paid to him-
(b) reduced, the excess amount so refunded shall be de ad • 
usess ... and an intimation shall be s.nt to the as .. sse. s~lfy~o ~the tax payable by the 1& 
and such tntimation shall be deemed to be a notice of demand . ~ ~amount 10 payable, 
the provisions of this Act shan apply accordingly: I8$U un er section 30 and aU 
1 011858. 

17 
Provided that an .... s .... who hu fumilhed a revIted return underMOlIon 15 atter the 
service upon him of the intimation tJnder IUb-HdIon (1) of this MCtIon •• " .. be 1IabI. to pay 
additional wealth-tax In relation to the adjustments made under the firlt provIao tDoIau •• (a) of 
sub-sactlon (1) and specified in the said Intimation. whether or not he 1'1.. made the said 
5 adjustments in the revised r.eturn."; 
(b) In sub-sectlon (4). in clause (i). for the words "befor. the end of the relevant _!Mnt y.ar". 
'the words. brack.ts and figures ·within the time allowed under sub-t.ec:tion (1) of section 14· shall be 
substituted. 
53. In HCtlon 17 of the WeaIth·tax Act, in sub-section (18). inciauM (a), forthewords ".xeept by an Amendment of 
10 Asuaing Officer of the rank of Assistant Commissioner or Deputy Commlssione'-. the words "by an MCtion 17. 
Asu .. 1ng Officer. who is below the rank of Assistant Commission.r. unless the Deputy Commiaion.r Is 
satisfied on the reasons recorded by such Assessing Officer that it Is a fit C8H 'ortM Issue of such notice· 
shan be substituted. 
54. After 88C1ion 35EE of the Wealth-tax Act. the foliowing section shall be inserted. namely:- lnaerton of 
new Mellon 
35EEE. 
15 "35EEE. " a person contravenes any order ref.rred to in the HOOnd proviso to aulHM:tion (1) or ConhIMnIIon 
sub-sec:tlon (3A) of section 37 A. he shall be punishable with rIgorouslrnpriaonment for a term which o~"" .= 
may ext,nd to two years and with fine,·. ~rovi~ to lUI>-
I8CIion (1) or 
aub-teclion 
~i of Mellon 
55. In section 35K of tile Wealth-tax Ad, in sub-section (1). for the words. figur .. and Iett,rs "'e ~ndtn..,t of 
...... ment year commencing on the 1st day of April. 1988. or any earlier uanament y""', the words I8CIIIOn 35K. 
2D "an .. sessment year" shall be substituted and shall be deemed to have bean subatituted with .ffect from 
the 1 at day of April. 1989. 
58. In the Wealth·tax Ad. In Schedule III. In Part G,-
fa} for rule 18. the following rule shall be substituted, namely:-
Amendment of 
Schedule III. 
"18. (1) The value of the jewellery shall be estimated to be the price which it would fetch if sold in ~::..~ 
the open market on the valuation date (here¢ter in this rule referred to as fair market value). . 
of 
(2) The return of net wealth furnished by the assessee shall be supported by.-
(i) a statement in the prescribed form. where the value of the jewellery on the valuation time 
does not exceed ru~ees five lakhs; 
(ii) a repurt of a registered valuer in the prescribed form. where the value of the jewellery on the 
valuation date exceeds rupees 'ive Iakhs. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything mentioned in sub-rule (2). the Assessing Officer may, if he is of 
opinion. that the value of the jewellery declared in the retum.-
fa} is I.ss than its fair market value by such percentage or such amount as is prescribed under 
sutH:tause (I) of clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 16A; 
35 (b) is less than its fair market value as referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 
16A, 
he may refer the valuation of such jewellery to a Valuation Officer under sub-section (1) of the said 
HCtion and the value of such jewellery shall be the fair market value as estimated by the Valuation 
Offlcer."j 
40 (b) in rule 19. in the opening portion, for the words. brackets and letter "Ctau .. (b) or. the words. 
brackets and figure "sub-rule (3)0'" shall be sub8tltuted. 
Gift-tax 
17. In section 9 of the Gift-tax Act. 1958 (herein., referred to .. the G/ft-taxAd),1n sulHection (2). in Am.lldll_1t of 
claute (a). for the figures "15,16·, the figures and letter" 3.14. 1 5.16. 16B.· shall be subatituted. Mdionl. , 
45 58. In section 15 of the Gift-tax Act.- Amelldment d 
NdlDn15, 
(a) after sub-section (1A). the foliowing sub-Nction ,hell be inMl1ed and ahall be deemed to haw 
been InHrted with effect from the 111 day of AprH, 1989, namely:-
"(18) Where an assessee fumishes a revised retum under section 14 after the ill .. of an 
Intimation. or the grant of refund. if any. under sub-salon (f) 01 thla MdiDn, the provIsiDM of aut>-
sectiona (f) and (fA) of this uaion shalt IIPPIY In ..." "auch rwIHd return Md-• 
(/) the intimation already sent for any gift-w. additional glft-tax or Interest shal be amended 
on ttlebais of t .. said revised.-urn and wMre MY amountpl¥llblebrwarDfglMax, addIIIDnaI 
gil-tax or Inter ... specilied in the .. id IntimIIIion has ..n.dy beenJlllld ~ ...... n •• then, • 
any such amendment 1'1 .. the effed of-
I' 

18 
(a) enhanCing the amount already paid, the intimation amended under thIa ,cieuse shall be 
.. nttoth ......... specifying the.xees. amountpayabl. by him and such Intlmltlon shall be 
deemed to be a notice of d.mand is.ued und.r .ectlon 31 and all the provlaionsot this Act shall 
IIPPiY accordingly; . 5 
(b) reducing the amount already paid, the exce .. amount paid shall be refunded to the 
assessee; 
(ii) the amount of the refund already granted shall be enhanced or reduced on the basis of the 
said reviMd return and where the amount of refund already granted is-
fa} .nhanced, only the exce .. amount of refund due to the BIIess" shan be paid to 
hin; 10 
(b) reduced, the excess amount 80 refunded shall be deemed to be the tax payable by the 
........ and an Intimation shall be sent to the ..... see specifying the amount 80 payable, 
and such Intimation shall be deemed to be a notice of demand issued under section 31 and all 
the provi.ions of this Ad shan apply accordingly: 
Provided that an as .. ssee, who h .. furnished a r.visad retum under section 14 after the 15 
service upon him of the intimation under .ub-Mctlon (1) of this section, shall be liable to pay 
additional gift-tax in relation to the adjustments made under the first proviso to clause (a) of 
.ub-section (1) and specified in the said intimation, whether or not he has made the said 
adjustments in the revisad return."; 
(b) in sub-.ection (4). in clause (i). for the words "baforethe end of the relevant assessment year", 20 
the words, brackets and figures "Within the time allowed under sub-section (1) of section 13-shall be 
substituted. 
Amendment 01 5 •• In .edion 16 of the Gift-tax Ad, in sub-section (18). in clause (a), for the words -except by an 
I8CIion 16. As .... 1ng Officer of the rank of Assistant Commissioner or Deputy Commis.ioner". the words "by an 
Assessing Officer, who is below the rank of Assistant Commissioner, unles. the Deputy Commissioner is 25 
.atisfied on the reasons recorded by such Ass.ssing Officer that it is a fit case for the is.ue of such notice-
shall be substituted. 
Amendment 01 
Act 52 of 1962. 
Rounding off 
of duty. etc. 
Amelldment 
01 Act 51 ot 
le7!5. 
CHAPTER IV 
~DIRECT TAXES 
Customs 
eo. In the ~atom. Ad, 1962 (hereinafter ref.rred to as the Customs Act),-
(a) In section 129C, for sub· section (5), the followillg sub-section shall be SUbstituted, 
namely:-
-(5) If the members of a Bench differ in Opinion on any point, the point .hall be decided according 
to the opinion of the majority, if th.re is a majority; but If the members are equally divided, they shall 35 
state the point or points on which they differ and make a reference to the Pre.ident who .hall eith.r 
hearthe point or point. hims.1f or refer the case for hearing.on such point or points by on. or more of 
the other members of the Appellate T rbunal and .uch point or point. shall be decided according to 
~he ~nlon of the majority of these members of the Appellate Tribunal who have heard the case 
Including thoM who first heard It. -; , 40 
(b) after .ectlon 154, the following section shall be in .. rted, namely:-
-154A. The amount of duty, intere.t, penalty, fine or any other sum payable, and the amount of 
refund, drawt.:k or any oth.r .um dua, under the provisions of this Act .hall be rounded off to the 
n.arest rupee and, for this pu~ •• , where .uch amount contains a part of a rupee conSisting of 
paI .. then, If such part is fifty palS. or more,lt shall be increased to one rupee and if.uch part Is 18ss 45 
than fifty palM It 1hall be ignored. -. 
11. The Customs Tariff Ad, 1975 (hereinafter r.rred to as the CustolM Tariff Act) .haH be __ ...L.. .... 
If, the manner apecIlad In the Second Schedule. ' am .. _ 
~~~,I~':n.ca;.: ~im=:S ~::.= ~~ to the Customs Tariff Ad, or in that 
cU8t~IoS anof~~~ual to fifty per oent. ~ the Value of the good. ~d:~:~ ': :x,~~::Zwltdutyh thofe 50 
prov.. ns ~, '4 of the Cystoms Ad. 
(2) Sub-Mction (1 ) aha/I ONS. to have ded after the 31 at day of March 1981 nd· 
section 6 of the General Clause. Ad 1897 shalllppiy _If the said I' ,. ___ ...'...t_ h'ada ...... ~n such ce .. er Central ltd. ' , ~IN" .""",,, repealed bv a 
cus:.-r:-~ ~.! customs .....". to In IUb IIction (1) shall be In addition to any dutl .. of 
force. gooda under the Cuatome Ad, or any other law for the time being in 
(4J The prowiIioneofthe CueIoma Act and the ruleeand ,.....". rNldethereunder 
56 
reIIIlng to....".Md exempIionI from duIIeI IhII. ' InctudIng thoM 
ooIlec1ion of'tht .uxIIIary duIIee of customI ~ ::,-~ may be, ~ In reIIdIon to the levy and 10 
u ... MCtion In rHplCt of any good. as t~ 
10 of 18e7. 

5 
10 
19 
apply In relation to the levy and collection of the duties of CUIloms on such goods under that Ad or thole 
NI .. and regulations, as the cue mlV be. 
Excise 
13. In the Central Exctaea and Salt Act, 1044 (herelnllfter referred to as the Central ExciI .. Ad), after Amelanent 
HClIon 37C, the following uction shall be lnaerted, namely:- of Act 1 of 
1944. 
"370. The amount of duty, interest, penalty, fine or any other sum payable, and the amount of refund RoundIna off 
or any other sum due, under the provisions of this Ad. ahan be rounded off to the nearMt rupee and, for of clJty, •. 
thie purpose, where such amount contains a part of a rupee consisting of PIi_then, if such part ie fifty 
pM- or more, It shall be Increased to one rupee and if such part ie less than fifty pili_it shall be 
Ignored.-. 
M. The Central Excise Tariff ¥, 1985 (hereinafter referred to as the Central Excise Tariff Act). shall An18I anent 
be amended in the manner specified in the Third Schedule. ~~ 5 of 
15. (1) In the cae of goods chargeable with a duty of excise under the Central Exc_ Ad, as ~ 
amended from time to time, read with any notificlllion for the time being in force issued by the Cernral dud;el of 
15 Government In relation to the duty 10 chargeable (not being a notification providing for any exemption for elCClM. 
giving credit with reaped to, or reduction of duty of excise under the said Ad on such goods equal to, any 
duty of exclae under the said Ad, or the additional duty under section 3 of the Customs Tariff Ad, already 
paid on the raw material or component parts used In the production or manufacture of such goods), there 
shall be levied and collected a special duty of exelse equal to ten percent. of the amount 10 chargeable on 
2D such goods. 
(2) Sub-section (f)shall cease to have effect after the 31st day of March, 1991, and upon such cesser 
10 of 1897. section 6 of the General Clauses Ad, 1897, ahall apply as If the said sub-tection had been repealed by a 
Central Ad. 
(3) The special duties of excise referred to In sub-sectlon (1 )shall be In addition to any duties of excise 
25 chargeable on such ~s under the Central Excises Act or any other law for the time being In force. 
(4) The provisions of the Central Excises Ad and the rul .. made thereunder. inctuding those relating 
to refunds and exemptions from duties, ahall, as far as may be, apply in relation to the levy and collection of 
the special duties of exel.eleviable under this section In respect of any goods as they apply In relation to 
the levy and collection of the duties of excise on such goods under that Act or those ruias, as the case 
30 may be. 
66. The Additional Duties of Excise (Goods of Special Importance ) Ad, 1957 (hereinafter referred to as Amendment 
the Additional Duties of Excise Ad), shall be amended in the manner specified in the Fourth 0~7 68 of 
Schedule. 1 .... 
87. In section 3 of the Additional Duties of Exelse (Textiles and Textile Articles) Act, 1978, in sub- Amendment 
36 section (1), for the words 'ifteen per cent.", the words -.wenty per cent." shall be substituted. of AI::t 40 of 
1978. 
68. The Khadi and other Handloom Industries Development (Additional Excise Duty on Cloth) Act, Repeal of 
1953 is hereby r.nAaied Act 12 of , ,._. 1953. 
CHAPTER V 
~LAND AIR TRAVEL TAX 
H. Inthe Finance Ad, 1989, with effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification ~I of¥! 130, 
In the Official Gazette, appoint.- 1989. 
(a) in section 41, for clause (d), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:-
'(d) "fare-means the total amount of an charg .. of whatever nature (including charges, If any. for 
provision of food or accommodation) payable to the carrier by or on behalf of a passenger in respect 
of his Inland journey;'; 
(b) In section 42, in sub-section (1). the words·. where the fare for such journey is paid in Indian 
currency,-shall be omitted. 

oIAd Sof 
, ... 
20 
CHAPTER VI 
MISCElLANEOUS 
70. In the Indian. Poet OffIcI Ad. 1898. for u,. First Schedule. the following Schedule shall be 
subltltuted. namely:-
"THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
(s.. section 7) 
~D POSTAGE RATES 
L.".,. 
5 
For a weight ra exceeding twenty grams 
For wary twenty grams, or fr.:tlon th«ear, exCHdlng twenty grams 
Re.1.00 
Re.1.oo 10 
For aletler-card 75 Paise 
Pott e.m. (not being pott cards conr.ining prlnt«l communication) 
15 paise Single 
Reply 30 paise 15 
Poet card, containing prlnt«l communication 
For a paM card 60 paise. 
ExpMMtlIon.-A post card shaH be deemed to contain a printed communication. if any matter (except 
the name and addr ... of. and ather particulars relating to, the sender and the place and date of 
duplllch) Is recorded by printing or by cydolty~ng or by any other mechanical process, not being type-
writing, on any pan of the paM CIrd except the rlghthand half of the address-side thereof. 
Book, /Mttern WId sample pacl<ets 
For the first fitly grams or fraction thereof 
For every additional ona hundred grams, or fraction thereof. in excess of fifty grams 
Registered newspapers 
For I weight not exceeding fifty grams 
For a weight exceeding fifty grams but not exceeding one hundred grams 
Re.1.00 
Re.1.00 
15 paise 
25 paise 
25 
For every additional one hundred grams or fraction thereof, exceeding one hundred grams 10 paisa 
In the case of more than one copy of the same issue of a registered newspaper being carried in the same 
pac:k8t- 30 
For a weight not exceeding one hundred grams 
25 paisa 
For evary additional one hundred grams. or fraction thereof, exceeding one hundred grams 10 paise: 
Provided that such packet shall not be delivered at any addressee's residence but shall be given to a 
recogni88d agent at the Post Office. 
PlIICfIIs 
For a weight not exCMdlng five hundred grams 
For every five hunched gr""s, or fraction thereof, exceeding five hundred grams Rs.6.00 
Rs.S.OO.-
DecIantIIonunder the ProW."., Collection of Taxes Act. 1931 
36 
It 18 heraby declared that lis expedient In the public Interest that the provisions of clauses 81, 
82, 84,85, 68 and 87 of this BlllhaII have Immediate effect underthe Provisional Collection of .eo 
TUII Act, 1931. 11 of 1111. 

5 
THE FJRST SCHepULE 
(See section 2) 
PART I 
INOOME·TAX 
Paragraph A 
Sub-Paragraph I 
. ~n. the case of every individual or Hindu undivided fam~y or unregistered firm or other association of persons or body of 
Individuals, whether incorporated or not, or every artificial juridical person referred to in sutH:lause (vii) of clause (31) of section 2 
of th.e Income-tax Act, not being a case to which Sub-Paragraph II of this Paragraph or any other Paragraph of this Part 
10 applles,-
15 
20 
Rates of income-tax 
(1) where the total income does not exceed Rs. 18,000 Nil; 
(2) where Ihe total income exceeds As. 18,000 but does not 
exceed Rs. 25,000 
(3) where the total income exceeds Rs. 25,000 but does not 
exceed As. 50,000 
(4) where the total income exceeds As. 50,000 but does not 
exceed Rs. 1,00,000 
(5) where the total income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000 
20 per cent. of the amount by which the total income exceeds 
Rs. 18,OPO; 
Rs. 1,400 plus 30 per cent. of the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs. 25,000; 
Rs. 8,900 plus 40 per cent. of the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs. 50,000; 
Rs. 28,900 plus 50 per cent. of the amount by which the tolal 
income exceeds As. 1,00,000. 
Surcharge on income-lax 
The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the preceding provisions of this Sub-Paragraph shall, in the case of 
every person having a total income exceeding fifty thousand rupees, be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union 
calculated at the rate of eight per cent. of such income-tax: 
25 Provided that no such surcharge shall be payable by a non-r.ident. 
Sub-Paragraph /I 
In the case of every Hindu undivided family which at any time during the previous year has at least one member whose total 
income of the previous year relevant 10 the assessment year commencing on Ihe 1 st day 01 April, 1 990 exceeds 
RS.18,000,-
30 Rales of income-lax 
35 
40 
(1) where the total income does not exceed Rs.12,OOO Nil; 
(2) where the total income exceeds Rs. 12,000 but does 
not exceed As. 20,000 
(3) where the total income exceeds Rs. 20,000 bul does 
not exceed Rs. 40,000 
(4) wherE! the total income exceeds Rs. 40,000 but does 
not exceed Rs. 60,000 
(5) where the tolal income exceeds Rs. 60,000 but does 
not exceed As. 1,00,000 
(6) where the total income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000 
25 per cent. of the amount by which Ihe lotal Income exceeds 
RS.12,ooo; 
Rs. 2,000 plus 30 per cent. of the amount by which the lolal 
income exceeds As. 20,000; 
Rs. 8,000 plu.s 40 per cent. of the amount by which the lotal 
income exceeds Rs. 40,000; 
Rs. 16,000 plus 50 per cent. of Ihe amounl by which Ihe lolal 
income exceeds As. 60.000; 
Rs. 36,000 plus 55 per cent. of the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000. 
Surcharge on income-lax 
The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the preceding provisions of this Sub-Paragraph shall, in the case of 
every person having a total income exceeding fifty thousand rupees, be increased by a surcharge for purposes of Ihe Union 
45 calculated at the rate of eight per cent. of such income-tax: 
50 
Provided that no such surcharge shall be payable by a non-resident. 
Paragraph B 
In the case of every co-operative society,-
Ralc.~ of income-wx 
(1) where Ihe total income does not exceed Rs. 10,000 
(2) where the total income exceeds As. 10,000 but does 
not exceed Rs. 20,000 
(3) where the total income exceeds 81. 20,000 
21 
15 per cent. of the lolal income; 
AI. 1,500 pllH 25 per cenl. 01 Ihe amounl by which Ihe lolal 
ill(:Ome exc.eds Rs. 1 0.000; 
~. 4,000 pllU40 per cent. of the amount by which the tolal 
income exceeds Rs. 20,000. 
" 
j 

22 
Surc,""gt 0" incOme-fax 
Thl amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the preceding provisions of this Paragraph shall, in the ca •• of every peI'IOR having a total Income exceeding fifty thousand rupees, be Increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union calculated at 
the rate of eight per cent. of such income-tax. 
Paragraph C 
Sub-Paragraph I 
In the caM of every registered firm. not being II ca.e to which Sub-Paragraph II of this Paragraph appIies,-
RallS 0/ incomt-lax 
5 
(1) where the total income does not exceed As. 10,000 Nil; (2) where the total income exceeds As. 10,000 but does not 5 per cent. of the amount by which the total income exceeds 10 
exceed As. 25,000 As. 10,000; 
(3) where the total income exceeds As. 25,000 but does not 
exceed As. 50,000 
As. 750 plus 7 per cent. of the amount by which the total 
income exceeds As. 25,000; 
(4) where the total income exceeds As. 50,000 but does not 
exceed As. 1,00,000 
As. 2,500 plus 15 per cent. of the amount by which the total 
income exceeds As. 50,000; 15 
(5) where the total income exceeds As. 1,00,000 As. 10,000 plus 24 per cent. of the amount by which the total 
income exceeds As. 1,00,000. 
Surcharge on income-lax 
The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the preceding provisions of this Sub-Paragraph shall, in the case of every person having a total income exceeding fifty thousand rupees, be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union 20 calculated at the rate of eight per cent. of such :ncome·tax. 
Sub-Paragraph /I 
. In the c.ase of ev.ery registered firm whose total income includes income derived from a profession carried on by it and the Income so Included IS not less than fifty-one per cent. of such total income,-
Rale.t 0/ income-lax 25 
(1) where 'he total income does not exceed As. 10,000 Nil; 
(2) where the total income exceeds As. 10,000 but does not 
exceed As. 25,000 
4 per cent. of the amount by which the total income exceeds 
As. 10,000; 
(3) where the total income exceeds As. 25,000 but does not 
exceed As. 50,000 
As. 600 plu.f 7 per cent. of the amount by which the total 
income exceeds As. 25.000; 30 
(4) where the total income exceeds As. 50,000 but does not 
exceed As. 1,00,000 
(5) where the total income exceeds As. 1,00,000 
As. 2,350 plus 13 per cent. of the amount by which the total 
income exceeds As. 50,000; 
~s. 8,850 plus 22 per cent. of the amount by which the total 
Income exceeds As. 1,00,000. 
Surcharge on income-lax 35 
The amount 01 income·tax computed in accordance with the ad' . . . every person h;oving • total income exceeding fifty thousand r~rec ': ~rovlslons of thiS Sub-Paragraph shall, in the case 01 calculated at the rate of eight per cent. of such'income-tax. pees, Increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union 
Explanalion.~or the purposes of this Paragraph, "registered firm" i I d .. under clause (b) of section 183 of the Income-tax Act nc u es an unregistered firm assessed as a registered firm 40 
Paragraph D 
In the case of every local authority,-
Rale 0/ income-lax 
On the whole of the total income so percent. 
Surcharge on income-ua 
The amount of income .. ax computed at the rate herei~before ecif' . 45 exceeding fifty lhou18nd rupHI, be increased by •. 'lUfCh- sP ied shall, In the case of every person having a total income cent. of tuch income.tax. , ... ~ve for rurposes of the Union,cabJtated at the tale of eight per 

5 
In the case of a company,-
I. In the case of a domestic company,-
23 
Paragraph E 
Rales of income-lax 
(1) where the company is a company in which the public are substantially 
Interested 
(2) where the company is not a company in which the public are substantially interested-
(i) in the case of a trading company or an investment company 
50 per cent. of the total 
Income; 
10 (ii) in any other case 
60 per cent. of the total 
income; 
55 per cent. of the total 
income. 
15 
20 
II. In the case of a company other than a domestic company,-
(i) on so much of the total income as consists of-
(a) royalties received from Government or an Indian concern in pursuance of an 
agreement made by it with the Government or the Indian concern after the 31 st day of March, 
1961 but before the 1 st day of April, 1976, or 
(b) fees for rendering technical services received from Government or an Indian concern 
in pursuance of an agreement made by it with the Government or the Indian concern after the 
29th day of February, 1964 but before the 1st day of April, 1976, 
and where such agreement has, in either case, been approved by the Central Government 
(ii) on the balance, if any, of the total income 
Surcharge on income-lax 
50 per cent.; 
65 per cent. 
The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the provisions of item I of this Paragraph shall, in the case of eyery 
person having a total income exceeding fifty thousand rupees, be increased by a surcharge calculated at the rateot eighI per 
25 cent. of such income-tax. 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
PART II 
RATES FOR DEDUCfION OF TAX AT SOURCE IN CERTAIN CASES 
In every case in which under the provisions of sections 193, 194, 194A, 1948, 19488, 1940 and 195 of the Income-tax Ad, tax Is 
to be deducted at the rates in force, deduction shall be made from the income subject to deduction at the following rates;-
Rate of income-tax 
--------...;..;.;;;,;,;;;..;~~.--.- .. ---
1. In the case of a person other than a company-
(a) where the person is resident in India-
(i) on income by way of interest other than "Interest on securities· 
(ii) on income by way of winnings from lotteries and crossword puzzles 
(iii) on income by way of winnings from horse races 
(iv) on income by way of insurance commission 
(v) on income by way of interest payable on-
(A) any security, other than a tax-free security, of the Central or a State 
Government; 
(B) any debentures or other securities for money issued by or on beh." of any local 
authority or a corporation established by a Central, State or Provincial Act; 
(C) any debentures issued by a company where such debentures are listed on a 
recognised stock exchange in India in accordance with the Securities 
Contracts (Regulation) Act,1956 and any rules made thereunder; 
(vi) on any other income (excluding interest payable on a tax-free security) 
(b) where the person is not resident in India-
(i) in the case of a non-resident Indian-
(A) on investment income and long-term capital gains 
(B) on income by way of interest payable on a tax-free security 
(C) on income by way of winnings from lotteries and crossword puzzles 
1 0 per cent.; 
40 per cent.; 
40 per cent; 
10 per cent.; 
10 per cent.; 
20 per cent.; 
20 per cent.; 
15 per cent.; 
40 per cent.; 

24 
(D) on Income by wlIf of winnings from 110 .... r"" 
(E) on the whole of other Income 
(ii) in the ca .. of any other person-
(A) on Income by way of interest payable on a tax-free security 
(B) on Income by way of winnings from lotteries and crossword puzzles 
(C) on income by way of winnings from horse races 
(D) on the whole of the other Income 
2. In the ca.e of a company-
(a) where the company is a domestic company-
(i) on income by way of interest other than "Interest on securities· 
Iii) on income by way of winnings from Iotleries and crossword puzzles 
(iii) on income by way of winnings from horse races 
(iv) on any other income (excluding interest payable on tax-free secur~y) 
(b) where the company is not a domestic company-
(i) on income by way of dividends payable by any domestic company 
(li) on income by way of winnings from lotteries and crossword puzzles 
(iii) on income by way of winnings from horse races 
(iv) on income by way of interest payable by Government or an Indian concern on moneys 
borrowed or debt incurred by Government or the Indian concern in foreign currency 
(v) on income by way of royalty payable by Government or an Indian concern in 
pursuance of an agreement made by it with the Government or the Indian concern 
after the 31st day of MIHCh, 1976, where such royalty is in consideration for the 
transfer of all or any rights (including the granting of a licence) in respect of copyright 
in a:.y book on a subject referred to in the proviso to sub-section (1 A) of section 115A 
of the Income-tax Act, to the Indian concern 
(vi) on income by way of royalty [not being royalty of the nature referred to in SUb-item 
(b)(v») payable by Government or an Indian concern in pursuance of an agreement 
40 per cent.; 
Income-tax at 30 per 
cent. of the amount of 
income 
or 5 
income-tax in respect of 
the income at the rat.s 
prescribed in Sub-Para-
graph I of Paragraph It. of 
Part 111 of this Schedule, 10 
If such incolM had been 
the total income, 
whichever is higher; 
15 per cent.; 15 
40 per cent.; 
40 per cent.; 
income-tax at 30 per 
cent. of the amount of 
income 20 
or 
income-tax in respect of 
the income at the rates 
prescribed in Sub-Para-
graph I of Paragraph A of 25 
Part 111 of this Schedule. 
if such income had been 
the total income, 
whichever is higher. 
30 
20 per cent.; 
40 per cent.; 
40 per cent.; 
21.5 per cent.; 35 
25 per cent.: 
40 per cent.; 
40 per cent.; 
25 per cent.; 40 
30 per cent.; 
45 
made by It with the Govemment or the Indian concem and which has been approved by 50 
the Central Government,-
(A) where the agreement is'made after the 31st day of March, 1961 but before the 181 50 per cent.: 
day of April. 1976 
(B) where the agreement is made after the 31st day of March, 1976 30 per cent.; 
(vii) on income by way of fees for technical services payable by Government or an Indian 55 
concem in pursuance of an agreement made by it with the Government or the Indian 
concern and which has been approved by the Central Govenment,-
(A) where the agreement is made after the 29th day of February, 1964 but before 50 per cent.; 
the 1st day of April, 1976 

5 
25 
(B) where the agreement is made. after the 31st day of March, 1976 
(viii) on income by way of Interest payable on a tax-free security 
(ix) on any other income 
30 per cent.; 
44 per celit.; 
65 per cent. 
ExpLanalion.-For the purposes of this Part, "investment income", "long-term capital gains" and "non-resident Indian" shall 
have the meanings assigned to them in Chapter XII-A of the Income-tax Act. 
Surcharge on income-tax 
The amount of income-tax deducted in accordance with the provisions of-
(a) sub-item (a) of item 1 of this Part shall be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union, and 
(b) sub-item (a) of item 2 of this Part shall be increased by a surcharge, 
10 calculated at the rate of eight per cent. of such income-tax. 
PAAT III 
RATES FOR CALCULATING OR CHARGING INCOME·TAX IN CERTAIN CASES, DEDUCTING INCOME-TAX FROM INCOME 
CHARGEABLE UNDER TIlE HEAD .. SALARIES" AND COMPl1I1NG "ADVANCE TAX" 
In cases in which income-tax has to be calculated under the first proviso to sub-section (5) of section 132 of the Income-tax Act 
15 or charged under sub-section (4) of section 172 or sub-section (2) of section 174 or section 175 or sub-section (2) of section 176 
of the said Act or deducted under section 192 of the said Act from income chargeable under the head "Salaries" or in which the 
"advance tax" payable under Chapter XVII-C of the said Act has to be computed at the rate or rates in force, such income-tax or. as 
the case may be, "advance tax" (not being "advance tax" in respect of any income chargeable to tax under Chapter XII or Chapter 
XII-A or sub-section (lA) of section 161 or section 164 or section 164A or section 1678 of the Income-tax Act at the rates as 
20 specified in that Chapter or section or surcharge on such "advance tax" in respect of any income chargeable to tax under section 
1158), shall be calculated, charged, deducted or computed at the following rate or rates:-
Paragraph A 
Sub-Paragraph T 
In the case of every individual or Hindu undivided family or unregistered firm or other association of persons or body of 
25 individuals, whether incorporated or not, or every artificial juridical person referred to in sub-clause (vii) of clause (31) of section 
2 of the Income-tax Act. not being a case to which Sub-Paragraph II of this Paragraph or any other Paragraph of this Part 
applies,-
Rates of income-tax 
(1) where the total income does not exceed Rs. 22,000 Nil; 
30 (2) where the total income exceeds Rs. 22,000 but does not 20 per cent. of the amount by which the total income exceeds 
exceed As. 30,000 As. 22,000; 
35 
(3) where the total income exceeds As. 30,000 but does not As. 1,600 plus 30 per cent. of the amount by which the total 
exceed Rs. 50,000 income exceeds As. 30,000; 
(4) where the total income exceeds Rs. 50,000 but does not 
exceed Rs. 1,00,000 
(5) where the total income exceeds As. 1,00,000 
Rs. 7,600 plus 40 per cent. 01 the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs. 50,000; 
Rs. 27,600 plus 50 per cent. of the amount by which the total 
income exceeds As. 1,00,000. 
Surcharge on income-tax 
The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the preceding provisions of this Sub-Paragraph shall,-
40 (i) in the case of every individual, Hindu undivided family or association of persons or body of individuals referred to in ~ections 
88 and 88A having a total income exceeding seventy-five thousand rupees, be reduced by the amount of rebate of Income· 
tax calculated under Chapter VIII-A, and the income- tax as so reduced, 
(ii) in the case 01 every person, other than those mentioned in item (i), having a total income exceeding seventy-five thousand 
rupees, 
45 be increased by a surcharge for purposes 01 the Union calculated at the rate of eight per cent. of such income-tax: 
50 
55 
Provided that no such surcharge shall be payable by a non-resident. 
Sub-Paragraph /I .' , 
In the case of every Hindu undivided family which at any time during the previous year has at least one member whose totallnoome 
of the previous year relevant to the assessment year cOmmencing on the 1st day of April, 1991 exceeds Rs. 22,000,-
Rates of income-lax 
(1) where the total income does not exceed Rs. 12,000 Nil; . . 
(2) where the total income exceeds As. 12,000 but does 25 per cent. of the amount by which the total Income exceeds 
not exceed Rs. 20,000 Rs. 12.000; . 
(3) where the total income exceeds Rs. 20,000 but does Rs. 2,000 plus 30 per cent. of the amount by which the total 
not exceed Rs. 40,000 Income exceeds Rs. 20,000; . 
(4) where the total income exceeds Rs. 40,000 but does Rs. 8,000 plus 40 per cent. 01 the amount by whICh ttle total 
not exceed As. 60,000 income exceeds Rs. 40,000; 

(5) .... 1he tatIIlncome uceeda Re. 80,000 but doea nat 
exceed Ra. 1,00,000 
(6) where the total income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000 
28 
As. 18,000 plus 50 per cent. aM the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs. 60,000; 
As. 36,000 plus 55 per cent. of the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000. 
Surc#UUge Oil income-lax 5 
The .amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the preceding provisions of this Sub-Paragraph shall, in ~he case of 
wery person having a total income IIxceeding seventy-five thousand r",pees, be reduced by the amount of rebate of Income-tax 
calculated under Ch~er VIII-A and the income-tax as so reduced be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union 
calculated at the rate of eight per cent. of such income-tax: 
Provided that no MlCh surcharge shall be payable by a non-resident. 10 
Paragraph B 
In the case of every co-operative society,-
Rales of income-tax 
15 per cent. of the total income; (1) where the lotallncome does not exceed Rs. 10,000 
(2) where the total income exceeds As. 10,000 but does 
not exceed Rs. 20,000 
Rs. 1,500 plus 25 per cent. of the amount by which the totai' 15 
income exceeds Rs. 10,000; 
(3) where the total income exceeds As. 20,000 Rs. 4,000 plus 40 per cent. of the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs. 20,000. 
Surcharge on income-tax 
The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the preceding provisions of this Paragraph shall. in the case of every 20 
person having a total income exceeding seventy-five thousand rupees. be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union 
calculated at the rate of eight per cent. of such income-tax. 
Paragraph C 
Sub-Paragraph I 
In the case of every registered firm, not being a case to which Sub-Paragraph II of this Paragraph applies,-
Rates of income-lax 
(1) where the total income does not exceed Rs. 15,000 
(2) where the total income exceeds Rs. 15,000 but does 
not exceed Rs. 50,000 
Nil; 
6 per cent. of the amount by which the total income exceeds 
Rs. 15,000; 
25, 
(3) where the total income exceeds Rs. 50,000 but does 
not exceed Rs. 1,00,000 
Rs. 2.100 plus 12 per cent. of the amount by which the total 30 
income exceeds Rs. 50,000; 
(4) where the total income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000 Rs. 8,100 plus 18 per cent. of the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs. 1 ,00,000, 
Surcharge on income-tax 
The amount of income-tax computed in accord 'th th d' , . every person having a total inco d' ance WI e prece Ing provIsions of this Sub-Paragraph shall, in the case of 35 
Union calc:ulated at the rate of e~ehtuxcee 109 SfeventY,-fiVe thousand rupees, be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the 
19 per cent. 0 such Income-tax. 
Sub-Paragraph II 
'." the cue 01 every reglltered firm whose total income includes i d' .'. 
SO Included is not less than fifty-one per cent. of such total i"Com,:...:e erlVed from a profeSSIOn carned on by It and the income 
Rates of income-lax 
(1) where the total income does not exceed Rs. 15,000 
(2) where the total income exceeds Rs. 15,000 but does 
not exceed Rs. 50,000 
Nil; 
5 per cent. of the amount by which the total income exceeds 
Rs.15,000; 
40 
(3) where the total income exceeds Rs. 50,000 but does 
not exceed As. 1,00,000 . ~s. 1,750 plus 1<> per cent. of the amount by which the total 45 
Income exceeds Rs. 50,000; 
(4) where the total Income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000 ~s. 6,750 plus 15 per cent. of the amount by which the total 
Income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000. 

27 
SlU'chDrge 011 incomt-IQ 
The .mount of Income-tax computed In accord.nce with the preceding ~n. of thiI Sub-Paragrllph thall, In the cue of 
every person having. total income exceeding Hventy-five thou .. nd rupees, be incre.Md by a surcharge for purpoaea oft". 
Union calculated at the rate of eight per cent. of such income-tax. 
5 ExplaMtlon.- For the purpo ... of thll P_agraph, "reg ... ...cf firm-indudet .., unregiltered firm ...... ed .. a registered firm 
10 
15 
20 
25 
under clauu (b) of section 183 of the lnoome-tax ltd.. 
Paragraph D 
In the case of every local authority,-
On the whole of the total income 50 per cent. 
Surcharge 011 u.come-m 
The amount of income-tax computed at the rate hereinbefore specified .haII, in the cue of every person having a total income 
exceeding seventy-five thousand rupees, be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union calculated al the rate of eight per 
cent. of such income-tax. 
In the case of a company,-
Paragraph E 
Rates of illcome-tax 
I. In the case of a domestic company,-
(1) where the company is a company in which the public are substantially interested 
(2) where the company is not a company in which the public are substantially interested-
(i) in the case of a trading company "Or an investment company 
(ii) in any other case 
II. In the case of a company other than a domestic company,-
(i) on so much of the total income as consists of-
(a) royalties received from Government or an Indian concern in pursuance of an 
agreement made by it with the Government or the Indian concern after the 31st day of March, 
40 par cent. of the total 
income; 
50 per cent. of the total 
income; 
45 per c,nt. of the total 
income. 
30 1961 but before the 1 st day of April, 1976, or 
35 
40 
(b) fees for rendering technical services received from Government or an Indian concern 
in pursuance of an agreement made by it with the Govemment or the Indian concem after the 
29th day of February, 1964 but before the' st day of April, 1976, 
and where such agreement has, in either case, been approved by the Central Government 
(ii) on the balance, if any, of the total income 
Surcharge 011 income-tax 
50 per cent.; 
65 per cent. 
The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the provisions of Item lof this Paragraph shall, in the case of every 
person having a total income exceeding seventy-five thousand rupees, be increased by a surcharge cak:ulat~ at the rate of eight 
per cent. of such income-tax. 
PARTN 
[See section 2 (9) (e)J 
RULES R>R OOMPtJrATlON OF NET AGRICUL1lJRAL INOOME 
Rule l.-Agricultural income of the nature referred t.o in sub-clause (a) of clause (lA) of sedion 2 of the Income·tax Ad. shall 
be computed as if ~ were income chargeable to income-tax under that Act under the head -Income from other sources· and the 
proviSions of sections 57 to 59 of that Act shall, so far as may be, apply accordingly: 
45 Provided that sub-section (2) of section 58 shall apply subject to the modification that the reference to section 40A therein shall 
be construed as not including a reference to sub-sections (3) and (4) of section 40A. 
Rule 2.-Agricultural income of the nature referred to in sub-clause (b) or sub-claus. (c) of clause (lA) of section 2 of the 
Income-tax Act [other than income derived from any building required a. a dwelling house by the receiver of the rent or revenue or 
the cultivator or the receiver of rent-in-kind referred to in the said sub-clause (c)) shall be computed as if it were income chargeable 

28 
to income.tlx unci.,. that ~ under the held -Profits and giins of business or profession- and the provisions 0' sections 30. 31. 32. 
36,37. 38. ~O. 40A lothef than sub-MCtioos(J)ane:l (4) thereat). 41.43. 43A, 438 and 43C ~:~ lnc:ome·~ Act shall. so far as 
may be. apply accordingly. 
Rule 3,-Agricultural income 0' the nature referred to in sub-clause (e) of clause (lA) of Netlon 2 6rthe ,Income-tax Act. ,being 
income derived 'rom any building requInId .•• dwIIftghDuse bV the receiwr of the 1WIt· or revenue or !he C'IdItivabr or theNCetVer of 5 
rent-in-kind referred to in the said sub-clause (e) shall be computed as H it were income chargeable tolncome-tax under that Act 
under the head -Income from house property- and the provisions of sections 23 to 27 of that Act shall. so 'ar as may be. apply 
accordingly, 
Rule 4,-Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provisions of these rules. in a G:Uewherethe assen,.·dfrives 
Income from sale of tea grown and manufactured by him In India. such income shall be computed in accordance with rule 8 of the 10 
Income-tax Rules. 1962. and sixty per cent. of such income shall be regarded as the agricultural income 0' the assessee. 
Rule 5.-Where the ... ess .. is a partner of a registered firm or an unregistered firm assessed as a raglstered firm under clause 
(h) of section 183 of the Income-tax Act. which in the previous year has any agricu~ural income. or is a partner of an unregistered 
firm which has not been assessed as a registered firm under clau,e (b) of the said section 183 and which in the previous year has 
either no income chargeable to tax under the Income-tax Act or has total income not exceeding the maximum amount not 15 
chargeable to tax in the case of an unregiltered firm 'but has any agricultural Income. then. the agricu~uraJ income or loss of the firm 
shall be computed in accordance with these rules and his share in the agricultural income or loss of the firm shall be computed in the 
manner laid down in sub-section (/ ). sub-section (2) and sub-section (3).of section 67 of the Income-tax Act and the share so 
computed shall be regarded as the agricultural income or loss of the assessee, 
Rult 6,-Where the assessee is a member of an association of persons or a body of individuals (other than a Hindu undivided 20 
family •• company or a firm) which in the previous year has either no income chargeable to tax under the Income-tax Act or has total 
income not exceeding the maximum amount not chargeable to tax in the case of an association of persons or a body of Individuals 
(other thall a Hindu undivided family. a company or a firm) but has any agricu~ural income. then. the agricultural income or loss of the 
association or body shall be computed in accordance with these rules and the share of the assessee in the agricu~ural income or 
loss so computed shaH be regarded as the agricultural income or loss of the assessee, 25 
Rille 7,-Where the result of the computation for the previous yesr in respect of any source of agricultural income is a loss. such 
loss shall be set off against the income of the assessee. if any. for that previous year from any other source of agricultural 
income: 
Provided that ~here the assessee is a partner,of an unregistered firm which has not been assessed as a registered firm under 
clause (b) of sectIOn 183 of the Income-tax Act or IS a member of an association 0' persons or a body of individuals and the share of 30 
the assesse~ in the ~ricultural income of the firm. association or body. as the case may be. is a loss. such loss shall not be set off 
against any Income of the ass.sse. from any other source of agricultural income, 
Ruk 8,-Any su~ payab~ by the as~essee on account of any tax levied by the State Government on the agricultural income 
shall be deducted In computing the egrtcu~ural income, 
Rule 9,~ J ~ Where ~he assessee has. in the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1 st day of April. 35 
1990. any agncu~urallncome and the net result of the computation of the agricultural income of the assessee for anyone or more of 
the prevlo~s years relevant to the assessment years commencing on the 1 st day of April. 1982 or the 1 sl day of April. 1983 or the 1 sl 
day of April. 1984 ~r the 1 st ,day of AprIl. 1985 or :he 151 day of April. 1986 or the 151 day of April. 1987 or the 1 st day of April. 1988 or 
the 1st day of April. 1989. IS a loss, then, forthe purposes of sub-section (2) of section 2 of Ihis Act,-
(0 the ~ss so computed lor the previous year relevan~ to the assessment year commencing on the 1 st day of April. 1982 to 40 
the extent. If any. such Io~s has not been set o~ against the agricultural income for the previous year relevant to the 
assessment year commenCIng on the 1 ~t day of April. 1983 or the 151 day of April. 1984 or the 1 st day of April. 1985 or the 1 st 
day of April. 1986 or the 1st day of April. 1987 or the 1st dayot April. 1988 or the 1st day of April. 1989, 
(ii) the loS,s so computed for the previous year r.levan~ to the assessment year commencing on the 1 st day of April. 1983. 
to the extent. If any. such, loss has not ueen set, off against the agricultural income for the previous year relevant to the 45 
af~s~lm~9nt8Y7ear coh ~menctd ng on th~ 1 st day of AprH. 1984 or the 1 st day of April. 1985 or the 1 st day of April 1986 or the 1st day 
o pn • or test ay of April, 1988 or the 1 st day of April. 1989. • 
t th(jjj) the 10~,s so computed for the previous yur relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1 st day of April 1984 
o e extent. I any. such, loss has not been set off against the agricultural income for the previous year relevant' to th~ 
assessment year commenetng on the 1 at day of AprH 1985 or the 1st d f Apr'I 1986 of April. 1988 or the 1st day of April. 1989,' , ay 0 I . or the I st day of April. 1987 or the 1 sl day 50 
to th~\I~~!:n~~: :Y~:~~~S~rh~: ~::v=/::: ~~-:;:~n~t t~ee ass~~~ent ~ear commencing on ,the 1 st day of April. 1985. 
assessment year commencing on the 1 at d f Ap'1 1986 th ag u ural Income for the prevIOus year relevant to the 
of April. 1989. ay 0 n. or e 1 Sf day of April. 1987 or the 1st day of Aprn. 1988 or the 1 sl day 
to thZ ~~:;S~ :~.~.:~a::r ~~: ~:tv= yea; re:vant to tn; asse~sment year commeneing on the 1 st day of April. 1986 
aasessment year co~mencing on the 1 at day" ~.Ap0 'j ~g9~~st t he agricultural in~me for the previous year relevant to th~ 
on. or t e 1st day of April. 1988 or the 1 at day of April 1989 
55 
(vi) the loss so computed tor the previous year relevant to the assessment . . .: 
to the extent, if any. such loss has not been set off against the a ricultur ~ear commencing on the 1 st day of April. 1987. 
assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April. 1988 or the l~t day or~I~~~~~8~r the prevIous year relevant to Ihe 60 

5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
29 
(vii) the loss 10 computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1 st day of April, 1988, to 
the extent, H any, such Io.ss has not been set off against the agricultural income for the previous year relevant to the assessment 
year commencing on the 1 st day of April, 1989, and 
(viii) the los8 so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1989, 
shall be set off against the agricultural income of the assessee for the previous year relevant to the assessment year 
commencing on the 1st day of April, 1990. 
(2) Where the assessee has, in the previous year relevant to the as ... sment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1991 or; 
if by virtue of any provision of the Income-tax Act, Income-tax is to be charged in respect of the income of a period other than that 
previous year, in such other period, any agricultural income and the net result of the computation of the agricultural income of the 
aSS88888 for anyone or more of the previous years relevant to the ... ament years commencing on the 1 st day of April, 1983 or 
the 1 st day of April, 1984 or the 1st day of April, 1985 or the 1st day of April, 1986 or the 1st day of April, 1987 or the 1st day of April, 
1988 or the 1 st day of April, 1989 or the 1st day of April, 1990, is a loss, then, for the purposes of sub-section (8) of sadion 2 of this 
Act,-
(i) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1983, 
to the extent, if any, such loss has not been $et off against the agricultural income for the previous year relevant to the 
assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1984 Of the 1st day of AprIl, 1 gaS or the 1s1 day of April, 1986 or the 1st 
day of April, 1987 or the 1st day of April, 1988 or the 1st day of April, 1989 or the 1st day of April, 1990, 
(ii) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment y.ar commencing on the 1 st day of April, 1984, 
to the extent. if any, such loss has not been set off against the agricultural income for the previous year relevaoJ to the 
assessment year commencing on the 1 st day of April, 1985 or the 1st day of April, 1986 or the 1st day of April, 1987 or the 1 Sf day 
of April. 1988 or the 1 st day of April, 1989 or the 1 st day of April, 1990, 
(iii) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1 st day of Aprii, 1985, 
to the extent, if any, such loss has not been set off against the agricultural income for the previous year relevant to the 
assessment year commencing on the 1 st day of April, 1986 or the 1st day of April, 1987 or the 1st day of April, 1988 or the 1st day 
of April, 1989 or the 1 st day of April, 1990, 
(iv) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1 st day of April, 1986, 
to the extent, if any, such loss has not been set off against the agricultural income for the previous year relevant to the 
assessment year commencing on the 1 st day of April, 1987 or the 1st day 01 April. 1988 or the 1st day of April, 1989 or the 1st day 
of April, 1990, 
30 (v) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1 st day of April, 1987, 
to the extent, if any, such loss has not been set off against the agricultural income for the previous year relevant to the 
assessment year commencing on the 1 st day of April. 1988 or the 1st day of April, 1989 or the 1st day of April, 1990, 
(vi) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day 01 April, 1988, 
to the extent, if any, such loss has not been set off against the agricultural income for the previous year relevant to the 
35 assessment year commencing on the 1 st day of April, 1989 or the 1st day of April, 1990, 
40 
(vii) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1989, 
to the extent, if any, such loss has not been set off against the agricultural income for the previous year relevant to the 
assessment year commencing on the 1 st day of April, 1990, and 
(viii) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1 $I day of April, 
1990, 
shall be set off against the agricultural income of the assessee lor the previous year relevant to the assessment year 
commencing on the 1st day of April, 1991. 
(3) Where a change has occurred in the constitution of a firm, nothing in sub-rule ( J ) or sub-rule (2) shall entitle the firm to 
set off so much 01 the loss proportionate to the share of a retired or deceased partner computed in the manner laid down in sub-
45 section (1), sub-section (2) and sub-section (3) of section 67 of the Income-tax Act as exceeds his share 01 profits, if any, 01 the 
previous year in the firm, or entitle any partner to the benefit of any portion of the said loss (computed in the manner aforesaid) which 
is not apportionable to him. 
(4) Where any person deriving any agricultural income from any source has been succeeded in such capacity by another 
person. otherwise than by inheritance, nothing in sub-rule (J) or sub-rule (2) shall entitle any person, other than the person 
50 incurring the loss, to have it set off under sub-rule (J) or, as the case may be, sub-rule (2). 
14 of 1!182. (5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this rule, no loss which has not been determined by the Assessing Officer 
11 of 1983. under the provisions of these rules or the rules contained in Part IV of the First Schedule to the Finance Act, 1982, or of the 
~;: ::: First Schedule to the Finance Act, 1983, or 01 the First Schedule to the Finance Act.1984, or of the First Schedule to the 
23 of 11188. Finance Act, 1985, or of the First Schedule to the Finance ~, 1986, or of the First Schedule to the Finance Act, 1987, or 01 
55 11 of lD87. the First Schedule to the Finance Act, 1988, or of the First Schedule to the Finance Act, 1989, shall be set off under sub· 
:Ie of 1 1188. 
1301 1l18li. rule (1) or, as the case may be, sub-rule (2) .. 
Rule JO.-Where the net resu~ of the computation made in accordance with these rules is a loss, the loss so computed shall 
be ignored and the net agricultural income shall be deemed to be nil. 
Rule J J . -The provisions of the Income-tax Act relating to procedure for assessment (including the provisions of section 288A 
60 relating to rounding off of income) shall, with the necessary modifications, apply in relation to the computation of the net agricultural 
income of the assessee as they apply in relation to the assessment of the total income. 
Rule l2.-For the purposes of computing the net agricuhural income of the assessee, the Assessing Officer shall have the same 
powers as he has under the Income-tax Act for the purposes of assessment of the total income. 
• 

THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(Set> section 61 ) 
In the First Schedule to the Customs Tariff Ad.,-
(1) In Chapter 26, in sub-heading NQ. 2620.30, for the entry in column (4), the entry -150%- shall be substituted; 
(2) in Chapter 29, in sub-heading No. 2925.11, fOr the entry in column (4), the entry -100% plus As. 25 per Kg.- shall be 5 
substituted; 
(3) in Chapter 85, in sub-heading No. 8511.10, for the entry In column (4), the entry -100% plus Rs. 10 per piece- shall be 
substituted; 
(4) in Chapter 96, in sub-heading Nos. 9607.11 and 9607.19, forth. entry in column (4), the entry -1SO%plusRs. 5 per metre-
shall be substituted. 10 
30 

In the Schedule to the Central ExcIH Tariff NA.-
THE nilRD SCHEDULE 
(SHMdIon 84) 
PART I 
5 (1) in Chapter 4, In lub-headlng No. 0401.13, for the entry In column (3). the entry ·-MIIk powder, ott. than powder apecIaIly 
prepared for feeding Infantl, put up In un. COIUInera and ordlnarly Irtencled for ..... IhIIII be lUbItIuMd; 
(2) In Chapter 9, in Iub-headlng Nos. 0101.20 and 0101.80. for the entry In column (4), the entry·''''·''''' be lUbltituted; 
(3) in Chapter 11, in sib-heading Nos. 1102.00 and 1104.00, for the entry In ooIumn (4), the entry ·15"'· shall be 
substituted; 
10 (4) in Chapter 13, in sub-heading No. 1301.90. for the entry in column (4), the entry ·'5"'· lhalJ be lubltltuted; 
(5) in Chapter 14. in sub-heading No. 1401.00. for the entry in column (4). the entry ·'5"'· ahalJ be aubllluted; 
(6) in Chapter 15, in lub-heading Nos. 1501.00, 1505.00 and 1507.00, lor the entry In column (4). the entry ·'5"'" ahall be 
substituted; 
(7) in Chapter 17, in sub-heading Nos. 1701.90, 1702.29, 1702.30 and 1704.90, for the entry In column (4). the entry ., 0%. Ihall 
15 be substituted; 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
(8)in Chapter 18,lnsub-heading Nos. 1801.00, 1802.00, 1803.00 and 1804.00, for the entry In column (4), the entry "15%"shall 
be substituted; 
(9) in Chapter 21 ,-
(8) in sub-heading Nos. 2101.30, 2102.10 and 2102.90, for the entry In column (4), the entry "15"'· ahaH be subetltuted; 
(b) In sub-heading No. 2105.00, for the entry In column (4), the entry "15% pIu. As. 2 per lit,.· shell be lubetltutad; 
(e) in heading No. 21.06, In column (3), for the entry "-Containing lime or katha (cat«:hu)or both, whether or not containing 
tobacco:", the entry "-Containing lime, katha (Clllechu) or tobacco or anyone or more of theae ingredients:" shall be 
substituted; 
(d) in sub-heading Nos. 2106.11 and 2106.90, for the entry In column (4), the entry "40% pIu. RI. 50 per kilogram" ahall be 
substituted : 
(10) in Chapter 22, in sub-heading No. 2203.00, for the entry in column (4), the entry "15%" Ihall be substituted; 
(11) in Chapter 23, in sub-heading No. 2301.00, lor the entry in column (4), the entry "Nir shall be substituted; 
(12) in Chapter 24,-
(8) in sub-heading Nos. 2403.11,2403.12,2403.21 and 2403.22, for the entry in column (4), the entry "RI. 500 per thousand 
or 3000/0 plus Rs. 20 per thousand, whichever Is higher" shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-heading Nos. !404.60 and 2404.90, for the entry in column (4), the entry "15%" shaH be substituted; 
(13) in Chapter 25,-
fa) for NOTE 2, the following NoTE shall be substituted, namely :-
"2. Except where their context otherwise requires, heading Nos. 25.01, 25.03 and 25.85 cover only products which have 
been washed (even with chemical substances, eliminating the Impurities without changing the structu,. of the product), 
crushed, ground. powdered,levigated. sifted, screened. orconcentrated by flotation, mlgnetic uparalion or other mechanical 
or physical processes (except crystallisation), but not products that have been roasted, calcined, obtained by mixing or 
subjected to processing beyond that mentioned in each heading or sub-heading". 
(b) In sub-heading Nos. 2502.10, 2502.30 and 2504.90, for the entry in column (4), the entry "10%· shall be substituted; 
(14) in Chapter 26, in sub-heading Nos. 2601.00, 2602.00, 2603.00, 2604.00, 2605.00, 2606.00, 2607.00, 2608.00, 2609.00( 
2610.00,2611.00,2612.00,2613.00,2614.00,2615.00, 2616.00, 2617.00, 2618.00, 2619.00, 2620.00 and 2621.00, forthe ently in 
column (4), the entry -10%" shall be substituted; 
(15) In Chapter 28,-
(a) in sub-heading No. 2815.00, for the entry In column (4), the entry "15% plus RI.1,OOO per tonne" shall be substituted; 
45 (b) In sub-heading No. 2818.10, for the entry In column (4), the entry· 10%" shall be aubetituted; 
(16)in Chapter 29, in sub-heading Nos. 2917.10 and 2917.20, forthe.ntry in column (4). the entry "15% pIu. Rs. 5 perkUogram" 
shall be substituted; 
(17) In Chapter 30, in sub-heading No. 3001.00, for the entry In oolumn (4), the entry "15%" shall be substituted; 
31 

32 
(18) In ChIpIIr 34, In ,ub-hMd1ng No. 3402.80, for the entry In column (4), the entry "25'" pIw AI. 2,000 per tame-"'" be 
1UbItIIuted; 
(18) In CMfUr 40,-
(a) In NoTE 9,-
(I) after the word IIld figu ... -and 40.08:, the wordI·except .. otherwise 'provided: ahaH be InMrted: 5 
(I/)the following paragraph shall be in .. rted at the end, namely:-
'Sub-helldlng No. 4008.2i .haH allO apply to "plat •• , ·.h ... • and ·strlps·, whether or not cut to "'..,e, and 1Urt.De-
worked or further worked 10 .. to render them fit for r8lOIing or repairing or re-treading of rubber tyreI. '; 
(b) In .Lb-hellding No. 4011.20, for the entry In column (4), the entry ·AI. 35 per tyre· 'hall be 1UbItftuted; 
(e)ln .Lb-helldlng No. 4011.50, for the entry In column (4), the entry "As. 2,600 per Iyr.· shaH belUbltltuted; 1 D 
(d) In aub-huding No. 4011.91, for the entry In column (4), the entry "60%. shall be substituted; 
(e) In lub-hNd.,g No. 4011.88, for the entry in QOiumn (4), the entry "30%. shall be aubltituted; 
(f) In sub-heading No. 4012.19, for the entry in column (4), the entry -As. 23 per flap- shall be aubltltuted; 
(20) In Chapter 41, In ~ub-heading No. 4101.00, for the entry In column (4), the entry ·10%· shan be 1UbetiIuted; 
(21) In Chapter42,1n su~heading No. 4291.90, for the entry In column (4), the entry ·15"'· shaH be subttltuted; 15 
(22) In Chapter 43, In .ub-headlng No. 4301.00, for the entry In column (4), the entry -15%· shall be substituted; 
(23) in Chapter 44,-
(I) ~lD 5 and 6 shall be renumbered as NOlD 6 and 7 respectively and before NOTE 6 as 10 renumbered, the following NoTE 
shall be In .. rted, namely:-
'5. For the purposes of heading No. 44.08, the expression -similar laminated wood- includes bIockboard,lamlnboard and 20 
battenboard, In which the core Is thick and composed of blocks, laths or battens of wood glued together and IUrfllCed with the 
outer plies and also panels In which the wooden core is replaced by other materials such as a layer or layera of particle boW, 
fibre board, wood waste glued together, asbestos or cork.'; 
(b)inaub-headlng Nos. 4-401.00,4402.00, 4403.00, 4404.00, 4405.00 and 441 0.90, for the entry in c:clumn (4~, the entry ·15"'" 
shall be substituted; 25 
(24) In Chapter 46, In sub-heading No. 4601.00, for the entry In column (4), the entry -10%- shall be IUbstltuted; 
(25) In Chapter 47, In sub-heading No. 4701.00. for the entry in column (4), the entry -10%· shall be IUbstituted; 
(26) In Chapter 48,-
(a) NoTEs 8, 9 and 10 shall be renumbered as NOTES 9, 10 and 11 respectively and before NOTE 9 as 10 renumbered, the 
foliowing NoTE shall be Inserted, namely:- 30 
'8. For the purposes m heading No. 48.14, the expression ·wallpaper and similar wall coverings" applies only to: 
(I) Paper In rolls, of a width of not less than 45 ems. and not more than 160 ems., suitable for wall or ceiling 
decoration: 
(i) Grained, embossed, surface-coioured, deslgn-printed or otherwise surface-demrated (I.g., with textile flock), 
whether or not coated or covered with transparent protective plastics; 35 
(ii) With an uneven surface resulting from the incorporation of particles of wood, straw, etc.; 
(iii) Coated or covered on the face side with plastics, the layer of plastics being grained ambo .. ed coloured design-
printed or otherwise decorated; or ' , , 
(Iv)Covered on the ftlCe side with plaiting material, whether or not bound together In parallel It rands or woven; 
(b) Borde,. and friezes, of paper, treated as above, whether or not In rolls, suitable for wall or calHng d8COt'lltlon; 40 
(e) Wall coverings of paper made up of several panels,in rolls or sh .. ts, printed 10 as to make up alO8ne design or motif 
when applied to a wall. • 
. Products on a base ~ paper or paperboard suitable for use both as floor coverings and as wall coverings, .... to be claulfled In helldlng No. 48.15.; 
(b) in sub-heading No. 4815.00, for the entry In column (4), the entry "30%- shall be substituted; 4S 
(e)in lUb-heading Noa.4B17.00, 4818.00, 4819.90, 4820.00, 4821.00and 4822.00 for the entry In column (4) th ..... "'.15-x.. shall be substituted; " ..... , 
(27) In Chapter 49, In sub-heading No. 4901.10, for the entry in column (4), the entry "15%· shall be substituted; 
..=~~hapter 53, In su~headlng Nos. 5302.20 and 5306.29, for the entry in column (4), the entry ·Rs. 700 per IOnne· shal be 
50 
.J::.:.~~hapter 58, In sub-heading No. 5607.19, for the entry in column (4), the ,entry ·As. 700 par tonne- nil be 

5 
10 
33 
(30) In Chi!pt.r 57. In .ub-h • .tlng No. 5702.20. for the .ntry In column (4). the .ntlY -At. 700 per tonne- IhiII be 
.ubetltut.t; 
(31) in CMpter 59.-
(a) in NoTE 2. in claUM (q. the warda "bv dot printing proceu- .haH be omitted; 
(b) NoTES4. 5 and 6ahaN be renumbered .. NoTES5. 6 and 7 respectively and before NoTE 5 .. 10 r .. umbered. the folowlng 
NaTE shall be Inserted. namely:-
'4. Forthe purpo.e. of heading No. 59.04. the .xpr ... lon '.xtUe wall coverings-appIIe.1O products In rolla. of a width of not 
le .. than45cm •.•• ultableforwaJlorcelllngdecor.tlon.con.latlngofat.xtlle.urf-=ewhlchhasbeenfixedon.t.cklngorhai 
been tr.ated on the back (Impregnated or coaled to permit paatlng). 
This heading does not. however.lIPf)Iyto wallcoveringa consisting of textile flock or duslflxed directly on abllcking of paper 
(heading No. 48.14).'; 
(e) In .ub-heading Nos. 5903.19. 5903.29 and 5903.99. for the .ntlY In column (4). the entry "30% plus RI.15 per aqUIf'l 
m.tre plus the duty for the time being leviable on base fabricl. If not already paid-.ha11 be lUbatltuted; 
(32) in Chapter 64. in (lub-headlng Nos. 6401.19 and 6401.99, for the entry in column (4). the entry -'0%- .haH be 
15 .ubstltuted; 
(33) in Chapter 65, in .ub-headlng Nos. 6501.80 and 6501.90. for the entry In column (4), the entry -10%- .hall be 
.ubstituted; 
(34) in Chapter 66, in sub-headlng No. 6602.00, for the entry in column (4). the entry -10%-.haIl be .ubstituted; 
(35) In Chapter 67, in .ub-headlng Nos. 6701.00 and 6702.00, for the entry In column (4), the entry -10%- shaH be 
20 substituted; 
(36) in Chapter 68,-
(a) In .ub-heading No. 6801.90, for the entry in column (4), the entry -15%-ahall be .ubstltuted; 
(b) in sub-heading No. 6807.00, for the entry in column (4), the entry -30%- .hall be substituted; 
(37) in Chapter 70, in sub-heading No. 7009.00, for the .ntry in column (4), the .ntlY -10%- shall be .ubstltuted; 
25 (38) in Chapter 71, in sub-heading Nos. 7101.39, 7101.40, 7101.60, 7101.70. 7101.80 and 7101.90, for the entry. In column (4), 
the entry -15%- shall be substituted; 
(39) in Chapter 72,-
(a) in sub-heading Nos. 7201.00, 7203.00 and 7204.10, for the entry in column (4), the entry -As. 400 per tonne-.haH be 
substituted; 
30 (b) in sub-heading No. 7204.20, for the entry In column (4), the entry "R •. 2,000 per tonne- .haH be .ubstltuted; 
(e) in sub-heading Nos.7205.10 and 7206.10, for the entry in column (4), the entry "As. 400 per tonne- shall be 
substituted; 
(40) in Chapter 73.-
(a) in sub-heading Nos. 7303.00 and 7304.10, fOr the entry In column (4). the entry "As. 400 per tonne- shall be 
36 substituted; 
(b) in sub-heading No. 7304.90, for the entry in column (4), the entry "As. 3,000 per IOnne-shaH be substituted; 
(e) in sub-heading No. 7305.10, for the entry in column (4), the entry "As. 400 per tonne- ahall be substituted; 
(d) in sub-heading No. 7305.90, for the entry in column (4), the entry "As. 3,000 per IOnne-.haH be .ubstituted; 
(e) in sub-heading No. 7306.10, for the entry in column (4). the entry "A •. 400 per tonne- ahall be .ubstluted; 
40 (f)in sub-heading No. 7306.90, for the entry in column (4), the .ntlY "As. 3,000 per tonne-Ihall be substituted; 
(g) in .ub-heading No •. 7321.10 and 7321.20, for the entry in column (4), the entry "25""-.haH be substituted; 
(h) in .ub-heading No. 7325.10, for the .ntry In column (4), the .ntry "A •. 400 per tonne- shall be substituted; 
(41) in Chapter 78,-
(a) in sub-heading Nos. 7801.10, 7801.90 and 7802.00. for the entry in column (4), th •• ntry "As. 4.000 per tonne-shall be 
45 .ubstltuted; 
(b) in sub-heading No. 7803.10, for the entry In column (4). the .ntry -AI. 5,000 per tonne-.haH be tubstltuted; 
(e) in .ub-heading No. 7803.21. for the entry In column (4), the entry "20%- thall be IUbstltutad; 
(d) in .ub-heading No. 7803.29, for the entry in column (4), the entry "Rs. 5,000 per tonne-shall be substituted; 
(e) in .ub-h.adlng No. 7803.30, for the entry in column (4), the .ntry "As. 4,000 per tonn.- .han be tubltituted; 
50 (f) in .ub-heading No. 7804.10, for the entry in column (4), the entry '''As. 5,000 per tonne-shall be subetltuted; 
(g) in sub-heading Nos. 7804.20, 7805.10, 7805.20 and 7806.00. for th. entry in column (4), the entry ~-ahall be 
substituted; 
• 

(.fI) In ChIpeIr 78,- _ 
(~In IUb-hudIng HM. 7103.10 Ind 7903.80, for the entry in column (4), the entry "20% lhall be aubllllUIId; 
(b) In lub-hHdlng b. 7904.21 Ind 7906.10, for the entry In column (4), the entry "30%-shall be ......... j 
(e)ln tlb-headlng b. 7906.20, 7907.10 and 7907.80, for the entry In column (4), the entry "2O%-lMIIbt aubetltuted; 5 
(43) In CMpter as,-
(a) In Iub-heedlng No. 8521.00, for the entry In column (4), the entry -40%- shall be 1UbstItuted; 
(b) In Iub-heedlng No. 8543.00, for the entry In column (4). the entry "25"'-thai be aubltltuted; 
(.u) In Chapter 87.-
(a)1n Iub-t.dlng No. 8703.00. for the entry in column (4). the entry -4O%-.a. be 1UbstItuted; 10 
(b) In lib-heeding Not. 8708.20 and 8706.40, for the entry in column (4). the entry "25% plu. AI. 8.000 per chulil-ihall be 
tubduted; 
(e) In lub-headlng No. 8708.30. for the entry in column (4). the entry -40%- shall be substituted; and 
(45) In Chapter 96, in sub-heading No. 9617.00, for the entry in column (4), the entry -10%-thaa be lubItitutecI. 
PART II 
Heading Sub- Rate of 15 
No. heading Description of goods duty 
No. 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
In the Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Ad.-
(1) In Chapter 22, aher heading No. 22.03 and the enkies reiating thereto, the following shall be inserted, namely:- 20 
"22.04 2204.00 ETHYl AlCOHOL OF ANY STRENGTH WHETHER DENATURED OR NOT. BUT NOT RI. 8 per 
INCLUDING AlCOHOlIC LIQUOR FOR HUMAN CONSUMPTION :: ;:_ 
oenlllge point 
Ilr8ngth of 25 
alcohol"; 
(2) in Chapter 25, for heading No. 25.05 and the entries relating thereto. the following shall be substituted. namely:-
"25.05 MINERAL SUBSTANCES NOT ELSEWHERE SPECIFIED (INCLUDING CLAY, EARTH 
COlOURS, NATURAL ABRASIVES, SULPHURS. SLATE AND STONE), LIME; PLASTERS 
WITH A BASIS OF CAlCIUM SULPHATE, WHETHER OR NOT COLOURED, BUT NOT 
INCLUDING PLASTERS SPECIALLY PREPARED FOR USE IN DENTISTRY 
2505.10 -Kaolin and other kaolinic clays, whether or not calcined; other clays, andalusite, kyanite and 15% 
siHlmanit., whether or not calcined; mulilte; chamotte or dinas earths 
2505.20 -Natural barium lulphate (barytes); natural barium carbonate (witherite), whether or not calcined, 
other than barium oxide of heading No. 28.16 15% 
2505.30 -Silicious fossil meals and similar silicious earths. whether or not calcined. 01 an apparent specific 15% 
gravity of 1 or less 
2505.40 -Dolomite, whether or not calcined; natural magnesium carbonate (magnesite); fused magnesia; 15% 
30 
35 
dead burned (Iintered) magnesia, whether or not containing small quantities of other oxides added 
before sinterlng; other magnesium oxide. whether or not pure 40 
2505.50 -Gypsum; anhydrite; plasters (consisting of calcined gypsum or calcium sulphate) whether or not 15% 
coloured. with or without small quantities of accelerators or retarders 
2505.60 -Quick lime, slaked lime and hydraulic Hme. other than calcium oxide and hydroxide of heading No. 15% 
28.25 
2505.70 oNllural boratel and concentrates thereof (whether or not calcined). but not Including bor.... 15% 45 
separated from natural brine; natural boric acid containing not more than 85% of H3 803 calculated 
on the dry weight; .arth colours, strontianite (whethtlr or not calcined) other than strontium 
ox~ • 
2505.80 .()ther 
15%-; 
• 

35 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
(3) in Chapter 40, after sub-heading No. 4011.70 and the entries relating thereto. the following shall be inserted, namely:-
-4011.80 -Of a kind used on animal drawn vehicles or hand carts, bearing prominent markings oftheletter8 60%-; 
ADVthereon 
5 (4) in Chapter 52,-
(a)for heading No. 52.03 and the entries relating thereto, the following shall be SUbstituted, namely:-
"52.03 5203.00 COTTON YARN INCLUDING SEWING THREAD, NOT CONTAINING SYN11iETIC STAPLE 20,.,.,. 
FIBRES count per 
kIogmm-; 
(b) for heading Nos. 52.06, 52.07, 52.08, 52.09, 52.10 and 52.11 and the entries relating thereto, the following shall be 
10 substituted, namely:-
"52.06 5206.00 
15 
52.07 5207.00 
20 
25 52.08 5208.00 
30 
52.09 5209.00 
35 
40 
52.10 5210.00 
COnON FABRICS (EXCLUDING FABRICS COVERED UNDER HEADING NOS. 52.09, 
52.10 AND 52.11),-
(a) WOVEN ON LOOMS OTHER THAN HANDLOOMS, AND 
(b) SUBJECTED TO THE PROCESS OF BLEACHING, MERCER ISING, DYEING, PRINTING, 
WATER-PROOFING, SHRINK-PROOFING, ORGANDIE PROCESSING OR ANY OTHER 
PROCESS OR ANY TWO OR MORE OF THESE PROCESSES WITH THE AID OF 
POWER OR STEAM 
COTTON FABRICS (EXCLUDING FABRICS COVERED UNDER HEADING NOS. 52.09, 52.1 0 
AND 52.11 ),-
(a) WOVEN ON LOOMS OTHER THAN HANDLOOMS, AND 
(b) SUBJECTED TO THE PROCESS OF BLEACHING, MERCERISING, DYEING, PRINTING, 
WATER-PROOFING, SHRINK-PROOFING, ORGAN DIE PROCESSING OR ANY OTHER 
PROCESS OR ANY TWO OR MORE OF THESE PROCESSES WITHOUT THE AID OF 
POWER OR STEAM 
COTTON FABRICS (EXCLUDING FABRICS COVERED UNDER HEADING NOS. 52.09, 
52.10, 52.11 AND 52.12),-
(a) WOVEN ON HANDLOOMS, AND 
(b) SUBJECTED TO THE PROCESS OF BLEACHING, MERCERISING, DYEING, PRINTING, 
WATER-PROOFING, SHRINK-PROOFING, ORGANDIE PROCESSING OR ANY 
OTHER PROCESS OR ANY 1WO OR MORE OF THESE PROCESSES 
COTTON FABRICS,-
(a) WOVEN, 
(b) SUBJECTED TO THE PROCESS OF BLEACHING, MERCER ISING, DYEING, PRINTING, 
WATER-PROOFING, SHRINK-PROOFING, ORGANDIE PROCESSING OR ANY OTHER 
PROCESS OR ANY TWO OR MORE OF THESE PROCESSES, 
(e) CONTAINING (i) COTTON, AND (ii) POLYESTER STAPLE FIBRE OR POlYESTER 
FILAMENT YARN OR BOTH (BUT NOT CONTAINING ANY OTHER TEXTILE 
MATERIAL). AND 
(t!) IN WHICH THE PROPORTION OF POLYESTER STAPLE FIBRE OR FILAMENT YARN 
OR BOTH IS MORE THAN 040% BY WEIGHT OF THE TOTAL FIBRE CONTENT 
COnON FABRICS,-
(a) WOVEN, 
tb) SUBJECTED TO THE PROCESS OF BlEACHING, MERCERISING, DYEING. PRINTING, 
WATER-PROOFING, SHRINK-PROOFING, ORGANDIE PROCESSING OR ANY 
45 OTHER PROCESS OR ANY TWO OR MORE OF THESE PROCESSES, 
(e) CONTAINING (i) COTTON, (H}POlYESTER STAPLE FIBRE, AND (Iii) RAMIE OR ANY 
ONE OR MOREARTIFICIAL"STAPLE FIBRES (NOT CONTAINING ANY OTHER TEXTILE 
MATERIAL), AND 
(d) IN WHICH THE PROPORT1ON OF POl VESTER STAPLE FIBRE IS MORE THAN 40% 
50 BY WEIGHT OF THE TOTAl. FIBRE CONTENT 
20% 
20% 
20% 
20% 
20% 
52.11 5211.00 COTTON FABRtCS,- 20%-; 
r-J WOVEN, 
tb) SUBJECTED TO THE PROCESS OF BlEACHING, MERCERISING. DYEING, PRINTING, 
WATER-PROOFING,SHRNC-PAOOFING,OAGANOEPAOCeSSINGORANYOTHER 
55 PROCESS OR ANY TWO OR MORE OF THESE PROCESSES, 
.. 

(1) (2) 
36 
(3) 
(e) CONTAINING (~COTTON, AND (II) POl VESTER STAPLE FIBRE, AND 
(d) OF VALUE EXCEEDING RUPEES TWENTY·FIVE PER SQUARE METRE 
(4) 
(S) in Chapter 54,-
(a}for heading Nos. 54.02. 54.03 and 54.04 and the entries relating thereto, the following shall be substituted, namely:-
'M.02 &402.00 SYNTHETIC FIlAMENT YARN AND SEWING THREAD INClUDING SYNTHETIC ~per 
MONOFILAMENT OF LESS THAN 60 DENIERS, NOT TEXTURED -wo-" 
54.03 
54.04 
5403.00 SYNTHETIC FILAMENTYARN,INCLUDING SYNTHETIC MONOFILAMENT OF LESS THAN 80 AI. 100 per 
DENIERS, TEXTURED IdIagrwn 
ARTIFICIAL FILAMENT YARN AND SEWING THREAD, INCLUDING ARTIFICIAL RI. 25 per 
MONOFILAMENT OF LESS THAN 80 OENIERS, NOT TEXTURED 1ciIagrmI"; 
(b) for heeding Nos. 54.08, 54.10, 54.11 and 54.12 and the entries relating thereto, the following shall be substituted, 
name!y:-
"54.08 50109.00 FABRICS OF MAN·MADE FILAMENT YARN (INCLUDING FABRICS OBTAINED FROM 20% 
MATERIALS OF HEADING NOS. 54.06 AND 54.07 BUT EXCLUDING FABRICS COVERED 
5 
10 
UNDER HEADING NO. 54.12).- 15 
(a) WOVEN ON LOOMS OTHER THAN HANDLOOMS. AND 
(b) SUIJECTED TO THE PROCESS OF BLEACHING. DYEING. PRINTING. SHRINK· 
PROOFING. TENTERING. HEAT -SETTING. CREASE RESISTANT PROCESSING OR ANY 
OTHER PROCESS OR ANY TWO OR MORE OF THESE PROCESSES WITH THE AID OF 
POWER OR STEAM 
54.10 5410.00 FABRICS OF MAN-MADE FILAMENT YARN (INCLUDING FABRICS OBTAINED FROM 20% 
MATERIAlS OF HEADING NOS. 54.06 AND 54.07 BUT EXCLUDING FABRICS COVERED 
UNDER HEADING NO. 54.12).-
(a) WOVEN ON LOOMS OTHER THAN HANDLOOMS. AND 
20 
(b) SUBJECTED TO THE PROCESS OF BLEACHING. DYEING, PRINTING. SHRINK· 2S 
PROOFING. TENTERING. HEAT -SETTING. CREASE RESISTANT PROCESSING OR ANY 
OTHER PROCESS OR ANY TWO OR MORE OF THESE PROCESSES WITHOUT THE AID 
OF POWER OR STEAM 
54.11 5411.00 FABRICS OF MAN-MADE FILAMENT YARN (INCLUDING FABRICS OBTAINED FROM 20% 
MATERIALS OF HEADING NOS. 54.06 AND 54.07 BUT EXCLUDING FABRICS COVERED 30 
UNDER HEADING NO. 54.12).-
(a) WOVEN ON HANDLOOMS. AND 
(b) SUBJECTED TO THE PROCESS OF BLEACHING. DYEING. PRINTING. SHRINK. 
PROOFING. TENTERING. HEAT-sETTING. CREASE RESISTANT PROCESSING OR ANY 
OTHER PROCESS OR ANY TWO OR MORE OF THESE PROCESSES 
54.12 5412.00 FABRICS OF POlYESTER FILAMENTYARN.-
(~ WOVEN. 
(b) SUBJECTED TO THE PROCESS OF BLEACHING. DYEING. PRINTING. SHRINK. 
PROOFING. TENTERING. HEAT·SETTING. CREASE RESISTANT PROCESSING OR ANY 
OTHER PROCESS OR AHY TWO OR MORE OF THESE PROCESSES. 
(e) CONTAINING (I) COTTON, AND (II) POLYESTER STAPLE FIBRE (NOT CONTAINING 
AHY OTHER TEXTl.E MATERIAL). AND 
(d) IN WHICH THE PROPORTION OFPOLVESTER STAPLE FIBRE AND YARN IS LESS THAN 
7cw. BY WEIGHT OF THE TOTAL RaRE CONTENT 
(f) In ChIpIer 55,-
(e)for heading No. 55.051ftd the ..... relating ....... 0. the following shaH be aubltitut.d, namely:-
"55.05 51105.00 YAM (INCLUDING Sew.IG THREAD) OF ARTIFICIAL. STAPLE FIBRES NOT CONTAINING 20,... per 
SYNTHETIC STAPLE FtBRES • CDUnI ~ 1dIogrWn"; 
35 
40 

37 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
(b) for he.dlng Nos. 55.08,55.09, 55.10. 55.11 and 55.12 and the entries relating ther8to, the following shall be substituted. 
namely:-
"55.08 5508.00 FABRICS OF MAN·MADE STAPLE FIBRES (EXCLUDING FABRICS COVERED UNDER 20% 
5 HEADING NOS. 55.11 AND 55.12).-
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
4S 
50 
(II) WOVEN ON LOOMS OTHER THAN HANDlOOMS. AND 
(b) SUBJECTED TO THE PROCESS OF BlEACHING, DYEING. PRINTING. SHRINK· 
PROOFING, TENTERING. HEAT -SETTING. CREASE RESISTANT PROCESSING OR ANY 
OTHER PROCESS OR ANY TWO OR MORE OF THESE PROCESSES WITH THE AID OF 
POWER OR STEAM 
55.09 5509.00 FABRICS OF MAN·MADE STAPLE FIBRES (EXCLUDING FABRICS COVERED UNDER 20% 
HEADING NOS. 55.11 AND 55.12),-
(a) WOVEN ON LOOMS OTHER THAN HANDLOOMS. AND 
(b) SUBJECTED TO THE PROCESS OF BlEACHING, DYEING. PRINTING. SHRINK· 
PROOFING. TENTER lNG, HEAT -sETTING. CREASE RESISTANT PROCESSING OR ANY 
OTHER PROCESS OR ANY TWO OR MORE OF THESE PROCESSES WITHOUT THE AID 
OF POWER OR STEAM 
55.10 5510.00 FABRICS OF MAN-MADE STAPLE FIBRES (EXClUDING FABRICS COVERED UNDER 20% 
HEADING NOS. 55.11 AND 55.12),-
(a) WOVEN ON HANDLOOMS, AND 
(b) SUBJECTED TO THE PROCESS OF BlEACHING, DYEING. PRINTING. SHRINK· 
PROOFING, TENTER lNG, HEAT·SETTING, CREASE RESISTANT PROCESSING OR ANY 
OTHER PROCESS OR ANY TWO OR MORE OF THESE PROCESSES 
55.11 5511.00 FABRICS OF POLYESTER STAPLE FIBRE.- 20% 
(a) WOVEN, 
(b) SUBJECTED TO THE PROCESS OF BlEACHING. DYEING. PRINTING, SHRINK· 
PROOFING, TENTERING. HEAT -SETTING. CREASE RESISTANT PROCESSING OR ANY 
OTHER PROCESS OR ANY TWO OR MORE OF THESE PROCESSES. 
(e) CONTAINING COTTON (NOT CONTAINING ANY OTHER TEXTILE MATERIAL), AND 
(d) IN WHICH THE PROPORTION OF POLYESTER STAPLE FIBRE IS LESS THAN 70% BY 
WEIGHT OF THE TOTAL FIBRE CONTENT 
55.12 5512.00 FABRICS OF MAN· MADE STAPLE FIBRES,- 20%"; 
(a) WOVEN. 
(b) SUBJECTED TO THE PROCESS OF BLEACHING. DYEING. PRINTING. SHRINK· 
PROOFING, TENTERING. HEAT -SETTING. CREASE RESISTANT PROCESSING OR ANY 
OTHER PROCESS OR ANY TWO OR MORE OF THESE PROCESSES. 
(e) CONTAINING (I) POLYESTER STAPLE FIBRE;AND (Iij ANY ONE OR MORE OF THE 
FOLLOWING FIBRES. NAMELY. COTTON. RAMIE AND ARTIFICIAL STAPLE FIBRES 
(NOT CONTAINING ANY OTHER TEXTLE MATERIAl). AND 
(d) IN WHICH THE PROPORTION Of POl VESTER STAPLE FIBRE IS MORE THAN 40% BUT 
LESS THAN 70% BY WEIGHT OF THE TOTAL. FIBRE CONTENT 
(7) In ChllPler 59, for heading No. 59.04 and the entries relating thereto. the following shall be .ubstltuted. namely:-
"59.04 LINOLEUM. WHETHER OR NOT CUT TO SHAPE; FLOOR COVERINGS CONSISTING OF A 
COATING OR COVERING APPLIED ON A TEXTILE BACKING. WHETHER OR NOT CUT TO 
SHAPE; TEXTILE WALL COVERINGS 
5904.10 ·LInoIeum 
5904.20 • T Ixtlle wan covlrlngs 
5904.90 -Other 
10% ,., 
AI. 2,850 par 
lome 
30%". 

11£ FOURTH saEDUl.£ 
(s. MCIIon ea) 
PART I 
In the AI'It Schedule to the AcIdIIIoMI Nits ci ExciM Ad,-
(1)ln IUb-hNdlng Nos. 2403.11 Md 2403.21,tot' the tnIry In column (4),the entry"Rs. 300 perthoUland,or175% pIuI 5 
Ra. 12 per thousand, wtllchtver II ~ sMII be subltltUltd; 
(2)in hHdlng No. 51.08, In column (3), for the words -WOVEN FABRlCSOFWOOl.-, thtworda. tncIc8taandflgur .. "WOVEN 
FABRICS OF WOOl (EXClUDING HAIR BEL 11NG, BlANKETS AND FABRICS OF WIDTH NOT EXCEEDING 15 CMS.)-shaH 
be subltItUled;. 
(3) in heading No. 51.07,-
(a) in column (3), fot' the words -woveN FABRICS OF WOOl-, the words, brackets and figures -WOVEN FABRICS OF 
WOOL (EXCLUDING HAIR BELTING, BLANKETS AND FABRICS OF WIDTH NOT EXCEEDING 15 CMS.,. shall be 
substituted; 
(b) sub-headlng No. 5107.10 and the entries relating thereto shaH be omlntd; 
10 
(4) in sub-heading Nos. 5803.19 and 5803.29, for the entry In column (4), the entry "5% plus As. 3 per Iquare metre plus the 15 
duty tor the time being leviable on bast fabrics, H not already paid-shall be subltltuted; 
(5) heading No. 59.05 and the entries relating thereto shall be omitted. 
PART \I 
Heading Sub- Rate of 
No. heading Description of goods additional 20 
No. duty 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
In the First Schedule to the Additional Dutie, of Excise NJ.,-
(a) for heading Nos. 52.08, 52.07, £2.08, 62.09, 52.10 and 52.11 and the entries relating themo, the following shall be 
substitutad, namely:-
-52.06 5206.00 COTTON FABRICS (EXCLUDING FABRICS COVERED UNDER HEADING NOS. 52.09, 20% pAJ. 
52.10 AND 52.11 ),- RI. 5 per 
52.07 
52.08 
5207.00 
(a) WOVEN ON LOOMS OTHER THAN HANDLOOMS, AND 
(b) SUBJECTED TO THE PROCESS OF BLEACHING, MERCERISING, DYEING, PRINTING, 
WATER-PR()()I:ING. SHRINK-PROOFING. ORGANOIE PROCESSING OR ANY OTHER 
PROCESS OR ANY TWO OR MORE OF THESE PROCESSES WITH THE AID OF POWER 
OR STEAM 
square metre 
COTTON FABRICS (EXCLUDING FABRICS COVERED UNDER HEADING NOS.52.09, 52.10 20% ".. 
AND 52.11 ).- RI. 5 per 
(a) WOVEN ON LOOMS OTHER THAN HANDLOOMS, AND 
(b) SUBJECTED TO THE PROCESS OF BLEACHING, MERCERISING, DYEING, PRINTING, 
WATER·PROOFING, SHRINK-PROOFING. ORGANDIE PROCESSING OR ANY OTHER 
PROCESS OR ANY TWO OR MORE OF THESE PROCESSES WITHOUT THE AID OF 
POWER OR STEAM 
square metre 
5208.00 COTT~'FABRICS(EXCLUDING FABRICS COVERED UNDER HEADING NOS 5209 5210 20% pAIl 
52.11 AND 52.12).- . . , . 'RI. 5 per 
(a) WOVEN ON HANDLOOMS, AND square meIre 
(b) SUBJECTED TO THE PROCESS OF BlEACHING, MERCERISING, DYEING, PRINTING 
WATER·PROOFING. SHRINK-PROOFING, ORGANOIE PROCESSING OR Nl.Y OTHER 
PROCESS OR ANY 1WO OR MORE OF THESE PROCESSES 
38 
• 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 

(1 ) 
52.09 
s 
10 
52.10 
15 
20 
52.11 
25 
(2) 
5209.00 
5210.00 
5211.00 
3V 
(3) 
COTTON FABRICS.-
(a) WOVEN. 
(b) SUBJECTED TO THE PROCESS OF BLEACHING. MERCERISING. DYEING. PRINTING. 
WATER-PROOFING. SHRINK-PROOFING. ORGANDIE PROCESSING OR ANY OTHER 
PROCESS OR ANY TWO OR MORE OF THESE PROCESSES. 
(e) CONTAINING (i) COTTON, AND (II) POLYESTER STAPLE FIBRE OR POLYESTER 
FILAMENT YARN. OR BOTH (BUT NOT CONTAINING ANY OTHER TEXTILE MATERIAl). 
AND 
(eI) IN WHICH THE PROPORTION OF POLYESTER STAPLE FIBRE OR FIlAMENT YARN OR 
BOTH IS MORE THAN 40% BY WEIGHT OF THE TOTAL FIBRE CONTENT 
COTTON FABRICS.-
(a) WOVEN. 
(b) SUBJECTED TO THE PROCESS OF BLEACHING. MERCERISING. DYEING. PRINTING. 
WATER-PROOFING. SHRINK-PROOFING. ORGAN DIE PROCESSING OR ANY OTHER 
PROCESS OR ANY TWO OR MORE OF THESE PROCESSES. 
(e) CONTAINING (i) COTTON. (ii) POLYESTER STAPLE FIBRE, AND(IH)RAMtEORANYONE 
OR MORE ARTIFICIAL STAPLE FIBRES (NOT CONTAINING ANY OTHER TEXTILE 
MATERIAL), AND 
(d) IN WHICH THE PROPORTION OF POLYESTER STAPLE FIBRE IS MORE THAN 40% BY 
WEIGHT OF THE TOTAL FIBRE CONTENT 
COTTON FABRICS,-
(a) WOVEN, 
(b) SUBJECTED TO THE PROCESS OF BLEACHING, MERCERISING. DYEING. PRINTING. 
WATER-PROOFING, SHRINK-PROOFING, ORGAN DIE PROCESSING OR ANY OTHER 
PROCESS OR ANY TWO OR MORE OF THESE PROCESSES. 
(e) CONTAINING (i) COTTON. AND (ii) POLYESTER STAPLE FIBRE. AND 
(d) OF VALUE EXCEEDING RUPEES TWENTY-FIVE PER SQUARE METRE 
(b) for heading No. 54.09 and the entries relating thereto. the following shall be SUbstituted. namely:-
(4) 
20% pIu. 
As. 5 per 
IqU8I'8 men 
20% pIuI 
As.Sl*' 
aquantmen 
20% pIu. 
RI.5per 
square 
maInt-: 
30 "54.09 5409.00 FABRICS OF MAN-MADE FILAMENT YARN (INCLUDING FABRICS OBTAINED FROM 20% pIu. 
MATERIALS OF HEADING NOS. 54.06 AND 54.07 BUT EXCLUDING FABRICS COVERED RI.5per 
35 
UNDER HEADING NO. 54.12),- ~ 
(a) WOVEN ON LOOMS OTHER THAN HANDLooMS, AND 
(b) SUBJECTED TO THE PROCESS OF BLEACHING, DYEING, PRINTING. SHRINK-
PROOFING, TENTERING. HEAT-SETTING. CREASE RESISTANT PROCESSING OR ANY 
OTHER PROCESS OR ANY TWO OR MORE OF THESE PROCESSES WITH THE AID OF 
POWER OR STEAM 
(e) for headinQ No. 54.12 and the entries relatinQ thereto. the followlnR shall be SUbstituted. namely:-
"54.12 5412.00 FABRICS OF POLYESTER FILAMENT YARN.-
4{) (a) WOVEN. 
20% pIu. 
RI.5per 
square 
maIr8"' 
45 
(b) SUBJECTED TO THE PROCESS OF BLEACHING. DYEING. PRINTING. SHRINK-
PRooFING.TENTERING. HEAT-SETTING. CREASE RESISTANT PROCESSING OR ANY 
OTHER PROCESS OR ANY TWO OR MORE OF THESE PROCESSES. 
(e) CONTAINING (I) COTTON. AND (ii) POLYESTER STAPLE FIBRE (NOT CONTAINING ANY 
OTHER TEXTILE MATERIAL). AND 
(d) IN WHICH THE PROPORTION OF POL YESTERSTAPlE FIBRE AND YARN IS lESS THAN 
70"10 BY WEIGHT OF THE TOTAl FIBRE CONTENT 
(d) for heading No. 55.08 and the entries relating thereto. the following shaH be substituted. namely:-
"55.08 5508.00 FABRICS OF MAN-MADE STAPLE FIBRES (EXCLUDING FABRICS COVERED UNDER ~5 =-
50 HEADING NOS. 55.11 AND 55.12),- ~ 
55 
l1'IIIIreo • 
(a) WOVEN ON LOOMS OTHER THAN HANDLOOMS. AND ' 
(b) SUBJECTED TO THE PROCESS OF BLEACHING. DYEING. PRINTING. SHRINK-
PROOFING. STENTERING. HEAT-SETTING. CREASE RESISTANT PROCESSING OR 
ANY OTHER PROCESS OR ANY TWO OR MORE OF THESE PROCESSES WITH THE AID 
OF POWER OR STEAM 
• r 

(1) (2) (3) (4) 
(e)tor heading Nol. 55.11 and 55.12 and the entries relating thereto, the following shall be substituted, namely:-
"&6..11 5511.00 FABRICS OF POLYESTER STAPLE FIBRE,- ~ ~ 
(a) WOVEN, ~,. men 
(b) SUBJECTED TO THE PROCESS OF BLEACHING, DYEING, PRINTING, SHRINK· 
PROOFING, TENTER lNG, HEAT·SETTING, CREASE RESISTANT PROCESSING OR ANY 
OTHER PROCESS OR ANY TWO OR MORE OF THESE PROCESSES, 
(e) CONTAINING COTTON (NOT CONTAINING ANY OTHER TEXTILE MATERIAL), AND 
(d) IN WHICH THE PROPORTION OF POLYESTER STAPLE FIBRE IS LESS THAN 70% BY 
WEIGHT OF THE TOTAL FIBRE CONTENT 
55.12 5512.00 FABRICS OF MAN·MADE STAPLE FIBRES,-
(a) WOVEN, 
(b) SUBJECTED TO THE PROCESS OF BLEACHING, DYEING, PRINTING, SHRINK. 
PROOFING, TENTERING, HEAT·SETTING, CREASE RESISTANT PROCESSING OR ANY 
OTHER PROCESS OR ANY TWO OR MORE OF THESE PROCESSES, 
(e) CONTAINING (i) POLYESTER STAPLE FIBRE, AND (ii) ANY ONE OR MORE OF THE 
FOLLOWING FIBRES, NAMELY, COTTON, RAMIE AND ARTIFICIAL STAPLE FIBRES 
(NOT CONTAINING ANY OTHER TEXTILE MATERIAL), AND 
(d) IN WHICH THE PROPORTION OF POLYESTER STAPLE FIBRE IS MORE THAN 40% BUT 
LESS THAN 70% BY WEIGHT OF THE TOTAL FIBRE CONTENT 
20% ,.,. 
RI.5per 
squn 
nae"o 
5 
10 
15 
20 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The object Of the Bill is to give effect to the financial proposals of the 
Central Govemment for the financial year 1990-91. The notes on clauses 
explain the various provisions contained in the Bill. 
MAOHU OANOAVATE. 
NEWOElHI; 
The 19th March, 1990. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 117 AND 274 OF THE 
CoNSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. F.3 (1)-B (0) 190, dated the 19th March,1990 from 
Prof. Madhu Oandavate, Minister of Finance, to the Secretary-General, 
Lok Sabha.j 
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the proposed 
Bill, recommends under clause (1) of article 117, read with clause (1) of article 274, 
of the Constitution of India, the introduction of the Finance Bill, 1990, to the 
LokSabha. 
2. The Bill will be introduced in the Lok Sabha immediately after the 
presentation of the Budget on the 19th March, 1990. 
41 

Notes on clauses 
Claus. 2, read with the First Schedule to the Bill, sHka to 
prescribe the rates at which Income-tax (InclUding surcharge 
thereon) Is to be levied on income chargeable to tax for the 
assessment year 1990-91. Further, it lays down the rates at which 
taX is to be deducted at source during the financial year 1990-91 
from Income subject to such deduction under the Income-tax Act; 
and the rates at which ·adYance tax"ls td be paid and tax Is to be 
calculated and charged in special cases for the financial year 
1990-91. 
Rat.s of income-tax for the assessment year 1990-91 
Part I of the First Schedule to the Bill specifies the rates of 
Income-tax on incomes liable to tax for the assessment year 
1990-91. These rates are the same as those specified in Part III of 
the First Schedule to the Finance Act ,1989, for the purposes of 
deduction of tax at source from·Salaries· and for computation of 
·advance tax· payable during the financial year 1989-90. 
As provided by the Finance Act, 1989, the amount of income-
tax computed in accordance with the provisions of this Part shall in 
the case of every person having income exceeding fifty thousand 
rupees be increased,-
(i) in the case of every person, being a resident, not being an 
Indian company, by a surcharge for purposes oft he Union, 
and 
(ii) in the case of an Indian company, by a surcharge, 
calculated at the rate of 8 per cent. of such incorne-tax. 
Rates for deduction of tax at source during the financial year 1990-
91 from income other than ·Sa/aries· 
Part II of the First Scheduleto the Bill specifies the rate at which 
income-tax is to be deducted at source during the financial year 
1990-91 from incomes other than ·Salaries". These rates are the 
same as those specified in Part II of the First Schedule to the 
Finance Act, 1989, for the purposes of deduction of tax at source 
during the financial year 1989-90. The amount of tax so deducted at 
source shall be increased,-
(i) in the case where the payment is made to a person, other 
than a company, resident in India, by a surcharge for 
purposes of the Union, 
(ii) in the case of person being a domestic company, by a 
surcharge, 
calculated at the rate of 8 per cent. of such income-tax. 
Rates for deduction of tax at source from "Salaries", computation 
of "advance tax" and charging of income-tax in special cases 
during the financial year 1990-91 
Part III of the First Schedule to the Oill specifies the rates at 
which income-tax is to be deducted at source from ·Salaries· and 
also the rates at whic; I "advance tax" is to be paid and income-tax is 
to be calculated or charged in special cases for the financial year 
1990-91. 
Sub-Paragraph lof Paragraph A of this Part specifies the rates, 
of income-tax in the case of every individual or Hindu unolVided 
family or every association of persons or body of individuals, 
whether incorporated or not, or every artificial juridical person 
referred to in sub-clause (vii) of clause (31) of section 2 of the 
Income-tax Act, not being a case to which Sub-Paragraph \I of 
Paragraph A or any other Paragraph of Part 11\ applies. In such 
cas .. , the income-tax exemption limit has been increased to 
Rs.22,OOO from Rs.18,000. Further the first slab of income-tax has 
been .xtended to As. 30,000 from Rs. 25,000. 
Sub-Paragraph lof Paragraph C of this Part specifies the ratea 
of income-tax in the case of every registered firm, not being. case 
to which Sub-Paragraph II of this Paragraph applies. In such cases, 
the income-tax exemption limit has been increasad to Ra,15,OOO 
from Rs.1 0,000. The number of tax slabs has also been reduced to 
three from five. The maximum marginal rate of tax haa also been 
reduced to 18 per cent. from the existing rate of 24 per cent. 
Sub-Paragraph 1\ of Paragraph C of this Part specifies the rates 
of income-tax in the case of every registered firm whose total income 
includes income derived from a prote"ncarried on by it and the 
income so included is not less than tlfty-one per cent. of such total 
Income. In such cases the Income-tax exemption limit has been 
increased to Rs.15,000 from Rs.1 0,000. The number of tax slabs 
has also been reduced to three from five. The maximum marginal 
rate of tax has also been reduced to 15 per cent. from the existing 
rate of 22 per cent. 
Paragraph E of this Part specifies the rates of income-tax in the 
case of a company. The rate of income-tax in the case of a 
company in which the public ara substantially interested has been 
reduced to 40 per cent. from the existing rate of 50 per cent. In the 
case of a trading or investment company in which the public are not 
substantially interested, the rate of income-tax has been reduced to 
50 percent. from the existing rate of 60 percent. Further, the rate of 
income-tax in the case of other domestic companies in which the 
public are not substantially interested has also been reduced to 45 
per cent. from the existing rate of 55 per c~nt. 
In the case of every person being an individual, Hindu 
undivided family, firm, association of persons or body of individuals, 
being resident in India, co-operative society and local authority, 
whose total income exceeds seventy-five thousand rupees and 
where income-tax is to be deducted at source or "advance tax" is 
payable in accordance with the provisions of this Part, such amount 
of income-tax shall be increased by a surcharge for purposes of 
Union calculated at the rate of eight per cent. of such income-tax. In 
the case of domestic companies having a total i",-'Ome exceeding 
seventy-five thousand rupees. the amount of income-tax computed 
in accordance with the provisions of this Part shall be increased by a 
surcharge calculated at the rate ofaight per cent. of such income· 
tax. However, in the case of individuals, Hindu undivided families 
and certain association of persons or bodies of individuals, entitled 
to tax rebate under Chapter VIII-A, the surcharge will be calculated 
on the amount of income-tax as reduced by the amount of such 
rebate. 
Clause 3 seeks to amend section 2 of the Income-tax Act 
relating to definitions. 
The proposed amendments vide sub-clause (i) are 
consequential in nature to the amendments proposed in section 28 
of the Act, vide clause 5 whereunder profits on sale of a licence 
granted under the Imports (Control) Order, 1955, cash assistance 
(by ~hatever name called) received or receivable by any person 
against exports under any scheme of the Government of India and 
the repayment of any duty of customs or excise as drawback to any 
person against exports under the Customs and Central Excite 
Duties Drawback Rules, 1971, are being treated as incomes and 
made chargeable to tax under the head ·Profits and gains of 
business or profession·, 
These amendments will take effect retrospectively from 
~he same, dates as specified in relation to the new clauses being 
Inserted In section 28, vid8 sub-clauses (8), (b) and (c) of 
clause 5. 
T~e ~oposed amendment vide sub-clause (ii) seeks to amend 
the definitIOn of the expression "regular assessment· given in clause 
(40) of that section 80 as to clarify that it would mean an assessment 
mllde only under sub-section (3) of section 143 or section 144. 
42 
, 

43 
this am.nd·m~nt will take .ffect retrospectively from W April. 
1989. 
under sutHectlon (3) d this section or any earlier previous year not 
being a previous year e.rller than the year in which the ship or 
ain::raftwas acquired or the machinery or plant was installed or the 
ship, aircraft. machinery or plant was first put to uSe. 
Sub-clause (Iii) seeks to omit clause (42C) of section 2 of the 
Income-tax Act containing definition of the term·security". The 
In .. rtion of the definition of tne term·security· in section 2 dealing 
with general definitions h.t created certain anomalies. The 
proposed omission of this definition is to overcome such 
anomalies. 
This amendment will take effect from 1 st April. 1990 and will. 
acco~ingly, apply in relation to the assessm.nt year 1990-91 and 
subsequent years. 
Clause 4 seeks to amend clause (15) of section 10 of the 
Income-tax Act. 
Sub-clause (i) seeks to amend item (i) of sub-clause (iv) of 
clause (15) of section 10 to extend the exemption from income-tax 
of interest received from Government on deposits made by an 
employee of the Central Government or a State Government, In 
accordance with such scheme as the Central Government may, by 
not~ication in the Official Gazette. frame in this behalf, out of the 
moneys due to him on account of his retirement, whether on 
superannuation or otherwise, also to the employees of a public 
sector company. 
This amendment will take effect from 1 st April, 1991 and wHI, 
accordingly, apply In relation to the assessment year 1991-92 and 
subsequent years. 
On the directions of the Supreme Court, certain amount of 
comper.lsation for the victims of the Bhopal gas tragedy was 
deposited by the Union Carbide Corporation and the Union Carbide 
India Limited to the credit of the Registrar, Supreme Court, in the 
Reserve Bank of India. This amount stands deposited in the 
securities of the Central Government. In order to provide 
exemption on the interest accruing on such securities. sub-clause 
(ii) seeks to insert a new sub-clause (v) in clause (15) of 
section 10. 
This amendment will take effect retrospectively from 1 st April. 
1989 and will. accordingly. apply in relation tothe assessment year 
1989-90 and subsequent years. 
Clause 5 seeks to amend section 28 of the Income-tax Act 
relating to income chargeable to tax under the head ·Profits and 
gains of business or profession". 
Sub-clause (a) seeks to insert a new clause (iiia) to make 
profits on sale of a licence granted under the Imports (Control) 
Order, 1955. chargeable to tax under the said head. 
This amendment will take effect retrospectively from 1 st April, 
1962. 
Sub-clause (b) seeks to insert a new clause (ilib) to make any 
cash assistance (by whatever name called) received or receivable 
by any person against exports under any scheme of the 
Government of India. chargeable to tax under the aforesaid 
head. 
This amendment will take effect retrospectively from 1 st April. 
1967. 
Sub-c/aus. (c) seeks to insert a new clause (1I1c) to make re-
payment of any duty of customs or excise as drawback to any 
parson against the exports under the Customs and Central Excise 
Duties Drawback Rules. 1971. chargeable to tax under the 
aforesaid head. 
This amendment wHI take effect retrospectively from 1st April, 
1972. 
~ Clause 6 seeks to· amend section 32A of the Income-tax Act 
I relating to investment allowanoe. 
l.... 
Sub-clause (i) seeks to provide that the reserve g' an amount 
equal to seventy-five per cent. of the Investment allowance to be 
; actually allowed is debited to the profit and 10 .. acoount of any 
. previous year in respect of which the deduction is to be allowed 
~ ~, 
i 
Sub-clause (ii) seeks to omit sub-section (9) so as to provide 
that It shall not be incumbent upon an assessee to create a reserve 
when there are no profits. 
These amendments will take effect retrospectively from 1 at 
April. 1976 and Will, accordingly, apply In relation to the assessment 
year 1976-n and subsequent years. 
Clause 7 seeks 10 amend sub-section (1) of section 32AB of 
the Income-tax Ad relating to investment deposit account. 
The proposed amendment seeks to provide that no deduction 
under this section shall be allowed in relation to the assessment 
year commencing on the 1 at day of April. 1991, or any subsequent 
assessment year. 
This amendment will take effect from 1 st April. 1990. 
Claus. 8 seeks to amend sub-section (1 ) of section 33A of the 
Income-tax Act relating to development alllowanea. 
The proposed amendment seeks to provide that the deduction 
provided under clause (i) of SUb-section (1) shall be allowed only if 
the planting of tea bushes has been completed before the 1 st day of 
April,1990. 
This amendment will take effect from 1 st April. 1990. 
Clause 9 seeks to amend section 34 of the Income-tax Act 
relating to development rebate. 
Sub-clause (i) seeks to provide that the reserve of an amount 
equal to seventy-five per cent. of the development rebate to be 
actually allowed is debited to the profit and loss account of any 
previous year in respect of which the deduction is to be allowed 
under sub-section (2) of section 33 or any earlier previous year not 
being a previous year earlier than the year in which the ship was 
acquired or the machinery or plant was installed or the ship, 
machinery or plant was first put to use. 
Sub-clause (ii) seeks to omit Explanation to clause (a) of sub-
section (3) of the section so as to provide that it shall not be 
incumbent upon an assessee to create a reserve when there are no 
profits. 
These amendments will take effect retrospectively from 1 st 
April. 1962 and will, accordingly. apply in relation to the assessment 
year 1962-63 and subsequent years. 
Clause 10 seeks to amend section 35CCB of the Income-tax 
Act relating to expenditure by way of payment of any sum to 
associations and institutions for carrying out programmes of 
conservation of natural resources. 
Sub-clause (i) seeks to substitute sub-section (1) to provide 
that where an assessee incurs any expenditure by way of MYment 
of any sum to an association or institution which has as its object the 
undertaking of any programme, being a programme approved by 
the prescribed authority, of conservation of natural re80UI'C88 or of 
afforestation. or to such fund for afforestation as the Central, 
Government may notify in this behalf, he shall be allowed a ,. 
deduction in respect of such sum from income under the head 
·Profits and gains of business or professlon-. 
Sub-clauH (ii) seeks to amend 5ub-sec:tion (2) so as to 
provide that no deduction in respect of any payment to an 
association or Institution which has as its object the undertaking of 
any programme referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (1) shall be 
allowed unless such association or institution is for the time being 
approved by the prescribed authority. 
These amendments wilJ takeeffed from 1 at April. 1991. and 
wUl, accordingly; apply in relation to the assessment year 1991 -92 
and subsequent years. 

Claus. 11 leeks to amend HCtion 438 of th.lnGOm ...... Ad. 
relating to deduction of certain sums only on Idual ~. 
The proposed amendm.nt seeks to amend d .... (d) In the 
laid HCtlon of the Ad. to provide that any .um paylbl ... Interest . 
on any loan or borrowing from a SbD flftanctlll aorporatton or a 
Stat. industrial Investm.nt corporation. In IICIOOrdance wtiI the 
terms and conditions of the ag .... ment governing IUCh IoW1 or 
borrowing, shall not be allowed as deduction In the computation of 
the profits and gains from buslneu or prot ... lon If the sum Is not 
actually paid by the assess •• before the due date appIicIbIe In his 
cue for furnishing the return of Income. Furth.r Explanation IV Is 
being substituted to includ. the deflnltlonl of ·State financial 
corporation· and "State Indultrlallnveatment corporation·. 
Th ... amendm.nts wlH take effect from 111 AprH, 1991, and 
wRl, accordingly, apply In relation to the ..... m.nt y.ar 1991-92 
and subsequent years. 
Claus. 12 seeks to Ins.rt an ExplMud/on In cia",. (a) of sub-
Ildion (1) of section 44AC of th.lncom.-tax ArA relating to special 
provision for computing profits and gains from the bullness of 
trading in certain goods. 
Th. proposed Explanation .. eks to define .purch. ... pric.· 
as any amount paid or payable by a buy.r to obtain alcoholic liquor 
for human consumption (oth.r than Indian mad. foreign liquor) 
excluding the amount paid or payable towards the bid money in art 
audion or the highest accepted offer in cas. of a t.nd.r or any other 
mode. 
Su/)...ct.us. (b) seeks to add a co-operatlv. society to the 
definition of the term ·seller" for the purpo .. s of Mdlon 44AC. 
These amendments will take effect from 1st April, 1991 and 
will, accordingly, apply in relation to the a ..... m.nt y.ar 1991-92 
and .ubsequent years. 
Clause 13 seeks to amend section 45 of the Income-tax ArA 
relating to capital gains. 
Th. proposed amendment seeks to In .. rt a new sub-section 
(8) In section 45 to clarify that the dlff.rence. between the 
repurchase price of the units ref.rred to in section 8OCCB(2) and 
the capital valu. of such units shall be d .. med to be the capital 
gains arising to the .... ss .. in the pr.VioUI year In which such 
repurchase takes place or the plan under which such units w.re 
purchased is terminated and such dlff.rence shall be taxed 
accordingly. The expr.ssion ·capltal value of 8uch units· has been 
defined as any amount inv.sted by the ........ in the units 
referred to in section BOCCB(2). 
this amendment will take .ffect from 181 April, 1991 and will, 
accordingly, apply in relation to the ass ... m.nt}' .. r 1991-92 and 
subsequent years. 
Clause 14 seeks to amend section 80CCA of th.lncom.lax 
ltd relating to deduction In respect of deposita und.r National 
S.vings Schem. or payment to a deferred annuity plan. 
Suix:lause (a) seeks to substitute the proviao to lub-sectlon 
(1) to provide that Ih. maximum .mount of deduction to be allowed 
under this section shall be forty thousand rupees In r.lation to the 
u .... ment year commencing on the 1s1 day of APril, 1991 and 
lubsequ.nt assessment y.ars. 
. Sulx:laus. (b) seeks to ins.rt.a n.w sub-section (3) to 
provide that wh.re a partition has taken place among the members 
of a Hindu undivided family or wh.rean usoclatlon of pel'lonS has 
been dissolved after a deduction has be.n allowed und. Iub-
HCtlon (1), the amount withdrawn from the Nlllonal Savings 
Scheme or received from the Life Insurance Corporation will be 
domed to be the income in the hands of the reclpl.nt .nd taxed 
iIccordingly . 
Th.ae amendm.nts will take effect from 1st April, 1991 and 
will. 8CCOrdlngly, apply In relation to Ih ....... ment y.ar 1991-92 
.nd subsequ.nt y.ars. 
• 
a.use15 leeks to Ins.rt a n.w aection Iocca in the Income-
texAd. 
Th. propoMd section seeks to provide that whe,. an 
......... being an Individual or a Hindu undivided family or an 
uaocIatlon of persons or a body of individuals conlilting, in either 
case, only of husband and wIf. governed by the ~m of 
community of property in force In the State of Goa and the Union 
t.rrItorles of Oadra and Nagar Hav.n and Daman and Diu. h .. 
acquired in the pr.vious y.ar, out of his incom. charg.abI. to tax, 
units of any Mutual Fund specified und.r clau .. (230) of aeotion 10 
or of the Unit Trust of India under any plan formulated In accordance 
with such scheme as the Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, specify (hereafter referred to as the equity Linked 
Savings Scheme), he shall be allowed a deduction in the 
computation of his total income of 80 much of the amount inv.sted 
as does not exceed tan thousand rupees in the previous y.ar. The 
amount which Is returned to the asses •••• lther on the repurcha .. 
of the units or on the termination of the plan by the said Fund or the 
Trust, in any previous year, shall be deemed to be the Income cI the 
ass.ssee of that previous year and shall be chargeabl. to tax 
accordingly. It is also being provided that where a partition ha. takan 
place among the members of a Hindu undivided family 01' wh.r. an 
association of persons has be.n dissolved, after a deduction has 
been allowed under sub-section (1) of the new aeollon. the person 
who receiv.s the deemed income on the repurchase of the unit. or 
on the termination of the plan by the said Fund orth. Trust, shall be 
liable to pay income-tax on luch income. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1991 and will, 
accordingly, apply In relation to Ihe ass.ssment y.ar 1991-92 and 
subsequent years. 
Clause 16 seeks to ins.rt a new section 8000 in the Income-
tax Ad. 
Under the new section, an individual or a Hindu undivided 
family resident in India will be entitled to a deduction of a sum of aix 
thousand rupees in a year in the computation of the total income 
where expenditure has been incurred by him or It on'th. medical 
treatment, training or rehabilitation of a person who suff.rs from a 
permanent physicaldilability (including blindness) or is subject to 
mental retardation and who Is a relative of the Individual or is a 
member of the Hindu undivided family and is depend.nt on the 
individual or the Hindu undivided family for his support. The 
deduction will be admissible only wh.re the total incom. of the 
Individual orthe Hindu undivided family as computed before making 
any deduction under new section 8ODO does not exceed sixty 
thousand rupees and the amount of deduction will be reduced In 
.ither case by the income. if any. of the handicapped depend.nt. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st AprIl, 1991 and will, 
accordingly, apply In relation to the ass.ssment year 1991-92 and 
subsequent y.ars. 
Clause 17 .. eks to amel'd section 80GGA of the Incom.-tax 
Act relating to deduction in respect of certain donations for scientific 
research or rural development. 
Th. proposed amendm.nts s.eks to allow a deduction in 
respect of donations made by any person, other than a person 
whose gross total Income Includ.s Incom. which Is charg.abI • 
under the h.ad ·Profits and gains of business or profession· to an 
association or institution, which has as Its object the undertaking of 
any programme of afforestation, to be used for carrying out any 
programme of afforestation approved for this purpose. Th. new 
clause (c:c) s .. kl to provide that any sum paid by the ........ In 
the prevIOUS ye.r to the fund for afforestation ref.rred to In that 
claus. shall be deducted in computing the total income of the a ........ 
. The .. am.ndments will take effect from 111 April 1991 and 
WIn. accordingly, apply in relation to the ...... m.nt y.'., 1991.92 
and sUbsequ.nt y.ars . 

Clau .. 18 aHka to amend aub-a.cUona (2) and (3) of uction 
80HH of th.lncome-tax Act r.lating to deduction in r.epect of proflta 
and gains from newly .. tebllahed induatrial und.rtakinga or hot.1 
busineas in backward ar .... 
Th. proposed am.ndm.nts seek to provide that thia aection 
shall apply to an industrial und.rtaking specified in aub-section (2) 
thereof and to the busin ... of any hot.lspacified In sub-section (3) 
thereof only if the induatrlal und.rtaking begins to manufactur. or 
produce articles or, as the case may be, the bulln .. a of the hot.1 
starts functioning before the 1st day of April, 1990. 
This amendment will take effect from 1 at April, 1990. 
Clause 19 seeks to amend sub-section (2) of section 80HHA 
of the Income-tax Act relating to deduction in r.epect of profits and 
gains from newly established small-scale industrial undertakings in 
certain areas. 
The proposed amendment seeks to provld. that this uction 
shall apply only if a small-scale industrial undertaking r.ferred to in 
sub-section (2) thereof begins to manufactur. or produce articl .. 
before the 1 st day of April, 1990. . 
This amendment will take effect from 1 st April. 1990. 
Clause 20 seeks to amend section 80HHC of the Income-tax 
Act relating to deduction in respect of profits retained for export 
business. 
Sulrelauses (a) (i) and (a) (Iii) seek to amend sub-section (2) of 
that section to provide that in order to avail the deduction under the 
section. the sale proceeds of goods or merchandise exported out of 
India must be received in. or brought into. India by the assessee in 
convertible foreign .xchange within a period of six months from the 
end of the previous year or within such further period as the Chief 
Commission.r or Commissioner may. for r.asons to be recorded in 
wr~ing. allow. 
Sub-claus9 (a) (Ii) seeks to provide that in the case of 
supporting manufacturer who s.lIs goods or m.rchandise to any 
Export House or Trading House. the condition of receipt of sal. 
proceeds in conv.rtible foreign exchang •• will not apply. 
This am.ndm.nt will take effect retrospectively from 1 st April. 
1989 and will. accordingly. apply in relation to the assessment year 
1989-90 and subsequ.nt years. 
Sub-clause (b) seeks to substitute sub-section (3) by a n.w 
sub-section to provide thaI the profits derived from the export of 
goods or merchandise as computed und.r th •. head -Profits and 
gains of business or prof .. slon- shall be worked out in the same 
proportion as the sal. proceeds rec.ived in, or brought into, India in 
convertible foreign .xchange bear to the total sale proceeds of such 
goods or m.rchandise. 
Sub-clause (c) (i) seeks to am.nd the definition of the 
expression -export turnover-In the Explan.tlon 10 as to m.an the 
sale proceeds. received in, or brought into, India by the .... ss .. in 
conv.rtible foreign .xchange in accordance with cla .. e (a) of sub-
section (2). of any goods or merchandise .xported out of India. 
Sub-clause (c) (Ii) seeks to insert a new clause (bb) in the 
Explanation to provide that the expression ,otal turnov.r- shall not 
includ. any sum rec.ivabl. by an export.r by way of profit on sale of 
a licence granted under the Imports (Control) Order. 1955. cash 
assistance (by whatev.r name called) received or receivabl. by any 
person against exports und.r any scheme of the Government of 
India and the repayment of any duty of customs or excise as 
drawback to any person against exports under the Customs and 
Central Excise Duty Drawback Rules. 1971, referred to In claus .. 
(ilia). (lIIb) and (Uic) of section 28 respectiv.ly. 
SUb-c/aUSI (c) (iii) ... ks to am.nd clause (d) of the 
ExpMnMlon 10 U to .xt.nd th. ben.flt of deduction to a person 
who proceues goode or m.rchandi .. and sells the same to an 
Export Houu or TI'IIdIng Houa. for the purposes of .xport. 
Th. prapoaed am.ndment., oth.r than in sub-clause (a) (Ii). 
wUI tlk. effect from 1st AprIl, 1891 and wiH, accordingly, apply in 
r.lation to the ...... m.nt y.ar 1991-92 and .ubsequent years. 
C.u .. 21 IHka to am.nd uction BOHHD of the Income-tax 
Ad. r.latlng to deduction in reapect of .amings in convertible for.ign 
.xchang •. 
Sub-dauN (a> IMkI to am.nd .ub-aectlon (2) of that section 
to proYlde thll the deduction und.r It shall be available only in 
respect of the receipta which .r. received In, or brought into, India 
by the ........ In convertible for.lgn .xchang. within a period of 
.ix months from the end of the previous y.ar or within such further 
period U the Chief Commi.aion.r or Commissioner may. for 
r.aeon. to be recorded in writing, allow. 
Sub-dIauN (b) .... to amend lub-sec:tlon (3) to provide that 
the deduction under the Udlon .hall be restricted In the proportion 
.. the receipts in conv.rtlble foreign .xchange received in. or 
brought into, India bear to the total receipts of the busin.ss carried 
onbyth .......... 
Th. proposed amendments will take effect from 1st April, 1991 
and Will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 1991-
92 and .ubaequ.nt years. 
C/au .. 22 8Mka to am.nd I8Ction BO-I of the Income-tax Act 
relating to deduction In r.1pId of profit. and gains from industrial 
undertaldnga, etc. 
Sub-da ... (a) .eeks to insert sub-section (1A). This sub-
section provld .. that in r.latlon to any proflta and gains derived by 
ana ....... from-
(i) an industrial undertaking which begins to manufacture or 
produce articles or things or to operate its cold storage 
plant or plants; or 
(ii) a .hip which i. first brought Into use; or 
(iii) the bu.ine .. of a hot.1 which starts functioning, 
on or after the 1st day of April, 1990, a deduction at the rate of thirty 
per cent. orhMntv-ftv. per cent. from such profits and galnSlhall be 
allowed in .the caM of corporat. and non-corporat. assesse.s 
r.spectlvely . 
SulH:lau ... (b), (c) and (d) aeek to provide that the deduction 
provided In this uctlon shaft aleo be allowable in the case of the 
industrial undertaking I, etc., which are lit up on or aft.r the 1 st day· 
of AprIl, 1810, but before the 31st day of March, 1995. 
ScJ:H:Iaus. (e) seeka to provide that the deduction in the case 
of profit. and gains d.rived by the .... S881 from industrial 
und.rtaklngs, etc., ret.rred to in aub-uctlon (1 A) shan be allowed 
fort.n ..... ment yea,.. Further, In the cue of an ass ...... being 
a co-operillve 1OCiety, deriving proflta and gains from an industrial 
und.rtaklng or a .hlp or a hot.1 referred to In that sub-seetion. this 
deduction \I propolld D.be provided for twelv. ass.ssment 
y .. rs. 
These amendm.nt. win take effect from 1 at AprIl, 1990. 
OMUM 23 .... to in .. rt an Explanation at the end of-sub-
HCtIon (1)of ucition 8Olofth.lncom.-tax Ad relating to deductIOn 
in respect of Interest on certain securities. dividends. etc. 
Under the _lItlng proviaions, int.rest on any security of the 
Central Gov.rnment or a State Governm.nt is allowed as a 
deduction wllhln IpICifJed limits. Th. proposed amendment is to 
darfy that the ucur." ref.rred to shall be the securities as 
defined In ct... (2) of HCtlon 2 of the Public Debt Ad. 1944. 
Th\e amendment will take effect from 1 at April. 1990 and will. 
.xxmtlng~. a,pIy in relation to th ....... m.nt year 1990-91 and 
.ubMquent yMIS. 

Claus. 24 seeks to substitute a new section for section 80M of 
the Income-tax /4J:;1 relating to deduction in respect of certain inter-
corporate dividends. 
Under the existing provisions of section 80M, in the case of a 
domeatic company, an amount equalto sixty per cent. of the income 
by way of dividends from another domestic company is allowed as a 
dedUction In the oomputatlon of the total income of such domestic 
company. 
Sub-l8Clion (1) of the new section seeks to provide that (a) in the 
cue of a dom .. tic company, being a lCheduled bank or a public 
financial institution, an amount equal to sixty percent. of the income 
by way of dividenda from another domestic oompany shall be 
allowed as a deduction In the computation of the total income of 
auch domestic oompany; and (b) in the case of other domestic 
companies, an amount equal to so much of the amount of income 
by way of dividends from another domestic company, as does not 
exceed the amount of dividends distributed by such domestic 
company on or before the due date for furnishing retum of income 
• hall be allowed as a deduction in the computation of the total 
income of such domestic company. 
Sub-aectlon (2) of the new section seeks to provide that where 
any deduction in respect bfthe amount of the dividend distributed by 
the domestic company has been allowed under clause (iI) of new 
sub-section (1 ) in any previous year, no deduction shall be allowed 
In retp8ct of such amount in any other previous year. 
Sub-section (3) of the new section seeks to make a transitory 
provision 10 as to disallow any claim for deduction relating to 
dividend distributed in respect of any period comprised in the 
previous year ending on the 31st day of March, 1990. 
The Explanation to the new section seeks to define the 
expressions ·scheduled bank", "public financial institution" end 
·duedate·. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1991 and will, 
8CCOrdlngly, apply In relation to the assessment year 1991-92 and 
aubHquent years. 
48 
Claus. 25 seeks to amend section 80R of the Income-tax /4J:;1 
relating to deduction In resped of remuneration from certain foreign 
sources in the case of professors, teachers, etc. 
Under the existing provisions, an individual who is a citizen of 
india and renders any service outside India In his capacity as a 
professor, teacher or research worker in any University or other 
educational institution or any other association or body .stablished 
outside India is allowed a deduction equal to 50 per cent. of the 
remun.ration received. 
Undersub-clause(a)oftheproposedamendment,thededuction 
allowable to such an individual will be of an amount equal to (i) fifty 
per cent. of the remuneration; or (ii) seventy-five per cent. of such 
remunerat~n as is brought into India by, or on behalf of, the 
........ In accord~.nce with the provisions of the Foreign 
Exchange Regulation Act. 1973 and any rul.s made thereunder 
which.ver is higher. ' 
Sub-clau .. (b) of the proposed am.ndment .eeks to omit the 
pIOVlao which restrictt the deduction allowable under that section to 
• period not exceeding thirty-six months. 
Thes. am.ndm.nts wHl take effect from 1'StApriI, 1991 and Will, 
accordingly, apply In relation to the ...... ment y.ar 1i91-92 and 
subsequ.nt y.ars. 
Clause 26 seeks to amend section BORR of the Income-tax Ad 
relating to deduction in rHpeCt of profeaelonallncom. from foreign 
lOurca in certain ca .... 
UAder the exi8ting provisions, an individual .... ldent in India 
being an author, playwright, artist, musician, actor or sportsm"; 
(Including an athlet.) who •• income includes any Income deriV8d 
by him In the .xercise of his profession from the Govemment of a 
foreign Stat. or any person not resident in India, is allowed. 
deduction from such income of an amount equal to twenty-five per 
cent. of the income so rec.ived in, or brought Into, India In 
accordance with the Foreign Exchange RegUlation Act, 1947 and 
any rules made thereunder. 
Under the proposed am.ndm.nt, the deduction allowable to 
such an individual will be of an amount equal to (I) fifty per cent. of 
such income; or (ii) seventy-five per cent. of such income .. is 
brought into India by, or on behalf of, the ........ in accordance 
with the provisions of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973 
and any rules mad. thereund.r, whlchev.r is higher. 
this am.ndment will take effect from 1 st April, 1991 and Will, 
accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment y.ar 1991-92 and 
subsequent years. 
Clause 27 seeks to amend section SORRA of the Income-tax Act 
relating to deduction in respect of remuneration received for 
services rendered outside India . 
The proposed amendment seeks to omit the proviso to sub-
section (1) of section 80RRA which restricts the deduction 
allowable under that sub-section to a period not exceeding thirty-six 
months. 
This amendment will take effect from 1 st April, 1991 and wiU, 
accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 1991-92 and 
subsequent years. 
Clause 28 seeks to insert new provisions relating to rebate of 
income-tax in respect of investment in Life Insurance premium, 
provident fund, etc. and certain equity shares and units. 
Presently, the tax concession in respect of investment in Life 
Insurance premium, provident fund, etc., as contained in section 
80C and certain equity sharas as contained in section 80CC Is 
allowed by way of a deduction from the gross total inoome. 
However, the total deduction is restricted to the amount of gross 
total income. 
The new provisions now seek to provide that in respect of these 
investmenls, deduction shall be allowed from the income-tax 
payable on the total income of any assessment year. 
The new provision under section 87 seeks to provide that the total 
deduction of Income-tax allowable to an assessee under sections 
88 and B8A In any previous year shall not exceed the total amount of 
tax (as computed before allowing the deductions under the said 
sections) payable by him on the total income of such pr.vious 
year. 
The new provision under section 88 seeks to provide that an 
assessee shall be entitled to a deduction from the amount of 
inoome-tax (as computed before alloWing the deductions und.r 
Chapter VIII-A) payable on the total income of any ass.ssment 
y.ar, ~f an. amount ~ual to t~enty per cent. of the amount paid or 
deposited 10 the varIOUS achemes enumerated in sub-section (2). 
Sub-section (3) of section 88 provides that the amount of 
deduction in r.spect of premium on an Insurance policy wHi be with 
reference to an amount of premium not exceeding ten per cent of 
the actual capital sum assured. . 
Sub-section (4) of section 88 seeks to specify the persons In 
whose name the inv.stments can be made. 
Sub-section (5) of section 88 seeks to provide that no deduction 
shall be allowed with reference to so much of the amount as 
.xceeds rupees ten thousand in respect of any sum paid or 
d~sit~ for the purposes of purchase or construction of a 
resid.ntlal house property the construction of which is completed 
after the 31 st March, 1987 as provided in clause (xv) of 8 ~ -~. ~ u~~ 
S~b-Mction (6) of section 88 seeks to provide that the deduction 
1 

47 
from the amount of income-tu uoo. sub-sedlon (1) shaR not 
exceed fourteen thousand ruJ)Hs In the cue of an author 
playwright, artist, musician, actor or sportsman (including a~ 
athlete) and ten thousand rupees, in other cases. 
Thie amendment wit tIM .rtect from 1 It April, 1990. 
eMu.. 32 .... to amend MCtton 138 ~ the Income-tu Ad 
relating to the return of Income. 
Sub-sectlon (7) of section 88 seeks to provide the consequences 
In the event of failure to continue to participate in certain ac:hemes or 
transfer the hou .. property referred to in clause (xv) of sub-secllon 
(~ before the expiry of two years or five yeara u mantiQned In that 
slb-section. 
The new provision under section 88A seeks to lubetltute the 
existing provision of section 80CC with certain modifications. 
Presently, deduction In r .. pect of inveatment in eligible lasu. of 
capital orthe units under the Scheme of the Mutuat'Fund re"rredto 
in ciau .. (230) of section 10 or of the Unit Trust of India is allowed 
from the gross total inoome. The new provisions seek to provide that 
deduction at the rate of twenty per Clnt. of the amount d investment 
In the eligible issue d capital or such units wili now be aliowed from 
the amount of income-tax (as computed before allowing the 
deductions under Chapter VIII-A) payable by the ....... on the 
total income of any assessment year. The total amount of 
inv.stm.nt now .Iigible for deduction has be.n increased to rupees 
tw.nty-five thousand from rupees twenty thousand. 
Further, the new section 88A also s.eks to provide that the 
Mutual Funds and the Unit Trust of India shall invest the funds 
mobilised by them in the eligible issue of capitai within a period of six 
months from the clos. of subscription to their schemes. Pending 
investment in the eliglbl. issue of capital, th.y may Invest their funds 
in such securities of the Central Government as may be approved 
by the Board in this behalf. 
The aforesaid provision also seeks to provide that the tax 
concession will not be available in respect of investm.nt in the units 
of any scheme of Mutual Fund or the Unit Trust of India, the 
SUbscription to which closes after 30th S.pt.mber, 1990. 
Thes. amendments will take effect from 1 at April, 1991 and will, 
accordingly, appiy in relation to assessm.nt year 1991-92 and 
subsequent years. 
Clause 29 seeks to amend section 115-i of the Income-tax Act 
relating to non-application d Chapter XII-A at the option of the 
asses .... 
The proposed amendm.nt seeks to do away with the 
requirem.nt of filing a separate dactaration In writing by a non-
resident Indian along with his return of income to opt that the 
Chapter shall not apply to him In an assessment y.ar. Aft.r the 
amendm.nt, such option can be .x.rclsed by him by filling in the 
appropriate column in the return of incom •. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st AprIl, 1990 and wHl, 
accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 1990-91 and 
subsequ.nt years. 
Clause 30 seeks to amend sub· section (1 ) of section 115J of the 
Income-tax Ac1 containing special provisions relating to certain 
companies. 
Th. proposed amendment seek. to provide that the provisions of 
this section shall not apply to an USH8tnent year which 
commences on or art.r the 1 st day of April, 1991. 
Thla amendment wiD take effect from 1st April, 1990. 
Claus. 31 seeks to amend .ection 119 of the Income-tax Ad.. 
Under the existing provisions of clause (a) of sub-section (2) of 
the .ection, the Board is empowered to relax the provisions of 
certain sections of the Ad, mentioned in the said ctause, relating to 
..... ment and collection of revenue In respect of any clas of 
Incomes or class of cues. 
The proposed amendment ueks to Incorponde referMC81 of 
sections 139, 234A and 2348 also In the said cI.,.. (a). 
Sub-cIeuN (a) seeks to provide tUt the due date for fumllhlng 
the return of income In a cae where the ass ...... OIher than a 
company, is required to furnish a report of an accOuntant under 
section 80HHC or MCtIon SOHHo. ahalI be the 31.~ day of Octcber 
of the useaament year. 
Thla amendment wII take effect kom 1st AprI, 1991 and will, 
accordingly, apply In relation to the ..... amant YNI' 1891-82 and 
subsequent yeara. 
S/Jb-cIsu •• (b) .eeks to lubst,ltute a new clause for clau .. (b) of 
the proviso to sub-section (10) of that section so thai a firm .. wei as 
a partner of a fnn can file the return of income even if thelncame Is 
below the taxable "mit. 
This amendment wIH tllke lIffect from 1 at April, 1980. 
CIlIuse 33 seeks to amend section 139A of the lncomHu Ad 
relating to allotment of penn.nent account number. 
The proposed am.ndment seeks to make it obligatory for aft 
categories of pttnlOns who are required to furnish their returns of 
income under the provisions of 8ub-aec:tlon (4A) of section 139, to 
apply for the allotment of permanent account number. 
Thie amendment wiD take effect from 1st AprIl, 19QO and wlH, 
accordlngly •. appIy in relation to the .... ssment year 199Q.81 and 
subsequent ~ra. 
Clause 34 s"ks to amend section 142 of the Income-tax Ad. 
Th. proposed amendment seeks to amend clau .. (i) of sub-
section (1) of thea HCllon 10 that a notice calling for a return of 
income can be issued under sub-section (1) of that section .ven 
within the relevant assessm.nt y.ar atter the time allowed under 
sub-section (1) of section 139 for filing the return hu .xplred. 
This amendment will take effect 'rom 1 st Aprii, 19QO. 
Clause 35 seeks to am.nd section 143 d the Income-tu Ad 
relating to ass.ssm.nt. 
The proposed amendment .... to insert a new aub-MCtiDn 
(18) in that section to cov.r c:aaes where a revised return Is 
furnished by an assess •• under sub-section (5) of section 139. The 
provisions of sub-.ections (1) and (1 A) of this section shall apply in 
relation to such reviMd ...rums. In view of the propoMd 
amendm.nts, the intimation already sent for any inc:ome-tax, 
additional income-ux or Interest can be amended on the buil of the 
said rwiaed return and the amount ~ income-tax, addIIIonaI 
incom.tu or interest can be enhanced or reduced u a reaul of 
such amendments. 5anllarty, the amount of refund IIready granted 
can be enhanced or reduced on the basil of the said reviled return. 
It i., however, being provided that an ...... ", who hufumlaheda 
r.vlsed return after the aervice upon h,lm of the intImalion under 
sub-section (1) of section 143, shall be liabl. to pay addlllonal 
income-tax in relation to the adjustm.nts made under !he first 
proviso to clause (a) oIlub-section (1) and specified In the said 
Intimation, whether or not, the asses8.. h.. made the said 
adjustm.nt8 in the revised return. • , 
This amendment wiD take .ffect retrospectively from 1st AprIl, 
1989 and will. accordingly, apply in r.lation to the aaaeument year 
1988-90 and s~uant years. 
Claus. 36 .... to amend section 145 of the Income-tu 1d. 
r.lating to the method of accounting. . 
The proposed amendment seeks to insert a new provilO to 
provide that no .... ssee .hall be precluded from being charged to 
lnoome-tax In raped of any Interest on .ecurltles reoelwd by him In 
• prevtoua "fUI, f tuch Interest had not been charged to incomHax 
for' any eerier pnMoua yelll'S. 

This amendment win taka effect r.Uoapectlvely from 11t AprIl, 
1989 and will, accordingly, ~ in relation to the ......".ent yHr 
1989-90 and subsequent yea,.. 
Claw. 371Hks to amend aec:tion 151 of the lncome-tax Ad. 
The proposed amendm.nt •••• to nend ,ub-,ectlon (1) of 
that section to provide that where an UlllllMnt hu been 
completed under section 143(3) or HCtton 147, an As .... ing 
Officer below the rank of Assistant Commissioner can reopen the 
assessment w~h the approval of the Deputy Commlulon.r, if he 
finds that any income has eacaped ...... m.nt. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st AprIl. 11*). 
Clause 38 seeks to insert a new .ection 1 Q4F In the Income-tax 
Act relating to deduction of tax at source. Under the proposed 
section, the person responsible for paying to any person any 
amount r .. ferred to in sub-section (2) of section IOCCB Ihan deduct 
income-tax thereon at the rate of twenty per OInt. 
This amendment will take effed from 1st AprIl, 1991 and will. 
accordingly. apply in relation to the as .... m.nt y.ar 1991-92 and 
subsequent years. 
Clause 39 seeks to am.nd section 246 of the Incom.-tax At:!. 
oil 
Under the proposed amendments, appeals against orders 
imposing penalties under sections 271 C. 2710 and 271 E are now 
to be flied before the Commissioner (Appeal.) Inst.ad of before the 
Deputy Commissioner (Appeals). Th... amendments are 
consequential to the amendments made in sections 271 C, 2710 
and 271 E of the Act. 
These amendments will take effect from 1 st April, 1990. 
Claus. 40 seeks to amend section 268 of the Income-tax Act. 
Under the existing provisions of the section. H the assessee was 
not furnished with a copy of the order when the notice of the order 
was served upon him. then, in computing the period of lim~ati'Jn 
prescribed for an appeal, the time required for obtaining a copy of 
such order shall be excluded. 
The proposed amendment seeks to apply the said provisions to 
applICations made under section 256. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1990. 
Clause 41 seeks to Insert a new section 271 BB in the Income-
tax Act relating to penalty forfaUure to subscribe to the .Iiglblelssue 
of capital. 
The new provision seeks to provide thai whoever falls to 
subscribe any amount of subscription to the units leaued under any 
scheme referred to in SUb-section (1) of section IIA to the eligible 
issue 01 capital under that sub-section within the period of six 
months specified therein, may be dlracted by the Deputy 
Comr"issioner to l"ay by wWf of penalty uum equal to twenty per 
cent. of t1'l9 amount not subscribed to the ellgble lesue of capital. 
This amendment will take effect from 1.t AprIl, 1990. 
. Claus9s42. 4380044 seek to amend sectlona271C, 2710 and 
271 E of the Income-tax At:!. 
The proposed amendments seek to Insert a new SUb-section (2) 
In eaeh of the said sections to provide that penalty under each 
section shall be imposed by the Deputy Commissioner. 
These amendments will take effect from 1st April. 1990. 
Clause 45 seeKS to amend section 275A of the Inc:oQ1e-tax Act 
relating to punishment for contravention of C4trtaln orders made 
under section 132. 
The proposed amendment l88kalilO to provide for punishment 
in case of contravention of .... order made by 1ht a"'horiMd offar 
under the second proviso to .ub-aectlon (1) Mellon 132 prohibiting 
the owner or person who is in Immediate poa .... ion or control of 
• 
any valuable article or thing from removing It. 
This amendm.nt will take effect from lit April. 1990, 
eMilie 46 seeks to omit Chapter XXII-B of the Inc:ome-tax At:! 
relating to tax credit oertlficat ... 
Under the provisions of this Chapt.r, which was Introduced with 
effect from 111t April, 1985, tax credit certlflca1 .. were granted to 
a.18IH88 fulfilling certain conditions. Th .. e certificates W8f8to be 
utilised for the adjustment of the tax liability or for refund or both. 
This Chapter has now become virtually redundant and Is, 
therefore, being omitted. However. H a person still pea"s", any 
tax cred~ certificates granted under seotion 280Z or section 280ZC, 
he shall be allowed to utilise the same up to 31 st March, 1991. 
This amendment will take affect from 1 st April, 1990. 
C/aus947 seeks to amend section 288 of the Income-tax AI;J.. 
The proposed amendment In clause (b) of sub-section (4) of that 
section seeks to provide that a person on whom penalty has been 
imposed under section 271 (1 )(ii) shall not be dlsquallfted to 
represent an assessee as authorised representative. 
This amendment will take effect from 1 sl Apri:. 1990. 
Claus9 48 seeks to make certain amendments of a 
consequential nature in different provisions of the Income-tax 
Act. . 
C/aus949 seeks to amend section 2 of the Wealth-tax Ad. 
The proposed amendment seeks to amend the definition of the 
expression ·regular assessment· given in clause (ob)ofthat section 
so as to clarHy that it would mean an assessment made only under 
sub-section (3) or sub-section (5) of section 1 6. 
This amendment will take effect retrospectively from 1st Aprl, 
1989. 
Clause 50 seeks to amend clause (xxviic) of sub-section (1) of 
section 5 "fthe Wealth-tax Act to extend the exemption from wealth-
tax in respect of deposits made, in accordance with the scheme 
referred to in item (i) of sub-clause (iv) of clause (15)of section 100f 
the Income-tax At:! by an employee of the Central Government or a 
State Government. al~o to deposits made by an employee of the 
public sector company. It is also proposed to i n98rt an Explanation 
in that clause to define the expression ·publlc sector company·. 
These amendments will take effect from 1 st April, 1991 and will, 
accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year' 991·92 and 
subsequent years. 
Clause 51 seeks to amend section 10 of the Wealth-tax At:!_ 
The proposed amendment seeks to empower the Central Board 
of Direct Taxes to relax the provisions of sections 14, 15 and 178 
also in respect of any class of cases. 
This amendment will take effect Irom 1 st April, 1990. 
Claus9 52 s.eks to amend section 16 of the Wealth-tax ~ 
relating to assessment. 
Sub-claus9 (8) seeks to insert a new sub-section (18) on the 
line. of similar sub-section inserted in section' 43 of the Income-tax 
Act vid9 clause 35. 
This amendment will take effect retrospectively from 11t April, 
1989 and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment yaar 
, 989-90 and subsequent years. 
Sub-claus. (b) seeks to amend SUb-section (4) on the Hnes of 
similar amendment made In section 142 (1) of the Incoma-tax At:! 
vkte cI~ .. 34. 
This amendment will take affect from 1at April, 1iQO. 
Clallle 53 seeks to amend section 17 of the Wealth.tax ltd. 
i The proposed amendment seeks to amend clau .. (a) of sub-

HCtion (1 B) of that section on the lines of similar amendment made 
In the corresponding section 151 (1 ) of the Income-tax Act. 
This amendment will take effed from 1 st April, 1990. 
Clauss 54 seeks to insert a new section 35EEE In the Wealth-tax 
/let. 
The new section seeks to provide for punishment in case of 
contravention of an order made by the authorised officer under the 
second proviso to sub-sect ion (1 ) or sub-section (3A) of section 37 A 
prohibiting the owner or person who is in immediate posseslion or 
control of any valuable article or thing from removing it. Any person 
contravening the said orders shall be punishable with rigorous 
imprisonment up to two years and with fine. 
This amendment will take effect from 1 st April. 1990. 
Clause 55 seeks to amend sub-section (1) of section 35K of the 
Wealth-tax Act relating to bar o~ prosecution. etc. 
The proposed amendment seeks to apply SUb-section (1) of 
section 35K to the assessment in any assessment year so that no 
person is proceeded against for an offence under section 35A or 
section 35D where the penalty imposed or Imposable under section 
18(1)(lii) has been reduced or waived under section 18B. 
This amendment will take effect restrosp8ctivly from 1 st April. 
1989. 
Clause 56 seeks to substitute a new rule for the existing rule 18 
of Schedule III to the Wealth-tax Act. 
Under the existing provisions of clause '.(a) of rule 18, the 
Assessing Officer has to compulsorily accept the valuation declared 
by the assessee in the return in case the declare~ value of the 
jewellery does not exceed rupees five lakhs. 
Clause (b) provides that in every case where the value of 
jewellery declared is in excess 01 rupees five lakhs, the Assessing 
Officer has to compulsorily reier it to the Valuation Officer. 
The proposed amendment seeks to provide that the value of 
jewellery shall be estimated to be the-price which it would fetch if 
sold in the open market on the valuation date. However, if the 
Assessing Officer is of the opinion that the value of jewellery 
declared in the return Is less than the fair market value, he may. 
having regard to the provisions of clause (a). or sub-clause (i) of 
clau.e (b), of SUb-section (1) ofsection 16A. refer it to the Valuation 
Officer and the value estimated by the said Officer shall be the 
value of such Jewellery. It is also being provided that the assessee 
has to make a statement in the prescribed form, where the value of 
jewellery declared by him in the return does not exceed rupees five 
lakhs. However. where the value of. the jewellery declared by the 
assessee exceeds rupees five lakhs, the return has to be supported 
by a report of the registered valuer. 
A consequential amendment is also being made in rule 19. 
These amendments will take effect from 1 at April, 1990 and will, 
ac:oordingiy. awly in relation to the assessment year 1990-91 and 
subaequent years. 
Claus. 57 seeks to amend section 9 of the Gift-tax Ad. 
The proposed amendment seeks to empower the Central Board 
. of Direct Taxes to relax the provisions of sections 13, 14 and 16B 
also in respect of any clasa of cases. . 
This amendment will take effect from 1 at April, 1890. 
Claus958 seeks to amend section 15 of the Gift-tax Act relating 
to assessment. 
Sub-clau .. (a) seeks to insert a new sub-section (1 B) on the 
lines of similar sub-section Inserted In section 143 of thelnoome-tax 
Ad vKJ. clause 35. 
This amendment win take effect retrospectively from 1st April, 
1989 and will. accordingly, apply in ntlation to the uaessm8nt year 
49 
1989-90 and subsequent years. 
Sub-c:Iaw. (b) .... to amend aub-section (4) on the lines of 
similar amendment made In section 142 (1) of the Income-tax Act 
vldeolause 34. 
This amendment will take 8fftct from 1st April. 1990. 
eMIII. 50 seeks to amend section 18 of the Gift-tax Act. 
The proposed amendment seeks to amend clause (a) of sub· 
section (1 B) of that section on the lines of similar amendment mad" 
in the corresponding section 151 (1) of the Income-tax Act. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st April. 1990. 
Clause 60 seeks to amend the Customs Act, 1962. 
Sub-cIau •• (a) sNks to substitute sub-section (5) of section 
1290 to provide that where the members of a Bench differ in opinion 
on any point, the point shall be decided according to the opinion of 
the majority, but If the members are equally divided, they shall state 
the point or points on which they dlffll' and make a reference to the 
President who Ihd either hear the point or points himself or refer 
the case for hearing on luch point or points by one or more of the 
othll'members. Such point or points ahall be decided according to 
the opinion of the majority including the members who had first 
heard the point or polnta. 
Sub-cIau .. (b) .. aka to insert a new section 154A which 
provides for rounding off of duty. interelt, penalty, fine or any othel 
sum payable or due under the provisions of the Act. 
Clause 61 read with the Second Schedule seeks to amend th~ 
Customs Tariff Ad, 1975 to-
(a) raise the buic customs duty rates on-
(1) Ash and residu.s, containing mainly copper; and 
(2) Sparking plugs; 
(b) restructure the basic customs duty on specific cum ad 
valorem buls on-· 
(1) Saccharin and Its salts; 
(2) SUde fasteners and parts thereof. 
C/aus.&2a .. kI to I.vy up to the 31st March, 1991. auxiliary 
duties of customs on all imported goods at the rate of 50"looftheir 
value. 
Claus. 63 s .. ks to amend the Central Excises and Salt Act. 
1944. 80 as to insert a new section 37D which provides for rounding 
off of duty. interest, penalty, fine or any other sum payable or due 
under the provisions of the Ad. 
Clalll. &4 read with the Third Schedule seeks to amend the 
Central Excl .. Tariff Act, 1985 to -
(a) impose a levy on Ethyl alcohol other than alcoholic liquors 
for human consumption; 
(b) raise the statutory rates of basic excise duty on-
(1) Whole milk powder; 
(2) Coff .. IUbstitutaS, coffee husks and skins; 
(3) Milt. inuRn and wheat gluten; 
(4) Gums, mint and othll' vegetable saps and extracts: 
(5) Vegetable plaiting materials and other vegetable 
products; • t. 
(8) Animal fats and oils. Industrial fatty acids and alcohols . 
vegetabl. and insld waxes: 
(7) Cocoa and Cocoa preparations; 
(8) Roasted chicory and other roasted coffee substitutes, 
extracts, e .. enees or ooncentrates of coffee, ),e86t, baking 
powders. ice cream and pan masala; 
(9) Vinegar and .lbItltut .. thereof; 
(10) Cigaretlel and certain other tobacco products; 
(11) Hydroxld .. and peroxides of sodium and potassium; 
Alumium hydroxide; 
(12) DMT and PTA; 
. (13) <MInI1 and other organs and extracts thereof, heparin 

and III ..... for therapeutic or pIGphyIacIIc UMI; 
(14) 0rg.nIc 8Utf-=e &tIve IIgMta, 1urf_-«tIve 
prepnlions and wuhlng prepandIOnI: 
(15) Certain varieties of tyres and flapI; 
(16) Certain articles of !either; 
(17) Manufactur. of furskina and artificial fur; 
(18) Certain specified wood products; 
(19) Certain articles of peper and paperboard; 
(20) P.per transf .... ; 
(21 ) Jute and jute products; 
(22) Textile fabrics, coated, covered or laminated with 
plastics; 
(23) Mill stone .. grind stones and certain other articles of 
atone. plaster, cement, ubnt08. mica and Ilmilar 
materials; 
(24) Glass inners for vacuum flasks and other vacuum 
v .... ; 
(25) Certain specified precious metals and artleles 
thereof; 
(26) Pig Iron, ferrous products obtained by direct reduction 
of Iron ore and other spongy ferrous products; 
(27) Iron ingots, waste and scrap of iron or stHI, granules, 
powders, etc., of pig iron; 
(28) TUbes. pipes and hollow pdIn of Iron or Iteel; 
50 
(29) Certain oooking and other appliances of iron or atHI 
and other cast articlee of Iron or .... 1; 
(30) Lead and articles thereof; 
(31) C.rtain specified articles of zinc; 
(32) Video recording or reproducing apparatus; 
(33) Certain eledrlcal machines and apparatus having 
individual functions; 
(34) Motor cars and other motor vehicles for tranaport of 
pef1Ons; chassis for public transport type passenger motor 
vehlclea and vehicles for the transport of goods; and 
(35) vacuum flasks and other vacuum vessels and parts 
thereof; 
(e) reduce the statutory rates of basic excise duty on-
(1) Chemically pure sucrose, sugar preparations and sugar 
confec:tlonary, not containing cocoa; 
(2) Residues and waste from food industries; 
(3) Cement clinkers, aluminous cement and marble 
,..ldues; 
(4) Or., alag and uh; 
(5) Certain types of tyres; 
(6) leather; 
(7) Manufactures of straw, eapwato and other plaiting 
materials; 
(8) Wood pulp; 
(9) Foot wear and parts thereof; 
(10) Headgear and parts thereof; 
(11) WaII-:ng sticks. seat It!cka, wh __ • etc.; 
(12) Artificial flowers and adlclu 01 human hair; 
(d) chInge the tariff description and r.truc:lure the duty rates 
In r8lp8Ct ot-
(1) Certain minerallubatanees; 
(2) TyrM for MImIII drawn v.tt ... and hand carts; 
(3) Coacn yam and fabrlcl; 
(4) Synthetic ...... IItIicW ftIIInent y.rn and man-made 
.... ; 
(5) UnoIeum MCI OCher textile tIDor cov ...... and waH 
ooverInga; 
(e) chInge the ChIIpW Not8I in r ..... at-
(1) Chapter 25, 10 _eo .... the .. tang Note 2 as a 
OCIrIUq;uenoe at ........... Gf ... '12\A1On or minerai 
.... IOM; 
(2) ChIipIw40.lOato ........... to..., .. lCOpeor 
.......... and .... of "" nino' ...... lIhIrthin hllld 
, 
rubber. for reIOIIng or repUtng or rIItreIidIng or rubMr 
tyrea; . 
(3) Chapler 44. 10 .. to InbOduce • new ChIpIer Nat. to 
provide a deflnlliDn for "IimIar IaminIled wood-; 
(4) Chapter 48. 10 as to introduce • new Chapter Note to 
pnwIde a dtIfInltion tor "Wall ~r "'" airaiIar wall 
CCJYeringt-; 
(5) C ... er 59,-
(a) 10 .. to amMd Nat. 2 .... Ing to 
ImJRgnatecL'coet" t.brtcI to cover ... Plftltltfor 
dlecretely plMtle coated textle ftbtlca 1ft heading No. 
59.03; 
(b) 80 .. to introduce. new.Chapter Note to provide a 
definition for 'extile wall coverings-. 
Clause 65 seeks to levy up to the 31.t March, 1991. special 
duties of excise on all excisable goods at the rate of 10 per cent, of 
the duty leviable under the Central ElCCIaes and Salt Act. '1844 read 
with the Schedule to th., Central ExciM Tariff Ad, 198&. 
Claus.66 read with the Fourth Schedule seeks to amend the 
First Schedule to the Additional DutIes of ExciM (Goods of Special 
Importance) Act, 1957, so as fo-
(a) raise the additional excise duty on-
(1) Cigarett.s; 
(2) Textile fabric:a, coated Of' COYered or 'aminated with 
plastics; 
(b) omit from the 8COPI of additional excise duty in Hau of 
sales tax-
(1) Woollen hair belting and woollen b&ankets; 
(2) Certain rubberised textile fabrics; 
(c) change the tariff deecriptlon and the duty ..... in 
resped of cotton and man-made fabrics. 
Clause 67 seeks to raiM the additional exdM duty under the 
Additional Duties of ExdM (T'xtIIH Md T •• Articlas) Act. 1978, 
from 15 per cent. to 20 per cent. 01 the duty leviable under the 
Central Excises and Sal Act, 1944 rud with the Schedule to the 
Central ExciM Tariff Act, 1985. 
Clause 68 seeks to repeal the Khadl and other Handioom 
Industries Developm.nt (Addilional ExciN Duly on CIolh) Ad, 
1953. 
CIauN 89 Hlks to amend MdionI 41 and Q 01111. FIMnce 
Ad, 1989, 10 .. to make eppIic8bIe the Ieyy of inland air tr ..... tu 
on the entire ticket lat., whether paid ,in lndiM currency or VI any 
other currency, from a dille to be notified by the Central 
Government. 
CIauae 70 seeks to s&bltltute the Firal SoheduIaIo the Indian 
Post Office Aa, 189810 as to revisethar ... ot certain IniandpolWl 
services Included therein. 
It is proposed to Incr .... the ride of printed ~ card from the 
existing 0040 palM to 80 paiee. 
The rate of latter card Ie 35 paisa plus 15 piIfM • ItatIDnery 
eharg.for.mbossedleltercard.ltlsnowpropoMd" ...... ar15 
paise par latter card and do -.y with ..... 1IJIIiDnery charge. 
For envelopM the praeent r •• II eo ptM far'" fIrIt 10 gma. 
and 40 pal .. for every 10 gml. in eXQM8 of3iO ",.,. " a 
stationery charge of 15 paIae for emboIHd .. • It now 
proposed to fix a rate of Re.1 forlhefi1ll20grM. .1 for.,., 
addltionat20 gnIa. orbcllonthereaf •• "1110"~.ledto ..... 
.wIth the present stationery chaIge. 
Thepresantr ... ofbookPlltllm_ ............. SO ..... 
for the tnt 50 gma. and 5O ..... tor..., ....... 100-.• II 
now prapo .. UofIx ..... CIIfRe.1. 101' .... _ ............ -. ... 
evwy MdItionaI100 .... or·hctiDn ..... . 
The preeent !III for PM* it .... 4 for .-y._ .... . 
traction 1hereoI.' Ie now ... '_ c-.d to ., __ .......... ... 
sqo gme. or f.aion ...... . 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 10 of the Bill seeks to substitute sub-section 
(1) of section 35CCB of the Income-tax Act. Under 
clause (a) of that sub-section, programmes of 
conservation of natural resources or afforestation are to 
be approved by an authority prescribed by rules. Under 
clause (b) ofthat sub-section, the Central Government is 
empowered to notify a fund for afforestation for the 
purposes of that section. 
Clause 11 of the Bill seeks to substitute Explanation 
4 of section 43B of the Income-tax Act. Under clause (c) 
of Explanation 4, the Central Government is 
empowered to approve State Industrial Investment 
Corporations engaged in the business of providing 
long-term finances for the purposes of section 43B. 
Clause 15 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 
80CCB in the Income-tax Act. Under sub-section (1) of 
that section, the Central Government is empowered to 
specify a scheme under which plans are to be 
formulated for the purposes of issuing units of any 
Mutual Fund or of the Unit Trust of India. 
Clause 16 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 
8000 in the Income-tax Act. Under clause (b) of sub-
section (1) of that section, the Central Board of Direct 
Taxes is empowered to make rules for specifying 
permanent physical disability and the extent of mental 
retardation which will enable an assessee to claim 
benefit under the said section. 
Section 28 of the Bill seeks to insert new sections 
87,88 and 88A in the Income-tax Act. Under clauses (v), 
(ix), (xi), (xiii), (xiv) and (xv) of sub-section (2) of section 
88, the Central Government is empowered to specify 
various matters in relation to certain funds and schemes 
covered by the said clauses. Under the proviso to sub-
section (1) of section 88A, proviso to sub-clause (ii) and 
sub-clause (iv) of clause (a) of sub-section (3) 01 that 
S1 
section and under clause (d) of that sub-section, the 
Central Board of Direct Taxes is empowered to approve 
certain securities of the Central Government and to 
make rules for the purposes of the said provisions. 
Clauses 31, 51 and 57 of the Bill seek to amend 
section 119 of the Income-tax Act, section 10 of the 
Wealth-tax Ad and section 9 of the Gift-tax Act, 
respectively. Under the propoaed amendments, the 
Central Board of Direct Taxes is being empowered to 
issue general or special orders in respect of any class of 
incomes or class of cases in relation to matters covered 
by section 139, section 234A and section 234B of the 
Income-tax Act, section 14, section 15 and section 17B 
of the Wealth-tax Ad and section 13, section 14 and 
section 16B of the Gift-tax Act respectively. 
Clause 56 of the Bill seeks to make certain 
amendments in Schedule III to the Wealth-tax Act. 
Under clauses (i) and (ii) of sub-rule (2) of rule 18, the 
Central Board of Direct Taxes is being empowered to 
make rules for prescribing forms in which the assessee 
will make a statement or, as the case may be, the valuer 
of jewellery will give a report. 
The aforesaid provisions of the Income-tax Ad, the 
Wealth-tax Act and the Gift-tax Act empower the Central 
Government or the Central Board of Direct Taxes to 
issue notifications, specify schemes and make rules for 
the purposes specified in the relevant provisions. The 
matters in respect of which notifications may be Issued 
or schemes may be specified or rules may be made in 
accordance with the aforesaid proviSions are matters of 
administrative detail or procedure and it is not 
practicable to provide for them in the Bill itseH. 
The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a 
normal character. 
• 

LOKSABHA 
A 
BILL 
to give effect to the fmanciaI proposals of the Central Government 
for the financial year 1990-91. 
(Prof. MadhuDantiavate, 
Minister of Finance.) 