1
Bill No. 37 of  2020
Short title and
commencement.
THE SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO THE KBK-K REGION
OF THE STATE OF ODISHA BILL, 2020
By
SHRI SAPTAGIRI SANKAR ULAKA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to KBK-K region comprising the districts of
Koraput, Malkangiri, Nabarangpur, Rayagada, Balangir, Subarnapur, Kalahandi,
Naupada and Kandhamal of the State of Odisha for the purpose of promoting
the welfare of the Scheduled Tribes, the Scheduled Castes and Other Backward
Sections of people and for the development, exploitation and proper
utilization of its resources.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance to the KBK-K Region of
the State of Odisha Act, 2020.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. There shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India,
every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as special financial assistance
to KBK-K Region comprising the districts of Koraput, Malkangiri, Nabarangpur, Rayagada,
Balangir, Subarnapur, Kalahandi, Naupada and Kandhamal in the State of Odisha to meet
Special Financial
Assistance to the
KBK-K region of
the State of
Odisha.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
the costs of such schemes of development, as may be undertaken by the State with the
approval of the Government of India for the purpose of promoting the welfare of the Scheduled
Tribes, the Scheduled Castes and Other Backward Sections of people and for the development,
proper utilization and exploitation of the resources in KBK-K region of the State of Odisha.
3. The Provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law.
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The KBK-K region, comprising the district of Koraput, Nabarangpur, Malkangiri,
Rayagada, Sonepur, Balangir, Kalahandi, Naupada and Kandhamal in the State of Odisha is
one of the poorest and most backward regions of the country. Despite years of focused
development intervention by the both the Central Government and State Government, large
proportion of rural poor and tribals in KBK-K region continue to face chronic hunger and
reportedly starvation deaths. Reduced forest cover, farmer distress, no visible employment
opportunity—people are forced to migrate to other States in search of Jobs. As per one
National Family Health Survey, only 47.38 per cent. women in the KBK-K region are literate
against the State average of 67.4 per cent. while the literacy level among men in the region is
72.93 per cent. against the State's 84.3 per cent. In case of institutional delivery, the region
with 76.48 per cent. lags behind the State's average of 85.4 per cent.
Central assistance for area development programmes like special plan for KBK, Backward
Region Grant Fund (BRGF) and Integrated Action Plan have been discontinued. The Central
Government has  discontinued ST/SC scholarship scheme thus depriving beneficiaries in
the tribal region. Some of the Schemes delinked from support of the Centre during the budget
2015/16: National e-Governance Plan, Backward Regions Grant Funds, Modernization of
Police Forces, Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat Sashaktikaran Abhiyaan (RGPSA), Scheme for Central
Assistance to the States for developing export infrastructure, Scheme for setting up of 6000
Model Schools, National Mission on Food Processing & Tourist Infrastructure.
Though the State Government has launched its own Biju  KBK Plan, this is not sufficient.
Justice Puncchi Commission on Centre-State relation has recommended for higher Central
transfers to backward States for improving the physical and human infrastructure. The
economic divide emanating from asymmetric growth and backwardness, dominated by Tribals
and vulnerable groups rise to regional imbalance and calls for focused attention of the
Government for achieving inclusive growth.
It is, therefore, necessary that the Central Government should provide special financial
assistance to the KBK-K Region of the State of Odisha for its all-round development including
the welfare of weaker sections and for the development and exploitation of its vast natural
resources. Such a step of providing financial assistance to this Region would go a long way
in building this nation more and more strong.
N
EW DELHI; SAPTAGIRI  SANKAR  ULAKA
January 21, 2020.
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that there shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the
Consolidated Fund of India, every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as
special financial assistance to the KBK-K Region comprising the districts of Koraput,
Malkangiri, Nabarangpur, Rayagada, Balangir, Subarnapur, Kalahandi, Naupad and Kandhamal
of the State of Odisha to meet the costs of such schemes of development, as may be undertaken
by the State with the approval of the Government of India.
The Bill, therefore, on enactment, will involve expenditure out of the Consolidated
Fund of India for providing special financial assistance to the KBK-K Region of the State of
Odisha. As the sums of moneys which will be given to the KBK-K Region of the State of
Odisha as special financial assistance by appropriation by law made by Parliament will be
known only after the welfare schemes to be implemented by the State Government with the
approval of Government of India are identified, it is not possible to give the estimates of
recurring expenditure, which would be involved out of the Consolidated Fund of India at this
stage.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of
India.
4

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to KBK-K region comprising the districts of
Koraput, Malkangiri, Nabarangpur, Rayagada, Balangir, Subarnapur, Kalahandi,
Naupad and Kandhamal of the State of Odisha for the purpose of promoting
the welfare of the Scheduled Tribes, the Scheduled Castes and Other
Backward Sections of people and for the development,
exploitation and proper utilization of its resources.
————
(Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—4870LS(S3)—17-02-2020.