1
Short title.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
SHRIMATI DARSHANA VIKRAM JARDOSH, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2017.
2. In article 22 of the Constitution, after clause ( 1) the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
"(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause ( 1), no police personnel
shall be arrested or detained in custody on the basis of allegations against him in
performing his duties in tackling militant, criminal or antisocial activities without the
orders of the appointing authority.".
Bill No. 37 of  2017
5
Amendment
of article 22.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Due to rapid increase of our population, the criminal activities have also increased.
Militant activities in our country have increased manyfold in recent times. While combating
with militants with explosive materials and arms, our police personnel are bound to take
immediate action to protect human lives and public property. It has been observed that
due to lack of proper guidelines for carrying out encounter against criminals and militants,
non-Governmental Organisations, Media and Human Right Commissions unnecessarily
level controversial allegations against Police Department. This puts tremendous stress on
police personnel. It also leaves adverse impact on their moral and psychology. This
adversely impact on their family life also.
While protecting human lives and property, our police personnel put their precious
life in danger without having any incentive, acknowledgement of credential or award.
Instead, the allegations by agencies and legal challenges demoralise the police personnel.
If such situation remains, Police Department would not be able to discharge their duties
efficiently protect society and curb possible crimes. Therefore, there is a need that the
Government should examine the incidents of tackling militant or criminal activities by the
police department and its circumstantial evidence before arresting or detaining any police
personnel.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Constitution with a view to ensure that no
police personnel shall, without the order of the appointing authority, be arrested or detained
in custody on the basis of allegations against him in performing his duties in tackling
militant, criminal or anti-social activities.
Hence this Bill.
NEW D ELHI; DARSHANA VIKRAM JARDOSH
February 1, 2017.
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * *
22. (1) No person who is arrested shall be detained in custody without being informed,
as soon as may be, of the grounds for such arrest nor shall he be denied the right to
consult, and to be defended by, a legal practitioner of his choice.
* * * * * *
3
Protection
against arrest
and detention
in certain
cases.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shrimati Darshana Vikram Jardosh, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4573LS(S3)—01-03-2017.