As INTRODUCED IN 1.06 SABHA
VA ALIS 2006

Bill No. 37 of 2006

THE RIGHTS OF PERSONS SUFFERING FROM ACQUIRED
IMMUNO DEFICIENCY SYNDROME BILL, 2006

By
Suri CHANDRAKANT Kuaire, M.P.
A
BILL

to provide for compulsory treatment and rehabilitation of AIDS patients and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.

Bz it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
४... follows:—

1.(/) This Act may be called the Rights of Persons Suffering from Acquired Immuno
Deficiency Syndrome Act, 2006.

5 (2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —

(a) “AIDS” Acquired Immuno Deficiency Syndrome in a person resulting
from HIV infection; E
10 (8) “HIV” means Human Immuno Deficiency Virus;

Short title,
extent and
‘commencement.

Definitions.


102 of 1956,

Compulsory
treatment of
HIV patients.

Non-disclosure
of HIV status
of a person to
another
person

Punishment.

Provisions of
the Act to be
in addition to
and not in
derogation of
any other

Power to
make rules

2

() “HIV infection” means the presence in the body of a person of HIV antibodies
or antigens detected on the basis of clinical tests;

(०) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;

(७ “registered medical practitioner” means a medical practitioner who possesses
any recognized medical qualification as defined in clause (h) of section 2 of Indian
Medical Council Act, 1956 and whose name has been entered in a State Medical
Register;

@ “test” means a serological procedure followed for detection of HIV antibodies
or antigens in the body of a person.

3. (1) Every registered medical practitioner shall be responsible for providing medical
treatment with available facilities to every such person who has been diagnosed with HIV
infection and approaches him for medical treatment.

(2) Ifany registered medical practitioner denies medical treatment to a person infected
with HIV infection, the registration of such medical practitioner shall be cancelled forthwith:

Provided that a registered medical practitioner may not entertain a person for medical
treatment if such person is suffering from full blown AIDS and has reached an advance stage
of his ailment which requires immediate hospitalisation for treatment of his ailment.

4. No person including a registered medical practitioner or his assistant or attendant
shall disclose or pass on any information concerning the result of HIV test or immune
function test or HIV antibodies status of a person without his consent to any other person
unless it becomes necessary to prevent the transmission of HIV infection among other
persons and rehabilitation of such victims.

5. Any person who violates the provision of the Act shall be punished with imprisonment
for a term which shall not be less than one year or with fine which shall not be less than
Tupees one lakh or with both.

6. The provisions of this Act, or the rules made thereunder shall be in addition to and
not in derogation of any other law for the time being in force or any rules, orders or any
instructions issued thereunder, for the welfare of persons infected with HIV/AIDS.

7. The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

In the recent years, India has witnessed a sharp increase in the estimated number of
Persons with HIV infections from a few thousand in the early 1990s to around 5.1 million in
2003. The spread of HIV within the country is as diverse as the societal pattern between its
different regions, States and metropolitan areas. In fact, HIV/AIDS is one of the most
challenging public health problems ever faced by the country.

In India, as elsewhere, AIDS is perceived as a disease of persons living on the margins
of society, whose lifestyles are considered perverted and sinful. Discrimination, stigmatisation
and denial are the outcome of such values; affecting life in families, communities, workplaces,
schools and health care settings. Because of HIV/AIDS related discrimination, appropriate
policies and models of good practice remain underdeveloped and people living with AIDS.
continue to be burdened by poor health care and inadequate services. The health care sector
has generally been the most conspicuous context for HIV/AIDS related discrimination, stigma
and denial. Negative attitudes from health care staff have generated anxiety and fear among
many people living with HIV and AIDS. It is said that there is an almost hysterical kind of fear
at all levels, starting from the humblest, the sweeper or the ward boy, upto the heads of
departments, which make them pathologically scared of having to deal with an HIV patient.
Wherever they have an HIV patient, the responses are shameful. In this way these persons
are stigmatised and treated as socially boycotted group.

In this situation, it is necessary to make it compulsory fora registered medical practitioner
to treat a person with HIV without any discrimination.

The information concerning the HIV positive status of affected persons be maintained
in a confidential manner and may not be disclosed without his prior consent to any other
person so that they may not face any discrimination in the society. It is high time that the
Government should come forward with a comprehensive policy to combat rapidly spreading
disease like AIDS and to safeguard the rights of the persons infected with HIV/AIDS and for
their proper rehabilitation.

Hence this Bill.

New ऐप; CHANDRAKANT KHAIRE
March 2, 2006.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Bill. The rules-will relate to matters of details only. As such the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.



LOK SABHA

A
: BIL
to provide for compulsory treatment and rehabilitation of AIDS patients and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.

(Shri Chandrakant Khaire, M.P)

MGIPMRND—6790LS—18.04.2006.