1
THE MISSING CHILDREN (FASTER TRACKING AND REUNITING)
BILL, 2016
By
DR. MANOJ RAJORIA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for faster tracking and reuniting the children, who go missing due to
abduction, kidnapping, luring or runaway from their homes, with their parent;
establishment of Special Cells in Police establishments with specifically
trained personnel to trace missing children; immediate registration of
F .I.R. for flashing photograph and details of missing children in
television,newspapers and social media so as to put in place
proper mechanism to trace missing children and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Missing Children (Faster Tracking and Reuniting)
Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 37 of  2016
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5

2
2. In this Act unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means, in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "child" means any human being who is below the age of eighteen years; and
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, the appropriate Government shall constitute Special Cell in the Ministry or
Department, as the case may be, dealing with children to exclusively deal with missing
children and put in place a proper mechanism to trace missing children.
(2) The appropriate Government shall also set up Special Cells, as per the need, in
its Police establishment with specifically trained personnel from the National Police
Academy or any such other organization specialized in imparting training to personnel of
Police or Para military forces, as the case may be, for tracking the missing children.
4. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force,—
(a) it shall be mandatory for Station House Officer of every police station to
register First Information Report (F.I.R.) immediately, on being informed, either in
writing or verbally by anyone, regarding a missing child and the F.I.R. shall be specific
with missing and abducted or kidnapped child and shall pass on the F.I.R. to Special
Cells constituted under section 3 in such manner as may be prescribed.
(b) the Special Cell of Police, shall, at the earliest opportunity flash the
Photograph and other details of the missing child in all the Television networks and
shall also publish in the newspapers and social media in such manner and with such
details, as may be prescribed;
(c) the Special Cell of Police shall start its probe with immediate effect to trace
the missing child so as to reunite him with his near and dear ones; and
(d) non-registration or any wilful delay in registration of F.I.R. regarding a
missing child shall be a criminal offence under this Act and the in-charge of the Police
Station shall be deemed to have committed the offence.
(2) The National Police Academy or any other organization referred to in sub-section
(2) of section 3 shall formulate training module for the Police personnel meant for Special
Cells and if required the assistance of academic Centres of Universities or Institutes shall be
taken for the purpose of tracking of missing children.
(3) The Special Cell while adopting its methodology of investigation in cases of
missing children may also identify begging spots, take mobile phone members of beggars
and put them on surveillance particularly in areas where large number of children have gone
missing, identify the children who are begging and investigate as to whether they are
controlled by any group or leader and whether they resemble missing children, probe the
known clinics where human organs are transplanted, in such manner as may be prescribed.
(4) The missing children rescued by the Special Cell of the Police shall be reunited
with thier parents or guardians, as the case may be, at the earliest opportunity.
5. Any Police officer of the Special Cell who is investigating case or cases of missing
children shall have the powers, with the assistance, if any, as he may deem fit, to inspect any
place, at any reasonable time, which he considers necessary for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
6. The offence committed under clause ( d) of sub-section ( 1) of this Act shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend upto one year and also with fine
which may extend upto one lakh rupees.
Definitions.
Appropriate
Government
to constitute
Special Cells
for missing
children.
Special
provisions for
missing
children.
Power to
search etc.
Penalty.
45
5
10
15
20
25
30
40
35

3
7. The approriate Government shall formulate rehabilitation and such other welfare
measures for the children covered under this Act who could not be reunited with their
families or guardians.
8. The Central Government shall after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds, from time to time, for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
9. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
10. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other law for the time being applicable to the subject matter of this Act.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session  immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
Welfare
measures.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Act not in
derogation of
any other
law.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
It is very unfortunate and sorry state of affairs that a very large number of children go
missing every day in every nook and corner of the country and it is more horrifying that the
National Capital tops the list where 20 children go missing every day and most of them
remain untraceable forcing their parents for endless wait for their return and reunion with
them. It is more shocking that most of these missing children belong to poor families and
when their parents go to Police Station to lodge an F.I.R. they are welcomed by indifferent
and heartless Police personnel who not only refuse to lodge F.I.R. but also insult the
hapless parents and shoot them away instead of making efforts to trace the missing child.
This negligent nonchalance is one major reason for the increasing number of missing
children across the Country. In fact, in the present Police scheme of things, resuce of the
missing child is of lesser moment.
The very large number of missing children also indicate presence of trafficking mafias
in the country who lure and abduct, the children and force them into begging, stealing,
pick-pocketing and other crimes after making them drug addicts. The girl child is pushed
into prostitution. It is also apprehended that the missing children might being used in illegal
organ transplantations.
The Supreme Court of India has taken a serious view over the missing children and
has also given directive to the Government. Though of late Delhi Police have made move in
this regard and Ministry of Woman and Child Development has launched a webportal but it
is not sufficient. The Bill propose to set up special cells in the Ministry or Department of the
Government and in the Police establishment exclusively to deal with missing children. The
Police personnel must get appropriate training for this purpose. Non filing of F.I.R. is
proposed to be made a criminal offence with penal provision. The task of rescue is very
critical for the missing children so that they are reunited with their near and dear ones.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MANOJ RAJORIA
February 11, 2016.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for establishment of special cells by appropriate
Governments for missing children. Clause 7 of the Bill provides for the welfare measures for
the children covered under this Bill. Clause 8 makes it mandatory for the Central Government
to provide funds for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of
rupees one thousand crore may involve as recurring expenditure per annum from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupee five thousand crore is also likely to be
involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

GMGIPMRND—4260LS(S-3)—29.02.2016.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for faster tracking and reuniting the children, who go missing due to
abduction, kidnapping, luring or runaway from their homes, with their parent;
establishment of Special Cells in Police establishments with specifically
trained personnel to trace missing children; immediate registration of
F.I.R. for flashing photograph and details of missing children in
television,newspapers and social media so as to put in place
proper mechanism to trace missing children and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Manoj Rajoria, M.P .)