Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE DIVORCEE WOMEN WELFARE BILL, 2018
By
DR. UDIT RAJ, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for maintenance and welfare measures to be undertaken by the State
 for the divorcee women or separated women and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Divorcee Women Welfare  Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Advisory Committee" means the Divorcee Women Welfare Advisory
Committee constituted under section 3;
Bill No. 37 of  2018
Definitions.
5
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(b) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(c) "divorcee woman" means a woman whose marriage has been dissolved under
section 13 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 or under sections 27 and 28 of the Special
Marriage Act, 1954 or under section 10 of the Indian Divorcee Act, 1869 or under
Muslim Personal Law or on any other ground on which she has been separated from
her husband and who has no relative to support her or who has no independent
source of livelihood including her minor children dependent on her;
(d) "Fund" means the Divorcee W omen Welfare Fund constituted under
section 5; and
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the official Gazette,
constitute a Divorcee Women Welfare Advisory Committee in each district within its
jurisdiction for the purposes of performing functions as assigned to under this Act.
(2) The District Collector shall be the ex-officio Chairperson of the Advisory Committee
and other members shall be nominated by the appropriate Government in such manner as
may be prescribed.
(3) Each Advisory Committee shall consist of such number of members and the
representatives of the organisations which are working for upliftment of destitute and
helpless women of the society, to be appointed by the appropriate Government in such
manner as may be prescribed.
4. The Advisory Committee shall—
(i) promote the welfare measures for the divorcee women;
(ii) examine the eligibility of the divorcee woman and recommend to the
appropriate Government to provide facilities to her under this Act;
(iii) give wide publicity through the electronic and print media about the welfare
measures provided under this Act; and
(iv) perform such other functions not inconsistent with the provisions of this
Act as may be assigned to it by the appropriate Government, from time to time.
5. (1) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament in
this behalf, constitute a fund to be called the Divorcee Women Welfare Fund for the purpose
of undertaking welfare measures and providing facilities to divorcee women.
(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute adequate
funds to the Fund, from time to time, in such proportions as may be prescribed for carrying
out the purposes of this Act.
6. The appropriate Government shall on the recommendations of the Advisory
Committee provide the women covered under this Act, the following facilities, namely:—
(a) monthly allowance to lead a minimum standard of living;
(b) residential accommodation free of cost;
(c) free education including technical education to dependent children;
(d) free medical aid;
(e) gainful employment;
(f) free vocational education wherever necessary;
(g) such other facilities, as may be necessary for her rehabilitation, proper
development and for maintaining a respectable life in the society:
Constitution
of the
Advisory
Committee.
Functions of
Advisory
Committee.
Constitution
of Divorcee
Women
Welfare Fund.
Facilities to
the Divorcee
Women.
25 of 1955
43 of 1954
4 of 1869
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
Provided that if any woman covered under this Act either gets gainful employment or
remarries, all the facilities provided to her and to her dependent children in accordance
with the provisions of this Act, shall be withdrawn from the date she gets the gainful
employment or remarries, as the case may be.
7. (1) The Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette make rules for
carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days, which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to make
rules.
5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In our country there is great disparity between the economic ramifications of divorce
between men and women. Men remain relatively unaffected while women, especially those
with children, face difficulty in "providing food, clothing and shelter for themselves and their
children". Often a woman is not able to rely on her family for support because many parents
feel they have discharged their obligations to a daughter by arranging her marriage and
providing dowry. Dowries are not returned after divorce. Also, due to the social stigma of divorce,
women find it difficult to remarry and usually attempt to establish an independent household.
While one should have the right to divorce, it is still a highly stigmatizing action.
Women are looked upon more harshly than men in this regard. There continue to be segments
of Indian society that feel divorce is never an option, regardless of how abusive or adulterous
the husband may be which adds to the greater disapproval for women. A divorced woman
will often return to her parents family, but may not be whole heartedly welcomed. She puts,
especially if she has children, an economic burden on her family and is often given lowly
household tasks to perform. There is also the risk that a divorced woman's presence would
ward off possible marriages for other daughters within the household. Unavoidably, the
overall status of the family and household is lowered by having a divorcee living with them.
A woman's class and caste are a major factor in her acceptance back into society. Women
from higher classes tend to have an easier time than middle or lower class women in returning
to the social order after a divorce. An exception to this model is the extreme bottom of the
society who have experienced little rebuff from peers after a divorce. This results from their
already a typical status in society.
As is well known among the poor who form the majority of the population—families
are in no position to support even unmarried daughters or sisters. Exposures of questionable
'marriages' of young girls to foreign tourists, by poor families, of continued 'sale' of young
women of different communities, and the high incidence of suicides, and destitution among
poor women after divorce, provide substantial evidence of the inability of their parents or
other relatives to provide maintenance.
More impracticable, unrealistic and unjust is the expectation that a divorced woman
will sue her parents and other relatives to obtain maintenance. It is an unfortunate fact of life
that the inheritance right of daughters to their fathers' property generally remain
unimplemented because most women find it inadvisable to sue their brothers. Field research
provides ample evidence that widowed, divorced or desterted women dependent on their
parental families find their lives unbearable, particularly after the death of the parents. Also
social research among poor women of all communities, has already identified growing
irresponsibility of husbands and fathers as a serious problem. The question also needs to be
asked—why should the brother shoulder the responsibility, while the husbands, responsible
(in the majority of cases) for the act of divorce are absolved of all responsibility. Moreover
the position of a divorcee woman is more aweful in rural areas because of being illiterate due
to the conservative attitude of villagers, they are exploited to the extent possible.
Ours being a welfare State, it is expedient to liberate the divorcee women from exploitation
by providing them financial assistance and other necessary facilities so that they live
honorably in the society. For this purpose Divorcee Woman Welfare Fund should be
constituted to ensure that life of no divorcee woman will become so miserable due to poverty
which may enable the unscrupulous elements of the society to exploit the situation and make
their lives disgraceful in the society.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; UDIT RAJ
February 1, 2018.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of Divorcee Women Welfare Advisory
Committee by the appropriate Government. Clause 5 provides for constitution of the Divorcee
Welfare Fund. It also provides that the Central Government shall contribute to the Divorcee
Women Welfare Fund. Clause 6 provides for various facilities to the divorcee women. The
Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated
that a sum of rupees fifty crore may involve as recurring expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees hundred crore is also likely to be incurred.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purpose of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for maintenance and welfare measures to be undertaken by the State
 for the divorcee women or separated women and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Udit Raj, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—3994LS(S3)—07-02-2018.