As introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 37  of  2024
THE RIGHT OF CHILDREN TO FREE AND COMPULSORY 
EDUCATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024
By
Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009.
 B e it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of  India as 
follows:–
 1. (1) This Act may be called the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education 
(Amendment) Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement.
5

 2.  In section 2 of the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009, 
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),—
(a)  for sub-section (ee), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:— 
“(ee) child with disability” includes,—
(A) a child, being a ‘person with disability’ as defined in clause (s) of section 2 of 
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016; and
(B) a child, being a ‘person with benchmark disability’ as defined in clause (r) of 
section 2 of the Right of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016;
(C) a child, being a ‘person with disability having high support needs’ as defined 
in clause (t) of section 2 of the Right of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016; and
(D) a child with ‘multiple disabilities’ as defined in para 5 of the Schedule to the 
Right of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016; and
(b) after clause (g), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(ga) “inclusive education” means inclusive education as defined in clause (m) of 
section 2 of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 (49 of 2016);”.
 3.  In section 3 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words “neighbourhood 
school”, the words “neighbourhood school providing inclusive education” shall be 
substituted.
 4. In section 8 of the principal Act in clause (b), for the words “neighbourhood school”, 
the words “neighbourhood school providing inclusive education” shall be substituted.
 5. In section 11 of the principal Act, for the word “may”, the word “shall” shall be 
substituted.
 6.  In section 29 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after clause (c), the following 
clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
“(ca) needs of children with disabilities; and
 (cb) universal design for learning;”.
2
5
10
15
Amendment of 
section 3.
35 of 2009.
Amendment of 
section 8.
Amendment of 
section 2.
Amendment of 
section 11.
Amendment of 
section 29.
20
25

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Education is a fundamental right of every child, which is essential for their growth 
and development. The importance of education cannot be overstated, as it enables children 
to acquire knowledge, skills, and values that are necessary for their personal and social 
development. The right to education for children is enshrined in various international and 
national laws, including the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child (UNCRC) 
and the Indian Constitution. Article 26 of the UNCRC recognizes the right of every child 
to an education, which should be directed to the development of the child’s personality, 
talents, and mental and physical abilities to their fullest potential. The Indian Constitution 
also recognizes the right to education as a fundamental right under article 21A, which was 
inserted by the 86th Amendment Act in 2002. This amendment made free and compulsory 
education a fundamental right for children between the ages of 6 and 14 years.
It has been more than a decade since the Right to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 
2009 (RTE Act) was enacted to enforce the fundamental right to education for children 
between six and fourteen years of age. Since then, India’s disability rights framework has 
also evolved to enforce obligations under the United Nations Convention on the Rights of 
Persons with Disabilities. With the passage of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 
2016 (RPWD Act), inclusive education got statutory backing in India.
However, even as legal standards that guarantee the right to education for children 
with disabilities have evolved in India, several inconsistencies exist. As a result of the 
inconsistencies, there’s a lack of clarity in what ‘inclusion’ means in terms of quality 
education for children with disabilities, leading to challenges in on-ground implementation 
of the laws.
The Bill seeks to focus on inclusive education by amending the definition of children with 
disability who have been identified as specially abled or divyangjan by the Honorable Prime 
Minister and we need to reform laws concerning education to provide them accessibility and 
a feasible environment which will take care of their special needs. We also need to focus on 
pre school education and the Bill also makes pre school education mandatory and the onus 
for the same is on the government.
Hence this Bill.
New Delhi;                                 SHRIKANT EKNATH SHINDE         
July 3, 2024.
3

4
ANNEXURE
[Extract from the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory  
Education Act, 2009]
(35 Of 2009)
*                             *                           *                               *                           *
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
     *                             *                           *                               *                           *
(ee) “child with disability” includes,— 
(A) a child with “disability” as defined in clause (i) of section 2 of the Persons with 
Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) 
Act, 1995 (1 of 1996); 
(B) a child, being a person with disability as defined in clause (j) of section 2 of 
the National Trust for Welfare of Persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental 
Retardation and Multiple Disabilities Act, 1999 (44 of 1999);
(C) a child with “severe disability” as defined in clause (o) of section 2 of the 
National Trust for Welfare of Persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental 
Retardation and Multiple Disabilities Act, 1999 (44 of 1999).]
 *                  *                     *                         *             *
(g) “guardian”, in relation to a child, means a person having the care and custody 
of that child and includes a natural guardian or guardian appointed or declared by a 
court or a statute;
 *                  *                     *                         *             *
3. (1) Every child of the age of six to fourteen years, including a child referred to in 
clause (d) or clause (e) of section 2, shall have the right to free and compulsory education in 
a neighbourhood school till the completion of his or her elementary education.
     *                             *                           *                               *                           *
[(3) A child with disability referred to in sub-clause (A) of clause (ee) of section 2 shall, 
without prejudice to the provisions of the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, 
Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995 (1 of 1996), and a child referred to in 
sub-clauses (B) and (C) of clause (ee) of section 2, have the same rights to pursue free and 
compulsory elementary education which children with disabilities have under the provisions 
of Chapter V of the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and 
Full Participation) Act, 1995: 
Provided that a child with “multiple disabilities” referred to in clause (h) and a child 
with “severe disability” referred to in clause (o) of section 2 of the National Trust for Welfare 
of Persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation and Multiple Disabilities Act, 
1999 (44 of 1999) may also have the right to opt for home-based education.]
    *                             *                           *                               *                           *
8. The appropriate Government shall—
(a) *              *              *                   *      *
Definitions.
Right of child 
to free and 
compulsory 
education.
Duties of 
appropriate 
Government.

(b) ensure availability of a neighbourhood school as specified in section 6:
*   *    *    *
11. With a view to prepare children above the age of three years for elementary education 
and to provide early childhood care and education for all children until they complete the age 
of six years, the appropriate Government may make necessary arrangement for providing 
free pre-school education for such children.
*   *    *    *
29. *   *   *  *
(2) The academic authority, while laying down the curriculum and the evaluation 
procedure under sub-section (1), shall take into consideration the following, namely:— 
(a) *   *   *  *
(c) building up child’s knowledge, potentiality and talent;
     *   *   *  *
             
Appropriate 
Government 
to provide for 
pre-school 
education.
Curriculum 
and evaluation 
procedure.
5

LOK SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009.
 
(Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde, M.P .)