ee

Bill No, 37-F of 2002

THE DELIMITATION BILL, 2002

(As PassED By THE Houses oF PARLIAMENI—

Lok SABHA oN 77TH May, 2002
Rasya SaBua on 15TH May, 2002)

ASSENTED TO
ON 3-6-2002

_ Acr No. 33 or 2002

ot



Bill No. 37.
THE DELIMITATION BILL, 2002

(AS PASSED BY THE Houses oF PARLIAMENT)

f 2002

A
BILL

to provide for the readjustment of the allocation of seats in the House of the People to the
States, the total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of each State, the division
of each State and each Union territory having a Legislative Assembly into territorial
constituencies for elections to the House of the People and Legislative Assemblies of
the States and Union territories and for matters connected therewith.

हर Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. This Act may be called the Delimitation Act, 2002.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “article” means an article of the Constitution;
(6) “associate member” means a member nominated under section 5;

(c) “Commission” means the Delimitation Commission constituted under
section 3; i

(@ “Election Commission” means the Election Commission referred to in
article 324;

Short title.

Definitions.


Constitution of
Delimitation
Commission.

of the
“ormission.

Associate
members.

2

(९) “member” means a member of the Commission and includes the Chairperson;
and =

(A) “State” includes a Union territory having.a Legislative Assembly but does
not include the State of Jammu and Kashmir.

3. As soon as may be after the commencement of this Act, the Central Government
shall constitute a Commission to be called the Delimitation Commission which shall consist
of three members as follows: —

(a) one member, who shall be a person who is or has been a Judge of the

Supreme Court, to be appointed by the Central Government who.shail be the
Chairperson of the Commission;

(2) the Chief Election Commissioner or an Election Commissioner nominated
by the Chief Election Commissioner, ex Officio:

Provided that after the nomination of an Election Commissioner as a member
under this clause, no further nomination under this clause shall be made except to fill
the casual vacancy’ of such member under section 6; and

(c) the State Election Commissioner of concerned State, ex officio.

Explanation.—For the purposes of clause (c), the State Election Commissioner of
concerned State, in respect of the duties of the Commission relating to that State, means the
State Election Commissioner appointed by the Governor of that State under clause (1) of
article 243K.

4. (7) The readjustment made, on the basis of the census figures as ascertained at the
census held in the year 1971 by the Delimitation Commission constituted under section 3
of the Delimitation Act, 1972, of the allocation of seats in the House of the People to the
several States and the total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of each State shall
be deemed to be the readjustment made by the Comm: n for the purposes of this Act.

(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (/) and any other law for the time being in
force, the Commission shall readjust the division of each State into territorial constituencies
for the purpose of elections to the House of the People and to the State Legislative Assembi: ly
on the basis of the census figures as ascertained at the census held in the year 1991:

Provided that where on such readjustment only one seat is allocated in the House of
the People to a State, the whole of that State shall form one territorial constituency for the
purpose of elections to the House of the People from that State.

5. (1) The Commission shall associate with itself for the purpose of assisting it in its
duties in respect of each State, ten persons five of whom shall be members of the House of
the People representing that State and five shall be members of the Legislative Assembly of
that State:

Provided that where the number of members of the House of the People representing
any State is five or less, then, all such members shall be the associate members for that State
and in the latter case the total number of associate members shall be less than ten by such
number as by which the total number of members of the House of the People representing
that State is less than five,

(2) The persons to be so associated from each State shall be nominated, in the case of
the members of the House of the People, by the Speaker of that House, and in the case of
members of a Legislative Assembly, by the Speaker of that Assembly, having due regard to
the composition of the House or, as the case may be, of the Assembly.

76 of


a
; The first nominations to be made under sub-section (2)—

(@) shall be made by the Speakers of the several Legislative Assemblies within

one month, and by the Speaker of the House of the People within two months, of the
commencement of this Act; and

(0) shall be communicated to the Chief Election Commissioner, and where the

nominations are made by the Speaker of, a Legislative. Assembly, also to the Speaker of
the House of the People.

(4) None of the associate members shall have a right to vote or to si ign any decision of
the Commission. :

(5) The Commission shall have power to call upon—
(a) the Registrar-General and Census Commissioner, India or his nominee; or
(७) the Surveyor General of India or his nominee; or
(2) any other officer of the Central Government or State Government; or
(d) any expert in geographical information system; or
(e) any other person,

whose expertise and knowledge are considered necessary by the Commission to provide
assistance to it in addition to the assistance provided by the persons referred to in sub-

section (J) and the officers and persons so called upon shall be duty bound to assist the
Commission.

(6) The Secretary to the Election Com mission shall be the ex officio Secretary of the
Commission and shall discharge his functions. with the assistance of the employees of the
Election Commission under the Supervision of the Chairperson of the Co.nmission,

6. if the office of the Chairperson or of a member or of an associate member falls
vacant owing to his death or resignation, it shall.be filled as soon as may be practicable by
the Central Government or the Speaker concerned under and in accordance with the
provisions of section 3 or, as the case may be, of section 5.

7. (7) The Commission shall determine its own procedure and shail, in the performance
of its functions, have all the powers of a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,
while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely:—

5 of 1908.

(4) summoning and enforcing the attendance of witnesses;
(0) requiring the production of any document; and
(©) requisitioning any public record from any court or office.

(2) The Commission shall have power to require any person to furnish any information
on such points or matters as in the opinion of the Commission may be useful for, or relevant
to, any matter under the consideration of the Commission.

(3) The Commission may authorise any of its members to exercise any of the powers
conferred on it by clauses (a) to (c) of sub-section (4) and sub-section (2), and any order
made or act done in exercise of any of those powers by the member authorised by the
Commission in that behalf shall be deemed to be the order or act, as the case may be, of the
Commission.

(4) If there is a difference of opinion among the members, the opinion of the majority
shall prevail, and acts and orders of the Commission shall be expressed in terms of the views
of the majority.

(5) The Commission as well as any group of associate members shall have power to act
notwithstanding the temporary absence of a member or associate member or the existence of

Casual
vacancies.

Procedure and
powers of the
Commission.

Oe


Readjustment
of number of
seats,

Delimitation
of
constituencies,

(6) The Commission shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of sections
345 and 346 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,

Explanation.—For the Purposes of enforcing the attendance of witnesses, the local
limits of the jurisdiction of the Commission shall be the limits of the territory of India.

8. The Commission shall, having regard to the Provisions of articles 81, 170, 330 and.
332, and also, in relation to the Union territories, except National Capital Territory of Delhi,
sections 3 and 39 of the Government of Union Territories Act, 1963 and in relation to the
National Capital Territory of Delhi sub-clause (8) of clause (2) of article 239AA, by order,
determine,—

(4) on the basis of the census figures as ascertained at the census held in the
year 1971 subject to the provisions of section 4, the number of seats in the House
of the People to be allocated to each State and determine on the basis of the census
figures as ascertained at the census held in the year 1991 the number of Seats, if any, to
be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and for the Scheduled Tribes of the State; and

(b) on the basis of the census figures as ascertained at the census held in the
year 1971 and subject to the provisions of section 4, the total number of seats to be
assigned to the Legislative Assembly of each State and determine on the basis of the
census figures as ascertained at the census held in the year 1991 the number of seats,
if any, to be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and for the Scheduled Tribes of the
State:

Provided that the total number of seats assigned to the Legislative Assembly of any
State under clause (6) shall be an integral multiple of the number of seats in the House of the
People allocated to that State under clause (a).

9. (1) The Commission shall, in the manner herein provided, then, distribute the seats
in the House of the People allocated to cach State and the seats assigned to the Legislative
Assembly of each State as readjusted on the basis of 1971 Census to single-member territorial
Constituencies and delimit them on the basis of the census figures as ascertained, at the
census held in the year 1991, having regard to the provisions of the Constitution, the
provisions of the Act specified in section 8 and the following provisions, namely:—

(a) all constituencies shall, as far as practicable, be geographically compact areas,
and in delimiting them regard shall be had to physical features, existing boundaries of
administrative units, facilities of communication and public convenience;

(0) every assembly Constituency shall be so delimited as to fall wholly within
One parliamentary constituency;

(०) constituencies in which Seats are reserved for the Scheduled Castes shall be
distributed in different Parts of the State and located, as far as practicable, in those
areas where the proportion of their population to the total is comparatively large; and

(व) constituencies in which seats are reserved for the Scheduled Tribes shall, as
far as practicable, be located in areas where the proportion of their Population to the
total is the largest.

(2) The Commission shall—

(@ publish its proposals for the delimitation of constituencies, together with the
dissenting proposals, if. any, of any associate member who desires publication thereof,
in the Gazette of India and in the Official Gazettes of all the States concerned and also
in such other manner as it thinks fit;

2 of 1974

20 of 1963


5

(0) specify a date on or after which the Proposals shall be further considered by
it; :

(c) consider all objections and suggestions which may have been received by it
before the date so specified, and for the Purpose of such consideration, hold one or
more public sittings at such Place or places in each State as it thinks fit; and

(d) thereafter by one or more orders determine—
(6) the delimitation of parliamentary Constituencies; and
(ii) the delimitation of assembly Constituencies,

of each State,

10. (1) The Commission shall cause each of its orders made under section 8 or section

publi ed in the Gazette of India and in the Official Gazettes of the States concerned
and simultaneously cause such orders to be published at least in two vernacular newspapers
and publicize on radio, television and other possible media available to the public and
after such publication in the Official Gazettes of the States concerned, every District Election
Officer shall cause to be affixed, the Gazette version of such orders relating to the area under

his jurisdiction, on a Conspicuous part of his office for public notice.

(2) Upon publication in the Gazette of India, every such order shall have the force of
law and shall not be called in question in any court.

(3) As soon as may be after such publication, every such order shall be laid before the
House of the People and the Legislative Assemblies of the States concerned,

(4) Subject to the Provisions of sub-section (5), the readjustment of Tepresentation of
the several territorial constituencies in the House of the People or in the Legislative Assembly
of a State and the delimitation of those constituencies provided for in any such order shall
apply in relation to every election to the House or to the Assembly, as the case may be, held
after the publication in the Gazette of India of that order and shall so apply in supersession

(3) Nothing in this section shall affect the Tepresentation in the House of the People
or in the Legislative Assembly of a State until the dissolution of the House or of the
Assembly, as the case may be, existing on the date of Publication in the Gazette of India of
the final order or orders of the Commission relating to the delimitation of parliamentary
constituencies or, as the case may be, of the assembly constituencies of that State and any
bye-election to fill any vacancy in such House or in any such Assembly shall be held on the
basis of the provisions of the laws and orders superseded by sub-section (4) as if the said
provisions had not been superseded.

(6) The Commission shall endeavour to complete and publish each of its orders
referred to in sub-section (/) in the manner provided in that sub-section, within two years of
the constitution of the Commission under section 3.

11. (/) The Election Commission may, from time to time, by notification in the
Gazette of India and in the Official Gazette of the State concerned,—.

(व) correct any printing mistake in any of the orders made by the Commission
under section 9 or any error arising therein from an inadvertent slip or omission; and

® where the boundaries or name of any district or any territorial division
mentioned in any of the said orders are or is altered, make such amendments as appear
to it to be necessary or expedient for bringing the orders up-to-date, so, however, that
the boundaries or areas or extent of any constituency shall not be changed by any
such notification.

Publication of
orders and
their date of
operation.

Power to
maintain
delimitation
orders up-to-
date.


6 ; : E

(2) Every notification under this section shall be laid, as soon 85 1189 be after it is
. before the House of the People and the Legislative Assembly of the State concerned.

Repeal. 12. The Delimitation Act, 1972 is hereby repealed.

76 of 1972.


A

BILL

to provide for the readjustment of the allocation of seats in the House of the People to the
States, the total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of each State, the
division of each State and each Union territory having a Legislative Assembly into
territorial constituencies for elections to the House of the People and Legislative
Assemblies of the States and Union territories and for matters connected therewith.

(As passed by the Houses of Parliament )

MGIP(PLU)MRND—1614RS—6-6-2002.