As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

“+ 3 DEC 2004

Bill No, 37 of 2004

THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2004
By

‘Suri Mouan Sinou, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as
|

1. (7) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2004. Short title and

‘commencement.
(2) Itshall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
inthe Official Gazette, appoint.

2, In section 55 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter referred to as the Code) the Amendment
following proviso shall be added at the end, namely,:— of Section 55.

"Provided that this section shall not apply to a person who is convicted under
section 303 of the Code.”


2

Amendment 3. In section 302 of the Code, the words "death or" shall be omitted.
of Section 302.

Amendment 4. In section 303 of the Code, for the word "death", the words "rigorous imprisonment
of Section 303. for jife" shall be substituted.

Amendment 5. In section 396 of the Code, the words "death, or” shall be omitted.
of Section 396,


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Society has entered into a phase of modernization and with it the scope for reformation
has also increased. The provisions relating to death sentence have been done away with in
many countries which are constantly aware of human rights. The abolition of death sentence
has led to exploring of more possibilities of improvement in the conduct of persons who have
been convicted for offences of serious nature. Nowadays death sentence has become a
thing of past. During British period, there was a system of hanging the revolutionaries to
create terror among public. Now our country is independent and envisaging a clean and
better society. In such a situation awarding death sentence to a person obliterates ali
Possibilities of his improvement. In this civilized era, an emphasis should be given to provide
an opportunity to convicted persons for their self improvement. The death sentence puts an
end to the life of a person forever and with it all the possibilities of his improvement also
‘come to an end. Therefore, there is a need to amend the provisions relating to death sentence
inthe Indian Pena! Code, 1860.

Hence this Bill.

New Deuni; MOHAN SINGH
June 25,2004.


ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE INDIAN PENAL Cope, 1860

$ . + . नि
55. In every case in which sentence of imprisonment for life shall have been passed the

appropriate Government may, without the consent of the offender commute the punishment
for imprisonment of either description for a term not exceeding fourteen years.

302. Whoever commits murder shall be punished with death or imprisonment for life
and shall also be liable to fine.

303. Whoever, being under sentence of imprisonment for life commits murder, shall be
punished with death.

. * * * *

396. If any one of five or more persons, who are conjointly committing dacoity, commits
murder in so committing dacoity, every one of those persons shall be punished with death,
or imprisonment for life, or rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years,
and shall also be liable to fine,

* * . * .

murder.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.

(Shri Mohan Singh, M.P)

MGIPMRND—1216LS—13.07.2004.