THE SALT WORKERS WELFARE BILL, 2012
By
SHRI P.L. PUNIA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for certain welfare measures for salt workers and for matters connected
therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called  the Salt Workers Welfare Act, 2012.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act,  unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "salt worker" means a saltpan worker and includes workers engaged in
digging wells for salt harvesting or drawing up sub-soil brine or briny water into
the salt pans or loading or unloading or transportation or marketing of salt for
earning their livelihood;
(b) "Board" means the Salt Workers Welfare Board established under
section 3;
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 37 of 2012
Definitions.
TO BE INTRODUCED  IN LOK SABHA
5
10

2
Establishment
of Salt
Workers
Welfare
Board.
(c) "Fund" means the Salt Workers Welfare Fund constituted under
section 5; and
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall establish a Board to be known as the Salt
Workers Welfare Board.
(2) The Board shall consist of—
(a) the Union Minister of Labour and Employment—Chairman, ex-officio;
(b) five persons representing non-governmental organizations working
for the welfare of salt workers, to be nominated by the Central Government in
such manner, as may be prescribed — members; and
(c) five persons from amongst the saltpan workers, to be nominated by the
Central Government in such manner, as may be prescribed—members.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of
service of the members of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. (1) The Board shall—
(i) undertake, from time to time, census of salt workers;
(ii) maintain a register of salt workers;
(iii) issue identity cards to salt workers and their family members;
(iv) fix, from time to time, Minimum wages for salt workers and ensure
payment of minimum wages so fixed to them;
(v) prescribe terms and conditions of work of salt workers including their
working hours;
(vi) ensure that the work place of salt workers have basic amenities like
access to potable drinking water, mobile clinics, protective gears, eye-goggles,
boots, face masks, modern equipments to be used in salt making, sanitation
facilities and rest sheds;
(vii) provide free group insurance coverage to salt workers;
(viii) ensure that there are adequate number of creches, schools and
entertainment facilities for the children of salt workers;
(ix) ensure that salt workers are provided with alternate employment
opportunities during lean season;
(x) provide adequate health care facilities for salt workers and their family
members; and
(xi) take such other measures as may be necessary for welfare of salt workers
and their family members.
(2) For efficient discharge of its functions, the Board may set up its offices at
such places, with such number of officers and staff members, as it may deem necessary.
5. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute a Fund to be known as the Salt Workers Welfare Fund with an initial corpus
of rupees five hundred crore.
(2) The Central Government shall, from time to time, credit such sums to the
Fund, as may be necessary for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(3) There shall also be credited to the Fund such grants or donations as may be
made by any person or institution.
Functions of
the Board.
Constitution
of Salt
Workers
Welfare Fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
Power to
make rules.
(4) The Board shall administer and utilize the Fund for carrying out the functions
entrusted to it under section 4.
(5) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the Fund
shall also be utilized for providing following benefits to salt workers, namely:—
(i) payment of compensation to the next of the kin of the salt worker in
event of his death;
(ii) payment of old age pension;
(iii) payment of disability allowance;
(iv) housing facility at subsidised rate;
(v) loan at concessional rate of interest; and
(vi) transportation and marketing facilities.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period  of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both
the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.
5
10
15
20

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Saltpan worker community is one of the most disadvantaged communities in the
world. They are the poorest of the poor. These workers live in extreme poverty. They
work in hot sunlight without any basic facilities like goggles, boots, drinking water,
sanitation, etc.
The children born to these parents also suffer from many ailments right from birth
as their parents work bare foot, exposed to the relentless sun and other occupational
dangers. Most of these workers suffer work related health hazards like blisters, burns,
cuts, falling hair, headaches, ulcer, wart in legs and feet, fissures, keatodermia, callosities,
atrophic scars, high blood pressure, skin cancer, etc. Their life expectancy is quite low
and infant mortality is high. These workers suffer from womb to tomb in silence.
Salt workers die young due to health hazards of their profession. It is said that a
saltpan worker has three ways to die—first Gangrene, second Tuberculosis and third
blindness. In every house, people die this way. Even after death, saltpan workers suffer
an ignoble fate: their hands and feet are difficult to burn during cremation because of
salt content in their bodies. The wages of saltpan workers are very low and hence they
have almost negligible chance to escape from the cycle of poverty and poor health.
Most of the salt workers fall in debt trap of moneylenders and hardly get any chance to
come out of it because of abject poverty.
Most of the saltpan workers belong to the Scheduled Castes or the
Scheduled Tribes. They are millions in number living in several States. There is an
urgent need to provide some succour to these voiceless, powerless and resourceless
citizens of our country. The Bill seeks to provide for setting up of the Salt Workers
Welfare Fund to be utilized for welfare and rehabilitation of salt workers and also for
setting up of a Board to administer the Fund in order to provide certain basic facilities
to salt workers and their family members.
N
EW DELHI; P.L. PUNIA
March 15, 2012
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for setting up of a Salt Workers Welfare Board.
Clause 4 provides, inter alia, for undertaking census and maintaining a register of salt
workers, issue of identity cards to them and other facilities. Clause 5 provides for
setting up of a Salt Workers Welfare Fund with an initial corpus of rupees five hundred
crore to be utilized for the welfare of salt workers. It also provides that the Central
Government shall, from time to time, credit such amount to the Fund as may be necessary
for carrying out the purposes of the Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring
expenditure to the tune of rupees two hundred crore will be involved per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees seven hundred crore will also
be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation
of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for certain welfare measures for salt workers and for matters connected
therewith.
————
(Shri P.L. Punia, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—5042LS(S3)—16-04-2012.