Bill Ko. 88 of 1952/,..... \ 
( ft?, 
"-Il""·.:y", ..... ~· 
THE INDIAN INCOME~TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL. 1952. 
(AB IN'lRIlDUCmD IN TIlE ROUBI-: 01' THE PBOPLE) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend flit: Indian Income-tax Act, 1922, 
BE it enacted by l)arliament as follows:-
1. Short tiUe.-This Act may be called t.he Indian Income-tax 
(Amendment) Act, 1952. 
2. Amendment of section 2, Act XI of 1922.-In section 2 of the 
Indian Jneomc-iax Ad, 19~2 (hereinafter referred to as the principa.l 5 
A~t),-
(a) for clllu;;e (2), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
.. (2) . il8sc8see' means a person by whom income-tax (whe-
ther with or without interest) or any other Sl1m of mop·: .... ';8 lilly- 10 
able under this Al't, and includp,; every person in respect of whom 
any proceeding undel' thiI-J Act hilS been taken for the assessment 
01 his income or of the loss sustained by him or of the amount of 
refund due to him; "; 
(b) cIUUSt' (6) shall be renumbered as clause (5A), and after clallse 15 
(5A) as flO renumbered, the following clause shall be inserted, name-
~:~ -
.. ((i) . Direetor of Illspettion' meaJ\~ a persoll appointed to be 
Il Direc:tor of Inspection under section 5, and includes a person 
!'"ppoinkcl to ill' an Additional Dirt'ctor of Jnflpeetion, a Deputy 20 
Director of Inspection or fill Ass;stant Director of Inspection;"; 
(c) ufter elRuse (6D). the followin.,! clause shit]] be inserted, 
namely:-
.. (6E) 'Inspector of Income-tax' rneal1F; a pArson appointed to 
be an InRpector of Income-tax under section 5;"; 26 
(d) for clallse (11), the following clanse shlt1l be substituted, 
nBmely:- • 
"(11) 'previous year' mea·na-
(i) in resp('et of uny separate source of income, profits 
and gainR- 30 
(a) the twelve months ending on the Slst dRY of 
\farch next precf'ning the year for which the QSsessment 
is to he ma.de, or, if the aceounts of the assessee hav(\ 
bflen made up to a date within the saiel twelve months in 
respect of a year ending on any date othp,r than the 35 
said R1Rt dAy of MRrch, then, At the option of the asses-
see, the year ending on the date to which bis lI.eeounts 
have been so mAde up: 
Provided tha.t where in respect of a particular 
source of income, profits and gains an o.sse::lSf'e has onoe 40 

10 
15 
20 
30 
• 
2 
b~en assessed.' or where in respect of a business, profes-
sion or vocatIOn newly set up a.n a.ssessee has exercised 
the option under sub-clause (0), he shall not, in respect 
of that source or, as the case may be; business, profes-
sion or vocation exercise .the option given by this sub-
clause so as to vary the meaning of the expression • pre-
vious year' as then applicable to him except with the 
consent of the Income-tax Officer and upon such condi-
tions 8S the Income-tax Officer may think fit to impose; 
or 
(b) in the case of aoy person, business or OOmpaU) 
01' class of person, business or company, such period ae 
lllay b~ determined by the Central Board of Revenue 
or by sllch authority as the Board may autHorise in this 
behalf; or 
(c) where a bllsinesfI, profession or vocation haG 
been new I,}' set up ill the finaneial yeal- preceding the 
year for which assessment is to be made, the period 
from the date of the setting up of the business, profession 
or vocation to the 31st day of March next following or 
to the last da~' of th(~ period determined under sub-
clause (b), or, if the B(~CountB of the assessee are made 
up in relilpect of a period not exceeding twelve. months 
from the date of the setting up of the business, profes-
sion or vocation and the ease is not one for which a period 
has been determined under sub-clause (b), then, st the 
option of t.he IIsseSset', the period from the date of the 
set.ting up of the business, profeFlsion or vocation to the 
date to whi(lh his nCCQunts have been so mude up: 
Provided th&t when sl1ch other date does not fall 
between the setting up of the business, profession or 
vocation and the .next following B1st day of March 
inclulive, it shall be deemed that there is no previous 
year for the said assessment year and ·the previolls year 
which would otherwise ha.ve been determined e.coording 
to the option exercised by the assessee sh&ll be deemed 
to be the previous ye&r for the next succeeding I\ssess-
ment year; 
(ii) in respect of the share of the income, profits .md 
gains of a firm where the ass~ssee is 8 partner in the :firm 
the period as determined for the assessment of the income, 
profits and gains of the firm;"_ 
8 • .Amendment of Action " Act XI of 1912.-(1) In sect.ion .. of the 
priDoipal Act,-
(II) in sub-section (1),-
(Ii) after the third proviso, the following further provisoes 
sh&ll be inserted, namely:-
"Provided further that, in the case of 8 person who was 
Dot resident in the taxable territories in two out of the three 
years jm~edjately preoeding the previous year, 80 much of 

3 
$he income, profit!:! and gains referred to in sub-ollmse (iii) 
of clause (b) as accrued or arose to him without India, shall 
not be included in hill total income ohargeable in any 'yElar 
subsequent to the year ending on the 31st day of Murch, 
HUH, whether hi8 assessment for that yeHr hus' or has not been 
completed b('fore the commencement of the Indian Income-
tax (AmeJl(lmtmt) Act, Hl52; 
Provided further that, ill the case of a person resident 
in the taxable territories to whom the preceding proviso 01 
paragraph 8 of the Part B States (Taxation COIlc(1ssions) 
Order, 19[)() , does not apply, so mllch of the income, profit!:! 
and gains referred to in sub-clause (iii) of clause (b) as Dc'C'rU-
ed or arose t.o hIm without India Hnd were not chargeable 
under this Act, lInlefls brought into or reoeived in the taxable 
territories, shall not be included in his total income if--
(i) such income, profits and gains nre brought into 
or received in the taxable territories after the 2nd c1aJ :>f 
September, Hlfil, snd before the 1st day of April, 1954; 
(ii) half of the smoun~ of such inoome, profits and 
gains is invested, within three months of the receipt 
thereof in the taxable territories, in seeurities of the 
Central Government or of a State Government purchased 
through t.he Reserve Bank of India and kept with the 
8Hid Bank for· (~l1st()dy for a minimum period of two 
years; and 
(iii) out of the remaining half, the amount of any 
income-tax, interest or penalty or any other sum due 
from slIch person under thiH Act on the date of receipt 
of sneh income, profits and gains in the taxable terri-
tories i~ paid within the said three months,"; 
(ii) in Explanation 2, aUer the words "payable in the taxable 
t.erritories", the words, brackets and figures .. and not being pen-
sion payable wit,hout India t,o any person referred to in clause (2) 
of article 221 or article 314 of the Constitution" shall be insertp,d; 
(b) in sub-section (3),-
(i) for clauses (i) and (ia), the following clause shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(i) Subject to the provisions of clause (0) of sub-sec-
tion (1) of section 16, any income derived from property held 
under 11 trust or other legal obligation solely for religious or 
charitable purposeR, in so far aR such income is Bpplierl to 
such religious or charitable purposes only, and in the case of 
a property RO held in part only for such purposes, tho inoome 
applied· or finally Ret apart for application thereto: 
Provided that such. income shall be included in the total 
income unlesH-
(i) in the e"'5~ of property held under. a trust or oth~r 
legal obligation created before the commencement of the 
Indian Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1952, the income 
where-from is applied to religious and charitnble T,urposes· 
without the taxable territories. the Central Board of Re-
5 
10 
15 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 

5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
4 
venue by general or special order in this behalf otherwu,,, 
directs; and 
(ii) in the CKBe of income derived from business carri-
ed on on behalf (jf a religious and charitable institution, 
the ineoIlle is IlJlplied wholl~' for the purposes of the intlti.-
tution alld-
~t") the businesa is carried on in the course of the 
carryillg out of a primary purpose of the institution, or 
(b) the work in connpction with the bllsiness is 
mainly carried on by the beneficiaries of the i!lstitu. 
tion :": 
(ii). in clause (~ii). for the figures "1952" the figures "HI54" 
shall be substituted: 
(iii) after dallae (xiii). the following clauses shall be inserted. 
namdv:-
• "(ziv) AIJ~' income received by a.n employee of a foreign 
enterprise. not engaged in any trade or business in the tA:xa· 
ble territories. as remuneration for services rendered .by him 
during the course of his stay in the taxable territorieil. where 
sl1ch stay does not exceed in the aggregate a perio,' of uincty 
days in any year a.nd where slIch remuneration is not liable 
tf) be declucted from the i1wome. profits and gRins chargeable 
undel' the Ad. . 
(Zt,) Any income received Ill; remuneration. whether 
direetly or indirectly. from the Government of al'orcigll Stat·e 
by any person who is assigned to nutie!'l in India in cC'nnec!tion 
with any co.operative technicBl assistance programmes Bud 
projects in nceordancA with an agreement entered into by th~ 
Central UoYernment and the Government of that fOl'eign 
State (the terms whereof pl'ovid~ for the exemption given by 
this clause) and any other income of sunh person or "f tha 
members of his family accompanying him to India. ,yhi<'b 
accrues or arises without the taxable territores, and io; not 
d('emed ~o 1I1.'crue· or arise ill the taxable territories, upon 
which sitch pel'son or the memberR of his family Bre requirod 
to pay any income or social security tax to the Goverlllnent 
f)f that foreign State. 
(zm) Any income from interest on. or from premiulll 011 
the redemption of, any bonds issued by the Central Govern· 
ment under Il loan I1greemrmt between ,the Central 
Governtnent a11(l the International Bank for F,ooonstruc·tion 
and Development, except where the holder of such hand is n 
perf;,)U TARic1ent in the tnxable territories. 
(;r.vii) InterCl;t on the 31 p~r cent. Ten Year Trea!\lII'Y 
SavingR Depmlit Certinco.te!!l isslled by or under tha allthority 
llf the- Central Gov€lrnment for an amount not eXMocli11g t~p 
mRximllln amollnt which 8n assessee is entitled to deposit in 
Fmch certificates. 
(Xl,iii) Interest on securitie!\ hehl b~' the IF.lsllt> DapRrt. 
mpnt of the> Centrnl Rank of C'eylon constituted \llllier the 
Ceylon Monptary Law Act. 1949. 
(zix) Any dRily allowanoe reoeived by, or which h~8 
scorned due to. perRon he>fore the 1st day of April, 1952, 

5 
by reason of his membership of the Dominion r.cgislature 
or of the Contltituent Assemblv or of l)arlilloment or of 
t;ny Stllte Legislature or of lIll):' Committt'e thereof." 
. (c) in the Im~t pal'agl'oph, 'in the definition oC "charitable pur-
r()s:: ", the word, letter and brackets "cla.use (ia)" shall be omitted, 
and for the words "income of a. private religions, truHt" the words 
"income from property held under a tru!'!t or other legal obligation 
foJ' privQte religious purposes" shall be substituted. 
(!) The amendments made by !:iub-clause (iii) of clause (b; of s~b, 
'8Poti'm (1) shall he deemed to he opel'Rtive in relation to all IlsseS!;n1ent.s 
fo::, any vear whether such assessments have or have not been completed 
bofol'e' ti~c e(mm~~l1cement of the Indian Income-tax (Amendment) ,\ot, , 
lU.i2. 
4. Amendment of aection 6, Act XI of 1922.-In section {) af the princi-
,pal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1),-
(i) after clause (a), the following dl\l1!'\e shall be inserted, 
l"lnmely:-
.. (aa) Directors of Inspeotion,"; . 
10 
15 
(ii) after clau!:ie (d), the following clause shall be iuserted, 20 
namely:-
"(e) .lnspectol'l; of IncoUlc-tlix.": 
~' , (b) after sub-aeeLion (1), the folIow;ng sub-section shall be insert. 
cJ. lIfunely:-
.. (J A) The Central Governmcut may appoint as mnny Direc- 25 
tors of Inspection as it thinks tit, undDirectors of Inspection 
shall, subject to the control of the Central Board of Revenue 
rerfoi'm such functions of auy other Income·ta.x authority as may 
be IIssigned to them by the Central Government."; 
(c) for sub-section (2), the followiug sub-section shraH be substl- 30 
tilted. namely:-
.. (2) The Central Government may oppoint 08 many Com-
missioners of Income-tax as it thinks fit and they shall perform 
their functions in respect' of such areus or of such persons or 
classes of perRollR or of such incomes or clH.!lses of incomes or of M 
sueh cuses or cl~ses of cases as the Central Board of Revenue 
nlli;}' direct, lind wh('re 8uch directioils have ussigned to two or 
more Commi!;lRioners of lncome-tox the same area. or the some 
persons or classes of persons or the same income or classes of 
incomos or thf' !'!ame oase!'! or classes of eases, they shall have con- 40 
current jurisdiction subject to finy orders which the Central Board 
of Revenue may make for the distribution ond allocation of work to 
he performed."; 
(d) for sub-sect'ion (3), the following sub-sections shall be substi· 
tuted, namely: - 45 
"(.1) The Central G'overnment may appoint as many Appellate 
or Inspecting AssistBnt Commissioners of Income-tax and Income. 
t·QxOfficers of Class I service 88 it thinks fit, and the Commis-

10 
16 
20 
80 
6 
sioner ma.y, subject to the l'ules lind orders of the Central Gov-
ernI?ent regulating the conditions of service of persons in publio 
serv~ces and posts, appoint 8S DUlDy Income-,tax Officers of Class II 
tlerVICe ~nd Inspt-dorB of Income-tax as may, from time to time, 
bE' sanctIOned by the Central Govc.>rnment, 
(8.4) Subject to the rules and orders of the Central Govern-
UH>Il,t regulating the oondition!; of ;jervice of persons in public 
l'ervICe,s und P?s~S, ~n income-tax ftuthority' may appoiut such. 
executIve or mmlsterlal staff 6R may he neceSRnry to lIssist it in 
the exec.ution of its functions,"; 
,(e) in the second Hentence of sub-section (5), the words "with the 
pI'eVlOU!:' a'pproval of the Central Donrd of Revenue:' shllll he omitted, 
and for t.he words "A ppellllte Assistant Commissioner" wherever they 
occur in this sontence, the words "Inspoctini Assistant Commissioner" 
shall be subRtituted ; 
(f) after SUb-section (5), the following sub-section Rh&ll he inserted, nnmcly:-
.. (6.1) InspectorR of Incomrdax shall perform such functions 
in the execution of this Act aR are IIssigned to them by the Income-
tnx Officer or other income-tax authority under whom they are 
appointed to work, and 'shall he sUbordina.te to such officer or 
authority. "; 
(g) for sub-section (7}, the following sub-section shall be substitu. 
ted, namely:-
14 (7) For the pUrposes of this Act,-
(i) Appella.te Assistant CommiFlRioners of Inrome-tli'X shall 
be slIbordinute to the Commissioner ·of Income-tax within 
whose jurisdiction they perform their functions; but DO ordera, 
instructions or directions shall be given to them so ssto inter-
fere with their diRcretion in the exercise of their appellate 
functions; 
(ii) InRpecting AssiRtf\nt Commissioners shall be suborrli-
nate to the Director of Inspection and to the C-ommissioner 
of Income-tax within whose jurisdiction they perform their 
fUDctions; 
(iii) Income-tax Officers shall be subordinate to the Di-
rector of TlI!ipertioD, the Commissioner of Income-tax and the 
Inspect,ing Assistant Commissioner of IncomA-tax within whose 
jurisdiction they perform their functions," . 
(h) £titer sub-section (7A), the following sub-sections sh,,11 be 
inserted, namely:-
"(7B) The Director of Inspection, the Commissioner or, the 
Inspect,ing ASRisttlnt Commissioner, R,:; the C8se may be, may Issue 
such instructions as he thinks fit for the guidance of any Income, 
tax Officer subordinate to him in the matter of Rny assessment, 
I4nd for the purposes of making any inquiry under this Ac~ (which 
;If~ is hereby empowered to do~, the I?irector of I~sp~ctlon, the 
Comm:Rl'lioner and the Inspectmg ASSIstant COlnmlssloner, shall 
have all the powers that an Inoome-tax Offioer has under thiS Aot 
in relation ~ the making of inquiries; and the question whether 

7 
lI.ny, and if so, what instructions were issued shall not be inquired 
into by any appellate authority under this Act or by any Court. 
(7C) Whenever in respect of any prooeeding under th!s Aot 
UIl Income-tax Imthority CMses to exercise jurisdiction and 18 suc-
ceeded by another who has and 'exercises juridiction, .the Income-
tax authority 1';0 !mcceerling may continue thE' proceedmg !:om. the 
st.age at which the proceeding was left by his predecessor. 
15. Amendment of section 15A, A.ct XI of 1922.-1n section .5A of the 
principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (~), the proviso shall be omitted; 
(/I) in sub-section (3), fol' the words beginning with "A judicial 
member shall be" and ending with the words Bud figures "the Auditors 
Certificl1tes Hules, 1U32: ", the following shall be substituted, namely:-
.. A judicial member shall be a person who has for at least 
ten yt'Ur!; either held a eivil judicial post or been in practice ~s 
:lll advocate of 0. High (X)urt, and an accountant member shall be 
(1 person who has for at least ten yehrs been in the practice of 
clccountaney as 11 chartered :\ccountLlnt under the Chartered Ac-
l~ountAntR Ad, 1949 (XXXYTIr of H140) or (IS a registered 8C-
('otmiant under any law fonnf'rly in force or partly as a registered 
HI'count-ant RlId partly Sf; ~ chartered accountant:"; 
«(~) in slIb-section (4), the' word "judicinl" shall be omitted. 
6. Amendment of section 7, Act XI of 1922.-1n Bub-section (1) of sec-
tiolJ 7 of the principal Act, in the vroviso to Explanation 2, after the words 
.. Jiabh' to iJ1(~ome-tfl'lC Blly pnyment" the words "of deat.h cum retireme!lt 
gratuity received after the 16th dny of April, 1950, under the revised Pen-
sion RuJeg of th0 Cent.ral Govemnwnt, or under nny similar scheme of a 
State Government or any payment" shall be inserted. 
7. Amendment of .. ction 9, Act XI of 1922.-(1) In seetion 9 of the 
principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1)-
(i) the words .. /Jona fide" shall bf' omitted; 
(ii) after chl.use (ii), the following proviso shall be inserterl, 
n9.mely:-
"Provided thut, for the purposes of making any assess-
ment for the year euding on the 31st day of March, 1952, in 
TAf'lPPct of the property !;itll~ted in an area affeGted by the 
Assam earthquake of 1950, the allownnce on nccount of re-
pairs rdert'ed to in C'IRUf'lCR (i) and (ii,) f'lh;dl be illl'l'rased up to 
a. lli(.ximum of 01le hnlf of tbe annual vallie thereof 01' the 
amount, or' expendit.ure proved 10 have heen actunlly incurred 
for repairs, whichever is the less" ; 
(h) for the first proviso to sub-secHon (2), the following proviso 
shall be subf;tit.utf'd, namel:v:-
"Provided that, where the property is in the occupation of 
the owner for the purposeR of his own residence, the annual value 
shall be det.ermined in the Bnmll manner 118 if the property hRd 
been let to a tenant. so' however thr.t, where the sum 80 deter-
mined eX<'f'eds ten pOl' cent. of the total income of the ()~'ner, 
10 
16 
20 
30 
40 

8 
the anriual value of the property shall be deemed to be ten per 
cent. of suoh total inoome". 
(2) i'he amendments made by sub-clause (ii) of clause (a) of sub-
section (1) shall be deemed to be operative for any &8gessment for the year 
6 ending on the 31st day of March, 1952, whether made before or after tha 
oOJn?llenoement of this Act, and where any such assessment has been 
made before such commencement it sha.ll be lawful for the Income-tax 
Offioer to revise it, wherever necessary, to give eBeet to this amendment. 
8. Ameudment of I8ctioD. 10, Act XI of 1992.-1n section 10 of the prin-
10 ci.pal Aot,- . 
Ii 
30 
(0. 
(a) in sub-section (2),-
(i) in sub-clause (a) of clause (vi), for the figures "1952" the 
figures "~954" shull be substituted, sud in clause (b) of the'llro-
viso to that clause, for the words "where full" the words "where 
in the assessment of the assessee or if the &sse~see is a. registered 
firm, in the assesslllent of its partners, fuU" shall be lr.lbstituted; 
(ii) in clause (via), for t.he words and figures "in the assess-
ments for euch of the fi ve years commencing on the 1st day of 
April, 1949, and ending with the 81st day of March, 1954", the 
words and figures "ill 110t more than fi VtJ sucoessive assessments 
for the financial ye&rs llext following the previous year in which 
:.Iuch buiJdingjl are erected and such machinery Ilud plant installed 
and falling within the period commencing on the 1st day of April, 
1949, and ending on the 31st day of March, 19;il)" shall be substi-
tuted, Itnd iu the prov:so to t.lmt clRtlRe, for the wordR Ilud figures 
"on the 31st day of M&Tch, H.l53" the words "on the B1st day C'I 
,lun:h iuulIediately preceding the last financial year in which the 
further jlum refen'ed to in thiK ('lnnR!;' is udll1i!;!';ihle" and fOl' the 
words "in the assessment for the year commencing next after 
that date", t.he words "in the nsseSRlllent for Kl1(1h last nm.ncio.l 
YPIP'" shall respeetivl>ly be substituted; 
(iii) ill clH118{~ (T'~JI for the words find br~ekt'tN "(not being it:. 
tlw lIutllrp of cap·t.a) expenditure or personal expenses of the 
assessee)" the word!! and brackl~ts ., (not being an allowance of 
the' nature i\f'Rrribert in nny 0.£ the clauReR (i) to (xiv) inclusive, 
e.nd not being in the nature of capital expenditure or personul 
expenses of the assessee)" shall be slIbst.ituted; 
(~) in sub-section (5),-
(I) after dauRe (b). the follo\\"iug c.iulIRe shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(I:) in the eRRe of aRRet.!! acquired by t.he allsessee hy 
way of gift or inheritance, the 'written-down-value' 811 in the 
case of the prE'ViO~l!! owner or the market value thereof which-
ever is the less: " and 
(il) at the end, th~ following E:tplanation shull he inserted, 
namely:-
.. E:r.planation.-}t·or the pllrpOEles of this sub-seotion, the 
expression '~Ilctual CO!lt" means the actual· cost of the assets 

9 
lUi l:educed by the amowlts, jf li:Uy, received in the COUll:le of 
bUlllllel;1; from lilly outside source lor 01' ill connection with 
the purchQ~(, ,of l!Uch, IlsElets, und an,}' allowall~e in respect of 
a~y de])rematIOJl ~Qrr1f:d forward undllr clause (b) of the pro-
V1SO ~ c~llous,e (VI) of sub-section (2) shall be deemed to be 5 
dep,'eCJatlOll actually allowed': ", 
9. Amendment of seotion 14, Act XI of 1922.-10 s6ctiol.l 14 of the prin-
cipal At,t, ill clause (c) of sub-section (:.1), for the words and letter "Part 
B f:)tate" the words "the State of .farmnu and Kashmir" shall be substi-
tuted, 10 
10. Amendment of section 150, Act XI of 1922.-1n section 15C of the 
principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (2),-
(i) in cluu!le (ii), for the word "three" the word "six" shall he 
tlubstituted ; 15 
(ii) ill clausc (iii), for the word "fifty" the word "twenty-five" 
shrill bt:' subgtituted : 
(II) for fillh-"('('j,jllll (li). th(, {ollo\\ iug ;;ub-seetiull shull be sub-
stitut.ed, na.mely:-' 
.. (li) The pl'Ovi~;olll' of this ISectiOll shall apply t<) the r.SHeSi;- 20 
mellt for the fimUlcial year lIext following the previous year in 
which the a.Hscssee begins to manufacture or produce articles and 
lor tlw folll' a88£'ssmelltH iJllUwdiately ~lwceediI\g," 
11. Amendl'Dent of section 17, Act XI of 1 •• -1n sub-section (1) 
of s!"clioll 17. uftl~l' the first proviso, the following further proviso shall 25 
be ills('rted. namely :-
.. Pl'(lvirl,·rl furt.hf'r that, where tilly sllch p~rRon sfitiRfies the 
Illc()uJ(· .. tax Officet' that he was prevt!llt.ed by Hufficitmt eftUse from 
HlakiJ'g sllch d~'(:l:ll'rtl;ioll 011 the nr!olL oecasioll on which he' became 
IlSS('K8ILbl~~ and hi;; fnilure to rnakp such declaration hits not resulted 30 
ill J'(·du('i11h hi;; liaiJilits to tux for any ycar, the Illcome-tux Officer 
1II1l;y. \\ itlt th,' previou;; approval of the Inspecting Assistant 
COIIIllJi!';siOllf'J', nllo\\' ;;u(~h pf'rson t.o mllke the declnrati011 lit :lny 
time nfte'l' the f'xpiry of the pcriod 8pecified, and such dceluration 
1:\~\I\!1 huvr) effect in I·datioll to tho U8SCSSlDPnt for the year in which 36 
the d('C'lal'Ution ifi made Of such asseSHment· harl not been completed 
bdoJ'c !llIch dt:'clhl'atiou) ulld nil n~St'Sfirnellts thert'uftt'l· ... 
12, Amendment of section 18, Act XI of 1922.~Tn section 18 of the 
principal Act.- ' 
(a.) in J>lIb'.U,ct'oll (:JB). 101' the wOl'ds "lit thll ruj,e ()[' I'Ilteg nppli. 40 
lIubk to t.he> ,'~til1l,,11'(1 illc'owl' of the n!'!;l'!,;SPI' und·.··l' this head", the 
following shall he 8ub;;titllterl, numely:-
"ou t,h!' eRt.imnterl incolllP of the fl8Hessee Huder this head in 
Ilceol'd,ulC'1' with tht· provh;ion!o1 of clause (/I) of sub.st:ction (1) of 
section 17; 4IS 
Provided that where-
(i) the perMon not IW resident has obtained a certificate 
in writ;ng from the Income-t.ax Officer (which certificate t,he 
Income-tax Officer shall be bound to give in every proper 
CBse on the applic&'tion of the aSRessee) stating that incomo:!- 50 

6 
10 
16 
25 
10 
10 
tax and super-tax may be deducted at the rates specified 
therein, or 
(ii) the Ino~me-taxJOfficer has, by an order in writing, 
required the persoo responsibltl for making pa.yment to deduot 
income-tax and super-tax at the rates specified in thut order, 
the person responsible for making p&yment shall, untU 
such certificate or order is canoelled by the Income-tax Offi-
cer, deduct income-tax and super-tax at the rates specified in 
such certifioate or oraer, as the case may be." ; 
(b) for sub-section!! (3.1), (3B), (3C), (3D) nnd (.1E), the following 
sub-st'ctions shall be substituted, namely:-
'(3A) The person responsible for paying ony income cha.rge-
able under the head "Ipterest on securities" to a person whom he 
h!JR no reason to believe to be r~sident in the taxable territories, 
shall, at the time of payment, deduct super-tnx 011 the amount of 
such interest--
(i) if Buch person is a. company, at the rute applicable 
to a company, 
(ii) if such persoll is not IJ. componv, in liccordance with 
the pl'ovil>iollS of clause (L.) of t!ub-sectio~l (1) of buct.on 17: 
. Provided t~at where such person is not a company, the pro-
\"lSO to s~lb-sectlOn .U!R) sl~llli Rp~ly to t.he ckducti'JlI of super-tax 
under thIS sub-sectIon as It applies to the deduction of super-tax 
under sub-section (2B). 
(3B) Any person responsible for paying to a person not resi-
dE'nt in the territories any interest not being ':Jnterest on seuuri. 
ties" or any other sum chargeable under the provisions of this Act 
shall: atl the time of payment, unless he is himself liable to pay 
any mcome·tux and supt'r-tax thereon as an agent, deduct income-
tax at the muximum rate and super-tax at the rate applicable to 
h: company OJ' in IIccordonce with the provisioll!:l of sub-clause (b) 
of sub-section (1) of section 17, as the case may be: 
Provided that 'where the person not resident is not a company, 
the proviso to sub-section (2B) shall apply to the deduction of in-
come-tax and super-tax under this sub-section as It applies to 
th(, dpduction of income-tax nnd super-tax under sub-scction (2B): 
Provided further that nothing in this section shall apply 
to tUly payment made in the course of transactions in respect of 
which a person responsible for the payment is deemed under the 
first proviso t.o section 43 not to be an agent of the payee. 
(30) Where the person responsible for paying any sum char-
~eRblt: under this Act other than interest, to a person not resident 
In the taxable territories, considers that the whole of 8\1ch sum 
would not be income chargeable in the case of the recipient, he 
. may makE' an application to the Income-tax Officer to determine. 
by general or ~pecial order, the appropriate proportion of such 
sum 80 chargeable and lIpon such determina.tion tux shall be de-
ducted therefrom by the person responsible for making such pay-
mp.nt in accordance with the provisions of Bub-section (.'lB). 
(3D) The principal officer of a.n Indilln company or R. com-

11 
pllony which has made such effMtive arrangements as may be 
prescribed for the dedul!tion of super-tux from dividends shall. 
at the time of paying /lny dividend to a Rhareholder whom the 
principal officer has 110 reltSOll to believe to be resident in the 
taxable territories. deduct super-tax on the amount of such divi- IS 
dencl liS incl'C'Med ill Ilccordance with the provisions of sub-section 
UJ) of secticou 16-
(.1) if the shareholder ie: n company, at the rate applioo· 
ble to 11 company, 
(ii) if the shareholder is a person other than a company, 10 
ill accordanCE; wit.h the provisions of clause (b) of sub-sectiol~ 
(1) of section 17: , 
Provided that in the case of a shareholder other than a com-
pany, the provilio to sub-section (2B) shall a.pply to the deduction 
of Sliper-tax under this sub-section as it applies to the deduction 16 
of super-tax under sub-section (2B).'; 
t'~} in su b-Htlctioll (5). &fter the words •. Any dad uction made" the 
wLrJs . 'and paid to the aC'..couot of the Central Government" shall be 
inserted; nfter the words "given to him therefor" the words "on the 
production of the eertif.catc furnished under sub-section (9) or section 20 
20, dS the cllHe llllly be." shall be iuserted, find after the second 
proviso. the following further proviso shall be inserted, namely:--
"Provided further that wh~re any security or share in a com-
pany is ownc,l jointly py two or more persons not constituting a. 
partlwrt;hip, eredit in rei'lpe'lt of the tax deducted or in respect of 26 
allY sum by which the dividend has been increased under sub-
sediol) (.:.?) of s('C'tion W, mny be given t.o r~aeh such person in the 
Name proportion in which the intcrellt on such security or dividend 
on su()h shttre hus been included ill his total inoome."; 
(d) ill sub-section (7), for the words, brackets, figures and lettera 30. 
"sub-sectioI,?-t! (3D) and (BE)" the word, Drackets, figure end l:~tter 
"sub-Rtlction (3D)" sha~l be suhstituted; . 
_ . (t) in sub-section (9), for the bro.ckets, figures, letters and word 
"(3C), (3D) or (3E)",.the worn, brocket'!, figurc and letter "or (3D)" 36 
shall be, substit,ut.ed; , ' 
(I) after sub-section (9~, the following Explanation shan be inser-
ted. namely:-
.. E:rplallotioTl.-Fol· the purposes of this 8~ction and section 
20A, the expression 'person responsible for paying'Ioeans-
(i) iii the ca'!e of payments of illeome chargeable under 40 
the helld 'S'alaries' other than payments by the Central Gov-
t'rnment or tht! Government of a. State, the employer himflelt 
or if the employer is a company. the company itself inoluding 
the prin'lipal officer thereof; 
(a) in the casl' of payments of income chargeable under 4.5 
t·he hend 'Interest on !'Iecurities', other than payments made 
bv or on behalf of tlw Ceutral Government or the Government 
of R State, the lO(~1\1 authority or company inoluding the 
principal offict<r thp.reof." 
(Iii) in the case of payment of interest not being 'Iuterest 60 
on Securities', the payer himself or if the payer is Q company, 
the company itself including the principal member thereof." 

_____ .~ __ ·~·EB .. ________________ ~ ____ ~--------------------------~--
12 
10 
lIS 
20 
13. AmendmtDt of .. CUCIID lU., Act XI of 1912.---.1n section l8A of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-seotion (1) (a), for the words "if that total income 
excC!eded six tho~and rupees", the words .. if that total inoome' 
exceeded the maxImum amount not chargeable to tax in his 08se by 
two t,hol1sand five hundred rupees" shall be substitukd; 
(b) in sub-section (8), for the words "is likely to exceed six 
tho\lsalld rupees," the words "is likely to exceed the maximum 
amOllnt not chargeable to tax in his case by two thousand five 
hundred rupnes." shall be subst:tuted; 
(c) to sub-section (.5), the followj'lg fUrther proviso shall be 
added, nnmely:-
"Provided further tha.t no interest shall he paya.ble ufter 
thl~ 31st day of March, 1952."; 
(11) in sub-section (6),-
If) in the first proviso after the word "Prbvided", the word 
"further" shall be insreted and before that proviso, the following 
proviso RhaU be inserted, namely:- . 
"Provided that after thfl 31st da,Y of March. 1952. 
interest shall be paya.ble at the rate of four per ~,ent, 
pel' annum: "; 
Hi) after the last proviso, the following further proviso shall 
h'l iJlRerted. namely:-
"Provided further that where the Ilssessment is not 
25 eon tested by the aRses'see and the tax has been paid 
n(lrQmingJ,'-' the Incomp-tux Officer may, hnving re-gard to 
the circumstances of tbfl case, reduce or waive the interest 
payable by the a~sesRee," 
14. Amendment "I section 22, Act XI ot 1922.-1n section ~'2 of the 
30 princip!lol Act.-
((t) H.fter Rllh-sention (Z>, the following sub-section sha,ll bo 
inserted, namely:-' 
"(2A) If Imy person, who ha'l not bAen served with Ii notice 
under 8ub-RAction (2) ha,R sustained a loss of profits ur gains in 
35 any ytur under the head 'Profits and gainll of busineRs.,. p,rofession 
or vocation', and 811C"h ]OS8 or any part thereof WOllIn ordinarily 
have been carried forward under sub-section (2) of section ~. 
he shall, if be is to he entitled to the henefit of the carry forward 
of Joss, in n.ny subsequent IU!sessment, furnish within the time 
~pecified in the general nt)ticfI given under sub-section (.1), all the 
~)articulars required under the prescribed form of retum of total 
incom!:' and total world income in the same manner u.s he would 
huyt' furnished a return undflr sub-section 1(1) ,had hill illcotne 
exceeded til(> maximum amollnt not liable to income-tax in his 
case. and 011 the provisions of this Act shall apply as if it were 
u rdurn under sub-section (1).'" 
(l,) in sub-section (4). for the .words "such accounts or document. 
AI the Income-tax Officer may require" the following shall be substi-
tuted, .r.rmely:-
"such accounts or documents, including accounts relating to 
any year subsequent to the previo1ls y~ar, &s the Inoome-tax 

18 
Officer mlly require, or to furnish in writing and verified in the 
preRel'ihed manne;' informa.tion in such form and, on sU6h 
points or matters (includiug a statement of all assets and liabiHtiAs' 
not included in the accountR') as the Income-tax Officer lUay., 
require: ". 6 
16. Amendment of sectlon 26. Act XI of 1922.-In section 24 of the 
p-illcipal Act.-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the first proviso. the following proYiso 
shall be substituted, namely:-
•• Provided that in computing the income, profits and pliins 10 
chargeable under any head or the loss of profits and gain!': fs.lling 
umler any head, so much of a.ny loss of profits and gains I1S would 
but 10l the 108s have BCcrued or arisen within the State of .Jammu 
ond Kashmir, shall not be taken into account except to the (·xtent 
of the umouut of income, profits and gains, if any, whieh would 16 
htl exempt unilpr the provisions of clause (0) of sub-sectic.l1 (2) 0' 
section 14."; 
(b) in sub-section (8).-
(i) for the words "under the head • Profits and ~l\h,s of 
bUf:in"ss, profession or vocation'," the words ,. in any business, 20 
profP.l;lolion or vocati,on" shall be sUbstituted; 
(ii) for clause (a) of the proviso, the following claus(~ 'Shall 
be suhstituted, namely:-
"(a) where the los8 sustained is ill any business, 
profession or vocation, so much of such loss as is referred to 25 
in the firs!, proviso to sub-section (1) shall not b~ set off 
except aga.inst the profits ana gains accruing or a.rising in the 
Rtate of Jammu Bnd Kashmir from the same business, 
profession or vocation and exempt from tax under the 
provisions of clause (0) of sub-section (2) of section 14." 30 
16. Amendment of section 30, Act XI of 1922.-1n 8~.ction 80 uf the 
principal Act, ...... 
(a) in sub-section (1), after the first proviso, the following r!'oviso 
shall he inserted, namely:-
., Provided further that !lO appeal shall lie under this section 86 
against an order passed by lin Inspectillg Assistlint Commissioner, 
when eXt'rcising the powers of the Income-tax Officer in pursulmce 
of 1\ direetion given by the Commissioner under sub-section (.5) oi 
section 5."; 
(b) in Rub-sE',ct,ion (lA), the brackets, figures, letters and word 40 
"(8.1)" and "or (30)" shall be omitted. 
17. Amendment of .ction 83, Act XI of 1_.-In section 38 of the 
prineip'll Act, after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namel~':-
"(1.4) Any assessee objecting to any such order as is referred to 46 
in sub·section (1) of section 80, passed by an Inspecting Assistant 
Commissioner when exercising the powers of an Income-tax Officer, 

14 
may nppeal to the Appellate Tribunal within the time IJpecified in 
suu-se(ltion (2) of that section, and the provisiolls of sections 30 Bnd 
31 shall, so far as may be, apply to such sp.peal as they apply to an 
uppcai to the Appellate Assistant CommissIoner from an order of 
,; the Inc.onw-tax Officer." 
18. Amendment of section 33A, Act XI of 1922.-1u 1mb-section p) 
of section 33A of the principal Act, after the words "made within one 
year frOlH the date of the order" the words and brackets" (or within tlul'h 
further period as the Commissioner may think fit to allow on being satiRfied 
10 that the assessee was prevented by sufficient cause from making the appli. 
cation within that period)" shall be inserted. 
. 19. Amendment of I8ctlon 84, A.ct XI of 1922.-1n the second proviso 
to sub·scction (3) of section 34 of the principal Act, for the words "in 
purSIllUtce of", the words "to an assessment or re-assessment made on 
15 the IlSSl·tiSe~ or any other person in consequenoe of or to give effect to hny 
finding 0,' din·ctioll contained in" shall be substituted. 
20. Amendment of HCUOD 86, Act la of 1922.-1n seotion 85 of the 
principal Act, after sub-section (4), the following sub-section!! shall be 
insert:-'rl, namely:-
20 "(5) Where in respect of any compll"ted assessment of B partner 
in a firm it is fOllnd on the assessment or re-assessmcnt of the finn 
01' 0:1 U11\' reduction or enhancement made in the income of the firm 
under section 31, section 313, section 33A, section SBB, section 60 or 
section OOA that the share of the partner in the profit or loss of the , 
firm hali! not been included in the assessment of the partner or. if 
included, i~ not correct, the inclusion of the share in the RS8eSSment 
or the correction thereof, as the case may be, shall be deemed to be 
a rectifioation of Q mistake apparent from the record within the 
meaning of this ~ection, and the ;>rovisions of sub-section (I> shall 
30 appl,v thereto Bccordingly, the period of four years referred to in t~at 
suh-Rectiol! being computed from the date of the final order passed 
in the case of the firm. 
(6) Where the exccss profits tax or -the business profitil tax 
payable by an assessee has been modified in appeal, revision or any 
l6 othel' pl'oceeding, or where any excess profits tax or busines.. pr{Jfits 
t.n x haH been assessed after the completion of the corresponding 
Rl'ReSsment for income-tax [whether before or after the commence-
mfmt or the Indian Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1952 J, and 
in f'Oflseqllence thereof it is necessQty to re-compute the total incomtS 
of the assessee chargeable to income-tax, such recomputation shall 
be deemed to be a rectification of a mistake apparent from t.he rl!cord 
within thf. meaning of this section, and the provisions of sub-section 
(1) Rhall apply accordingly, the period of four years referred to in 
that RUh·section being computed from the date of the order modifying 
the Ilssessment of sIJch excess profits tax or business profits tax . 
.EzpZ'anation.-Foj the rurp08es of sub-section (6), where the 
&SS88see is & finn, the provisions of sub-section (6) shall also apply aE! 
they apply to the reoti,fication .f the assessment of the partners of the 
firm." 

15 
Sl. Amendment of I8CtIoD. 87, .lct XI of 19U.-Bection 87 of the 
principal AI}t shall be numbered as sub-section (1) of that section, and 
after sub-sec'llon (1) as so numbered, the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(2) Any authority referred to in suh-section (1) may 6 
impf.uud alld retain in it.l> eustody for such period 8s it think!; tit any 
book!' of account or other documents produced before it in auy 
procf·eding under 'this Act." 
22. Amendment of I8OtiOD 66, .lct XI of 1922.-In sub-seotion (7) of 
seotion 46 of the principal Act, for the proviso, the following pruvisos and 10 
the· }/J:l.'p/anation sha.ll ue flubstituted, namely:-
.. PJ'Ovided . that t.he period of one year herein referred to shall:-
(i) where an assessee has been treated as not being in default 
under section 45 n.s long R.S his appeal is undisposed of, be 
r('ckoned from the date on which the appeal is disposed of; 16 
(ii) where recovery proceedings in any case have been stayed 
b~' liny order of II court, he reckoned from the date from which 
the order is withdrawn; 
(iii) wht:'re the date of payment of tax has been extended 
by aD income-tax authority, be reckoned from the date lip to 
which the time for payment had been extended; 
(iv) Wh(lre the sum payable is allowed to be paid oy iustal-
ments, from the date on which the last of such insto.lmt'nts was 
due: 
l'l'Ovided further that nothing in the foregoing .proviso shall 
havI' the effect of reducing t.he period within which proceedingH for 
recovery can be commenced, namely, after the expiration of 
one year from the last day of the financial year in which the demand 
is made. 
E:x:pZanation.-A proceeding for the recovery of any sum shall 
be deemed to have commenced within the meaning of this section, 
asomtl action is taken to recover the whole or any part of the sum 
""thin the period hereinbefore referred to, and for the removal of 
doubts it is hereby declared that the several modes oC recovery 
specified in t.his sect.ion are neither mutually exclusive, nor affect in 
any way any other law for the time being in force relating to the 
recovery of debts due to Government, and it shall be lawful tor the 
lucerne-tax Officer, if for any special reasons to be recorded he so 
t.hinltl\ fit, to have recourse to any such mode of recovery notwith-
standing t.hat the tax due is being recovered from an assessee by any 
other mode." 
13. Insertion' of new I8ction 46A In Act XI of 1922.-After . section 
40 of the principal Act, tho following section shaH he inserted, ~R./m!ly.-
20 
30 
'46A. PcrBons leaving India to obtain tax clearance c6rtijicatsB.-
(1) Subject to such exceptions as may Be made by the Central 46 
Government. no person who is not domiciJed in India, or wl'o. eve:l 
if domiciled in India at the time of his departure, has, in the opinion 
of an Income-tax authority, no intention of returning to India, shall 

10 . 
30 
- ". 16 
leave the territory of India by land, sea or air unless he titld: ubtuills 
from Huuh authority as may be appointed by the Central Govern-
ment i.. this behalf (hereinafter in this S8<ltion referred to as th~ 
"competent authority") 0. certificate stilting that he hal! no liabilities 
under this Act, the ExctlsS Profits Tax Act, 1940 (XV of 1940), or the 
Business Profits Tax Act, 1947 (XXI of 1947), or that satisfactory 
ummgllmeuts huve been made for the payment of lill or any of such 
taxes which are or may become payable by that person: 
r'rovided that if the competent authority is satisfied 'that 
such person intends to return to Indiu., he may issue an (,xt!llIj,tioD 
certiticHte either III respect of 0. single journey or in l'eRp(!('t Clr a.1I 
journej',; to be ulldeJ·tnken by tha.t persoll within such pcl'ilJd 'is 
may be t!pecified in the certificate. ' ' 
(2) it U.,~ owner or aharterer of sny ship or a.ireraft carrying 
persons !rOUl any plaut' in the telTitory of India to a.ny plRce outside 
the territory, allows any per&Oll to whom sub-section (1) 6}lpJies, to 
tra\'tll 11." such ship ur aircraft without first satiRfyillg h;)URelf that 
such person i,l in possession oi II. certificate as requir.ld by tnat !>ub-
section, he shall be personolly liable to pay the &mount of ta.x, if any, 
which is or may be paya.ble by such person, and shall also be punish-
able with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees. 
T~xplanation.-For the pur!JoStlS of this sub-se(\tion the expres-
sions "owner" alld "charterer" indude any representati'lt', agent or 
emploJee empowered by the owner 01' charterer to allo,,' p"rsolls to 
travel h;;" ~he ship or aircraft. 
(3) h? respect of any sum payable by the owner or chartt'rer of: 
'any ship 01' ulrcruft, nnder sub-section (2). the owner or charterer, 
as the case may bE', shall be deemed to be an assessee in default 
within Ille maaning of suh-section (1) of section 46. 
(4) 'Ihe Central Government may make rules for re~\Ilating any 
matter necessary for, or incidental to, the purpose of curr~ ing out 
the provisions of this section .' 
26. AmendmaDt of I8CtiOD 698, .Act XI of 1922.-Section 49B. the 
principal Allt sha.ll he numbered as .Bub-section (1) thereof, and after 
Bub-section (1) as fiO numbered, tbe following 8ub-Flectior shall bl' inserted. 
IlRmely:-
.. (2) For the purpo~e!'o of Ruh-section (I), income-tax shall be 
deI'H'pc1 to include agricultural income-tax [.l!sessed on /l company by 
any Stflote Government other than the Governmert of J nmmu and 
Kashmir, and where any shareholder proves that, the company has 
bpen' so 1I!,;;,p;:;:erl to agricultural income-tax, he I3hall be entitled to 
the reriulltioll from t.he tax payable by him under thi'l Act of a sum 
~~~ , 
(a) the QPplopriate agricultural 6ncome·tax (redl1eed by 
the &mOllDt of refund, if any, allowed to him by the State Govern-
ment), q 
(b) the appropriate Indian income-tax on the I\moll."t of 
th~ dividend which has not been incre8seit under Rub f(ct\on (9) 
d sention 16, 
whichever is the less. 

17 
Ezptanntion'.--In this sub-section,-
(a) 'appropriate agricultural income-tax' means such prvpor-
tion of the agricultural income-tax as the amount of dh-idend 
which has not been increased under sub-section (.2) of section 16 
beurs to the total profits of the company asseslled to agricultural 
income-tax; and 
(b) 'appropriate Indian income-tax' means sU('h proportion 
of the income-tax payable by the shareholder under ~his Act as 
the amount" of dividend which has not been increased under sub-
section (.e) of section 16 ~ars to the to~al income of the sbare- 10 
holder," 
26.· Amendment of section '9D, Act XI of 1922.-For section 49'0 of 
~e principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:-
490. Rdie/ in respect 0/ income, accruing or arising outside i.he 
taxable territoTies.-(l) If any person who is resident in the taxable 15 
territories in any year proves that, in respect of his income which 
accrues or arises during that year without the taxable territories 
(and which is not deemed to accrue or arise in the taxable tcrritorits), 
he has paid in any country, with, which there is no reciprocal· 
arrangement fol' relief or avoidance of double taxation, income·tax, 20 
by deducticn or otherwise, under the law in force in that c")untry, he 
shall be entitled 'to the deduction from the .IndiaD inc'(me-tax 
payable by him of a S~lm calculated on. such d,~ly tax.ed Income at 
the Indi~lI rute of tax or the rat«! of tax of thc saId ,)ountry,' whk~h(,"er 
is the lower. 25 
(2) Th\l Central. Government may, by notification in the Offidal 
Gazette, d.~tllore that the provisions of sob-section (1) shall also apply 
in relation to any such income accruing or arising in the United 
Kingdom and chargeable under this Aot for the year el'ding on the 
·31st da.y of March, 1950, -or for the year ending on t!1e 31st day of 30 
March, 1951 or {or the year ending on the 31st day c,f March, 1952. 
E:rTllanaiion.-Ir· this section,-
(I) the expression ':Indian inoome-tax" means income-t.ax 
Rnd euper-tax charged in accordance with the provisions o~ this 
Aot; 35 
(ii) thl' expression "Indian rate of tax" means the rate 
determined by dividing lhe amount of Indian income-tax after 
deduction of Bny relief due under the other provisions d this Act 
but before deduction of any re11ef due under this sentien, by the 
total income; • 40 
(iii) the expression "rate of tax of the said cc-untry" tnl~ans 
income-tn and super-tax actually jfaid in the said country in 
accordance with the corresponding laws of the Raid country 'after 
deduction of all reliefs due, divided bv the whole amount \'f the 
in(,OIlle assessed in toe £laid country. oIi 45 
26, Amendment of section 49B, Act XI of 19U.-In seotion 49E, of 
the principal Act, for the words "against tlie tax" f1ie words "against 
the tax, interest or penalty" shall be substituted. 

10 
. 1 ti 
27. Amendment of section 54., .A.ct XI of 1922.-:-1n sub-section (3) of 
section 54 of the principal Act,-
(i) for clatlses (a) 'and (b), the following clau8CSI'lhall .l'e stlbsti-
tu\ed, llamelv:-· . . 
"(a) of any such ,particulars in connection "",it I , Il T,rosecution 
under the Indian Penal Code· (Act 'XLv ·of 1860) or 'wder this 
Act, ill rt:8pect of any matter arising in the course (,f the, execution 
of this Act, or . 
(b) of allY such part,iculsl's to any person netiu!! in the' 
execution of this Act or of the iaxation on Inoome (Ill\'cstigation 
CommiMsioll) Act, 1947 (XXX of 1947), where it is rteces"nr,v 01' 
desirnbl.! to disclose ,the se,me to him for the purpuses 1.f either 
this .'\('t or the Taxstil:>Ii 011 Income. (lilVestiga.tion Commissiou) 
l\Ct, 1947,"; or 
iii) in clause (d), after the wora "Oovernment" thi> 1I',m}" "or 
any Income-tax authority" shall be inse11e<1 and aftf'!' the wo!'ds 
,!'under this Act", the words "or under any other law f.·1' tl ~ time 
beil1~ in force suthoril'ling any Income-tax nuthority to I'xrrd"e any 
powers thereunder" shall be inserted: 
20 (iii) ill clause (gg), the words or·ill oonlleetion with income-tax 
pl'ceeedillgs" shall be omitted alld for ore words "registel'(~d nCCollnt-
lint" the words "l~hartered aceollntant" shall he substituted. 
2li 28. Amendment \t section 680, Act XI of -19U.-ln sub-section (1) of 
section 58:] (IF tho principal Act,-
30 
86 
(i) to dillise (d), the following proviso sh.all be ad(l,,!!. 1:\ln(,ly:'-
"Provided that.the fund may consist also of thl~ r,cl'umulat-
ed bslllm:e aue to lin employee ~ho has ceased to he an em-
rJl()~4:'e UllU of interest (simple and compo~nd) in !'hSpect thereof 
whel'e sue}, balance is retnineu in toe fund' in aC(J()I'dl\!I(~e, with 
t1w prO\-isions of clallse (g),": .. 
(ii) in cIalls'l (g), after tlJe words •• mRintaining thp fUlld' - ,the 
wOl'd;; "liJl1f.sS at the request of the emp"tOyee made ill \Hiting, the 
trustp€s M thE' fund consent to retain the whole or. nn~' part (f the 
accnmulated balance due ,to the employee ip the fund to be drawn by 
bim at Rny time on uemand" shall be inserted. 
29. Amendment pf HCtioa' d~, Act XI of 1922.-1n sub-sE'l'tion (I?) of 
section 59 or the princip!ll Act,fo~ clauses (0) and (d), tht' follo\\ ing dRuse 
shall be substitutt'd, namely:-. 
"(r) prescribc the procedure for l!ivinll effect to thfl tm'n\s of 
any a!n'~I'ment, for the avoic1anee of double taxation on income 
which· mAT be entered into bv the Central GOV('Tmnent under 
seetion 49AA;". v 
80_ .Am~ndment of actiOn 88A, Act D· of 19ft.-1n su15-secliion (1) of 
sectir)!l p,11\ of thA principal Act, for 'the words, bl'RCkettJ Rnd 1i~urps "and 
46 in resped of fillch cars~, ~h~ pT.qvisiqns. of se<?tiqn ~ of tJ.1tl COII41 of· Ch it 
Proct'(l\lr~. 'HJl'H (A~t ~ol 10(9) shalt so faT 8,S' may he, I\pply' notwith-
standing nnvthing contained in t.he T .. etters Patent' ~f aTl~' Ri~hCo\lrt 

19 
estnblielJed by Letters PRtent or in allY other la.w {qr t4e time being itt 
f,)l'Cfl". i,~e followillg shall be substituted, namely;-
"a11l1 l:ihall be decirled in accordance with the opinion ofsuc~ Judges 
or of thfl majority (if any) of such Judges: 
l'ro\"ided that where there i~ no such nllljodty, tb-e Judges shall 
stlliuthu.)Joint of lllw upon whi(:h they differ, and. the case 8hall then 
bo henril UPOII that poiut only lJy (m6 or more pf the otlter ,.Tudgf3B 
o~ tJJt' High COlll·t. alld sueh point shall be decided oo';ording i'j the 
opillion nf the majority of the Judges who have heax:d tj:Ie case, 
indurling those.who first heRrd it." -! """: ,,' • 
31. Substitution of new section for section 67, Act XI of 
seetioll (~7 ot the prineipal Act, the isJllowing section shall ,be 
Dumely:-
1922,--For 
substitut'3d, 
"67: Bar to legal proceedingl1.-(l) No suit or oth~r bgal pro-
cee.UlI!,i l:ihall lie in uny civil court--
5 
.10 
15 
(II) to set aside or modify Ally assessment under this Act, or' 
(h) ferr the grant of tiny relief which will have the effect of 
preventing the ('ommelWement or continuance of any assessmt,int 
proct,t'ding ugaillst any perRon under this Aut. 
(2) 1\0 -prosecution, suit or other legal proceeding sholl lie against 20 
any nffcer of the Government for anything in good faith done or 
jr'h·"df'd to be done under this Act." 
32. Amendment of the Schedule, Act XI of 1922.--(1) In the Schedule 
to the principul Act,-
(a) fOI' the words "SuperintclI!lent of Tn8\11'1\nCe", wherever they 25 
0': ('Ill'. the wordB "Controller of InSllrflllea" shall be substituted; 
(b) in rule 2,-
(i. in dause (b), for the WC7l'ds "actuarial valuation made for 
the lflst inter-valuation period", the words "actUArial valuation aO 
Ill/Ide ill aceordance with the Insurance Act. '1938 (IV of 19!\8) , 
ill l'eflped of .the lust inter-valuation period" shall be substituted; 
, (ii) in clanse (d) of the proviso, for the figures P12" the 
figUl'l'S "15" shall be substituted; 
(c) in clause (Il) of rule 3, for the words "one-half" the words 35 
"foUI'-fifilH!" shal~ be substituted. and in the second provisol for the 
words "one-half of surh amount" the words and brackets "that pro-
portiol) of such amount (one-halt or four-fifths, as the case may b€)" 
shall be fHlb"Ututed; 
(01) for rule 8, the foilowing rule shall be substituted, namely:,- 40 
"Fl, Th!' profits and gaills of the branches in the taxable Len'i-
tOl'iHl of a persoll noL resident in the taxable territories aud 
clur,yin;! on allY busillf's>; of infll1rAnce, may, in the absence of 
Jr;Ol"!~ reliable data be deemf'rl to he that proportion ot the worla-. 
il1('ornt> of such person whi!'h corrt'~pollds to the proportiolJ whi~h 
his Dl'cmium income derived fram the taxable territories bears 45 
to J~is total premium income. . 
For the purposes of this rule, the world income in relation 
to life insurance business of 1\ person not resident in the taxable 
tl'rl'itories shall be ~omputed in the manner lsid down in these 

%0 
rulE's for the computation of the profits and gmns of life insurance 
business carried on in the taxable territories." 
(C) The amendments made by sub-section (1) shall be deemed tc' be 
opara.~ive in relation to any a.ssessment subsequent to the assessment for 
6 the ye!ll' cnJbg on the 31st day of March, 19tH, whether such assessment 
haa or hRa not been made before the commencement of this Act and where 
any such assl"sl!Ipent has been made before such. oommencement it shall 
be lawf1.!l' for the Income-tax Officer to revise it; wherever necessary, to 
giv~ effect to such amendments. 
10 33. Application of .A.ct.-Subject to any special provision made in this 
behalf in this Act, the amendments made by this Aot in the principal Act 
shall ha"e effect in relation to all 'assessments for the year ending on the 
31st day of March, 1958 and subsequent years. 
M. Validity of certaln notice. and I118I1D1811tl,-For the removal of 
16 doubta it is hereby declared that the provisions of sub-sections (1), (2) and 
(3) of section 34 of the principal Act shall apply and shall be deemed 
BlWI\YB to have applied to any assessment or re-assessment for any year 
ending befl'ra the 1st day of April, 1948, and any notice issued in accord-
ance with Bub-section (1) or any assessment completed in pursuance of 
20 such natice within th~ time specified in sub-section (8), whether before 
or after the commencement of the Indian Income-tax (Amendment) A('t. 
1952, shall, notwithstanding any judgment or order of any court, Appellate 
Tribunal of Income-tax authority to the contrary, be deemed to hllve been 
validly iss<led or completed, as the case may be, and no such notice, assea~-
25 mer.t or re·~ssessment shall be called in question on the ground illercly 
that the rravisions of section 34 did not apply or purport to apply in 
respect of a~\ assessment or re-assessment for any year prior to the 1st Jay 
of April, lI:l4t:J. 

21 
STATEMENT OF OB;JECTS AND REASONS 
"I'he objeot of this Bill is-
(a) to give effeot to some of the urgent, olarUicatory and 
benefioial provisions contained in the oomprehensive Inoome-tax 
Amendment Bill (Bill No. 56 of 1951), which-was introduoed in June 
last year and which has now lapsed; 
(b) to give effeot to some further ooncessiansto Industriell} 
(c) to make certain amendments which have become necessary 
owing to som,e recent judicial decisions, and in ~he ligh~ of the ex-
perienoe gained in the working of the Aot; and 
(d) to make certain amendments so as to bring the law in line 
with the practioe and with the administra~ive ohanges ~eady made 
or under oontemplation. 
2. A comprehensive Inoome·tax (Amendment) Bill including, amongst 
others, such recommendations of the Income-tax lInv,es:tigation Com-
mission as had been acoepted by Government was introduoed in June 1811t 
year, but it could not be taken up for consideration in the subs,equent 
sessions of Parliament owing to pressure of other urgent busines~. That 
Bill has now lapsed, and in any case its provisions would have required 
detailed examination in the light of ~he comments received from various 
quarters. Meanwhile, it, has become necessary to introduce a shorter 
Bill containing the amendments desoribed above. 
3. The notes on clauses explain the object underlying each of the 
amendments oontained in the Bill. . 
NEW DELHI; 
The 13th Ma.y, 1952. 
C. ]). DESHMUKJI. 

22 
Notes on cllluBes. 
Clau8e 2 amends seotion 2 of the Aot relating to definitions . 
. Sub-claWl8 (a) amplifies the definition of 'asse8s~e' to' include a 
persooby ,~hom. income·t~x, interest or penalty or any other sum is pay-
able: updEJr th~ Aot, and also includes a person in respect of whom any 
proceeding has been taken for the' assessment of his incoDle or of' the 
amount of. refund due to bim or of the lOiS sustained by him . 
.. Sub-cl~'u8e8 (b) & (c) ill.sert the definition of 'Director .of Inspection' 
and of' Inspector of Income·tax'. As these two officials are already 
w'orking in execution of the Act, it is necessary to define them and to in-
olude them in the Income-tax authorities in section 5. 
Sub-clause (d).-The definition 'Of "previous year' has beem fe·drafted 
to make it clear that (i) if the option of 'previous year' has once been exer-
oised hy tbeassessee, including the option for a J;lllwly set up business or 
professi~111 . he cannot cha.nge it without the Income·tax OffiCC1"S consent, 
(ii) in the· case of a newly set up 'business or profession, the accounts have 
to be made· up for a period not exceeding twelve m()nths froUl the setting 
up of the business to enable t·he assessee to exercise the option, (iii) If 
suell aocounts have been mllde up to a date faping \\'ithin the R!'lSeSsment 
year, then'tbat 'previous year' would become th~ 'previous, year' for the 
nextsucoeedingltssessment year, nnd (iv) the l)r~vious year adopted by a 
firm 'is the 'previous year' in the case of its partners in respect of their 
share of income in the firm. 
OIa·/l.8c 3 amends the cbllrging.section 4 of ~he Act. 
Sub-clausll. (1) ,(a) (I) inserts two more provisos in ~ub·sedion (1). 
Thetisi pJ'()viso 'implements the concession announced in ~rny 1950, for-
exempting foreign profits remitted to or brought into India by (\ J)Cr80n wit.h. 
in the first two years of h~ becoming resid/:'ut in India.. This pxempt.ion 
is given retrospeotive effect from the assessmeut year 1951·52. The 2nd 
proviso grants exemption to. B resident person in respect of his foreign 
profits which become chargeable only on remittallce and were not charge-
able in the year in which they accrued or arose. Th~ conditions for the 
exemption are that (i) the amount is brought intp India after the 2nd 
September, 1951. when the concession was announced, (ii) half the amount 
is invested within three months of the receipt. in Government F;ecmities 
purchssed through the Reserve Bank of India And kept with the said 
bank for @8f~ custody for at least two years and (iii) 01:lt of the remaining 
half, the taxes due from the assessee are paid. 
Sub·c.la.uBe (1) (a) (ii) exempts pension paid outside India to a Jud~e 
.of the High Court or to an officer 01£ the Secretary of State Services resid-
ing o,ltside India, who continned to sprve after the commencelllent of t.he 
Constitlltion. They enjoyed this exemption under the provisions of arti-
cles 221 (2) and 314 of the Constitution. The amendment is intended to 
give effect to this exemption. 
Rull-clause (1) (b) (i) implements recommenda.tionR Nos. 52·54 of the 
Income· tax Investiglltion Commission regarding religious and charitable 
'trusts, nn~ely (i) that the exemption should apply to charitable purpoRes 
within the country, (in that the potentialities for fra.ud by creating re-
vocable charitable trusts. be eliminated by making the exemption subject-
tathe pr(lvisiorfs of section 16(1)(c) of the Act ,(under whioh income from a 
revocable trust is toO be included in the income of the settlor), and (iii) that 
income of Q cha.ritable ,business· to he exempt only if the bt!siness is 
carried Q,n on behalf of a religiolls nnd charitable institution and it is 

23 : 
carried on ill the :(,0111'S6 of implementing. 8 primary purpose of the iUEltitu-
tiOll or the work of the business is mainly dOl)e by the beneficiaries of the 
institution. In the case cit religious. or charitable purposes outside India, 
already ill p.xistence. the Central Board of Revenue is empowereJ to grunt 
exemption h~' a general or special order, It IS made ~lel.1.r·· thut the 
exemptiou 3pplies to so much of the inoome of 9. religious IUld charitable 
trust- R~ is applied to r.eligious and charitable purposes only. h if< 1\1[0'0 1!18de 
clear by tht: 3Dlendment made by lIu/l-da"Ullo (l){c) that the inconJl~ of 9. 
pnvMe n'[lgious endowment is not exempt. . 
Suh-c1aulle (l)(b)(ii).-:-The income from property cortr,ltrtwtecl ,,'ithin 
the period 1st Anrill946 to 31st March 1952 is exempt for 2' years. The 
amendm£,nt extends the period of ·construction of .such property by an-
oUier tw'.· ~(,8.rs I.e. up to 31st March 1954. '. 
Sub-dO/PIe (1)(11 )(iti) inserts six clauses giving exemptions, in respect 
of-
'i) remuneration of technicians paid by foreiWl enterprises if their. 
stu;\' in I ndin does not l'xeeed 90 Jays; '. 
_ (ii) illeollle of persons comin~ to India in pursuance of e.n agree-
mUlit betw('en India. and the Government of a foreign State i.ll 
connection with any co-operative technical assistance pro-
grUlllIne; 
(iii) interest on bondsi'lsued by the Central . Government under 
iOl1n agreement with the Intenlationlll Ba.nl. for Reconstruc-
tion and Development; 
(iv) interest on 3i per cent.' '1'eu Years Treasury Savings Deposit 
certi1icates; . 
(v) illterest on securities lif!ld. by the Issue Department of the 
Central Bank of Ceylon; 
(vi) .m .... dllily aJlow311ce recl~i\'Cd by II porson by reason of his luem-
hcrsttip of the Dominion Legislature or of Constituent Assl":r,nb-
l,v or of Parliament or of any Stat(! Legislature or ()f all~' c·1m-
Itllttee thereof which_ bas fallen due before the ht April 19.)2. 
Sub-cia ww (2) gives retrospective effed tQ the exemptions inserted by 
clause (1) (b),(iii)., . 
Cla1lllo .J.. am~nds section.5 of the Act relating to Income-tax 8\Jthol'ities. 
Bub-clauses (a) (i) & (ii) include Directors of Inspection Ilnd Inspectors 
of Ineome-ta.x in the Income-tax uuthoritit-'s. . . 
Sub·clauBe (/I) inserts a new sub-section regarding the appointment 
aud fuuctiolls of Directors of Inspection_ 
Sub-;·lllllse (c) amends sub-section (2) relating to .the appointment 
of Commissioners of Income-tax. 'I'he sub-section as amended empowel'8 
the Central Government to IIppoint Commissioners who may perfvnn their 
functiolls in respec.t of such ar~as, o.r of such pertlons or classes' of ft'rsOus 
or of such incomes or classes of incomes as the Centra.l Board of Rl,venue 
may dire~t. This is administratively more cOllvenient a.nd it would make 
it possibl,' to appoint two or more Commissioners to perform their ft11l!It.ions 
cotiolJl'rent~y ill sllch charges as may be 'unwielrly for one Comnlissioner. 

24 
Sub-cI.aU8e (d).-Under the Cla!sification and Control Rules, the power 
to appoint Inoome-tax Officers in class II. Service has been delegated to 
Commissioners. The sub-clause amends sub-section 3 specifically dele-
gating the power to appoint Class 11 officers to Commissioners, thus 
making the law in oonformity with the servioe rules. 
A new sub-section (SA) is added to permit appointment of such execu-
. tive and ministerial staR as may be necessary in the execution of. the Act. 
In view of the seorecy provisions of the Act, it is necessary that the 
appointment of suoh staff is recognised by the Act. 
Bub-L~lauIl6 (6).-The omission of the words would enable the Commis-
sioner to direct, without reference to the Board, that an Inspecting Assis-
tant Commissioner should exeroise the powers of an Income-tax Qfficer in 
respect of a particular case. 
Sub-clauB6 (/) is consequential to the inolusion of Inspectors of Income-
tax in the Income-tax authorities. 
Sub-clau86 (g) has been re-drafted to indicate speoifically to whom 
Appellate Assistant Commissioners are subordinate for the purposes of re-
visional powers exeroisable by the Commissioner of Inoome-ta.x, and to 
whom the Inspecting Assistant Commissioners and Inoome-tax Officers 
are subordinatl! for the purposes of revisionai powers of the Commissioner 
or for receiving any guidance. 
Sub-clau.e (h) inserts two new sub-sections (7B) and (7C). Sub-
section t 7B) implements the Investigation Commission's recommtlllda-
tions Nos. 146-147 to the effect that it should be possible for the Income-
tax Officer to obtain and for the Inspecting Assistant Commissioner, Com-
missioner or toe Dir~tor of Inspeotion to give advioe and guidanoe in 
difficult cases. Such advice would be confidential. It also gives these 
authorities the same powers whioh tn Inoome-tax Offioer has in relation 
to making of inquiries. 
The new sub-seotion (7C) enables the successor income-tax authority 
to continue 8 proceeding from the stage at whioh it was left by the pre-
decessor. 
Ula,,1J6 :; amends section 5A reI ailing to the appointment of the Appellate 
'l'ribulIlll. 
Sub-clause (a) deletes. a proviso whioh was otiose. 
S111J-dau1J6 (b).-Tbe reference to 'Registered Aocountant' is substituted 
by ttl£; words 'Chartered Acoountant' which is the correct expression after 
the pr,saing of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949. To qualify for :J.p-
pointment 8S a judicial member of the Tribunal, the period ot holding a 
civil judicial post or of having been in legal practice is raised from six to 
ten years. Similarly for e.ppointment as accountant membl'r, the requisite 
peri.)d of praotice as an aocountant is raised from six to ten years. 
811/l-~lallRfI, (n' remOWR the statutory bar to the appointment of an flC-
countant member as president of the Appellate Tribunal. 
Clause " gives exemption in respect of death-cum-retirement gratuity 
p_yable under the Revised Pension Rules of the Central Govenunent nr 
unde.' 1\ similar scheme of R State Government. 
Cl41ls6. 7 amends section 9 relnting to computation of inoome from Fro-
·perty. 

25 
Sub-alauB" (1)(a)(ii) 4nd Bub-cla,u86 (2), increases the allowance for re-
p:lil'':> in respect of property affected by the Assam earthquake of 1950 from 
on", sixth to a maximum of one-half of the annua:l letting value. S'ub-
cla\lse (2) gives retroslJective effect to this concession for the assessment 
Jear lU51-5~. 
Sub-clauBe (l)(b) makes it cl~ar ~.hat the annual letting value of pro-
perty ill the owner's occupation for residence is to be computed in the same 
manner as that of the property let out on rent subject to its not exceeding 
10 p.c. of the owner's total income. 
ClauBe 8 amends section 10 relating to computation of income chargeable 
undel' the Profits and gajns of business, profession or vocation. 
Sub·clause (a)(i) makes two amendments in clouse (vi) of section 10(2). 
'l'he first relates. to extending the perio~ by two years to 31st March, ~954. 
within which buildings used for purposes of business have to be constructed 
to get the benefit of higher initial depreciation. The second is intended to 
make it clear that where unabsorbed depreciation has been effectively allow. 
ert iT. the assessment of a partner of a registered firm, it would not be carried 
forward in the C8se of the firm. 
8ul,-clau8e (a)(ii) extends the period upto which double depreciation is 
admissible by five years upto 31st March 1959. The number of 88sessments 
for which depreciation is admissible remains the same, i.e., five. Provision 
for making further allowance ill the last financial year if the market value 
faHIJ is also being continued. 
Sub-dauBe (a)(jij).-This is a clarificbtorv amendment to make it clear 
that the revenue expenditure admissible under this residuary olause is that 
which is not specifically (lovered by the preoeding clauses. If it is oovered 
by thoi'e clauses, it should be admissible only under those olauses, and not 
LInder this residuary clause. 
Suh-clau8e (h)(i).-This amendment makes it possible to bllow dE:.IJrecia. 
tion in respect of assets acquired by a person through gift or inheritance.' 
Sul'-clau8e (b)(il) inserts an' Ezplanation which makes it clear that (i) 
wher(1 a part C1f the cost is met in the course of business from an outside 
SOllrce, depreciation is to be allowed on the net cost borne by the owner, 
and Ci) the expression "actually allowed" covers tbe unabsorbed deprecia· 
tion carried forward for being set off against subsequent profits. 
Clause 9 makes an amendment consequential to the extension of the Act 
to llc.rt H States other than the State of Jammu and Kashmir. 
OlauBe 10 amends section 15C of the Act relRting to exemption of income 
of new industrial undertakings upto 6 per cent. of the capital employed. 
Sllb-clall8e (a)(i) increases the period within which production must 
commenoe for securing exemption from th1"6e years to Biz years. 
Sub-clau86 (a)(i1).-To give the benefit of exemption to smaller undertak-
ing-fl. the number of persons to be employed is reduced fr9m 50 to 25. 
Sub-do.use (b).-The period of exemption is so fixed that every lindertak-
in;\, which qualifies for exemption would get exemption for five suocessive 
M!St'ssrnent years. 
C/att8e 11 umends section 17(1) of the Act relating to the computation 
of tox payable by a non-resident'. A non-resident is liable to pay incom,,· 
tnx on his Indian income at the maximum rate lind super· tax at the first 
slab rat.e applicable to aD individual. He is, however, given the option to 

26 
elect i.n the. firs~ ye8.t when h~ becomes chargeable to tax I\S non·resident. 
thu~ hls Indlall lllC()mebe assesSed lit the rate applicable to h:s totul world 
incoUlE:'. The amendmellt enables the Income-tax Officer; to allow a llon-
residt:ut to make Q declaration' after the expiry of the time aUowed if he 
wus prevented by'sufficieut caUSe from doing so ill proper tillli) anil jf hit:! 
ft-ilurtl to moke Ii declall"l:I.tioll h~ llot res~lted in' reducing his liability to-
t.ax for. liny year. -
.' , . 
CLa1l8e 12 ameuds section 18 of the Act relating to dHduct'Oll of tax ut 
8{,urCt'. Prilllllrib-, the Hmendm6nts art' cOllsequelltiai on the amendment 
of I!ection 17( 1) rtlgnrdillg the computatioll of tax payable by ti non· r(.'!;idellt.. 
Sub-clause (a).-This aruelldment requires the perSOll responsible for 
pU~lin,.r t:!1i!ary to Ii lIon·resilient· todedl1ct therdrom snper.tilx nt. the Ad 
rate i'l accordanoe with the provisions of ~ectioll!7(l-). If, hnwcvcl', the 
1l0tl-1'esidtmt has exerejs~ the option of ueing chnrged to tnx: on his Indian 
II1CGDle 8t the r~te applil.lEibJe to hi~ 'wadd income' and obtains n certificut,e 
from the Income.tax OfficE'l' for deduction of income·tux and super-tax at A. 
lowl'l' rate ort1:le BUI,er·tax payable on the Indian incC)me of the nOIl·resi· 
deilt nt the tint rate is inndequllt-e, lIud the lncome-tux 'Officer hag given a 
dil't'ctioll for d!"!ductiOl,l of super·tux at u higher rate, the persOll t"tlliposihl'3 
for payment of salary is required to deduct tl-.X llt fHlCh lower or higher rate 
as the' case mav be . ., 
,suIJ-clauII8 (u),-Suu.sections (SA) to (3E) have been replMed by lIew 
suu·sed4011s. 
I 
New sub.section (3A) re.quiries the persoll responsible for paying any in-
ft'r~st Oil securities to u· nun·resident to deduct thet'drom sllper.tux at the 
flat rate or, as in thE' Cl\8e of . salaries , at R lower or higher rate ae(:l)rding 
to the direction issued by the IUl~ome·tax Offioer. 
~t'W sub·section (.'JB) "cplaceR the old sub·sectiou (3.4) and requires the 
perSOll .respolls·bIe for puyjng to 1\ non-resident Iill)' sum chargt'llble under 
tht' Act to deduct iucome·tux lit the mHxinl\lm rutetmd super· tax fIt th~ 
nn·t ~lab rate or at such higher or lower rates liS the Income·tax Officer may 
direct.. . 
l:)ub·section (3e) is new, the old sub-sectbll (3C) having been omitted, 
\\' here the perNoll respoJJsible fOt" pa.ying Iln~' sum chargeable under this Act 
is ill doubt as to whether the whole of such sum (e.g. royalty, film hire, (·tc.), 
is chtirgeable or only 1\ pill·t of it, he llIay upprollch the lilcollle·tn:lt Offwer 
to delennine by general or special order, the appropriate portion of such .. 
slim 011 which tax is deductible. • 
New sub-Rection (3D) rt,j)laces the old sllb·aec·tioll (8Ji:), the del sub-
section (BD) having been omitted. The principal officer of 11 company dis· 
tributing dividEmds in India is reguired to deduct super·tax from the divj· 
dents puyable to Il non·resident nt the rate appropriAte to a non·resi<1ent 
(IOmploll." or at the rate approprm-te to 11 nOI1"'esiderit individual, IHI thp caRe 
mav bp. If however, any di,'ection iR issued bv the Jllcome,·tax Officpr for 
the' decJlIcti~n of liuper-t~ at n lower or higher r"te, snper.tllx iF! r~'quir~d 
to be deducted accordingly. . " 
Sub.c1aulI'tl (r,) makf's three Rmendmentfl in Sll.b-flllction ,(5). The first 
s~cures t,hut credit for the tax d~dllcted at somee 1& to be glv~n whel'e the 
amount :deducted has been paicl totl1e account of the Central Government. 
'rh~. secc)Jld Recures that credit is to be given on the, production of It certi·· 
ncate rec,Illired to be given under ~ Act by tbepersoll resposible f(lr pay-

27 
IfltlUt or by th8 princIpal officer of the compllny, uil; the' 'case may be. ' 'l'he 
third 6111entiment seeur~ thltt where a joint investment is held by two or 
mOl~e IkrsollR, credit in res}>ect of the tux pllid ut source would be given to 
eaoh buch persoll in proportion to the income from iIivestment included in. 
hia to~al income. \Vitbout, this' amendment credit could not' be given to 
the ben",ticial owner of income. ' 
Sub-ciamlJ (d.) and (8}.-These ainendrnellts Qr~ merely consequf,utial to 
the umebdments m~de hy cla.use (b). I 
Sul}.d(/~/fHl (fl.-A~ /<:xplanaiion is illserted to dearify the meanillg of, 
the expression 'persoil responsible for paying'. ' 
Clause 13 amends section 18A-regardiug adv811('e payment of iRX. 
/31t/1-c/ftuHf8 (a) and (II) )Ire cOIlseqlleutiul to the increLlse in the t!~xable 
miuirnml1 plll'ticulurly ill the Cll8e of a. Hindu undivided family. According 
(0 the utm'll<hnellt a H;ndu undivided family whose income doesllot excefJd 
H~. 9,700, would not be liable To pay advnn<:e tax. 
Suil-dauHB (o).-At present Government pa.ys 2 per cent. in:terfJst from 
the dnto of pnyment of advance tux to the clute of provisional or regular 
assesslJJent. The pa.yment of this intel'est is discontinued from If;t Apl.'il 
Hl52 OF there is hurdly lilly difference between the advilIlce ]la,nnent 'of 
tax undel' the PAY AS YOU EAH.N scheme Oll incomes on which tax is 
not dp(luctl'd,nt source nnd dedudiol1 Qf tax in a,dvunce nt'source 011 'S9.l:J-
rieR' hlld 'iil!el'f'st on securIties' oil which no interest. is paid .. 
8u/l-clallRf: (d)(i).-As the interest payable'by Government is reduced 
by 2 per cent. to nil, the interest psynble by t.he assessee on short !'uyment 
of tux Recording to his own est'rnn'te ill also redudt~d by 2 p(~r ct'ut. from 
6 pel' ('(~ut. to 4 per (~ent. 
Nul,-cla URI' (d)( ii) gives discretion to the J ncome-tax Officel' to r(~d uce 
or \\·al\" ... HI(' int,erest paYlible h.v the aRReSR!"e wht'!'e the tlSMssmeut; is not 
contested !llld the tax is paid QR assessed by the Incom~-tllx Officer. 
mallse 14 amends section 22 relnting to' submission' of return of total 
incom!'. 
SU/J-c/aulJll (a) ennbles 8 person who has sllstained A. 10Hs to file a return 
VOl1111tl\ril~· Ilnd to have this lostl .o.et(·rnlined for the purpose of its being 
carried forward and set off in subsequ1:'nt years under section 24(2) of the 
Act. Wit.bout this provision, the assesspe could not mnke 8 vollllltary 
retul'll, nor was it incumbent on the Incomt>-tux Officer to llaH for 8 re-
turn and to determine the loss. 
Sub-clauH6 (b) enables the Income-tax Officer to call for the Ilcconnte. 
of the period suhsequent to the 'prl>viotls :veal" !lnu also to req uire the 
BS8eRSOA to furnish information in wl'i'ting includillg a Iiltatement of !lss!'ts 
and linbilitit'!1 not included in the books of R~counts. 'l'his is essPllti!l1 for 
proper assessment.. Th~ Investigation CommisRion ha!'l bllsed it,s c1etermiun.-
tion mostly on sllch stlltements of wealth submiHed by Bssessees. . 
(,'!aulltJ 15 am"cnds Rection' 24 relating to set off and carry-for\\'ard of 
losses. 
S'Ull-dallse (a).-The amendment secures that' the lo~ sustailw(l by 
an I\Rseflsee in th,' Htat.e of .TRmmu und KnRhrnir is to be set. off onl~' !1gninst 
his inoome arising ill that State which illl exempt llnder section 14(2)(c) of 
the Act. 
Suh-clau86 (b)(i).-This is merely 8 rlBrifiC8tory amendment. 

28 
. Bu~-c14u .. (b)(il).-:-This is also a clarificatory amendment. The loss 
In busm8ss sustamed 10 the State of Jammu and Kashmir whioh has been 
carried. forward is to be set off only against the profits arising in that State 
Hom the same business. 
Clau'6 16 amends seotion 80 relating to appeals to the Appellate 
Assistant Commissioner. 
Sub·clau'6 (a) provides that where assessment is made by an Inspecting 
Assistant Commissioner~xercising the lunctions of an Income-tax Officer, 
the appeal against his order would not lie to the Appellate Assistant Com. 
missioner Clause 17 provides for an appeal in such a case to th~ Appellate 
Tribunal. 
B1tb-clau .. (b).-This amendment is merely consequential to the 
changes made In section 18 of the Act. ' 
Clau~e n.-The new sub-section (IA) provides for an nppeal tv the 
Appellate Tribunal against an order passed by an Inspecting Assistant 
Commissioner exercising the functions of an Income·tax Offioer. 
Cl·all1l6 18 amends s~ction BSA relating to revisional powers of Com. 
missioners. The amendment gives them power to condone delay in the 
case of a revision application made after expiry' of the time·limit of one 
year laid down in this section, 
Clau'6 19 amends section 84 relating to assessment Or re-assessment 
()f income which has escaped tax. The amendment makes it. cle8&' that 
the time-limit ·does not apply to aD assessment or re-assessment made on 
the assessee or any other person in consequence of or to give effect to any 
finding or direction contained in an appellate or a revision or a High Court 
()rder. 
Clause 20 amends section 85 relating to rectification of mistakes. 
~o new pub-sections are being added to section 85. New ilub·section (5) 
provides that in the case of a partner of a firm, the inclusion of bis correct 
share in the firm according to the firm's assessment, re-assessment or any 
modification thereof in appeal, revision, etc., would be treated 8S recti· 
fication of a mistake a.nd the period of four years fol' rectifying the mistake 
will count from the date of the final brder in the case of the firm. The 
~ubstitution of a partner's correct share on the determination of the income 
()f the firm is more or less a routine matter and can be treated as a recti. 
fication of a mistake. 
New sub-section (6) provides that where an excess profits tax or busi. 
ness profits tax assessment is modified in appeal, revision or otherwise, or 
any excess profits tax or business' profits tax is assesspd after the comple-
tion of the corresponding income-tax assessment, the recomputation of 
total income for purpose of income-tax will be trpated as rectification of a 
mistake and the period of four years will count from the date of the order 
'modifying the eXClil8S profits tax or businpss profi~s tax assessment. T~e 
excess profits tax or business profits tax levied on chargea.ble profits IS 
allowable as a deduction in computing the total income liable to income-
tax. If the excess profits tax or business profits tax is reduced it would 
Tesult in corresponding enhancement of tl)t~l income. chn~ge~ble .to incom~. 
tax. But such enhancement may be outSIde the tIme-lImIt laId down lD 
section 34 or 85. This question is not one which has newly cropped up. 
but the previsions of the proposed Bub· section were being applied ~n 
'Practice by executive orders to which the 8ssessees inv~ri8bly r.greed. It IS 
necessary to place this arr~ngement. on a legal fo!,tmg and hence reo 
tro.spective effp.ct is proposed for thIS new sub-seotlon. 

Clause 21. amends section 87 relating to the examination and 
suinmoning of witnesses. The new sub-section specifically empowers the 
authorities to impound and retain the books or documents produced before 
them. The Department was advised that this power was implicit, but. 
a contrary view in a case in the Calcutta High Court indicated that the 
matter should be placed beyond any doubt by making a specific provision 
in this respect. 
Clause 2:~ amende section 46 relating to recovery proceedillgs. The 
proviso to section 46(7) has b.,enamplified so as to extend the period of 
commencing recovery proceedings where payment of tax has been 
held in abeyance till the decision of the appeal or under orders of the court. 
or by extending thf' date of payment or by allowing i1U:ltalments. . This 
would avoid unnecessary issue of recovery ~ertificates m'~rely to. save 
time-bar. 
The E:rplanation which has been added makes it olear that rroceed-
ings for reoovery oommenoe on the daie on which any nction under this 
section is taken for the first time and that the several modes of reco\"ery 
proceedings may be ta.ken a.lternatively or concurrently without prejudice 
to any other mode of recovery available at law for the recovery of a 
debt due to OovE.rnment. 
C(~.UlI(J 23 inserts a new section 46A whioh requires any lerson who 
is not domiciled in India, or who, even if domiciled in India, has, in the. 
opinion of an Income-tax authority, no iutention of returning to India, 
to obtain a t&).·clearance certificate before leaving India. The provision 
is intended to safeguard the interests of revenue and sl1ch a provision 
exists in the Income-tax enactments of several countries such as 
America, Australia. Ceylon, Pakijitan, etc. 
The Central Oournment is empowered to make exoeptions anci also 
to makd rules for regulating any matter necessary for or incidental to 
the purpcses of carrying out the provisions of this new section. While 
securing the interests of revenue, the rules will be so framen that no 
hardship is caused to persons who want to visit :>th"r oountries on 
business or for pleasu~e. The responsibility is laid on the owner or 
charterer of a ship or aircraft to see that no person is allowed to travel 
and go out of Indin without satisfying himself that such person is in 
possession of the requisite certificate. If he fails to do so, he w<'uld be 
personally liable to pay the amount of tax payable by the persoll going 
out of India. 
Clo4us8 24 amends section 49B under which income-tax paid by a 
company proportionate to the dividends distributed by it is deemed to 
have been paid bI its shareholders themselves. 
According to recent judicial decisions, .the dividends paid ).y a com-
pany out of its agrioultural income are not 'agrioultural woeme' in the 
hands of the shareholders and are therefore . chargea.ble to Central 
income·tax even though the oompany bas been assessed to State agricul-
t·.lral income-tax. The amendment se~s to grant relief from double 
taxation in such CRses and to place the dividends paid by gllch ct.mpanies 
on' ~he same footing as dividends paid by a company whosa entire income 
is derived from nOD·agrioultural souroes. 
A new sub-section is added to section 49B· to provide that the expres-
sion income-tax includes agrioultiural income-~ax assessed by any State 

Ooverlllnollt (other than the Stat,e of Jammu and Kashmir). .'1'11(1 agrklul-
tural income-tax l>aid by a company in any State leD any l'bfulJd tlJerfof 
obtairwtl from the' ~tt\te by tlll~ t;harehold~r or tho Central incomo-tax 
payable by tho l!lilul'eholder on the appropriate portion llf the diddend, 
whichever is the less, woule! be allowed 8S 8 deduction to the share-
hol,1<:r from Lbe tax payaWe by him. For example the dividel!" received 
by a ~hareh()ldel' frOllJ a. tela. company is Us. ~jO() and the total income of 
the sh!ll'tholdl~r is TIs. 15,000 ineluding Ita. 1,000 for dividenJ hS groF.sed 
up on the IlR!mmption that, Ceutrnl income-tax payable b;y :the Tea Com-
corupnny is at tt1l' rate of 4 Bnnas in the Tllpee Qnd that 40 p.e. ·,)f its 
income W8!! assessed to Central in('onw·f,nx and 60 p.c. I\sse!o\sed to the 
Sta.h~ agrioultural income-tax. The average rate of Central tax on 
Hs. 1.i.OOiJ is sny 10 p.c..l'hus the portion of the dividend pertaining 
to ngril!ultural illeome of the (lompany (and which is not agric:ultur31 
ineorne in the htluds of the shareholder) is Rs. 600 on which tux at the 
average rute of 10 p.c. appropriate to the shareholder is 60. No'w, if 
the agricultural income pard by the company (less. refund, if Hny, obtain-
ed by the shnrenolder) is Rs. 40; the shareholder is to be allowed II d~dllQ­
tion of Us. 40, from the tax payable by him, but jf .thl! agriclIltllral 
income·tax paid ·thereon is Rs. 75, the shareholder would be allowed a 
deduction of Ro;. 60 only. Thus, while the provision Sl)cures thl£t there 
is no dOlJbl~ taxation of the portion of the dividend paid cut of the 
compull;.·S ngrieultural income. there is no refund payable t.o the' shlu'e-
-bold!.'r .ut t,h~ co!"t, of Central Government, in respect of thli! llfricultural 
inCOml!-tax paid by the company appropriate to the I\griCIl1tul'll~ portion 
of .the dividend namely Rs. 600. 
Clau8e 25 nmend", section 49n of 'the Act under ,·,hich Idief from 
double taxation if; at present allowed equal to one-half. of the foreign tax 
or of Indiun tax OJl Buch doubly taxed income, whichever is the less. 
This method of Ul",ilaterBl relief was being allowed in respect of income 
Brrising in 8 countr~' with which there were no other 'relief fj·:raugemcnts . 
. ' The prm'ision SF. proposed to be amended secures' that tbis llnilatElral 
relief will be ill(.reased from one-half to the abatement <,f tax at the 
full Indian rate or the full foreign rate of tax Wihiche"cr is the lower. 
This amendment implements the concession announced in fI l'rcss Note 
on the 20th ,May, 1950 a.nd would encourage persons resident in India 
to fl!'ltllblish brRnch bUl'linesseR in foreign countries. As respects t.he income 
accruing or arising in the U.K., the Central Government is empowerea 
to mnke this unilateral basis' of relief applicable, if neCe:iSBl'Y, for the 
assessment years 1949-50, 1950-51 find 1951-52 . . 
Clausc fJ6 amends section 49E under which a. refund dl~e· to an 
8SMssee can be set ot! against the tax due from him. '1'h(l proposed 
amendment will enable such refund to be Bet off against ta,,; int,ered Rud 
penalty. 
ClausfJ 27 amt"nds section 54 dealing with disclosure of income by a 
publicscrvRut. 
l::ub·~lallllfJ (I') widens the scope of the existing clauses (a) aHd (b) of 
Bub-Medion (8). 'l'he amended clause (a) permits d~8Closure of informa-
tion in connection with a prosecution in respect of any ma.ttl~r arising 
under the Act. The attiEmded clause (b) permits commul1ic:o.tion, of 
inform,\tion gathered from the nccounts of one assessee for use in the 
assessment of· another assl!I.ee and also permits the uohange of infor-
·mation col1e('h~'.l by tbe ,Investigation Commission; 

8UiJ-c/1I11I1C (ii).-'l'h~ Q,lditioll of t.he words "or filly income-tax Illltho-
rit.y" if' lIl'eeSf;IlI'y' (\;; ,,'nne times appli('ations are made to High COIII·t,s 
for ,1I:ril.l ngaiw .. t a particular Income-tax: Officer. It if, I\l~o m'l'I'Rj;llr,Y 
to rf'f,~1' to any other Act [c.g. Payment of 'faxes (Tranofel' of l~rol'er­
ty) Ad] a~ !>orlle times. mandamlls procceding!:; are takdll ill High Cot:rt 
agaillst the In('onw-tax Offieel' ading Ullder that Act. 
SU/J-I:{UUMJ ·(iii).-Thu ollliHsion of thr. words "in connection with 
ilwo1!w-La.x 1'1olleedil1g'fl" wOIIlIl permit disdosure of inforlnlltiol.1 il'l'espec-
t.i\'l~ of thc fllllt whetller the misconduot arose in any incomE'-tax proceed-
ing" or ill eomH~q\1enC(~ of any profp.Hsional advif'U given without aetl1a\l~­
rep'·I~;:;untiJl.:~ the -Itssessee before nn inoome-tax authority. 
("'/11811 ~N:I ILIIII'IIII" f'nctinn [iHC n'latillg to I'r~l.'ogni~:l'(l provid"nt funds. 
SU!J-CIIlI,.HC U) udds U )l)'l)viKO to ela\lf'(' (d) of suction j)HC(l) which 
hns the pif('d of nJlnwing the Ul'Cllllllllatcd balullce ,Iue to an pmplo~'t"o 
bpillg ]::ept in the flllld Ilft(~r his retirement in accorllatl'.:o with ille provi-
sions of elauf;n (g) which if! altlo being amended. . 
81l1J-d(lI/,~e (i.) ImlelldH clltuse (g) according t,o which the 1l(l('ullltiloted 
bHltll!('~' d,"~ to nil pmplo'yee is at preSp.llt payable to him nt (.t,(·{, Ul his 
.<"pa":lIg h bl' !Ill t'lllphJ,yce. The amenciment, secureH th&t 011 the writt.en 
TC'f]IH',:t of th.! I'mp)oYtlc and with the consent of the t-r!lsh'l's, t,hl! whole 
01' H part ot the aenmllliated balRnce Dlay remain in t.he fllnd t:o be dl'Hwn 
by th,! ernplo,\"fe at any time on demand. 
Th.· n 111('11 (l!/l1'1I t givps I'l'I'ect. to th(~ 11l\'estiglltion Commlssion'~ l'e('OIl"l-
Dlendation "!\o_ 75 which was made with the objeet of pr(Aet'ting the 
hard-l'llrJwtl Rnvingf' of I'mplo,\"l'p.s from lleing frittered 1\ W 11." (,I' 10,,1 in 
ill(li"l'l't.',·t illv,~stmel't afte)' tlw nrllount is withdrawn from the I'llIhl. 
(lal/lil' 29 nmnwls s(>etiou. jin of the Act rpillting ~,() tl1l' 1'1I!e-1l~Hhing 
power of t.l1l~ Central Board of Uevpnue_ 
S/lI'-c/IIII.q(j (ij andf; II new clauf;e empowering the ('ellf.!-al Doard of 
Hp\'I'IlIl(\ to 1'1'<'fo,{'l'ihe t1w pro('('dllre for giving pffp(·t to tlw !t"I'IIIS ,'d AI1~­
agmeml\11t fol' the Il\'oidanec. of double tAxation I'lltel'l'cl illt-o 1I1,dl'I' !;I:et:on 
40:\1\ of 1111' Ad. 
811/J-da/lHC (ii) delek!'\ elause (d) whieh is redundant nft,!'r ,abolit.ion 
of the nla hnsi~ of dOlJble-income-tnx relief betwf'en J:ndill find the lI_K. 
IlIHI('r sl'eti(.al 4~1 of the Act. 
! '1'IIl~e ;10 I\m'~lldb ~~n~4~"1g the hear~lIg of mfel'c,nee 
Ilpplic'atiollo; by f\ 'Bench of not less than two judges of th!. High C)lll'L 
The fJre;;;cnt Eub-f:t.·ction (1) l~ys down thn't the referen'~e appliclltioll 
f:holild hI) hr./lrn by n BerlC!h of not less than two jlldgf\s of tl1(' High 
C'l1l1't !l11(1 that the pmvif;ions of sed· ion 9R of thl' Civil Pro('edllre Cone, 
HIOt! would IlRPly. Accordil1g to seetioD 00 of the Civil }'roeedure Codl', 
i{ an appeal is heunl by a Rench of two or more jlldge!'!. HI(' dE'cision if! 
aecor<iing to tho opinion of the majority, and where t,here is no major"t,v, 
the jl1tlgrnf'llt of the lower COl1rt prevails. It is, no doubt" OPPlI to tho 
judges to refer ttl<' qllestioll on which there is dil'l'er<.'nl'(' of opinion t.o 
one 01' T1JOI\' othpr judges nun thiR if! what WM hitherto hpill!!: dOllt' whl'n-
ever t.here was a. difference of opinion. Recent']y, however, the :!Hndras 
High Court did not refer the matter to 0. third Judge with the result that 
the Tribllllnl't; vil1w prevnilpn (1(Fi' T,T. n. 21B at p. a14). .\K income-
tux iR nn importA;Dt Bubjpd. nfRII-Tndin. Rl"plicQ.t,ion. it, iR n(,(,('1'!'!n!~' thlll. 
the ruling:'! Rhould be authoritntive by B majority of jlldgC'l" of the High 

~W~'~jf.e~~;;!~:::'~_.·il!lM·~ir~UJI:za2PL!!AQ!Jf!DEJDU!!!,m 
Court itself. liEince the amendment that whenever Ihere is a differE:.nce 
of opinion, the question should be referred to one or more judges and decid-
ed according to the opinion of the majority. . 
ClauBB 31 substitutes a new section for the existing section 67 which 
bars suits in a civil court to set aside or modify any a8/1flBllmflnt made 
under this Act. In the Supreme Court judgment in 16 State of Tripura 
V the Province of East Bengal (1951 I. T .R. ~ 17~) which was a (ase under 
the Bengw Agricultural Income-tax Act, there are observations which 
indicate that the existing section 67 of the Act is liable to be construed 
a8 barring a suit only to set aside or modify an I1oIISelJSment, but a suit 
could lie for an injunction restricting the completion of an assessment. 
The practical consequences of such a construction would be far rllaching 
and assessee! may have recourse to courts of law in order to delay Bnd 
defeat assessment proceedings. Hence it is necessary to IlIRke it' clear 
that no suit or other legal .proceedings : would lie in sny civil court not 
only to set aside an Clf:!!essment, but also for the grant of any rplief whicb 
hRs the e~ect· of preyenting the commencement or continuRnce of any 
assessment proceedings. 
The latter part of section 67 which bars pros~Qution or other proceeding 
against any officer of the Government for ihythlDg done in good faith 
has been put 8S a separate sub-section. 
Clau86 32 amends the Schedule relating to the computation of profits 
and gains of the life insurance business. 
Sub-clau8e (a) makes only a consequential amendment due to the 
change in the designation of the post of Superintendent of Insurance. 
Sub-claUlI6 (b) (i) is a clarificatory amendment making it clear that 
the actuarial valuation referred to in the rule is the statutory "8~l1ation 
required to be made in accordance with the fiisurance Act. In the 
absence of this clarification, some insurance companies took advantage 
and prepared .for the purposes of income·tax assessments ad hoc annual 
valuation reporta which were immune from the scrutiny of Controller of 
Insul'tlnce. • 
Suh-cl.a.u8e (b) (ii).-This implements Investigation Commission's re-
commendation No. 46, wherein it is suggested that in the case of l'l'newfl.1 
premiuIDs, the allowance for management expenses be raised £rem 12 to 
15 p.c. of the premium receipts, in view of the general risc in RRlarieR and 
expenses. Le.) ttl '11.1/- . 
Suh-clauBe ~~ {#)r Thi implements~vestlgatiori Commission's re-
mission's recommendation o. 44. The Commission W8S satisfied that 
owing to the fall in the net interest yield, the prespnt allowance of half 
the bonus resern'd for policy-holders was Inadequate. 'l'be bonus paid 
to policy-holders consisted partly of the additional premium pnid by 
participating policy-holders and partly of the interest and other sllyings 
of the insurance business. So much of the bonuB 8B W8S npportiolll&ble 
to the extrn premium (or load) paid by the participating policy.holders 
was merely a return of capital and was, therefore, allowable a'3 d"ductioll .. 
But since it is impossible to work out the correct proportion of the bonus 
allocable to extra premium in l'Bch Rnd every CRse, the proportion four-
fifths of the bonus reserved for policy-holders is regarded 8S allocable 
generally t.> the "loading" included in the premiums bed by life insuran-
ce ('ompanies. Thus four-fifths of the bonus reserved. for policy-holders 

aa 
would be allowable as u deduction and one-fifth only would be regarded 
as reprelOenting tht: savings in investment in05me of the cvmpany to be 
shared by the !)olicy-hoJders and the share-holders. 
Sub-clause (d).-ltuJe I:J has been amended Iilld redrafted for the Hake 
of clarity. This rule at preseut refers to an' insurance cumpany whereas 
the principlo of tht! rule actually applies to any Don-resident p(!rson 
carrying on life insurance business. This is beuIg made clear by omitting 
the word company and substituting "any person carrying (In the busmelB 
of life insurance." . 
'rhe second sentence of rule 8 is also being amended fortha sake 
of clarification. 'l'he purpose of the second sentence is to say that the 
world profits cf the life insurance business of a non-l'eside1Jt are to be 
computed on the principII's . applicabl(! to the computation of Indian 
pl'ofits. Actually, the sentence refers only to the oomputation of world 
profits Rctording til the "surplus valuation" basis but says not.hjng about 
the alternative basis of "interest less expenses". As the same l'rinciple 
should apply to both methods of valuation, the wording is being suitably 
u,meluieJ. 
Hub-cluuse (:!) gives retrospective offect to the amendnl(mt made by 
sub-clauso (1). Thir;; is necessary as 0. reduction of six pies iu the super-
t·ax rebute udmiHsibJo to insurance companies Was made in the Finance 
Act, 1951, 011 the recommendation of. the Income-tax Investigation 
Commissi'm that thc super-tsx rebate WIlS not justified 011 such pOltion 
of the profits of immrance companies as was distributed as dividend to 
shareholders. This recommendation was acccpted, while the other 
recoTIllIlcndat·iollS beneficial to insurance companies affecting. the 
computation of profits wl're included in Bill No. 56 of 1951 which has since 
lapsed. 
eZltUHC 8:1 nmkes th(l Amendment Act opf:lrlltive for the asscssmeut 
:veQf 1052·53 Ilnd subsequent years. Where retrospective effect of certain 
amendments is intended for earlier assessment years, the necessary 
IU'ovh;ioll hilS hnen inclllded in tlw rplElVlmt chm!'!!'. 
Clause .'H.-This provision validating the noticcs issu<:ld under the 
existing section 34 as amended in 1948, and the assessments made in 
Plll'SUlllICe thl'l'eoI for the assessment years' prior to 1st April 1948, hus 
become necel:'snry owing to the recent judgment of the Calc'utta High 
C\Jurt in the OBlte of Calclltta Discount Company Ltd., on its applru~tioll 
for 11 writ under l~rticle 226 of the Gonstitutiou. An appea.l has been filed 
against this jlldgment and on the strength of certain observations of the 
Privy Council laying- down that section 84 of the Act is merely pro('edural 
a!'¥l not " ('hargiJlg section, there is likelihood of this judgment being 
reverRed. Rut, nR the final decision of the Supreme Court might take Q 
lon~ t.ime, f).nef menllwhileo. number of 8SReSlIecs relying on this jud~ment 
mn.~' file Rimilar arplieRtions, the 8mendmont ReekR to set at rest any douhts 
by mHkiJl~~ it <'lellr t.hlLt Beet.ion 34 as amended in 1948 applies to UcseHsments 
for parlier years also. . 

34 
ANNEXURE 
Extracts from the Income-ta.x Act, 192'J (XI of 1(22) . 
• * * • 2. DefiDitioDS.-
II< 
• * • 
(2) .. a~Bt'Sbee" m~o.llB a person by whom income-tax is payable. 
* • • • 
(11) "previous year" meallS in respect of Bny separate source of income 
protlto aud gains- ' ' 
, (a) the twelve months ending on the 31st day of March next pre-
cedmg the year far which the I1I:;SOOl:;ment is to be made, or, if t,he 
aceounts of t,he assebsee have been made up to a date within the said 
t~elve months in respeet of a year ending on any date other than the 
Bald 31st dllJ of March, then at the option of the aBsessee the y(~lir 
ending ou the day to which his ac'xmnts 'have so been made up: 
Provided that where nn assesl:;ee has ollce been assessod in respect 
of a particullll' source of illcome, profits and gains, he shall not in 
resped of that source exercise this option so us to vary the meaning 
of the expreEsion 'previous yoor' us then applicable to him except 
with the consent of the Iucome-tax Officer Hud upon such conditions 
as the In(·ome-tax Officer may, think fit; o~ 
(b) in the case of any person, business or company or class of per-
son, bUE-iuess or company, sueh period as may be determined by t!:J.e 
Ceutml Board of Reveuue ar by su-::h Iluthority aij, the Board may 
authorir,;e in this behalf; or 
(r,) where a business, profession or vocation has been newly (I'Jt 
up ill th, fina.nciul year preceding the year for which assessment is 
to be IJillde, the period from the date of the setting up of the business, 
, profession or vocation to the 31st day of Murch next following or to 
the lust duy of the period determined under sub-clause (b), or if the 
al'Cf)unts of thfl assessee are made up to some other date than the HJ!:It 
day of Mureh and the ouse is not one for whieh a period has been 
determincci by the Central Board of Hevenue under sub-clause til), tht-ln 
at the vption of the assessee, the period from the date of the setting 
up of the business, profession or vocation to sll'}h other da.te: 
j)rovidcd that when such other date does not fall between the 
setting up of the business, profession or voootion and th,e next fol~ow­
illg Glst da: of March, it shall be deemed that there IS no prevIOus 
year; and 
• when the assessee is u purtner in a firm, 'previolls year' in respect 
of his F-hat,~ of tLe income, profits and gains of the ~rm means t~e Ilre-
viouA year as determined for the assessment of the income, j,)rofits and 
gains of the firms; 
• • 
,. AppUcatloD of Act.-
• • • • 
Explanation 2.-Income which would be chargeable under the head 
• Slllaries' if payablu in the ttlxable territories shaH be deemed. to ac('rul;) or 

as 
arisa in tho' t,uxable territories wherever paid if it is earned in the taxllbJ.a territories. 
... ... ... ... 
(3) Any i.ncomc, ~rofits or ga~n!! falling within the following classes 
sho.ll not be IIlcludeu 1lJ the total mcorne of the person reeeiving them: 
.(.1) ~ny ineorne deriv~~ from property held under trust or other legal 
oLhglltlOli whully .for religIOus or ehuritl1ble purposes, and in the case of 
property so held III part only for such purpOSL"S, the income applied or 
finally set apart for application, thereto. ' 
(ia) Any in!:ome derived from business carried on on behalf of a religious 
or chflrit!lbls institution when the in~me is applied solely to the purposes 
of the illstitutjor.. o.nd-
((/) t,he business is ':arl'ied on in the course of the carrying tlut of 
a primary,purpose of the institution, or 
(b) the work in connection with the business is mainly carried on 
by beneficiaries of the institution. 
(il) Any ineome of a religions or charitahle institution 
voluntary contributions and appliellble solely to religious 
purposes. 
... • • • 
derived froUl 
or charibble 
(a:ii) Ally income chargeahle under the head "Incom~ from property·' 
in respect of u building the erection (1£ whbh is begun and completed be-
tween the 1st dny of April 1946 and the 13lst day of March 1952 (both dat(lS 
inclusiv,'), for a period of two nars from the date of such completion. 
• • ... * 
In this sub-sel'tion "charitublo PIJI'POSC" indudes relief of the poof, 
education, medical rdief, snd the ad vallcement of nny other object of 
general puhlic utility, but nothing contained in clause (i), clause (iao) or 
clauso (ii) shoH operate to exempt from the provisions of this Act that 
pal't of th<' income of a private religious trust which does not ensure for 
the benefit of the public. 
.. • ... • 
5. Income-tax autborittea.-
* • .. 
(9) The Central Government mt1;y appoint It Commissioner of Income-
tax for any arp.u specified in the order of appointment, anel may' appoint 
Commil:;sioners of Income-tax, not mOre than three in all, each to discharge, 
without reference to area., and to the flxclusion of any Commissioner 
appointed for nlly arell, the functions of a Commissioner in respect of tiny 
eRsa:; or clnss~;s of caRes assigned to him by the CentrllJ Board of ReveJlue. 
(3) '1'he Central Government may appoint as many Appellate or Ir,spe?-
tinb Assistant Commissioners of Income-tax and Income-tax Officers 8R It 
thinks fit. 
• * ... • .. .. 
(5) Inspecting Assistant Commissioners of Income-t.ax and Income-tax 
Officers shall perform their functions ill respect of Ruch persons or class 
of persons or of su<'h incomfls or classes of income or in respect of 
such areas IlS the Commissioner of Income-tax may direet, and, whl're !!'lch 
dirf:ctions linve been Bssif,tnfld to two Or more Inspecting Assistant CommiR-
sioners of Tncome-tp.x Qr Income-tax Officers, the snme persons or clRss<lfj of 

l .a as .. .I .. _ sass .... 
persons or the Bame incomes or classes of income of the Barne area in 8C'QOr-
dalllle with allY orders which the Commissioner of 11lOOllHl-tux may make for 
the distribut.ion and alLocliltion of thtl work to bo pel'fonned. The Com-
miasilmer. mllY, with thtl 'previous approval of the Central BOlLrel of Uevenue. 
Ly general or special order ill writing, dil'ellt thut the powers 1I0nferred on 
the lm·omn··tax Officer and the Appellate Assistunt Commissioner by or 
under this Act shall. in rOSpllCt of any specified CIA.Sl! or d!\ss of callos. be 
eXer'}ised by the Inspe~~til1g AssiHtltnt Commissionrr Bnd the" Commissioner, 
retlpootively. undo for- the pUl'poses of IIny cuse in respect of which (lUoh 
ord,~r applies, l'eferences' ill this Act or in (my rules made hereu/lrler to 
the Im'pme-taJI OtBl~l~r /llld the Appellute Assistllllt Commissioner shan be 
d2emed to btl references to the Inl'lpecting Assistllnt Commissioner Bnd the 
COll!missionOl'. respcctively. 
• * * * * * 
(7) Assistant CommissionerR of Income-tax and IMome-to.x Offiocrs 
abBIl. fO' the purpORes of this Act, be subordinate to the Comp1issioll{\r d 
Income-tax for the Rrea in which ~he'y pel'form their functiollR. lIr where 
thoy pcrir)ml functiolls RS>ligm!d to thf'm hy 1\ Conllllissioner of Inl'om(~-ttlx 
apf'(linted without reference to area, to tha.t Commissioner. 
'" '" * * * 6A. '!'he Appellate Tribull&1.-
• * • 
(,1) A judicial member shall be a person who hIlS exercisEld' the powt'!"O; 
of a Di~trle~ Judge or who possesses Fmch qUlllifiC!\tions as are 11 orm 1\11 y 
required for nppointment to the post of l>iRtrict. Judge; and nil I\'}couutant 
membH shall be a person who has, for II period of not less t,hs1I six years. 
p.lllctiR<.-'d professionally as a Registerm) Account.nut enrolled on the Registor 
or ACCOUlltR~ts maintained by the Centrl~l Government under the Auditors 
C.~rtifillate Rules, 1932: 
l'rovided that the Cpnt.ral Government rm,y appoint as an acoollntant 
member of the 'fribunal any person not posscssing the qualifications 
rlJquir'ell by thiB suh-section; if it is Ratisfied that he has qualificatioIls and 
has lnJ ucle1llmtu experience of a ehuracter whi~h render him suitable for 
nJiJl(!jntm~nt to the Tribunal, 
(4) The Central Government shall Il.ppoint 1\ judicial member of the 
'l'ribunnl to be president thereof. 
• ... ... ... 
8. Beads of income chargeable to Income-tu.-
... ... * * • 
Explan.ation 2.-A payment due to or received hS 811 flssesseo froOl 8n 
emplOYlIl' or former employer or from a provident or other fllnd. is to the 
extent to which if; does not consist of contributions by the assessee or 
interest on such contributions Q profit received in lieu of salary for the 
purposes' of this sub-seotion. unless the payment is made solely BS compen-
sation for loss of employment und not by wily of remnnerntion for past 
services: 
Pl'Ovid(~d that nothing herein contr~in('d shBlI render liable to income-
tax Blly poym~nt from a provident. fund to which t.he Provide.nt Funds. Act, 
19-16 (XIX af 1925), applies, or any payment from /l recOb"'l1l~ed provldp.l1t 
fUllc! within thp. menning of Chapkr IXA if such pnymcnt·ls elSempteu 
from" payment of income-tax under the provisions of Chnpter IX~, or auy 
paymlOnt from All npprov'ed superll.nnl18tion 'fund 'within the n}(~a.ning of 
Chaptet lxn made on the -defttb of a benefieiary or in lieu of or in l~om-

37 
n.utation of an annuity. or by way of refund of contributions on .the death 
of u bemfhiary 01' on his leaving the employment in connection with which 
thd 1'unu is t:6tabJished, 
,.. ,.. * * * 9. Property.-(l) 1'he tax shall be payable by an assessee under tq.e 
head "Income from property" ill respect of the bona {uJo annual value of 
PJ'()pot,v COllsiRting of Bny buildings or lands appurtenant thereto of whioh 
he iA tllfl owner, other than such portions of such property as he mlly 
oc·.mpy fell' the purposes of any business, profession or vocation carried 
on b'y him the profits of which are assessable to tax, subject to the follow. 
ing allowances, namely:-
* ,.. * * 
(I!) Fol' th, purposes of this section, the annual value of any property 
shall bfo deemed to be the sum for whi'lh the property might reasonably be 
expecteu to let from year to year: . 
l'rf,vidoll thut where the property is in the ocoupation of the owner lor 
t;~a purpOflt:R of his own residence and ,the aforesaid sum exceeds ten per 
cent: of the tCJlial irwome of the owner, the annual value of ~he property 
shull be deemed to be tell per cent. of sU(~h total income: 
• * * • 
10. BuaiDetI8.-
~ . . . 
. (2) Such profits or gains shall be computed after making the following 
aUowalw;)!!, namely:-
* • • • 
(vi) ill Iflflpect of depre'}iation of such buildings, maohinery. plant or 
furniture being the prop6rly of the assessee, a sum equivalent where the 
assets IlTd shipa ot.her than ships ordinarily plying on inland watel\!l, t.o 
SUllh pereontagc on the original cost thereof to the assessee as may in any 
(,I1S(~ III' cluss (\f cases be prescribed and in any other case, to such per· 
cent'lgn on thp. written down value thereof 88 may in any CBse or class of 
cases be Jll'escribod: , 
And where the buildings have been newly erecteJ, or the 
machinery or plant being IIew ha.s been installed, after the Slst day of 
March, 194/i, a further sum whioh shall however not be deductible in 
determining the written down value for the purposes of this clause in res· 
pent of the ,year of erection or installation equivalent,-
(a) in the cnse of buildings the erection of which is begun and com· 
pleted between the 1st day of April, 1946 and the Slst day of March, 
1952 (both dates inrlusive), to fifteen per cent. of the cost thereof 
to the &ssessee; 
* * * * 
• Provided that-
(0) the prescribed po.rtiouln1'8 have been duly furnished; 
(b) where full effeet cannot be given to any such allowanoe in 
any year, not being a year which ended prior to the 1st day of April, 
WHO, owinp- to t.here being no profits or gains ehBrgeable for that year, 
or owfng to the profits or gaius chargeable being less than the allow· 
Ance, then, subject to the provisions of clause (b~ of the proviso to sub. 
!:lection (2) of scction 24, the allowBnce or part of the a.llowance to which 
effel't hilS not. been given, ns the caRe may be, shall be added toO the 
amount of the allowance for depreciation for the following year aud 
d(lnmcd to bl' part of that allowance, or if there is no such a.llowsnce 

for that yea~, be deemed to be the aUo'Yance for that year, aud so on 
for bUOl!eeding years. 
.. .. ~ . 
(:tv) any expenditure (not being in the na.ture of oa.pital expenditure 01' 
pe~olldl expense!! of the assessee) laid out or expended whO'lly and eX-
Ch1B1ve1y for ilie lJurpose of such husiness, profession or vocation; 
• • * 1 •• l:umpttoD8 01 a l8Dlral nature.-
'. * * * (2) l'he ta'( shall not be payable by an assessoe-
• * • * 
(e) in respect of any income, profits (Jl' gains accruing or arisiug 
to him within a -Part B 8-tate unless such income, profits cr gains are 
r(!ceived or deemed to be received in or are brought into the taxable 
territori!!s in the previous year by or on behalf of the 88S6ssee, or &I'e 
assl'ssnblc under sectian 12B or section 42, 
• • • • 
160. ExemptiOn lrom tax of newly e8tabliahed lDduatrlal undenaklnp.-
* * *' * 
(2) 'l'his section applies to' any intluBtrial undertaking which--
• * * • 
(ii) hos hegun or begins to manufacture or produce articles in any part 
of the taxa.ble territories at any time within a period of three years from 
the 1st day c.f Apr-il, 1948, or such further period as the Central Government 
may, by u(Jtification in the Official Gazetttl, speeify with reference to any 
particular industrial undertaking; 
(iit) employ more than fifty persons; and 
• • • • 
eli) The provisions of this section shall apply to the assessments for th6 
yes1"8 commencing on the 1st day of April, 1949 and ending on the alst 
day of March, 1954. 
* • * • 
18. Payment by dedactlOn at SOUlce.-
* • * • 
(2B) Any person responsible for pa~ing ~i'iy income chRl'g~abl~ under 
the head . 'Salaries " to " person not reSident 1D the taxable temtorles shall 
at the time of payment deduct income-tax at the maximum rote and also 
super-tax at ,the rate or rates applicablle to the estimated income of the 
assessee under this head. 
* • * • 
(SA) Any person responsible for paying to a person not resident in the 
taxable territories any interest not being 'Interest on Securities', or Bny 
other sum chRrgeable uncleI' the provisions of this Act, shall, at the time 
of payment, unless he ill himself liable to pay income-tax thereon 1\8 an 
ageItt, deduct income-tax at the maximum rate: 
Provided that where the pers3n so payable ill a eitizen of India or a 
British subject as defined in section 1 of the British Nationality Act, 1948, 
and the Income-. OfficCl: gives a certificate in writing (which certificate 
he shaU give in every proper CRee Oll the application of the assessee) that 

3t 
to the best. of his belief the total world income of such person will b~ leas 
than the minimum liable to income-tax or that his totld income ·wlll be 
liabl~ to a rate of income-tax Jess than the maximum rate, the person 
respOl~sible for pa.ying any income referred to in this sub-section shaJ~, until 
such certificate is eancelled by the Income-tax Officer, pRy the mcome 
without deduction or deduct the tax at such less rate, a.s the case may be: 
Provided further that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to any pay-
meut made in the eourse of trunsactions in respect of which the -person 
responsible for making the payment is d.eemed under the Drst proviso to 
section 43 not to be a.n agent of the payee. . 
(3B) "VherH the Income-tax Officer has reason to belh've that the total 
wlldd income of any person residing out of the taxable tel'k'itories to ",hom any 
inte/'est not being •. Interest on Securities" or any other 811m chargeable 
IIIl(ler this Act, is payable, will in any year exceed the maximum amount 
which is 1I0t chsreable with super-ta.x under the law for the time being in 
fo/'ce. he rnay, by order in writing, require the person responsible for making 
Rlich payments to such pHrson to deduct at the time of payment super-tax at 
the rates determined by the Income-tax Officer to be applicable to the total 
world income of such person in that year, . 
(Be) Where toe perl!ion responsibl.e for paying any interest not being 
"Interest on Securities" or any other sum chargeable under this Act to tlDy 
person makes to that person in any year payments exceeding in the aggre-
ga.te the lIluximum amount which is lIot chargeable with .sut>er·tax under 
the ]:uw for the time being in force, the person responsible for making Buch 
puyments, shall, if he has not reason to believe tha.t the recipient: is resident 
III t~lC t~x/l,ble territories, and no order under sub-section (BB) has been 
,'ecelved 10 respect of such recipient, deduct at the time of payment Buper-
tflX OIl t~le umollnt by which the total amount of such payments exceeds 
the U1aXUIlUlll Ilmount Dot chllrg!'sble with super-tax at the rute applicable 
to SlIch excess. -
tal»~ Where the Inoome-tux Officer has reason to believe that any person, 
who is Il. shareholder ill I\. company, is resident out of thll taxable territories 
and thut the total world income of sueh pelson wm in any year exceed 
the max;mulll amount which is not ehargeabJe to super-tax under the law 
for the time being ill force, he may, by order in writing, require the principal 
offieN' of tlw oompuny to dlldu(·t at tllll time of puymellt of any dividend 
from the company to the sha.reholder in that yel\.r super-tux at such rate 
us the Income-tax Oftioer may determine as being the rate applicable in 
respect of the income of the shareholder ill that your. 
(BE) If in any yea.r the amount of any dividend or the aggregate amount 
of any dividends paid to any shareholder by an India.n company or by B 
eompany which has made such effective urrBngt'ments as may be prescribed 
for thfl deduCltion of super-tux from such dividends inereused in accordRllce 
with the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 16 exeeeds the maximum 
amount of the totul income of a person whit~h is not chargeable to super-tax 
IInder the lllw for the time being in force, and the principal offioer of the 
company has no reaSO!l to helieve that the shareholder is resident in the 
taxahll~ territories and no order under swb.section (8D) has been rec:eived 
in respect of such shareholrler by the llrincipa.l officer from the Ill(~ome-~ax 
Officl'r. the principal offieer shall nt the time of payment deduct super-tax 
on the a.mollnt of such excess at the rate which would be applicable ut·der 
the law for the time being in foroe if the amount of such dividend or 

dividenlls increased as aforesaid constituted the .hole total income of the 
shareholder . 
• • • • • • 
(5) Any deduction made in accordance with the provisions of this section 
and any sum by which a dividend has been increased under sub·section (2) 
of section 16 shall be treated as a payment of iIl(~ome·ta.x or BUptlr·tux 011 
behalf of the person from whose income the d~duction wus made, or of the 
owner of the security or of the shareholder, as the ease may be, and credit 
shall b~ given to him therefor in the assessment, if any, made for the follow-
ing year under this Act: 
• • • • • • 
(7) If any such person does llot deduct or after deducting fails to pay 
the tax 88 required by or under this section, he, and in the cusel:! !lpccified 
in sub·sections (3D) and (3E) the company of which he is the principal 
officer shoJI, without prejudiee to any other (~Ollsequelwes which he or it 
may illcur be deemed to be an assessee in default in respect (If the tax: 
• • • • • • 
(U) Every person deducting inoome·tax or super-tax in aocordunee with 
the prO\'isions of sub·sections (3), (SA), (3B), (3C), (3D) or (SE), shulI, at 
the time of paymept of the sum from tax has been detiucted, furnish tu 
the person to whom such payment is made a certificate to the effeet that 
income·tax or super·tax has been deducted. and specifying the amount so 
deducted, the" rate at which the tax has been deduoted, and such other 
particulars as may be prescribed. 
• • • • • 
18A. Advance Payment of tu.-(l) (a) In the case of income ill respect 
of which provision iii! not made under section 18 fOr deduction of iccome· 
tu: at the time of payment, the Ineome·tax Officer mny, on or after the 
1st day of April in Bny financial year, by order in writing, require an 
asses&ee to pay quarterly to the credit of the Celltral Government on the 
15th day ~f June, 15th day of September, 15th day of Dec·.ember uud 
15th day of :Murch in that year, respectively, an lImount equal to one-quarter 
of the i.u<'ome·tax and super-tax payable on so much of such income as is in" 
'lluded in his total income of the latest previous year in respect of which ht: 
has been assessed, if that total income exceeded six thousand rupees_ Such 
income·tax and super·tax shall be calculated at the rates in force for the 
financial year in which he is required to pay the tux, and shull bear to the 
total Bmount of ineome·tax nnd super·tux 80 ca\eulaLed on the suid. totol 
income t.he same proportion as the amount of such inclusions bear!! to his 
total income or, in caS6B where under the provisions of Imb-!!ectioJ\ (1) of 
section 17 both income· tax and super·tax or super·tax are chargeable with 
reference to the total world income, shall bear to the total amount of irworne-
tax and super· tax which would have been payable on his tota.l world' irwome 
of the sa.id previous year had it been his total income the sa.me plGportion 
as the amount of such inclusions bears to his total world income: 
• • • • • • 
(8) Any nerson who has not llitherto been assessed shaIl, before the 
15th day of March in each fina.ncia1 year, if his total income of the perio<j 
which would he the previous year for an asseS!lment for the financinl yeRI' 
'next following is likely to exeeed six thousand rupem;, send to the Inc~me' 
tax Oftic~an estimate of the tax payable by him on that part of his income 

Ii 
21. ........ 1-2-
to which the provisions of section 18 do not apply of the said previous year-
cahlulated in the manner laid down in sub-section (I), ~d shall pay the 
amount, ou such of the dates specified i.n that sub.-sectlon as bav~ noti 
expired, by instalments which may be reVised accordmg to the provIso to 
sub-section (~). 
• • • • • • 
22. Return of income.-
• • • • • • 
(4)' fhe Income-tax Officer may serve on any person who has mad~ a 
returu under sub-section (1) or upon whom a notice has bee~ serve~ under 
sub-section (2) a notice requiring him, on a date to be thermn speCified, 110 
prOdUc.l·, or c.ause to be produced, such accounts or documents as thf!l lnoome-
tax Officer may require: 
• • • • • • 
24. Bet off of 1011 in computiDI agre,&te incom.e.-
• • • • • • 
Provided that, where the 108S sustained is a loss of profits or gains 
,,"hiBh would but for the loss have accnled or arisen within India, but OU1i-
side the taxable territories and would, under the provisions of clause (c) ot 
sub-section (2) of section 14, have been exempt from tax, such loss shall 
not Ill' set off except against profits or gains accruing or arising within India, 
but outRide the taxable territories and expmpt from tax under tbe Maid 
l,rovisiQlls: 
• • • • • • 
(2) \Vhere any asseHsee susttlins a lOllS of profits or gains in any year, 
beillg a previous year not ea,rlier than the previou8 year for the asse8sment; 
for the ~'eur ending on the 31st day of March, 1940, under the head "Profits 
aud gail'S of business, profession or vocation" and the loss cannot ~)e wholly 
set off ultder sub-section t 1). the portion not so set off shall be carried 
forward to the following yeRr, and Ret off IIgRinst the profits and ga.ins, 
if Ull,Y, of the BSsessee from the same business, profession or vocation for 
that -,"par; aud if it cannot· be wholly so sd off, the amount of loss not 80 
s~t otT shall be carried forward to the following year, and so on; but no 
~OSR Hhall ~e so carried forward for more than six years, and 1\ loss arising 
m the prevIOUS yearR for the BSRessment for the years pnding on the 31st day 
of M,\rch. 1940, the 31st day of March, 1941, the 31st day of March 1942 
thl~ nlHt (lay ~f MaTch, 1943 and the 31st day of March, i944 , respedtively: 
shall he earned forward only for one, two, three four and five years 
respectively: " 
I~rovided that-
(!l) where the losR sustained is a loss of profits and gains of B business, 
profession or vocation to which the first proviso to suh-section (1) is appli-
cable, and the profits and gains of that business, profession or vocation are, 
under the provisions of <:lause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 14, exempt 
fro.n tax, such losll shaH not be set off except against profits and gains 
accruing or arising in India, but outside the taxable territories from the 
same business, profession or vocation and exempt from tax under the said 
provisions; 
· . . , . . . 

80. Appeal alaiDlt lllUlmeDt UDder thlI Act.-
• • • • • • 
(lA) Any person baving, in accordance with the provisions of sub-section 
{SA), (3B) or (3C) of section 18, read with sub-section (6) of that section, 
deducted and paid tax in respect of any sum chargeable under this Aot 
o{Jther than interest who denies his liability to make such deduction may 
.appeal to the' Ap~enate Assi~ant Commrssioner to be declared not liable 
to make such ·deduction. . 
• • • • • • 
34:. Income "Cloping &ll8lllDeDt.-
• • • • • • 
(8) No order of assessment under section 2S to which cllause (c) of sub-
'section (1) of section 28 applies or of assessment or re-assessment in CRses 
falling within clause (a) of sub-section (1) of this section shall be made after 
·the expiry of eight years, and no order of assessment or re-assessment in 
'any other case shall be 'made after the expiry of four years, from the end 
Df the year in whioh the income, profits or gains were first assessable: 
• • • • • • 
48. Mode &Del time of recovery.-
• • • • • • 
Provided that where the sum. payable is allowed to be paid by instal-
ments the period of one year herein referred to shan be reckoned from the 
date on whiQb the last of such instalments was due. 
• • • • • • 
49D. B.eUef in reapect of tu charged in country . not provldlng for reUe! 
1D respect of Indi&D IDcome-t.u.-I£ any p'erson wbo has paid by deduction 
.,r otherwise Indian income-tax for any year in respect of any income arising 
without the taxsble territories in a country the laws of which do not provide 
for any relief in respect of income-tax cbarged in the taxable \erritories 
proves that he has paid income-tax by deduction or otherwise under the 
laws of the said country in respect of the same income, he shall be entitled 
to the deduction from the Indian income-tax payable of a sl1m equlM to 
one-half of such Indian income-tax or to one-half of such tax payable in 
the said country, whichC'ver is the less. 
E:tTlla.nation.-The expression "Indian income-tax" in this section 
meaD!'! income-tax and super-tax charged in accordance with the provisions 
·of this Act. 
• • • • • • 
491:. Power to set oft amount of refu.nds' against tax remalnlDg payable.-
Where under any of the provisions of this Act, a refund is fonnd to be duo 
to any person, the Income-ta.x Officer, Appellate Assistant Commissioner or 
Commissioner, as the case may be, ma.y, in lieu of payment of the refund, 
set o!f the amount to be refunded, or any part of that amount against the' 
ta.x, If any; remaining payable by the person to whom the refund is due. 
• • • • • • 
M. Disclonre of 1D!ormatioD by a pubUc se1"Vant.-
· . . ~ , . . .1 

(3) Nothing in this section shall apply to the disclosure-
(ll) of ally such particulars for the plJrposes of a prosecution under the 
Indian Penal Code (XLV of 1860) in respect of any sueh statement. return, 
accountt5. documents, evidence, affidavit or deposition, or for the prlrposes 
of a prosecution under this Act, or . 
(b) of any such pa.rticulars to any person acting in the execution of this 
Act where it is necessary to disclose the same to him for the purposes of 
this .'\d. or . 
• • • • • • • 
(d) of uny such particulars to a Civil Court in allY suit or p~oceedings 
toO which GO\'enuuent is It party, which relates to any matter anslOg out of 
any proceeding under this Act, or 
• • • • • • 
(gg) of nny such particulars. relevant to a.ny inquiry into a charge of 
misconduct in connection with income·ta.x proceEldings against a lawyer or 
registpred a('countant" to the authority referred to in sub·section (3) of 
section 61. when exerCising the functions referred to in that sub-section; 
• • • • • • 
680. Conditions to be I'&tWled by a recopiled provident tund.-
• • • • • • 
(g) The aecnmul'ated balance due to Iln employee shall be payable on 
the dayhe censps to be an employee of the C'mployer maintaining the fund. 
• • • • • • 
59. Power to make rule •• -
• • • • • • 
(2) Wit,hout prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules mny-
• • • • • • 
(c) provide for such arrangements with His Majesty's Government, a.a 
mfly be necessary to enable the appropriate relief t.o be granted under 
lIact.ion 27 of the Finance Act, 1920 (10 & 11 Geo. 5, o. 18), or under 
section 49 of this Act; 
(ell 1'I'ofleribe the year which, for the purposes of rC'lief undel' ~,eeti()n 49. 
is to be taken as corresponding to the year of 6Sflessment for the purposes 
of SPf'ti()1l 27 of the Finnnee Apt. 1920 (10 & 11 Geo. 5, c. 18); Bild 
* • * * 
88A. RefeJ'ence to be heard by Benches of High Oourt. ed appeal to 
lie in certain cases to the Supreme Oourt.-(I) When Ilny case has been 
referred to the High Court under section M. it flhn.l1 be heard bv It Benoh 
of not less than two Judge!:! of the Hi~h Court. and in respect of stich 
case the provisions of section 98 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (V of 
I90R) , Rhall, so fAr as mny be). apply notwithstanding anything ('ontained 
in the Letters Patent, of any High Court Afltablished hv Letters Patent or 
in Bny other law for the time being in force. . 
• • • • • • 
87. Bar of ~uits in Ot~l Oourta.-No sui!, shall be brought in Bny Civil 
Court 1".0 set RSlde or modIfy Any assessment made under this Act. a,d no 
prosecution. suit or other .proceeding shall lie against any offioer of the 

- . • := 
Government for anything in good faith done or intended to be done under 
this Act.. " , 
• • • • • • 
THE SCHEDULE 
• • • • • • 
2. 'l'he profits and gains of life insurance business shall bQ taken to· 
be either-
•• • • • • • 
(b) "h~ annual average of the surplus arrived at by adjusting the su.-
plus or deficit disclosed by the actuarial valuation made for the last inter· 
valuation period ending before the year for which the assessment is' to be 
made, so as to exclude from it any surplus or deficit included th~ein 
which was made in any earlier inter-valuation period and any expenditure 
other than expenditure which may under the provisions of section 10 of 
this Act be allowed for in computing the profits and gains of Ii business, 
• • • • • • 
(d) 12 per cent. of all renewal premiums received during the preceding 
year. 
3. In computing the surplns for the purpose of rule 2,-
(a) one·hulf of the amounts paid to or reserved for or expended on behalt 
of policy·holders shall be allowed 88 a deduction: 
• • • • • • 
Provided further thut if any amount so reserved for policy-holder& 
ceases to be so reserved, and is not paid to or expended on behalf of policy-
holders one-half of such amount, if it has been previously allowed as a.. 
deduction, shall be treated as part of the surplus for the period in which. 
the said amount ceased to be so reserved; 
• • • • • • 
. 8 The profits and gains of the branches in the taxable territories of an 
insurance company not resident in the taxable territories, in the absence-
of more reliable data, may be deemed to be the proportion of the total 
world income of ~he company corresponding to the proportiolJ which its 
premium income derived from the taxable ten-itories bears to its 
total premium income. }'or the purpose of t,his rule, t~e total world' 
income of life insurance companies not resident in the taxable territories 
wh.)se profits are periodically ascertained by actuarial valuation shall be 
eomputed in the manner laid down in these rules for the computation of 
the profits and gains of life inBurance bUBiness carried on iD the taxable-
territoriel .. 

HorE.E OF 'I'm! P.EO~LE 
... 
BILL 
further to amend the Indian Inooma-tax Aot, 1922 
The Preaident has, in pursuan08 of olause (1) of a.rtiole 11' 
a.nd olauae (1) of artiole 274 of the Ooustitution of India, reoom· 
mended to the House of the People the intrdduotion of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
8urew""11· 
(81tri O. D. DesJmw.JeIt, 
M i.i.der for Fi,.,.,..) 
GIPD---J,A '>--207 P .s..-IB-6-Mt-l ~OO 