BJU No. 38 of 1"1 
.... 
" 
THE ASSAM MUNICIPAL (MANIPUR 
AMENDMENT) BILL, 1961 
(To BE INTRODUCED IN Lox SABHA) . 
.. 
. 
'.'". 

BUr Ro. 3' of 1"1 
THE ASSAM MUNICIPAL (MANIPUR AMBNDMBMT) 
. . BILL, 1961 
(To BE INTRODUCED IN LoK 8ABHA~ 
A 
BILL 
further ~ amftd the As-sam Mun.icipal Act, 19S6 as in. fO'rce in- the 
Union territcwy of Mantpur. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twelfth Year of the Republic 
C)f II\<fia as follbws:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Assam Municipal ~Manipur Shore tid. 
Amendment) Act, 1961. :: com-
S (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Chief CommfJ.. 
AIIIID N:t 
XV of 15157. 
43 of 15150 . 
10 
IS 
43 of 15150. 20 
sioner, Manipur may, by notification in the Official. Gazette, appoint. 
Z. In the Assam Munieipal Act, 1956 as In torce in the Union terri- ~idi<JD 
tory of MaDipLlr (hereinafter referred to as the prinrlpal Act), for == -for .' 
settion 14. the following section shall be' substituted, narn:e!y:- _:~~ 
'14. (1) The persons entitled to \Tote at elections of Commis- E1tfCtC1n'lars: 
sioners shall be the persons registered, by virtue of the provi- e1umnlt 
mons of the Constitution and the Representation of the People ro •• 
Act, 1950, as voters at elections to the House of the People. 
(2) So mtteh of tire electoral roll for any parliamentary 
~ for tire time befng in fbr:ce as relates to the areas 
eompri~ within a ward-shall be deemed to be the electoral roll 
1D:" , l')j ',." ; (," tl't~ purposes of this Act; 
-E:rpIo~ID sub-sectioll (2), the expression "partia-
~ent~ constituen~y" has the mewnl 881igbed to. it under 
the Repreaentation of the People Ad, 1950.'. 
... 

2 
AmeadmcDt 3. In section 15 of the principal Act, for clause (i), the follow-
of eection IS· ing clause shall be substituted, namely:-
.. (i) is not reeistered as an elector in the electoral roll for 
a ward, or". 
lDHrtioo of 
·newuctiOD 
J5A, 
" After section 15 of the principal Act, the following section shan S 
be inserted, namely:-
Rilbtto 
vote. 
AmeadmCDt 
ofeecdon J6. 
1DIcrtloo of 
DeW acctlon 
:MIA. 
TlaDlitioual 
provisions 
!orec.amis-
slonera' of. 
and pDeral 
election to, Impbal' . 
.MunJci.pa1 _---a ,J 
- .. 
"15A. (1) Every person whose name is, for the time being, 
entered in the electoral roll for a ward shall be entitled to vote at 
the election of a Commissioner from that ward. 
(2) In every ward an elector shall have as many votes as 10 
there are Commissioners to be elected from that ward but no 
elector shall at any election give more than one vote to anyone 
candidate.". . 
5. In section 16 of the principal Act,-
(1) for the words "by an unsuccessful candidate or person 15 
. qualified to vote at the election to which such question refers, 
such person", the words "by any candidate at such election or 
by any elector of the ward concerned, such candidate or such 
elector, as the case may be," shall be substituted; 
(2) in the second proviso, for the word "qualified" in both 20 
the places where it occurs, the word "entitled" shall be sub-
stituted. 
6. After section 26 of the principal Act, the following section 
shall be inserted, namely:-
"26A. Notwithstanding anything in this Act or in any noti- ::a~ 
fication, rule or order issued or made thereunder,-
(a) the Commissioners of the Imphal Municipal Board 
holding office immediately before the commencement of the 
Assam Municipal (Manipur Amendment) Act, 1961 shall 
cease to hold office on and from such date as the Chief Com- 30 
missioner may by notification in the Manipur Gazette 
specify; 
(b) the general election of Commissioners of that Board 
to be held for the first time after such commencement shall 
be held and completed before such date as the Chief Com- 35 
missioner may by a . like notification specify.". 
Amendment· . 7~ In section 301 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2) ,-
olMCtion 
3OJ • (a) in clause (i), the words "the quallftcations and disquall-
llcations and registration of voters," shall be omitted; 

3 
(b) after clause (i), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
.. (ia) provide for the manner of the splitting up of 
electoral rolls for parliamentary constituencies into parts 
S for the purpose of constituting one or more of such parts 
into the electoral roll for a ward, and the appointment of 
the officer or authority by whom such splitting up is to be 
carried out;" 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND BlIJASONS 
The recommendiation of the Imphal Municipal Board for the in-
uo6let!m ,of adult suftrage in municipal elections in Manipur was 
.. proved :by the Advisory Committee for Ittampur in its ·meeting held 
on the lOth February, 1961. On examination the recommendation 
appears worth acceptance. To give effect to this recommendation, 
it is necessary to amend suitably section 14 of the Assam Municipal 
Act, 1956, as extended to Manipur. 
The term of office of the existing Commissioners of the Imphal 
Municipal Board will continue up to the 31st March, 1962. In order, 
however, to avoid simultaneous holding of municipal elections and 
the next general elections to Parliament, it is proposed to confer 
powers upon the Chief Commi3sioner to curtail, if necessary, the 
term of office .of the existing Commissioners. 
Hence this Bill 
NEW Dm.m; 
The 30th June, 1981. 
D. P. KARMARKAR. 
" ., 

ANNEXURE 
ExTBAC1'S PROJII TH! AssAM MUNICIPAL ACT, 1956 
(AsSAM ACT XV OF 1957) 
• • • • • • 
CHAPTER III 
Constitution of MUnicipal Boards 
14. Every person of the full age of twenty-one years, being a ~ualiIc.:t:ODS 
citizen of India, who has been for a period of not less tlmn twelve 0 9otcra. 
months immediately before the 1st of January of the year for which 
the muntdpal electoral roll is ,being .prepared, hereinafter referred to 
as ''the preseribed date", resident within the limits of a municlpality 
and oceuptes a holding 'assessed to tax under Section 68 of the Act 
or an ll'ihabitant thereof, and wh(>-
. .. 
71 
. ' 
(i' lias, during the tw~lve months immediately preeeding 
tile PI*Icribed date, paid in respect of any rates an aggregate 
amount of not less than one rupee, or 
(ti) ia a member of joint family of which :my member is a 
voter under item (1), or 
(iii) being a graduate of any University, orhaV'ing pueed 
the Intermediate or Matricukition Examinations of the Gauhati, 
or any other University or the corresponding standard of the same 
or any other University, or Middle English or Middle Vernacular 
,or ,an equivaleDtexamination or senior or junior Madru..cm Exa-
mination under the old or reformed scheme, or the . Sanskrit 
Title Examination of the Calcutta/Assam Sanskrit Association, 
or having read up to Class VII of a HighS~hool or being a rE;~is­
tered medical praditioner under any law relat.ing to registratlon 
.of medical practitioners or being an Advocate QI" holding a cer-
.tificate authorising a person to practise as a Pleader or as a 
Mukhtar or as a revenue agent, occupies a holdin~ .01' part of a 
holding, in respect of which there has beeIl paid, during the 
s 

6 .- - ~ 
twelve months aforesaid in respect of any rates an aggregate 
amount of not less than one rupee, or 
(iv) is a manager or person in charge of a company, firm, 
society or business owning or occupying any land or buUding 
within the limits of the municipality if the company, firm, society 
or business possesses the qualifications set {orth in clause (i) j 
shall· on registration in the prescribed manner be qualified to vote at 
the election of the Commissioners of such municipality. 
Expla.nation--'Tax' for the purpose of this Section shall not 
include service charges. 
InelCibiU" 15. No person shall be eligible for election as Commissioner of a 
for electiOD. Municipal Board if such person-
Proc:eedinp 
to act.ide 
In cJccIi on. 
(i) is not entitled to vote at the election of Commissioners 
of the Municipal Board.. or 
• • • • • 
16. If the validity of an election of a Commissioner is" brought in 
question by an unsuccessful candidate or person qualifted to vote at 
the. election to which such question refers, such person may at any 
time within twenty-one days after the date of the declaration of the 
result of the election, file a petition in the prescribed manner before 
the District Judge of Manipur, and shall at the same time deposit 
one hundred rupees in Court 88 security for the costs likely to be 
incurred: I I 
Provided that the Deputy Commissioner ar the Sub-divisional 
Officer, as the case may be, may be authorised by the Chief Commis-
sioner to receive election petitions on behalf of the District Judge for 
transmission to him: 1 
Provided further that the validity of such election "shall not be 
questioned in any such petition-. 
<a) on the ground that the name of any penlon qualified to 
vote haa been omitted from the electoral roll; or 
(b) on the ground that the name of any person not qualified 
to vote has been inserted in the electoml roll; or 
(c) on the ground of acceptance or refusal of nomination of 
candidates provided further that an appeal in the Inanner pres-
cribed shall lie to the District Judge against such acceptanc~ or 
. "refusal of nomination. -" 
• • . , • • 
• 

-:-;" CHAP:ER IX 
RULES AND BYE-LAWS 
Rules 
301. (1) The Chief Commissioner may make rules for the pur- Power of 
Chief Com-pose of carrying out the provisions of this Act. miuionet' to 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers make rula. 
such rules may- I I 
(i) determine the mode and time of election' of Commis-
sioners, the qualifiClQtions and disqualifications and registration of 
voters, qualifications of candidates, the acts to be deemed cor-
rupt practices at elections and generally regulate all electiom 
under this Act; 
• • • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Assam Municipal Act, 1956 as in force 
in the Union territory of Manipur. 
(Shri D. P. Karmarkar, 
Minister of Health.) 