,!!Il No. 18 of 12. 
THE BANKING COMPANIES (AMEND-
MENT) BILL, 1960 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA 
ON 4TI1 AUGUST, 1960) 

Btu No. 38 of 1960. 
THE BANKING COMPANIES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1960 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOI[ SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Banking Companies Act, 1949. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eleventh Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Banking Companies (Amend- Short title. 
ment) Act, 1960. 
10 of 1949. 5 2. After section 34 of the Banking Companies Act, 1949, the InsertiOQ of 
new section 
34A. 
14 of 1947. 
10 
20 
following section shall be inserted, namely:-
"34A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section ProductiOQ 
11 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, or any other law for :~~f 
the time being in force, no banking company shall, in any pro- confidentiAl 
ceeding under the said Act or in any appeal or other pro- nature. 
ceeding arising therefrom or connected therewith, be compelled 
by any authority before which such proceeding is pending to 
produce, or give inspection of, any of its books of account or 
other document or furnish or disclose any statement or infor-
mation, when the banking company claims that such document, 
statement or information is of a confidential nature and that 
the production or inspection o~ such document or the furnish-
ing or disclosure of such statement or information would in-
volve disclosure of information relating to-
(a) any reserves not shown as such in its published 
balance sheet; or 
(b) any particulars not shown therein in respect of pro-
visions made for bad and doubtful debts and other usual or 
necessary provisions; 

2. 
(2) If, in any such proceeding in relation to any banking 
company other than the Reserve Bank of India, any question 
arises as to whether any amount out of the reserves or provisions 
referred to in sub-section (1) should be taken into account by 
the authority before which such proceeding is pending, the 5 
authority moly, if it so thinks fit, refer the question to the Reserve 
Bank and the Reserve Bank shall, after taking into account prin-
ciples of sound banking and all relevant circumstances concern-
ing the banking company, furnish to the authority a certifio.lte 
stating that the authority shall not take into account any amount 10 
as such reserves and provisions of the banking company or may 
1'lke them into account only to the extent of th~ amount specified 
by it in the certificate, and the certificate of the Reserve Bank 
on such question shall be final and shall ~ot be calledi~ qu"s1.i~n 
in any such proceedin,. 15 
(3) For the purposes of this section,. "banking company" 
shall he,ve the meaning assigned to it in the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 1947.". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The interpretation of the provisions of the Banking Companies 
Act, 1949, relating to certain special reserves maintained by btmks 
has not been quite clear and the question of clarifying the intention 
has been under consideration for some time. 
2. As credit institutions dealing primarily with depositors' monies, 
banks have to make certain special provisions against emergencies 
or unforeseen contingencies as a matter of financial prudence. The 
legal position in the United Kingdom and certain other countries is 
that b~nks have been specifically exempted by law from disclosing 
information relating to these provisions. In India the form of the 
balance sheet and the profit and loss account prescribed for banks 
by the Banking Companies Ac~ en~ures that such provisions need 
not be disclosed. But a doubt has been felt whether notwithstand-
ing this, any Tribunai or -other authority could cbmpel banking com-
panies to disclose information relating to these reserves and provi-
sions. As such reserves and provisions are for emergencies and 
unforeseen contingencies, it is not in the public interest or in the 
interests of the banking system of the country to disclose these 
particulars. It is accordingly proposed to insert a new section in 
the Banking Companies Act to make it clear that information, which 
according to the law is not required to be published in the balance 
sheet or profit and loss accounts of a banking company, need not be 
disclosed to the various authorit!~~ !!!!~!!r the Industrial Disputes 
Act. Although the secrecy of the special or inner reserves is thus 
proposed to be maintained, the various authorities constituted under 
the Industrial Disputes Act are being specifically empowered to call 
for rep()rts from the Reserve Bank of India, as an expert authority, 
regarding the amount of such reserves which may be taken into 
account for the purposes of the proceedings under that Act. 
NEW DELHI; 
The ~~t~ Jul,¥, ~9~~. MORARJI DESAI. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Banking Companies Act, 1949. 
(Shri Morarji Desai) 
Minister of FInance., 