10

5

20

25

30

XL HI of the People Act, 1950.”;
1950.

Bilt No. 38 of x9ss.
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (SECOND
AMENDMENT) BILL, 1055
{As IntRopucep in Lok Sapa)

i 8
BILL

further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951 aad to
make certain consequential amendments in the Government of
Pari C States Act, 1951.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Sixth Year of the Republic of
india as follows:~-
i. (1) This Act may be called the Representation of the People Short - title
(Second Amendment) Act, 1955, and com
mencement,
(2) Tt shall come into force on the Ist day of January, 1958,
2. In section 2 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 Amendment
(hereafter in this Act referred to as the principal Act),— of section 2.
{a) in sub-section (1),—
(6) in clause (9), for the words ‘to a primary election’,
the words and letter ‘the electoral college of a scheduled
Part C State’ shall be substituted;
(ii) after clause (9), the following clause shall be insert-
ed, namely:— .
“(bb) ‘chief electoral officer? means the officer
appointed under section 183A of the Representation of

(iit) in clause (d), for the words ‘and includes a primary
election’, the words and letter ‘or in the electoral college of
a scheduled Part C State’ shall be substituted;

(iv) for clause (e), the following clause shall be substi-
tuted, namely: —

“{e) ‘elector’ in relation to a constituency means a
person whose name is entered in the electoral roll of
that constituency for the time being in force and who
is not subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned
in section 16 of the Representation of the People Act,
1950.”; ‘

(v) clauses (h) and ($) shall be omitted;

{vi) clauses (9), (k) and (1) shall be re-lettered as
clauses (0), (#} and (8) respectively and after clause (i)

a



2

a8 80 re-letiered, the following clause shall be inserted,
namely: — :

“(j) ‘State Government’ in relation to a Part C State,
means the Lieutenant-Governor or Chief Commissioner

thereof.”; हे 5

@) in sub-section (2), for the words ‘a Council of States
constituency’, the words ‘an electoral college constituency’ shall
be inserted; ,

(0) in sub-section (3), for the words ‘to a primary election’,
the words and letter ‘the electoral coHege of a scheduled’ Part C10
State’ shall be substituted;

@ sub-sections (5) and (7) shall be omitted and sub-
section (6) shall be re-numbered as sub-section (5).

Amendment

obasction 3. In section 7 of the principal Act, for clause (०, the following

clause shall be substituted, namely :— 15

“(c) if he has failed to lodge an account of his election ex-
penses within the time and in the manner required by or under
this Act, unless five years have elapsed from the date by which
the account ought to have been lodged or the Election Com-

mission has removed the disqualification;”, 20

Amendment 4, In section 8 of the principal Act, in sub-section ()—
(a) for clause (9), the following clause shall be substituted,
namely:— |

#(09). a disqualification under clause (c) of that section
shall not take effect until the expiration of two months from 25
the date on which the Election Commission has decided that
the account of election expenses has not been lodged within
the time and in the manner required by or under this Act”;
(b) clause (g) shall be omitted.

Amendment 5. In section 10 of the principal Act, for the words ‘Council of 30
orsecion 29. States’, the words ‘electoral college’ shall be substituted.

Substitution 6; For Part III of the principal Act, the following Part shall be
fnew Part substituted, namely: — }

for Part 111, '
. “PART 8 1 ६
Notirtcatton or General ELEcrrons
Notification c 12. For the purpose of filling the seats of members of the *
election 10 ‘ouncil of States retiring on the expiration of their term of office

the, Comncil the President shall, by one or more notifications published in

oF States, the Gazette of India on such date or dates as may be recom-
mended by the Election Commission, call upon the elected 40
members of the Legislative Assembly or, as the case may be,

10

1§

20

25

30

35

4o

8

the members of the electoral college, of each State concerned te
elect members in accoydance with the provisions of this Act and
of the rules and orders made thereunder:

Provided thai ne notification under this section shall be issued
more than three months prior to the date on which the term of
office of the retiring members is due to expire.

18. For the purpose of reconstituting the electoral college for
a scheduled Part C State, the President shall, by notification
published in the Gazette of India, call upon all electoral college
constituencies in the State to elect members in accordance with
the provisions of this Act and of the rules and orders made
thereunder:

Provided that every such notification shall be issued at the
same time as a notification calling upon the parliamentary con-
stituencies in the State to elect members for the purpose of
constituting a new House of the People is issued.

14. (7) On the dissolution of the House of the People, a
general eleclion shall be held for the purpose of constituting a
new House of the People.

(2) For the said purpose the President shall, by one or more
notifications published in the Gazette of India on such date or
dates as may be recommended by the Election Commission, call
upon all parliamentary constituencies to elect members in
aecordance with the provisions of this Act and of the rules and
orders made thereunder.

15. (1) On the dissolution of the Legislative Assembly of a
State, a general election shall be held for the purpose of consti-
iuting a new Assembly.

(2) For the said purpose, the Governor, Rajpramukh, Licute-
nant-Governor or Chief Commissioner, as the case may be, shall,
by one or more notifications pubNshed in the Official Gazette
of the State on such date or dates as may be recommended by
the Election Commission, call upon all assembly constituencies
in the State to elect members in accordance with the provi-
sions of this Act and of the rules and orders made thereunder.

16. For the purpose of filling the seats of members of the
Legislative Council of a State retiring on the expiration of their
term of office, the Governor or Rajpramukh, as the case may
be, shall, by one or more notifications published in the Official
Gazette of the State on such date or dates as may be recom
mended by the Election Commission, call upon the members
of the Legislative Assembly of the: State and all the council
constituencies concerned to elect members in accordance with
the provisions of this Act and of the rules and orders made

thereunder:

Notificat:
for recon
tution

electoral
colleges for
certain Part
© States.

Notification
for general
slection to
the House off
the People,

Notification
for general
election to a
State Legis
lative
Assembly,

Notification

for biennial

electicn to 2
State Legis-
lative Coun-
ci



Ammendmozt
of section 19.

Substitution
of new sec-
tions for secs
tions 26 and
25,

General
duties of
chief clecto-

ral officers.

Returning
Officers.

Amendment
of section 22, s

Amendment
Of section 26.

Amendment
of section 29,

Substitution

of new sec he
tion for’ sec-

tion 30.
Appointment

of dates for
nominations,

etc. -

following further Proviso shall be added, nam

and brackets ‘(other than 8 pri

4

NG notification under
‘an three montis prior 4

Provided that
issued more th
term of office of the veliring members is due to expire.”

4. In section 19 of the
* States constituency’, the

words ‘an electoral college co,
shall he substituted,

है, For sections 26

and 21 of the Principal Act,
liens shall be substit

uted, namely: --

“20. Subject to the superintendence,

of the Election Commission, the chief el

State shall supervise the conduct of all

under this Act,

direction and

21, For every constituency,
or seais ia the Council of State:

an officer of Government:

Provided that nothing
tion C

hall be omitted,

40, In section 26 of the principal Act, to sub-section (1), the
ely; —

“Provided further that
vent the returnin,
be the presiding

same premises,”
iL. In section 29 of the princi

nothing in this sub-section shal] pre-
8 officer from appointing the same Person to
officer for more than one polling station in the

mary election)’ shall be omitted,

12. For section 30 of the principal Act, the following section shall
substituted, namely: —

the Official Gazette, appoint—
(a) the last date for making nominations, which shall
be the tenth day after the date of Publication of the first

e in this section shall prevent the Elec-

this seetion shall he
fo the date on which the

principal Act, for the words ‘a Council of

slituency’ 5

the following sec.

coniral
ectoral officer of each 10
elections in the State

20

25

| 3
ipal Act, in sub-section (D, the words

8 Uist Canad Sco

ra

5

20

25

30

35

be substituted, namely: —

mentioned notification or, if that day is a public holiday,
the next succeeding day which is nei 8 public holiday;

(6) the date for the scratiny of nominations, which
shal) be the second day after the last date for making morale
nations or, if that day is a public holiday, the next sueceed-
ing day which is not a public holidey;

[2) the last date for the withdrawal of candidatures,
which shall be the third day after the date for the serutiny of
nominations or, if that day is a public holiday, the next i
succeeding day which is not a public holiday;

(व) the date or dates on which a poll shall, if necessary,
be taken, which or the first of which shall be a date nol
earlier than the twenticth day afler the last date for the
withdrawal of candidatures; and

(८) the date before which the election shall be com-
pleted.

Explanation.—In this section, “public holiday” means any
day which is a public holiday for the purposes of section 25 of
the Negotiable Tastruments Act, 1881, or any day which has been
notified by the State Government to be a holiday for the Govern-
ment offices in the State.”.

13. In section 32 of the principal Act—

Amendment
(०) the words “in any constituency” shall be omitted; and ०

of section 32

i ‘ds, letter and figures
b) after the words “this Act”, the words, a

“or Qe the provisions of the Government of Part C States Act,
1951, as the case may be” shali be added. "

14. For section 83 of the principal Act, the following section shall Spbstitution
tion for sec-
tion 33.
“33. (1) On or before the date appointed under clause @) of Presentation
section 30 each candidate shall, either in person or by his pro- tion paper
10867, between the hours of eleven o’clock in the forenoon and and require
three o'clock in the afternoon delivet to the returning officer at valid .nomi-
the place specified in this behalf in the notice issued under nation.
section 31 8 nomination paper completed in the prescribed form
and signed by the candidate and by an elector of the consti-

tuency as proposer.

i i d, a-candi-
2) In a constituency where any seat is reserved, .
date Spal! not be deemed to be qualified to be chosen to fill that



Amendment

oftsection 34. fol

6
Seat unless his nomination Paper contains
specifying the Particular caste or tribe of
and the area in relation to which that ca:

duled Caste or, as the case may he, a 5;
State, ' ‘

8 declaration by him
which he is 8 member
ste or tribe is a Sche
cheduied Tribe of the

5
(3) Where the candidate is a person who, having held any
office referred to in clause (f) of section 7, has been dismissed
and a period of five years has not elapsed since the dismissal,
such person shall not be deemed to be duly nominated as a
candidate unless his nomination paper is accompanied by a certi- 10
ficate issued in the prescribed manner by the Election Commis.
sion to the effect that he has not been dismissed for corruption
or disloyalty to the State.

red in the
those entered in the electoral

Provided that the returning officer shall permit any clerical
or technical error in the nomination paper in regard to the said 20
hames or numbers to be corrected in order to bring them into
conformity with the corresponding entries in the electoral rolls;
and where necessary, direct that any clerical or printing ‘error
in the said entries shall be overlooked,

(5) Where the candidate is an elect
stituency, a copy of the electoral roll of
the relevant part th 7
entries in such roll shall be वी.
paper; and where it is not So filed, it shall be produced before
the returning officer at the time of scrutiny, 30

(6) Nothing in this seciion shall prevent any candidate from

being nominated by more than omination paper for election
in the same constituency.”,

or of a different con- 25
that constitueney or of

he nomination

one n

~15. In section 34

of the principal Act,
lowing sub-sectio

wn shall be substituted,

namely :— 35

be deposited— |
(७) in the case of an.
constituency,
candidate is a

Tribe, a sum of two hundred and fifty ry

election from

es or where the 4०

pees;

»
7
i 1 yor
(b) in the case of am clection from an assembly का
council constituency, a sum of two hundred ane . ae nee
or where the candidate is a member of a Sched ved oe an
Scheduled Tribe, 8 sum of one hundred and twenty.
§ rupees; and

(6) im the case of an election from an electoral college
t fifty rupees:
constituency, a sum of fifty ह
Provided that where a “candidate has been nominated | by
inati per for election in the same:
ve than one nomination paper ः हे a
tueney not more than one deposit shall be required of him un
ic y 0 ,
this sub-section.”,

ment
16. In section 35 of the principal Act, for the words ‘the persons Amendm

2 oO section
whe have subscribed the nomination paper, as proposer and secender’, 35.
the words ‘ihe proposer’ shalf be substituted,
hnent
: incipal Act, oP Section
I$ 1%, In section 36 of the principa ;

6.
“and one seconder” shall 3
(a) in sub-section (7), the words “and o1

be omitted;
. तप 2),--
(8) in sub-section (2),
(४) for the word ‘refuse’, the word ‘reject’ shall be substi-
20 tuted; and |
Gi) for clauses (a) to (e), the following clauses shall be
substituted, namely: —

i i lified to be chosen
“(q) that the candidate is not qual ho
to an Oh seat under any of the following provisions
that may be applicable, namely:—
“ articles 84 and 173 of the Constitution,
c
section 7 of the Governmént of Part C States
Act, 1951, and ;
sections 4, 5, 6 and 10 of this Act; or
(6) that there has been a failure to comply with
30 any of the provisions of section 33 or section 34; or

(c) that the signature of the candidate or the pro-
poser on the nomination paper is not genuine.”;

(c), in sub-section. (3),—

“clause (९०),

a the words, brackets and letters “el

* lau. a or clause (e)”, the words, brackets and letters
“clause (b) or clause (c)” shall be substituted; and



Amendment
of section 37,

Substitution
of new sec-
tion for sec-
tion 38,
Publication
of list of
contesting
candidates.

Substitution
of new sec-

tion 39,
Nomination
of candidates
at other elec~
tions,

be substituted, namely: —

tion for 8६०० be substituted, namely :—

&
(i) for the werd ‘refusal’,
substituied;

(७) for sub-section (7),
substituted, namely;—

the word ‘rejection’ shal] he
the following sub-sections shall be

“(7) For the purposes of this
an entry in the electoral roll for ¢
constituency shail be conclusive €
Person referred to in that entry ij
tuency, unless it is proved that hi
tion mentioned in section 16 0:
People Act, 1950.

section, a certified copy of 5
‘he time being in force of a
vidence of the fact that the
is an elector for that consti-
8 is subject to a disqualifica-
f the Representation of the 10

(8) Immediately after all the nomination papers have
been scrutinized and decisions accepting or rejecting the
same have been recorded, the returning officer shail pre-
pare a list of validly nominated eandidates, that is to say, 15
candidates whose nominations have been found valid, and
affix it to his notice board.”,

18. In section 37 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), the word

“seconder” and the proviso shall be omitted.

18. For section 38 of the principal Act, the following section shall 20

“38. (2) Immediately after the expiry of the period within
which candidatures may be withdrawn under sub-section (1)
of section 37, the returning officer shall Prepare and publish in
such form and manner as may be prescribed a list of contest. 25
ing candidates, that is to Say, candidates who were included
in the final list of validly nominated candidates and who have
not withdrawn their candidature within the said period,

(2) The said, list shall contain the names in alphabetical
order and the addresses of the contesting candidates as given in 30

the nomination papers together with such other particulars as
may be prescribed.”.

20, For section 39 of the principal Act, the following section shalt

“39. (1) As soon as the notification calling upon the elected 35
members or the members of the Legislative Assembly of a
State or the members of the electoral college of a Part C State
to elect a member or members is issued, the Election Commis-
sion shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint— दि

(०) the last date for making nominations, which shail 40
be the tenth day after the date of publication of the first-

ro

5

20

25

30

35

40

G

mentioned notification or, if thal day is a public holiday,
the next sucteeding day which is not a public holiday;

(6) the date for the serutiny of nominations, which
shall be the second day after the last date for ma कि
nations or, if that day is a public holiday, the next s
ing day which is not a public holiday; a कि

(0) the last date for the withdrawal ef candida ue
which shall be the third day after the date for the serutiny
of norninations or, if that day is a public holiday, the
succeeding day which is not a public holiday;

ici li shall, if neces
the date or dates on which a po! , न
cary ‘be taken, which or the first of which shall be é ate
not earlier than the seventh day after the last date for ६,
withdrawal of candidatures; and

(९) the date before which the election shall be com-~-
pleted. _ ;
Explanation—In this section, “public holiday” has the

same meaning as in section 30.

(2) The provisions of sections 31 to 38, excluding rae
sections (2) and (5) of section 33 and section 34, shall Bophy a
relation to any such election as they apply in  relatio:
election in any constituency:

Provided that— ‘he etectonat

i i isions to the elector:
references in the said provisions r
1 @ the constituency shall, unless the context otherwise
re uires, be construed, in the case of an election by i
members or the elected members of the Legislative Assembly
of the State, as references to the list of गा or 3 ected
; f that Assembly m:
members, as the case may be, 0 हि ined
i 152, and in the case ०:
sub-section (1) of section , 2

पा py the members of the electoral college of a Fant S

State, as references fo the list of members of such elector

college maintained under sub-section (2) of that sec’ 10 पर 20

(b) any references in the said provisions to section 3
shall be construed as references to sub-seciion (1) of this
section; and —

© at the time of presenting the nomination paper, the

eturning officer may require the person presenting the sane

‘ roduce either a copy of the electoral’ roll, or part of

the’ electoral roll, in which the name of the candidate :

included or a certified copy of the relevant entries in suc.
roll,”,



19
ही, For section 40 of the principal rT i
a cipal Aet, the following sect

BERET SE be substituted, namely; — ह Ming fection shell

ton 40.

Election “40. A candidate at an election May appoint in thé preserib.

Agents, ed manner any one person other than himself to be his election
agent and when any such appointment is made, notice of the 5
appointment shall be given in the prescribed menner to the
returning officer,” ;

Amendment 22, In section 42 of the principal Act,—

of section

42.

(a) in sub-section (2), the words “whether he be the candi-

date himself or not” shall be omitted; and £0

(8) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shali be
substituted, namely: —

“(@) In the event of such a revocation or of ihe death of
an election agent whether that event occurs before or
during the election, or after the election but before the 15
account of the candidates’ election expenses has been lodged
in accordance with the provisions of section 78, the candi-
date may appoint in the prescribed manner another person
to be his election agent and when such appointment is made
notice of the appointment shall be given in the prescribed 9,
manner to the returning officer.”. °

Stone a 23, Sections 43 and 44 of the principal Act shall be omitted,
and 44.

Substitution
of new sec-
tion for

section 45,

Functions of हि is
destion 45. An election agent may perform such functions in con-

agents, nection with the election as are authorised by or under this
Act to be performed by an election agent.”

24. For section 45 of the principal Act, the followin: i
be substituted, namely: — , seen shall

25

Substitutio . .
of Mew see- 25. For section 46 of ‘the principal Act, the following section
tion Eg sec- shall be substituted, namely :—

Appointment a i i ii
Open ‘46. A contesting candidate or his election agent may 30

agents. appoint in the prescribed manner such number of agents and
relief agents as may be prescribed to act as polling agents of
such candidate at each polling station provided under section
25 or at the place fixed under sub-section (1 i
the अल (1) of section 29 for
35

आम 3 2 कक कल

oe

ive)

20

25

30

35

4०

45

46. Bor section 47 of the principal Act, the following se:
be substituted, namely ("व

“47, A contesting eandidate or his el:
appoint in the preseribed manner one or
exceeding such number as may be prescribed, to be presen
his counting agent or agents at the counting of votes, and
any such appointment is made notice of the appointment shall
be given in the prescribed manner fo the returning officer.
89. In section 52 of the principal Act, for the words “If a can~ Arnendment

didate who has been duly nominated under this Act dies after the Of sectlos 52.
date fixed for the scrutiny of nominations and a report of his death
is received by the Returning Officer”, the words “If 2 contesting
candidate dies and a report of his death is received” shall be substi-
tuted.
28, In section 53 of the principal Act, —

(a) for sub-section (7), the following sub-section shall
substituted, namely :—

“(1) If the number of contesting candidates is more
than the number of seats to be filled, a poll shail be taken.”;
and
{b) in sub-section (8},—

(i) for the words “apprepriate authority” wherever they
oceur, the words “Election Commission” shall be substituted;

(ii) the words “before such date as may be appointed in
this behalf by the Election Commission and specified in the
notification” shali be omitted; and

Gii) in the proviso, the words “until such date as the
Election Commission may specify in this behalf” shall be
omitted.

29. In section 54 of the principal Act,—-

(a) for the ‘words “number of candidates” wherever they
occur, the words “number of contesting candidates” shall be
substituted;

(8) in sub-section (4, in the Iilustration, for the words
“six candidates”, the words “six contesting candidates” shall be
substituted;

(2) in sub-section (5),—

(i) for the words “appropriate authority” wherever they
occur, the words “Election Commission” shall be substituted;

(ti) the words “before such date as may be appointed
in this behalf by the Election Commission and specified in
the notification” shall be omitted; and

(iii) in the proviso, the words “until such date as ‘the
Election Commission may specify in this behalf” shali be
omitted; and

waay Hon 47.
5 मा Ai

Amendment
be of section 53.

Amendment
of section 54.



Amendment
of section $5.

Amendment
of section 58.

Insertion of
new section
678.

Date of र1०९%
tion of candi~
dates

Amendment
of section 63,

12
2) suio-section (6) shall be omitted.
30, Ta section 55 of the principal Act, the words, letter and figures

“or under the Government of Part C States Act, 1951, as the case
inay be” shall be added at the end.

SL. In section 58 of the principal Act,— 5

(a) in sub-section (7), the proviso shall be omitted:
(b) in sub-section (2),--

8) the words “or at any polling booth” shall be omitted;

(i) the words “or in such polling booth, as the ease may
be” shall be omitted; Bie)

{c) in sub-section (3), the words “or in such polling booth”
shall be ornitted.

32. In Chapter V of Part V of the principal Act, after section. 67,
the following section shall be inserted, namely:—

“67A. For the purposes of this Act, the date on which a 15
candidate is declared by the returning officer under ‘the provi-
sions ‘of section 58, section 54 or section 66, to be elected to a
House of Parliament or of the Legislature of a State or to the
electoral college of a scheduled Part C State shal] be the date
of election of that candidate.” 20

33, In section 68 of the principal Act—

(a) in sub-section (1), for the words “within ten days from
the date of publication in the Gazette of India of the declara-
tions that he has been so chosen or, if such publications have
been made on different dates within ten days from the later of 25
such dates, intimate”, the words “within ten days from the date,
or the later of the dates, on which he is so chosen, intimate”
shall be substituted; and

(b) the following sub-section shall be added at the end,
namely :— 30

“(4) For the purposes of this section and -of section 69,
the date on which a person is chosen fo be a member of
either House of Parliament shall be in the case of an elect-
ed member, the date of his election and in the case of a
nominated member, the date of first publication in the 35
Gazette of India of his nomination.”

is

35

20

25

30

35

one of the seais”, the words “by writing under his hand addresses. to

ig
#4, In section 88 of the principal Act menses
fa} in sub-section (1), for the words ‘on the publication in of section 69-
the Gazette af India of the declaration. that he has beer se
chosen’, the words ‘on the date or which he is so choser all
be substituted; and
(by in sub-section (2), for the words ‘on the publication in
the Gazette of India of the declaration that he has been so
chosen’, the words ‘on the date on which he is so chosen’ shall
be substituted.

eae te ttn ame:
45. In section 70 of the principal Act, after the words “all but Amends Be

1

the Speaker or Chairman, as the case may be, or to such other .

authority or officer as may be preseribed” shall be inserted.

wae dment
36. In section T1 of the principal Act— Amendment,

(0) sub-section (1) shall be omitted and sub-sections (2) and Te
(8) shall be renumbered as sub-sections (i) and (2) respectively;

(b) in sub-section (1) as so yenumbered, the words, brackets
and figure “sub-section (2) of” and the words “and group of such
States” shall be omitted;

(९) in sub-section (2) as so renumbered, the words, brackets -
and figure “or sub-section (2)” and the words, brackets and
figures “sub-section (1), or as the case may be, sub-section (2)
of” shall be omitted.

inci it
8%. In section 72 of the principal Act, . Amendment,

72.
(a) the words ‘first constitution or any subsequent? shall be
omitted; and

(b) for the words ‘Council of States’, the words ‘electoral
college’ shall be substituted.

28. In section 73 of the principal Act,— Amendment

of — section
(a) for the word and figures ‘section 15’, the word and figures 73.
‘section 14 shall be substituted; and

(b) the words ‘in due time or on the expiration of its dura-
tion or’ shall be omitted. -

89, In section 74 of tHe principal Act,— Amendment

of — section

(a) for the word and figures ‘section 17’, the word and figures 94,
‘section 19 shail be substituted; and



ie

(8) the words ‘in due time or on the expiration of its dura.
tion er’ shall be omitted,
Amendment

Apendment 46. In section 75 of the principal Act,—

{a} sub-section (1) shall be omitted and sub-sections (2) and
(8) shall be re-numbered ag subsections (1) and (2) respectively; 5

(9) in sub-section (2) as so renumbered, for the words,
brackets and figures ‘sub-section (2) of section 18, the word and
figures ‘section 16’ shall be substituted; and

(०) in sub-section (2) as so renumbered,

i) the words, brackets and figure ‘or sub-section (2y to
shatl be omitted;

हि (it) for the words, brakets and figures ‘sub-section (OH
or, as the case may be, sub-section (2) of section 18’, the word

and figures ‘section 16” shall be substituted,
Substitution 44, For sections 76, 77 and 78 of the principal Act. the following 15
of new sec. हु «
tions for see. Sections shall be substituted, namely ;-—
tions 76, 77

and 78.

Application “76, This Chapter shall apply only to elections to the House

of Chapter. of the People and to the Legislative Assembly of a State.

Account of 77. (9 Every candidate at an election shall, either by him-
sention and self or by his election agent, keep a separate and regular 20
feaximaum account of ali expenditure incurred or authorised by him or by
thereof.

his election agent in connection with the election,

(2) The account shall be kept in such form, and shall
contain such particulars, as may be prescribed,

(3) The total of the said expenditure shall not exceed such 2g
amount as may be prescribed.

(4) The said expenditure shall not be deemed to include
any expenditure incurred by a recognised party organisation
for furthering the prospects of the election of candidates sup-
Ported by it.

Explanation —The expression “recognised party organisa-
tion” means a party organisation which has heen tecognised by
the Election Commission in this behalf.

Tedging of 78. Every contesting candidate at an election shall, within
the returning the prescribed period, lodge with the returning officer an 35
officer, account of his election expenses which shall be a true copy of

the aecount kept by him or by his election agent under section
27.".

30

Amendnient 42. In section 81 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the
of section Wo

oo rds and figures ‘tm such form and within such time but not earlier 40
than the date of publication of the name or names of the returned

i
i eati der section 67, as may
i 7 candidates at such election un : ° am
sae ited the words ‘within two months trom, nee carlier
th on the date of election of the returned candidate, or if ई hese are
more than one returned candidate at the election ant fhe 8 ae e
8% their election are different, the later of those two dates’ 8!

substituted.

1 jon ¢ Substitution
4%. For section 82 of the principal Act, the following gection shall of co
प्‌ a 2
be substituted, namely: — for section

Ba
t is ition—— i the
“go A petitioner shall join as respondents to his petitio: 11 ६० hs
हे where the petitioner e¢lairas a declaration nner
clause (8) of section 84, all the contesting candies thet
than the petitioner, and in any other case, all the retur
candidates; and ;
(b) any other candidate against whom allegations of any
corrupt or illegal practice are made in the petition. wal
inci fe ing section shal
44, For section 83 of the principal Act, the following oe oe
be substituted, namely:-— 7 seas
“83, (1) An election petition— ae
{a) shall contain a concise statement of the- materia
i iti lies;
facts on which the petitioner relies;
हे (b) shali set forth full particulars of _ any comupt हि
illegal practice that the petitioner alleges, tneluding | roped 2
i of the parties
statement as possible of the names a alee te
, i illegal practice an: e
committed such corrupt or i and
red lace of the commission of each such practice; and ;
(2) shall be signed by the petitioner ans verified
the manner laid down in the Code of Civ! Procedure,
for the vertification of pleadings." salon.
(2) Any schedule or annexure to the petition. shall also ae
signed by the petitioner and verified in the same manner as
etition.”. ; nen
1s In section $4 of the principal Act, for clause (९), the follow. Amendmen
: ituted, namely:— 84.
i lause shall be substituted, - है
meee (c) that the election as a whole is void.”.

4G. For section 85 of the principal Act, the following section Substitution
| ह 131 for
shall be substituted, namely: — seston हि
i P:
“95, If the provisions of section 81 or section 82 or section Procedure oa
117 ha 2 not been complied with, the Election Commission shall Setition.
ay

ismi ition: * कक
का ean that the petition shall not be ‘issed without

giving the petitioner an opportunity of being heard.”

१0५

3S

| Substitution
of

25

30

33

40



1

Substituti ry, i inet i
Sa ution 4%. For section 86 of the principal Act, the following section

section for Shall be substituted, namely :—
section 86,

Azpoint. “86, (D Ef the petition is not dismissed wader section 25,
Ekcotion the Election Commission shall cause a copy thereof to be publish-
cibunat. ed in the Official Gazette and a copy to be served by pest on हि

each respondent, and shall then refer the petition te an Election
Tribunal for trial.

(2) For the purpose of constituting such Tribunals, the
Election Commission shall obtain from the High Court of each
State (other than Jammu and Kashmir) a list of persons who qo
are district judges in the State and are in the opinion of the
High Court fit to be appointed as members of Election Tribunals
and shall maintain the list by making such alterations therein
as the High Court may, from time to time, direct.
हु Explanation—In this sub-section, the expression ‘district 15
judge’ includes judge of a city civil court, additional district
judge, joint district judge and chief judge of a small cause
court.

(4) Every Tribunal shall consist of two members selected
by the Election: Commission from any of the lists maintained 20
by it under sub-section (2):

Provided that where the petition is in respect of an elec-
tion to the Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council of a
State, no person who is a district judge in another State shall
be selected for appointment as a member of the Tribunal ex- 25
cept with the consent of the Government of that other State,

(4) Tf for any reason a vacancy occurs in the office of mem-
ber of a Tribunal, the Election Commission shall, as soon as
practicable, appoint a person to fill the vacancy in accordance
with the foregoing provisions of this section; and upon his 30
joining the Tribunal, the trial of the petition shall be continued
as if he had been on the Tribunal from the beginning:

Provided that the Tribunal may, if it thinks fit, recall and
re-examine any of the witnesses already examined.”.

Substitution 48, For section 89 of the prineipal Act, the following section shall 35
tion -- for: be substituted, namely :—

section 89.
Power of “89. The Election Commission may at any stage, for reasons

Election to be recorded, withdraw. any petition pending before a Tribunal

18

tS

20

25

30

35

Li

d नि A Tri witited 15 to withdraw
and transfer it for trial to another Tribunal constituted in aceur- © stor

dance with the provisions of section 86; and upon such transfer, sevid
that Tribunal shall proceed with the irial from the stage at
which it was withdrawn;

Provided that it may, if व thinks fit, recall and ie-cxamine
any of the witnesses already examined.”,

49. [8 section 90 of the principal Aci,— Amendment,
92
(a) sub-section (३) shall be omitted;
“further”

(b) in sub-section (2), the first proviso and the word ‘iurth
in the second provise shall be omitted, and the sub-section shall |

be renumbered as sub-section (7;

(९) sub-section (3) shall be renumbered as sub-section (2);

id) for sub-section (4), the following sub-sections shali be
substituted, namely :—

“(3) The Tribunal shall dismiss an election petition which
does 20 comply with the provisions of section 81, section 62
or section 117 notwithstanding that it has not been dismissed
by the Election Commission under sub-section (1) of section
85.

(4) Any candidate not already a respondent shall,
upon application made to the Tribunal within fourteen
days from the date of commencement of the trial and sub-
ject to the provisions of section 119, be entitled to be joined
as a respondent.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section and
of section 97, the trial of a petition shall be deemed to
commence on the date fixed for the respondents to appear
before the Tribunal and answer the claim or claims made in
the petition.

(5) The Tribunal may, upon such terms as to costs and
otherwise as it may deem fit, allow the particulars of any
corrupt or illegal practice alleged in the petition to be

amended or amplified in such manner as may in its opinion
be necessary for ensuring a fair and effective trial of the
petition, but shall not allow any amendment of the peti-
tion which will have the effect of introducing particulars
of a corrupt or illegal practice not previously alleged in

the petition.”.



18

Amendment

oe आप 38. In section 97 of the principal Asi,
97. (७) in i
8) in ihe proviso. to sub-section (1), 1;
row! ) 2 (4), for. the words
figures ‘the publication of the election petition under section ea
© words ‘commencement of the trial’ shali be substituted; ,
(89) in sub-section (2), the words ‘ist of’ shall be omitted. 5
Amend: i i
of nendment “a हि 1m Section 98 of the principal Act, in clause (dq), for the words
98. e wholly void’, th ‘ ‘voi
substitu # » the words ‘as a whole te be void’ shall be

A ‘
Amendment 52. In section 99 of the principal Act,—
99. i
(व) in sub-clause (४) of claus
A © (4) of sub-section (7 .
the figures and ward ‘141 to 143’, the figures and word wat हित *
142’ shall be substituted; and _—
(8) sub-section (2) shall be omitted,
Amend: 3 i i
Smendment @ हित In section 100 of the principal Act, for sub-sections (३) and
too. 2), the following sub-sections shall be substituted. namely :
मु i 15
‘
(2) If the Tribunal is of opini
n pinion that the election h
no been 3 free election by reason that bribery, undue im
ence or group intimidation hag extensively prevailed
at the election, the Tribunal shall declare the election a
whole to be void: “8
20

Explanation—In this section,—

(@ the expressions

‘bribery’ and ‘undue i
पा Ue 7 7
have the meanings give: influence

n to them in section 123; and 30
हे (89) the expression ‘group intimidation’
interference or attem

ty, group or section

r of the right to vote or
imidation, coercion, sociale 35

yeott, threat of
similar means of such boycott or other

1o

aS

20

30

35

(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), if the
‘Teibunal is of opinion—

(a) that on the date of his election a returned candi.
date was not qualified, or was disqualified, 16 be chosen
10 fill the seat under the Constitution or this Act er the
Government of Part C States Act, 1951: or

(8) that any corrupt practice specified in section 123
has been committed by a returned candidate or His agent
or by any other person with the connivance of a returned
candidate or his agent; or

(ए) that the election of a returned candidate has
been procured or induced by any corrupt or illegal prac-
tiee; or

({d) that the result of the election, in so far as it con-
cerns a returned candidate, has been materially affected—

@ by the improper acceptance or rejection of
any nomination, or

Gi) by the improper reception, refusal or rejec-
tion of any vote or the reception of any vote which
is void; or

{ii} by any non-compliance with the provisions
of the Constitution or of this Act or of any rules or
orders made under this Act or any other Act or rules
relating to the election;

the Tribunal shall declare the election of the returned |
candidate to be void.”.

5A. For section 104 of the principal Act, the following section gupstitation

हि a हर i
shall be substituted, namely: af fnew Seon |
tion 10 4 « |

104. (1) If at the conclusion of the trial of an election peti- Ditferomee of

tion there is a difference of opinion between the members of opinion bet-
the Tribunal on any question regarding the order to be made Ween, the
under section 98 or section 99, they shall state the question on the Tribunal.
which they so differ together with their respective opinions

thereon and refer the same for determination to such. Judge

of the High Court having jurisdiction over the Tribunal as the

Election Commission may, with the concurrence of the Chief

Justice of that Court, nominate for the purpose:

Provided that where the High Court consists of only one
Judge, the question shall be referred to that Judge.



106,

tion . 107,
Effect of

orders of th:
‘Tribunal.

Amendment.

of section.
qn.

Insertion of
new section
TITAs

Procedure
where the
petitioner
fails to
appeat.

Substitution 56. For section 107 of the
Sion for shall be substituted, namely :—

ae
(2) After a reference has heen made under
(7) the Tribunal shall not make any order under section 98 or

section 99 until, and except in accordance with, the deci-
Sion of the Judge upon the reference,”

sub-section

Amendment n : e oe
of section 2% वह section 108 of the principal Aet,—

(०) the brackets and words

हे ‘(other than a primary electiony
shall be omitted;

(8) for the words ‘shall eause the order to be published in
the Gazette of India and in the Official Gazette of the State
concerned’, the following shall be substituted, namely: — To

“shall cause the order to be published—

[6) where the order relates to an election to a
House of Parliament, in the Gazette of India as well
as in the Official Gazette of the State concerned; and

(0) where the order relates to an election to the as

House of a House of the Legislature of the State, in the
Official Gazette of the State.”,

principal Act, the following section

“107. (1) Every order of the T
e Section 99 shall take effect as soon
Tribunal.

tribunal under section 98 or 20
as it is pronounced by the

(2) Where by an order under section 98 the election of a
returned candidate or the election as a whole is declared to be
void, acts and proceedings in which any returned candidate 25
affected by the order has, before the date thereof, participated
as a member of Parliament or as a member of the Legislature
of a State shall not be invalidated by reason-of that order, nor
shall such candidate be subjected to any liability or penalty

on the ground of such participation,” 30

5%. In section 111 of the principal Act, the following words shall
be added at the end, namely: --

“and thereupon the Election

the report in the Official Gazette”,

58. After section 111 of the
shall be inserted, namely : --

Commission shall publish

principal Act, the following section 35

“LIA. (7) Where the petitioner fails, or if there are more
petitioners than one, all the petitioners fail, to appear at any
stage during the trial of the petition, the Tribunal may, on the
application of any other person who might himself have been 40

ai

jg necessary for ends of justice
he petition for default, order
petitioner छः

a petitioner and if satisied ‘that Bs
so to do, instead of Ce for ett Tal
mn io he substituted for ine) OUe’
oa ooo upon. such terms as की, thinks just. se the परत
वि छाए fi fault the TE ny
a ition ig dismissed for def 7
वि ee ie the Election Commission aed, पदक
Samii publish the report in the Official

petition
5 (2) When
hall report thy +
the Biection Coramission shall
Gazette.”.
59. In section 119 of the prin
and figure “sub-section (17, the
* tion (4y’ shall be substituted. विश
“a लो Ach of section
tion 128 of the principa. है ts ana e
890. Tn sec (i), in the Explanation, for the words a 23>
if jection expenses referred io mM section 4 हि
हि 8 “account of election expenses referre

4 rds, brackets, Amendment
cipal Act, for the words, ve, of ection

words, brackets and figure Tide

(a) in clause
figures “return हि हि
tn lon ig" shall be substituted; .
हे Jause (7), the words oy the employment of any

(७) ndidate or his agent” shall be omitted; and एप्पल
हे हि ot clause (8), for the Explanation, the following Ewp
ec) in i

tion shall be substituted, namely :—
—#or the purposes of this clause— sai on
i ja

erson serving under the Government ots ao

ed ent of any State shall not include a 9 me

te ere declated by the Central Government on ase

oan ay be, the State Government to be a person 3

fhe provisions of this clause shall not apply, rartherance

(b) a person shall be deemed to assist wn ive epee

हि i ’s election if he ai

fa candidate's ९: i on

a i हि ree i" polling agent or a counting agent of tha |
election

30 candidate.”.
81. In section 124 of the pring nore
“return” wherever it occurs, 1 © wo a

62. In section 134 of the principa’

i i 7, the
1 registration officers’,
the ene ee ofcers shall be inserted.

15 हि 5
in sso

20
“Explanation

25

i for the word amendment
ipal Act, in clause (4), 7 dim
we ccount” shall be substituted. of sect’o!

et, in sub-section (3), after Amendment
‘ i - 01 secl
e words ‘assistant elec: 1

। ॥ ce e wi jon Insertion of
| ५ tl incipal Act, the following section i oF
63. After section 135 of the princip: + ne

गे जन ion wi i
shall be inserted, aaa econ makes in, or in connection with, aMY Making false
“135A. TE 8 Pp! “

nomination of a 0) v ६ of election declarations.
0) i ti tion
di ion or any account 5
inati candidate for electi ० y 3 7
0 an a statement or declaration: in writing which is false
wi ich be ¢i er knows or believes to pe false or does not
and which he either ki ar



Amendmeny

of section 64. In section 1

39 of the prince

ipal Act, in clause

139. section (2),
» att word
ex the word and figu (8) of sub.

a 1 4
mid Lett tes, “section 135’, the

छा “or section 1354?

shall be inserted, words, figures 5

fasertion of

new section
74०8. 140, the 15

brincipal Act, in Chapter I, after se

Removal + .
wal of hall be inserted, namely :— ction

disqualifica~

“140A. An: i
. y disqu,
Temoved by the Fleets

tions.

[९ नि
alification under this Chapter mm ay be

- a
ia writing.” on Commissii

iting”, ssion for reasons to be recorded

rded 10

Amendment

of section

144. word and figures *

4 » in clause (a), after the

or sestion

Omission

i secel 67, (1 .
of section * (D Section 14g
i end of the pringi
ipal Act shall hy

'8 omitted.

romoval of (2) 16 1:
disquatifi- (2) It is hereby declared है 35

equal curr that i i
Gisqualise | ed by any person under th at any disqualification tor voting i
ine

red under return i
of i ९ said i
election expenses g Section for default in making
a

that section,
nde shall stand Temoved

Omission of

‘ 68. Secti है
section 146, ection 146 of th i
8 principal Act sh
shall be omiti
ed.

Amendment 69.
of section . In section 148 of
148, States’, th ae 0) the principal
e words ‘electoral college’ sa शक the words ‘Council of
Substituted, 20

Amend:
a nendmemt a In section 152 of the principal
152. words “ nal ;
S “or group of such States” shall oe tas it गा (@), the
11120. हि

Substitution 71. For section 153 of

of new sec~ th on
tion for - shall be A © principal A
tion 753. substituted, namely: -- et, the following section
Extensis 4 fe
Bate ion of “158. Tt shall be competent f 25
completion reasons which it considers sullciewt Election Commission f

en Or

of elect ions :
» to extend the time for the

completion of an i
y election by making necessary tel
amendments in

the notification i
issued i
of section -39.”, ed by it under section 30 or sub-secti
section (1)

30

a3
oti inci —_ Amendment
92. In section 158 of the principal Act, a lon

{a) in sub-section (), the words, rackets and figures ‘or 8 ad
thet section read with subsection (4) of section 38 and the
words, brackets and figure ‘or in that sub-section read with the

5 said sub-section (4) shall be emitted; aad

(b) in sub-section (4),~

rackets and figures ‘or wader that sub-

(i) the words,
ction (4) of section 39 shall be

section read with sub-se
omitied; and

iso, the words ‘er at an election in
by the members of
geais in the State

x0 Gi) in the second prov.
a Council constituency and an election
the State Legislative Assembly to fll
Legislative Council’ shall be ornitted.

tion

‘the Election Amendment
पं of sect
359.

15 43. In section 159 of the principal Act, the words
Commission or’ shall be omitted.

cipal Act, after sub-section (2), the Amendment
of section.

74, In’section 169 of the prin
namely :—~ 269,

following sub-section shali be inserted,
shall, as scon us may

“@3) All rules made under this Act
oth Houses ef Farlia-

be after they are made, be laid before b

20 ment.”,
5. In the Government of Part C States Act, 1951,— Consequen-
tia] amend-
tents.

(8) in section ied
) the word ‘and’ shall be a
(a); and

ded at the end of clause

25 (ii) the word ‘and? at the en of clause (0), the whole ot
clause (c) and the Explanation shall be omitted;

{b) section 8 shall be omitted

shall apply to any election which has beer ५0६ not te

called before the commencement of this Act or to any election apply to
pending

30 petition arising out of such election, whether such petition is pending sections,

at such commencement or ig presented afterwards, and all such cte.
elections shall be held and petitions tried, and all matters in connec-
tion with such elections or petitions (including the constitution of
Flection Tribunals) shall be regulated, in accordance with the provi-

35 gions of the law in ferce immediately before such commencement.

"6. Nothing in this Ac



Clause §—-At present sssistanl returning officers have no power

to perform any of the functions of a returning officer which relate

to the acceptance of the nomination paper or to the serutiny of

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
nominations or to the counting of votes unless the returning officer

ig unavoidably prevented from performing the said functions.

The i is Bi
b&oposals in this BN for the amendme:

i
tin of the People Act, 195i, are based on th ‘at of the Representa.
e There does not appear te be any valid reason why assistant return-

the Election Commission ag well as the G experience gained by
Over ing officers who are also responsible officers should not be competent

of ४ कि
the Act during and after the last general chen in the working

changes proposed are explained below: elections. The main to perform all the functions of the returning officer subject of

eourse to his control, Tt is accordingly proposed to omit the provise
to section 22 af the Act.

Clauses 3 and 4
Under secti,
membershi ‘ jon 7(c) a person 18 di :
to lodge 4 Parliament or of a State Legislatere ened por
arn of election expenses as required oy be has failed

or under the

Act, and under .
"0 | Section: 06)(७) ६ ‘fonts
the expiration of twe monthe” Pa Tee aliseation takes effect on

Clauses 10 and 31.—At present the Act and the rules reier to
polling stations as well as to polling booths which a polling station
may have, In practice, many polling stations have as many as

four or five polling booths. It would be administratively more cons
venient to do away with polling booths eltogether and to treat poll.
ing stations es indivisible units and allot definite polling areas to
each of them as contemplated by section 25, and where necessary,
groups of electors with reference to the electoral roll even where
two or more polling stations are located in the same building. It
is accordingly proposed that the references to polling booths should
be eliminated from section 58 and section 26(1) should be amended
enabling the appointment of the same person to pe the presiding
officer for more than one polling station in the same premises.

Clause 12—Under the existing law, a minimum of 42 days is

required between the notification calling for an election and the com-
mencement of polling. At least 30 days have to be allowed between
the last date for the withdrawal of candidatures and the commence-
ment of the poll which appears to be unduly jong. It is also felt
that the election programme should as far as possible be fixed in the
Jaw itself. It is, therefore, proposed not only to reduce the periods
prescribed in clauses (a), (b) and (व), but also to provide in clause
{a) that the last date for making nominations should be the tenth
day after the publication of the notification calling the election and
in clause (9) that the date of scrutiny should be the second day after
the last date for making nominations. By making the election pro-
gramme shorter by about a fortnight, the over-all election expenses of
candidates will also be reduced. As the superintendence, direction
and control of elections are vested in the Election Commission it is
proposed that these various dates should. be fixed by the Commis-
sion in the case of general elections as they are at present fixed by
the Commission in the case of bye-elections.

हे general
» The durations of the
Assemblies are due
1957. The brovisos
[४ to hold general

Clause 14.—Section 33 of the Act prescribes the procedure for
presentation of nomination papers and the requirements of a valid



26

nomination. Sub-section {2) of this section seems to be umneres-
sarily cumberous. From the practical point of view it seams Quite
immaterial whether an elector subseribes one or more than one
nomination paper and the existence of 2 statutory restriction as in
the proviso to sub-section (23 merely leads to frivial objections
being taken and a good deal of the returning officer's time being
wasted and in some cases the nomination papers being inproperly
rejected,

So also, sub-section (3) in its present form has heen a feuitfadl
source of election petitions on the ground of unlawful rejection of
nomination papers. Tis main provision is that along with every
nomination paper there should be a declaration by the eandidate
that he has appointed either himself or another specified person as
his election agent. The great majority of candidates in this country
appoint themselves as. their own election agents. Experience of
the last general elections shows that the system of election agents
has not been very popular with the candidates, The appointraent
of election agents is therefore proposed to be made optioaal for
candidates is clause 21. In view of this there is no neoessity for
the provision that the nomination paper should be accompanied by
a declaration relating to the appointment of an election agent,

With a view to making the nomination paper as simple as
possible, it is proposed to dispense with a seconder. In the case of
a Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe candidate there need not be 3
separate declaration. The nomination paper itse!f may contain the
declaration. The revised section 38 incorporates these changes.

Clause 15—A deposit does not seem necessary in the case of an
election to the Council of States or in the case of an election to a
State Legislative Couneil by the members of the Legislative
Assembly of that State, and it is proposed to do away with this reo
quirement.

Clause 17.—At present under sub-section (2) of section 86 there
are five grounds on any one of which a nomination paper may be
tejected. Out of a total of 338 election petitions arising out of the
last general elections, as many as 116 contained allegations regard-
ing improper rejection of nomination papers. Since the serutiny
proceedings before the returning officer are of a summary nature,
it is considered that the scrutiny of nominations should be made
less technical. The.grounds on which a nomination paner can be
rejected should bée'made simple so that returning officers may take
quick and correct decisions, While the question whether a candi-
date has or has not. the. requisite “qualifications” under the Consti-
tution or the Representation of the People Act, 1951, is comparative.

2)
ly easy and straightforward, the question whether be is किक शकनत
is ui i पे and involves difficult points ef fact arm
fied” is usually complicated an गत poants of fect ant
It is tk fore proposed to remove this iatier ques a
law. Tt is therefore proposed हर : ia men
the purview of the returning officer, feaving it to e वश हा
necessary, by means of an election petition after the cornpliel:
the election.

The rule of evidence contained in clause (a) of eae
of section 36 is not properly worded. The मरना sony nf we ud
in the electoral reil of a constituency sould only e oe tens «of ibe
है indivi d to in the entry is for
‘act that the individual referre: 7 or ee ae

i i in the constituency, and the elu
being registered as an elector in ee

é this pi i hould also be confine
i ture of this piece of evidence s D = im
fact “The right of the individual to stand for election or t subsorbe
a nomination paper as proposer or हर seconde aaa eat
isi f which have to =
devant provisions of the Act h ° ; pore
and the mere production of a certified copy of an entry in as & ee
toral roll cannot be taken es conclusive ovens कं ay a hese
i ise clat a) 9: -§
i . It is accordingly proposed to revise clause | ४
oat section 36. Clause {b) of sub-section (7) is proposed te be
omitted in view of the proposed omission of sub-section (2) ©:
section 33,

Tt is also proposed to insert a new sub-section (8) in this section
requiring every returning officer to prepare a list of validly ome
nated candidates immediately after the scrutiny of noming
papers is over.

Clauses 19 and 28—At present the Act seems to Gra a distin
ily i igi “duly nominated” ea: 2
tion, not readily intelligible, between ताप tay
, i i i » Apparently, candidates
“validly nominated” candidates. ‘ ; हे
have been कण nominated” although their nomination Pepe ae
j i by the returning officer. Whereas accor
rejected on scrutiny by ret ५ न
‘list of validly nominate:
to the rules under the Act the हि te dates
i dates whose nomination pap
contains the names of those can हु डा
fe i tiny and who have no’
have been found to be in order on scru’ a vhf we
i i in ti der section 37. Then again,
drawn their candidatures in time unc in cabscuion (1)
i that the list referred to in sub-se
though section 53 suggests r ; Hon
ion i: the list of valid nomin
of that section is not to be the same as 1 पक अत ns
i ‘tion 38, the rules provide otherwise, a
published under sect / the does. Tt is pre
ist i i lished under both 52८1
same list is required to be pub: HONS. ace at
i ‘ho have been duly nominated an
onde ain ean id der section 37 miay be referred te
withdrawn their candidatures under 56 nye referred te
ing candidates. It is accordingly propos ; ०
tion eae in this clause and to make necessary consequential amend
ments in section 53(1) as in clause 28.



Clouse 25.—Section 46 of the Act provides for the appointment
of polling agents at least three days before the commencement of
the poll. Many candidates at the general elections found it ime
bossible to comply with this time-limit and in order to avoid hard-
ship the returning officers and presiding officers had to accept
polling agenis appointed later. It is proposed to remove this ‘time
limit which appears to be unnecessary,

Then section 48 lays down that the notice of appointment of
polling agents shall be given in the preseribed manner to such
officers as may be prescribed, This again is not easy to comply with
in practice. In order ta simplify the appointment of polling agents,

it is proposed to delete the latter portion of section 46 and formally
revise the rest.

Clause 26.-~—Section 47 at present restricts the number of counting
agents of every candidate to one. so that at the time of counting
only the candidate, his election agent, if any, and the counting agent
are entitled to be present and watch the proceedings. It is almost
impossible for a single counting agent to watch with any degree of
care and thoroughness when a number of counting parties are doing
the counting. It is therefore proposed in this clause that section 47
should be amended so as to allow the appointment of a number of
counting agents subject to the prescribed maximum. It is also
Proposed to omit from this section the requirement that counting
agents shall be appointed before the commencement of the polis.

Clause 32.—-Questions often arise ag to when exactly an elected
candidate becomes a member of the House to which he is elected
and what is the date of his election, There is usually an interval
between the date of declaration of a result under section 53, 54 or
66 and the date on which that declaration is published in the
Official Gazette under section 67, The declaration is reproduced
verbatim in the Gazette and contains the date on which it has actual-
ly been made by the returning officer. The date of notification in
the Gazette is therefore not material and there appears to be no
real justification for regarding the latter date as the date on which
an elected candidate becomes a member of a particular House.
Moreover, while the elected candidate is immediately aware of the
declaration made by the returning officer and its date, he has to
keep a close watch on the Official Gazettes in order to know the
date on which’ the declaration is notified in the Gazette, and this,
from the point of view of the candidate is neither easy nor ¢on-
venient. In this clause it is accordingly proposed to insert a new
section defining the date of election of a candidate.

Clause 35.—Under section 70, if a person is elected to more than
one seat in either House of Parliament or in the House or in either

29
House of the Legislature of a State, then unless within the presevih~
.d time he resigns all but one of the seats a seats shail be 01128
Sacant Under article 101(8) and articie wee ifa menaber resi 7
seat D3 iti vc his hand addressed to the Spe, Z
hi + by writing under his hand 8: on |
Chetrman his seat thereupon becomes vacant. Bat cxbenionse
n xe ceasi when the office 0
has shown that there may be occasions 5 eS oe
& i in the case of the Legislature of a Sia’ °
speaker or the Chairman in te i nee
in i the case of failure of cons Q
may remain in abeyance as in ete "oF constitutions!
i i i the Constitution, In suc! 88:
machinery under article 356 of 1! ‘ ६ हि गत
tion should be  subroi
है is not clear as to whom the resigna . | suby 1
Under section 70. To provide for a contingency Uke this it is pro
posed to amend section 70 as in this clause.

Clause 41—The law relating to election expenses as contained
in sections 76, 77 and 78 (and also section 44) has been found है
be unnecessarily complicated and Giftioult bo soe ng th oe

i ify it and make ij workable by re é
proposed to simplify i : हि whe eee
i qT tion of these sections
tions mentioned above. The opera’ k
ग़लत to elections to the House of the People and ० खान

i i T intaining regular
lative Assemblies. The duty of main ध् ह
accounts of all election expenses at these elections will he oun
primarily on the candidate himself, but if he has an election agen Z
he can ask that agent to maintain the account. Fe re eros

i isation in furthering -
uurred by a recognised party organisa रा
pects of andidates supported by it will net ee part of See cana,

indivi हि है हि

es of any individual candidate. Only the ९
dates vill be required to lodge an account of their expenses, and
that too, not in the form of a complicated return classifying the
expenses under ten or twelve different heads, but a oo i

i intai ६ itself, Lastly, -

hich they have to maintain the account!
went restriction on the number of persons who may be employed
on payment in connection with the election is proposed to be
moved, since it does not seem to serve any useful purpose:

Clause 42.Under sub-section (1) of section 81, the period of
limitation for presenting an election petition is left to be ae peity
ich i tisfactory. It is propose
by rules which is not very sa Pe coe ging

his 100 ii i 45 days are allowed fo:
tl eriod in the section itself. e 1 i
the return of election expenses and, adding 15 days to it, the Perio?
of limitation for presenting an election petition may be two re as
from the date of the election of the returned candidate, oy कि vere
i it the election an e@
more than one returned candidate a
of their elections are different, two months from the later of those

dates. है

Clause 43—Section 82 provides that all the duly nominated
candidates shall be joined as respondents to an election petition.



fiven in the case of elections ta the House of the People or a State
Legislative Assembly, particularly in plural member constituencies
the number of duly nominated candidates has heen very large, with
the result that the service of notices on them takes’ 2 very long
time and holds up the trial of the election petition, Naturally, it
is only the returned candidate who takes any interest in contesting
the election petition. Moreover there is a provision in section
98 which enables any other candidate to join as a respondent,
i is accordingly proposed in this clause that section 82 should be
revised so that it is necessary to join as respondents only those

candidates who are interested prim B utcome 0: ie
didat he d prima facie in 4
he out f th

Clause 44.—Where the petition alleges any corrupt or illegal
practice, sub-section (2) of section 83 requires a separate list setting
forth full particulars of the practices alleged, and also as full a
statement as possible as to the names of the parties alleged to have
committed those practices at the date and place of commission of
those Practices. This provision is often not fully understood by
petitioners, or even where it is understood, there is great deal of re-
petition as between the petition proper and the list. It would. be
simpler from: all points of view to have a complete. and self-con-
tained petition. It is proposed that section 83 should be revised
formally from this point of view.

Clause 46.—It is proposed to make two changes in section. 85
which empowers the Election Commission to dismiss election peti-
tions in certain circumstances, The question whether a petition
is in acordance with section 83 cannot properly be decided with-
out hearing both parties. On the other hand, the Election Com-
mission will find it easy to see whether section 82 has been com-
plied with. It is therefore proposed to substitute section 82 for
section 83. In view of the nature of election petitions and the
desirability of reaching finality in regard to all election matters it
is proposed that the provision for condoning delay should be omit-
ted and that the power to dismiss a petition for non-compliance
with section 81, 82 or 117 should belong not only to the Election
Tribunal under section 90-but should also be given to the Election
Commission. Before dismissing a petition however the Election
Commission should give the petitioner an opportunity of being
heard. Section 85 has been revised accordingly.

Clauses 47 and 54.—Under the existing law the Election Tribu-
nal is to consist of three members of whom the Chairman shall be
cither a retired or setving judge of a High Court or a retired or
serving district judge, the second member shall be a retired or
serving district judge and the third member shall be an advocate

30

of not legs than 10 years standing. The undue delay im the dis-
posal of several election petitions is attributable largely te this
composition, The intention in having -a three-member tribunal
was that its decisions would be final and not open.to any appeal
er revision before a higher court. But it has been authoritatively
held that the powers conferred by article 186 on the Supreme Court
or by aricles 226 and 227 on the High Courts are exercisable im re=
lation to Election Tribunals. In order to reduce the expense and
delay which the existing composition of a three-member tribunal
necessarily involves, it is proposed to amend section 86 providing
for double-member tribunals consisting of serving district Judges
only and to provide in revised section 104 (vide clause 54) that in the
case of difference between the two members on any question re-
garding the final order to be made, the question sheuld be referred
to a judge of the High Court nominated for the purpose by the
Election Commission with the concurrence of the Chief Justice and
that the final order showid then be made by the Tribunal in accor-
dance with the decision of the judge upon the reference.

Clause 48—At present the Election Commission has no power
to transfer election petitions from one tribunal to another. In the
absence of such a power, the Election Commission could not take
any action for the expeditious disposal of petitions and much un-
necessary expense had to be ineurred. By this clause it is proposed
to insert a new section giving the necessary power to the Election

Commission. ' i

Existing section 89 appears to be of little practical utility, and
it is proposed to omit it.

Clause 53.—Sub-section (1) (c) of section 100 provides that if
the tribunal is of opinion that the result of an election has been
materially. affected by the improper acceptance or rejection of any
nomination, the Tribunal shall declare that election to be wholly
void, There does not appear to be any sound and valid reason why
the entire election should be set aside on the ground of improper
acceptance or rejection of any nomination. It is accordingly pro-
posed to omit clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 100 and to
make a provision in sub-section (2) [vide proposed clause (d)1
that if the Tribunal is of the opinion that the result of the election
in so far as it concerns a returned candidate has been materially
affected by the improper acceptance or rejection of a noraination the
Tribunal shall declare the election of the returned candidate to be
void.

Sub-section (2) (९) provides inter alia that if the Tribunal is of |
opinion that the result of an election has been materially affected
by any non-compliance with the provisions of the Constitution or



32

of the Act or any rules ov orders made thereunder, the Tribunal
shall declare the election of ihe returned candidate to be void.
Now it might happen that although on the date of serutiny of the
nominations the candidate was not disqualified for being chosen as
a member, he subsequently, but before the date af his election, in=
curred a disqualification and continued to be subject to that disquae
lification even after the election. Such a case would obviously be
outside the purview of section 100(1) (९०). Tt does not also seem
possible to bring it within the purview of section 100(2) (०), since
it cannot be asserted that there is a non-compliance within express
constitutional or statutory requirement. It is accordingly proposed
to insert a new provision in sub-section (2} that if the Tribunal is of
spinion that on the date of his election a returned candidate was
not qualified, or was disqualified to be chosen to fill the seat under
the Constitution or the Act, the Tribunal shall declare the election
of the returned candidates to be void.

Under section 54(2) in plural-member constituencies if the
number of candidates qualified to be chosen to fill the reserved seats
is equal to the number of such seats, all those candidates shall forth-
with be declared to be elected to All the reserved seats and a poll
shall be taken in respect of the general seats. Now, if bribery, un-
due influence or intimidation prevailed in the contested election re-
lating to the general seat there is no justifiable reason why the पतन
contested elections of the reserved candidates should also be set
aside. It is accordingly proposed to insert a proviso to proposed
sub-section (1) of section 100. In view of the changes proposed
above, sub-sections (1) and (2) have been revised as in this clause.

Clause 56—At present under section 107 an order of the Tribunal
under section 98 or section 99 takes effect only on its publication in
the Gazette of India. It is proposed that the order of the Tribunal
should take effect as soon as it is pronounced by the Tribunal.

Under the law a good deal of time elapses between. the election
of a candidate and the date on which his election may be declared
void by a Tribunal under section 98. But in this interval which
may extend not only to months but even to years, the returned
candidate may take part in various: Acts and proceedings as a
member of Parliament or as a member of the Legislature of a State.
The provisions of article 100(2) or article 189(2) do not appear to be
comprehensive in this respect. Then there are the provisions of
article 104 and article 193 imposing penalties in certain eases. In
order that a returned candidate whose election is subsequently
declared void may not be subjected to any liability or penalty or
that the Acts and proceedings in which he participated may not be
declared to be void, it is proposed to recast section 107 as in this
clause.

है (0) of the Explanation relating io persons serving

33
Clauses 57 aid 58—When the report of withdrawal of के petition
ig sent by the Tribanal te the Hlection Commi fon it is acs
that the report should be published in the Official Gazette et
ingly it is proposed te arnend section 111 of the Act a
(b) of this clause. cua
titioner fal a i any stage during the irial
Where a petitioner fails to appear at an ; ve Iriel
af the vatition, it is desirable that the Tribunal instead of Revie
to dismiss the petition for default, should have the power nee
absti for the petitioner i tha: '5'

ther person to be substituted au “titles ; person
wight himeelt have presented the petition. This is provided in t

new segtion 111A.

Ciquse 60—Under clause {a) of the Explanation below section
123(8) a person serving under the Government of India sha. aot
include a person who has been declared by the का, nat aot हि

isi if that clause shall not apply.
erson to whom the provisions 0 8 a :
But ty clause (b) of that Explanation a State Government sec
i illage from the operation of se

barred from exempting village officers et
i anvass at election
ith the result that no village officer can ९ election
for हरि candidate. This provision leads. not only ite ranches
i i ections. it is felt that claus
put also to anomalies at the time of elections. लिन na तआ
ernment of any State should be on the same lines as clause (2) हा
that Explanation relating to persons serving under the entra.
Government. हा
Certain judicial decisions have raised doubts as to weet बा

i unting agent of a

as an election agent or polling agent or co ig ane
isting i furtherance of the prospects

ld be regarded as assisting in the t nee ¢ है t
fa candidaie’s election within the meaning of this section. n js
proposed to remove these doubts by an express provision in
Explanation. .

Clause 63—In this clause it is proposed that if a person makes
a false slatement or declaration in connection with the nomination
of a candidate or the return of election expenses he shall be guilty

of an offence.

Clause 65—In Chapter I of Part. VIII of the Act the Election
Commission has no power to remove any disuualifieations fon ees
i ion 140 of the Act but in Cha
xship under section 189 or section 4 |
Tat that Part the Election Commission has power under seetion
144 of the Act to remove any disqualifications for voting. A oe
qualification under section 7(c) of the Act may be removed by the

Election Commission. There does not appear to pany zound हिला

ituti i tatus of the Election -
constitutional authority of the s ] c °

win should not be given the power to remove disqualifications

|
i
|


34

fer membership in other cases also. It is accordingly proposed ta
insert a new section 140A after section 140.

Clouse 67,—In view of the fact that failure to lodge a return of
election expenses within the time and manner required by or under
this Act is a disqualification for mermbership under section 7{c) of
the Act, there is no need to make such failure a disqualification for
voting. It is accordingly proposed te omit section 143,

Clause 68.—Section 146 does not seem to serve any useful pur-
pose, and, in paris, is of doubtful validity. Tt is therefore proposed
to omit ii,

Clause 75.—The amendments proposed by this clause in the
Government of Part C States Act are consequential upon the pro-
posai to integrate ihe election provisions of that Act with the pro-
visions of the Representation of the People Acts.

» Clause 76.—By this clause it is proposed that the amendments
proposed in this Bill should not apply to any pending bye-election
or to any election petition arising out of such bye-election,

की, V. PATASKAR
New Dewy; :
The Wth July, 1955.

ANNEXURE

EXTRACTS TROM THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PROFLE
Aer, 1951 CXLUT op 1951)

Ey eo कर रू रू e &

&, Interpretation —(i} In this Act, unless the context otherwise
requires,—

oa cy a * हु ca

(b) “Appropriate authority” means, in relation ta an elee=
tion to the. House of the People or the Council of States or io a
primary election, the Central Government, and in relation to an
election io the Legislative Assembly or the Legislative Council
of a State, the State Government.

* x % & # & *

(०) “election” means an election to fill a seat or seats in
either House of Parliament or in the House er either House of
the Legislature of a State other than the State of Jammu and
Kashmir and includes a primary election;

(९) “elector”, in relation to a constituency, means a person
whose name is for the time being entered in the electoral roll
of that constituency; .

* % oy * « &

(h) “primary election” means an election for the purpose
of constituting or reconstituting an electoral college under sec-
tion 27A of the Representation of the People Act, 1950 (XLIIT
of 1950) for a scheduled Part C State or for the purpose of filling
any casual vacancy in the seat of a member of such electoral
college;

(i) “Scheduled Castes” and “Scheduled Tribes” in relation
to a Part C State, mean respectively the castes specified in the
Sixth Schedule and the tribes specified in the Seventh Sche-
dule to the Representation of the People Act, 1950 (XLIII of
1950) in relation to that State.

co * * * * e e

35



36

(2) Por the purposes of this Act, a Council of States constituency,
a Parliamentary constituency, an Assembly constituency, a Council
constituency, 4 local authorities’ constituency,
tuency and a teachers’ constituency shall
stituency of different class,

a graduates’ consti-
each be treated as a con-

(3) Any requirement under this Act that a notification, order,
rule, declaration, natice or List issued or made by any authority shall
be published in the Official Gazette, shall, unless otherwise express-
ly provided in this Act, be construed as 8 requirement that the noti-
fication, order, rule, declaration, notice er list shall—

(9) where it is issued or made by the Central Government,
be published in the Gazette of India;

(b) where it is issued or made by a State Government, be
published in the Official Gazette of the State; and

(c) where it is issued or made by any other authority, be
published in the Gazette of India if it relates to an election to,
ov membership of, either House of Parliament or to a primary
election, and in the Official Gazette of the State if it relates to

an election to, or membership of, the House or either House of
the Legislature of a State.

ca * ® कं रू * *

{5) Any reference in this Act to a law which is not in force in a
Part B State shall, in relation to that State, be construed as a refe-
vence to the corresponding law, if any, in force in that State.

* कक * लव * कि ‘

(7) Any reference in this Act to the Legislative Council of a

State shail be construed as not including a reference to the Coorg
Legislative Council.

& के न लि लि * *

Cuapter IT
Disqualifications

7. Disqualifications for membership of Parliament or of a State
Legislature—A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and
for being, a member of either House of Parliament or of the Legis-
lative Assembly or Legislative Council of a State—

37

(e) if, having been nominated as 2 candidate for Parties
ment or the Legislature of any State or naving acted io 2
election agent of 0 nominated, he ते failed to to 5
a veturn of election vin the time and in the manner
yequired by or under this Act, unless five yea: fave ae 7
frore the date which the return ought to have been lodged oF
the Election Commission has removed the disqualification.

मु & * हे

* ®

8. Savings-(J) Notwithstanding anything in section vi
# & * * * 2 ®

(0) a disqualification under clause (ec) of ek sect oe
not take effect until the expiration of two months rom ‘ 6 ate
by which the return of election expenses ought to cave sen
lodged or of such longer period as the Blection Comin
may im any particular case allow.

हि *
= * + * * *

i i i r j 1 that section may,
a disqualification under clause Go ‘
in ae se of any of the candidates for the first elections under
this Act, be removed by the Election Commission for reasons
| 2 wee
to be recorded by. it in writing.

* « * रू के *

Cyaprer TV
Qualification and disqualification for membership of electoral
colleges

10. Qualification for membership of electoral colleges ier coriain
f Cc Ji not be qualified te be chosen
Part C States.—-A person sha जद eee ete an
f an electoral college for any schedules A te,
eee an elector for any Council of States constituency iu that

State.

* * * * * * *
PART TIE
Notrication or GENERAL ELECTIONS
Cuaprer T
Parliament

The Council of States

12. Notification for electi Hl (1) For the
i lectien to the Council. of States.—( or
* we कि हि the Council of States under the Constitution
ting S

yurpose of co:
i 1 i shall,—

in due time, the President shall, 7 a

“ (व) after the names of the elected members of the Legisla

tive Assemblies of Part A States and Part B States other than



ae
38

the State of Jammu and Kashmir first

1 » each scl ried.
i i f the electoral lege for each schedu:
i th si nent reconstitution of the ele: e
constituted under Le ubgequent Pecos

के कि i People
हि es under ‘V-A of the Representation of the
Constitution have been notified under see Part € State under Part TV-A ol

tion 67, call upon the

elected members of cach

2, by 8 notification ir ct, 195! of 1850), the President sh yy one or more notif-
5 he Pre: abl 9. 3
है » y vay Act, U (21 3, ६1

¢ वि up meil of. States 2।
the Gazette of India, to el eations in the Gazette of India call upon all Couneil of Sia

fect members in accordance with the

t mt in accordance with the pro
under begs we, het and of the rules and ond tituencies concerned io elect members in ac

है 4 der be-
isions of this a ई the rules and orders made thereun
under before such date ss may be appointed in this behalf by visions of this Act and 0

pol 2 is behalf by ithe
8 06७ a ay be appointed in this behal:
the Election Commission and specified in s fore such date or dates as may हाई

ificati : हैं ६ notifivations:
Neh notification, and Election Commission and specified in the notification or notifications

A वि Council of
Provided that every such notification calling upon the Council o

हा al iss far as
TV-A of the Representation of the People Act, 1950 (ALOE of States constituencies in any Part C State shall be issued, as far

on 67, by another notification

van हि liae
may be, at the same time when a notification calling upon the Parlia

oral college for each Part (१

mebers
mentary constituencies in such State to elect a member or me

State or group of such States concerned to elect a meraber or
members in accordance with the provisions of this Act and of

for the purpose of constituting the House of the People in due time

or on the expiration of the duration of that House or on its dissolu- :

the rules and orders made thereunder before such ते; tion, as the case may be, is issued.

ale as may
be appointed in this behalf by the Election

Commission and

specified in such notification.

The House of the People
(2) For the purpose of filling the seats 0

£ members retiring on
ffice in every second
stitution of the Council of States, the President

the expiration of their respective terms of oi
year after the co:
shall,—

i elections io the House of the People—()) A general
election chall be held for the purpose of constituting the House of
the People under the Constitution in due time.

(०) by a notification in the Gazette of India, ‘call upon the
elected members of the Legislative Assembly of each of the
States referred to in sub-section (7) concerned to elect mem-
bers in accordance with the provisions of this Act and of the

(2) A general election shall also be held on the expiration of pee
duration of the House of the People or on its dissolution in order tha
a new House of the People may be constituted.

rules and orders made thereunder before such date as may be

y ection Commission and speci- 15, Notification fer ciection te the House o! e People—For
for elect! et ff the

rpose of constituting $] ouse of the People under the Cons-
purp he Hous
the pu ig

titution in due time or on the expiration of the duration of the

f i i i the President shall, by one
Oe ether notion fall upon the members of the House of the People or on its dissolution, the Pr न

electoral college for each of the Part C States and group of such

or more notifications published in the Gazette of India on such date
States concerned to elect a member or members in accordance

or dates as may be recommended by the Election Commission call

with the provisions of this Act and of the rules and orders made
thereunder before such date as may be appointed in this behalf
by the Election Commission and specified in such notification:

upon all the Parliamentary constituencies to elect members पा accor
isi i dof the rules and orde
ith the provisions of ‘this Act an i r

oe thereundst before such date or dates as:may. be appointed in

this behalf by the Election Commission and specified in the notifica-

Provided that the notifications under this sub-section shall tion or notifications:

be issued on such dates, not being more than four months prior
to the date on which the term of office of the retiring members

Provided that for the purpose of constituting the House of the
P ile on the expiration of its duration, no such notification sha.
be isgued at any time earlier than four months prior to the date on
which the duration. of the House of the People would expire in the
ordinary course of events.

would expire under-section 154, as may be recommended in this
behalf by the Eléction Commission.

13. Notification for ‘constitution of electoral colleges for certain
Part © States—For the purpose of the first constitution and of each



aS

Cnarras Lf

State Legislatures

fhe State Legislative Assemblies

ceo te elections te Legislative Assemblies—(1) A general
पा 8 हर held for the purpose of constituting the Legistativ.
ly of each State under the Constitution in due time, हु

लीक generat election shall also be held on the expiration of the
21 of an Assembly or on its dissolution i हा
Assembly may he couteune dissolution in order that a new

47, Notification fox election ६
i ४ on ta State Legislative Assembli है
the Purpose of constituting the Legislative Assembly of 2 State
pads e Constitution in due time or on the expiration of the du ‘
fos ne a Bssembly or on its dissolution, the Governor or Raj _
mak as oe case may be, of the State shall, by one or more motif.
patios pul iehed e the Official Gazette on such date or dates as may
commended by the Election’ Commissi
‘ t ‘jon, call
Assembly consti iencies to elect members in accordance vith the oe
‘ions of this Act and of the rules and हि be
ders made th:
fore such date or dates a: in alt by the
8 or 8 may be appointed in this behalf b
Election Commission and specified in the notification or वा आप मिल

Provi
Assembly ot inet o the purpose of constituting the Legislative
8 ate on the expiration of its duration, no s i

3 p uch i>

que Sal Be issued at any time earlier than four months Pier ta
2 which the duration of the Legislative A:

State would expire in the ordinary course of events. Sembiy of the

The State Legislative Councils

ro 18. Notification for election to State Legislative Councils —(1)

ror naire constituting the Legislative Council of a Siate
onstitution in due time, th a j

the State, as the case may be, shall Governor or Rajprarsuikh of

(a) by 8 notification in the Offici
i not , cial Gazette call upon ev.
focal Suthorities constituency, every graduates’ constituency
ery teachers’ constituency to elect in ii e
ev ‘ accordance with th
provisions of this Act and of the ri :
1 - e rules and orders made there-
wetted hae or members before such date as may be ap
t ed in this behalf by the Eiection C. issi fi 1
in such notification, and (पाया and specified

the expiration of their respec
year after the constitution of
Governor or Rajpramukh, as the case may

issued ob such dates, not being mo
date on which the term of office of the retiring members would ex-

pire under section 156, as may
Election Commission.

189) after the names of the members of the Legislative As
f the State first constituied under the Constitution
eetion 67, eall upon. such members,
icial Gazette, io elect members
of this Act and of the rules and
date as may be appointed
4 specified in such

sembly 1
have been notified under 8

by another notification in the O.
in accordance with the provisions
orders made thereunder before such
10 this behalf by the Election Commission an:
notification.

e of filling the seats of members retiring 08.
tive terms of office In every second
the Legislative Council of a State, the
be, shali—

(2) For the purpos

(8) by a notification in the Official Gazette call upon every

Jocal authorities’ constituency, every graduates’ constituency
and every teachers’ constituency concerned to elect in accor-
dance with the provisions of this Act and of the rules and orders
tiade thereunder a member or members pefore such date as may
be appointed in this behalf by the Election Commission and .
specified in such notification, and

(b). by another notification in the Official Gazette call upon
the members of the Legislative Assembly of the State to elect
members in accordance with the provisions of this Act and of
the tules and orders made thereunder before such date as may
be appointed in this behalf by the Election Commission and spe-
cified: in such: notification:
Provided that the notifications under this sub-section shall be
ve than four months prior to the

be recommended in this behalf by the

PART IV

ADMINISTRATIVE MaCHINERY FOR THE ConpUCT OF ELECTION

19: Definition.—In this Part and in Part V, untess the context
otherwise requires, “constituency” means a Council of States con-
stituency or a Parliamentary constituency or an Assembly constitu-
éney or a Council constituency.

20, Returning Officer for each eonstijuency—For each constitu-
ency there shall be a Returning Officer who shall be such officer
of Government as the Election Commission may, in consultation with
the:Government of the State in which the constituency is situated,

designate or nominate:



42

c Provided that nothing in this section shall prevent the Election
imumission from designating or nominating the same person to be
the Returning Officer for more than one constituency,

21, Returning Officers at other elections —The Returning Officer
for an election (other than a primary election} fo All a seat or seat:
ta the Council of States or for an election hy the members of the
Legislative Assembly of a State to fill a seat "
tive Council of the State shall be such officer
Election Commission may, in consultation wit
that State, designate or nominate.

of Government as the
70 the Government 0६

may pane Returning Olficers.—(1) The Election Commission
int one or more persons to assist any Returni i
the performance of his functions: 2 SIEEINE Offer का

Provided
mene ‘ided that every such person shall be an officer of Govern

@) Every Assistant Returnin, j
, 8 Officer shall, subject tot]
» of Returning Officer, be competes any of tenet

‘ nt to perform all -
tions of the Returning Officer: ° BP OF 209 of the fae

Provided that no Assistant Returnin,
5 ay
of the functions of the Returni whieh relate Goro 4

‘tance of a nomination paper

* a * * * * *

fn 28, Appointment of presiding officers for polling stations. —(7)
he Returning Officer shall appoint a presiding officer for each

polling station and such polling officer or officers as he thinks necas-

sary, but he shall not appoint any person who has been employed

by or on behalf of, or has been otherwise ii
work i i
or about the election: ehing Tons 9 candidate in

eo ek * * x ow Cn के *
29. Special Provisions iz: the case of certain electi

5 पु lections—(1) The

Returning Officer for an election (other than a primary sleston) to

fill a seat or seats in the Council of States or for an election by the

43

mentbers of the Legislative Assembly of a State io fll 2 seat or seats
in the Legislative Council of the State shall, with the previous appre-
val of the Election Commission, fix the place at which the poll will
be taken for such election and shall noiify the place 80 Sxed in such
manner as the Election Commission may direct.

हू कर * x * हि *

50. Appointment of dates for nominations, ele—As soon as the
notification calling upon a constituency to elect a member ce mem-
bers is issued under this Act, the appropriate authority in the case
where such notification has been issued under the provisions of Part
If or of this Part, and the Election Commission in the case where
such notification has been issued under the provisions of Part IX,
shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint—

(a) the last date for making nominations, which shall be a
date not later than the fourteenth day after the date of publica-
tion of the first mentioned notification not earlier than the eighth
day after the date of publication of the notification under this
section; पु है

(8) the date for the scrutiny of nominations, which shall be
a date not later than the seventh day after the last date for mak-
ing nominations;

(2) the last date for the withdrawal of candidatures, which
shall be the third day after the date for the scrutiny of nomina-
tions; and

{d) the date or dates on which a poll shall, if necessary, be
taken which or the first of which shall be a date not earlier than
the thirtieth day after the last date for the withdrawal of candi-
datures.

& * * * * * *

32. Nomination of Candidates for election—Any person may be
nominated as a candidate for election to All a seat in any constituency
if he is qualified to be chosen to fill that seat under the provisions of
the Constitution and this Act.

33. Presentation of nomination paper and requirements for a valid
nomination. —(1) On or before the date appointed under clause (a) of
section 30 each candidate shall, either in person or by his proposer or
seconder, between the hours of eleven o'clock in the forenoon and
three o'clock in the afternoon deliver to the Returning Officer at the
place specified in this behalf in the notice issued under section 31 a



pomapnation paper completed in the prescribed form and subscribed
y the candidate himself as assenting te the nomination and by twa
persons referred te in sub-section (2) as proposer and seconder.

» 2) Any person whose name is registered in the electroal roll of
a ie constituency and who is not subject to any disqualification men-
ioned in section 16 of the Representation of the People Act, 1950
CELUI of 1950), may subscribe as proposer or seconder as “man

nomination papers as there are vacancies to be Alled but no more: y

हे Provided that if the name of a person is entered more than once
in the electoral roll of a constituency or is included in the electoral
roll of two or more constituencies of the same class, such person
shall not be entitled to subscribe as proposer or seconder nore than.
one nomination paper for each vacancy to be filled in that -consti-

to ५ .
ही reney, or in not more than one of such constituencies of the same

(3) Every nomination paper delivered under sub-secti

be accompanied by a declaration in writing abotnbed bp te endl
date that the candidate has appointed as his election agent for th

election cither himself or another person who is not dis castified
under this Act for the appointment and who shall "be tamed in the
declaration, and by stich other declarations, if any, as may be prescri-
bed, and ne candidate shall be deemed to he duly nominated unless
se 1 dee ‘nation pon or all such declarations -are, delivered -along with

Provided that in a constituency where any seat i

Scheduled Castes or for the Scheduled ‘Tribes, ot canaldte shall be
deemed to be qualified to be chosen to fill that seat unless his nomi.
nation paper is accompanied by a declaration varified in the pres-
cribed manner that the candidate is a member of the Schedul dd
Castes or of the Scheduled Tribes for which the seat has been so हा

served and the declaration: specifies the particular caste or tribe of
which the candidate is a member and also the area in relation to

which such: caste or ‘tribe is one of th C
Tribes, 88 the cscs may be: (९ of the Scheduled Castes or Scheduled

दि Provided further that in a constituency where any seat is reserved

or an autonomous district of Assam other than the constituenc
comprising the cantonment and municipality of Shillong, no candidate
shall be deemed to'be: duly nominated for the seat so reserved unle:
the nomination paper‘is accompanied by a declaration verified i the
Eresenbed manner thatthe candidate is a- member of any of the Sche.

tiled Tribes of: that-district, and the declaration specifies particular
tribe of which the ee | is a ‘member: rm

45

Provided also that where any person having held any office vefer-
red-to in clause ({) of section 7 has been dismissed and the period of
five years from the date of such dismissal has not expived or the dis~
qualification, if any, under that clause has not been remeved by the
Election Commission under clause (g) of sub-section (1) of section
8, such person shall not he deemed to be duly nominated as a eandi-
date unless his nomination paper is accompanied by & certificate is-
stied in the preserihed manner by the Election Commission to the
effect that he has not been dismissed for corruption or disloyalty ta
the State.

(4) Any nomination paper which is not received before three o°
clock in the afternoon on the last date appointed uncer clause (a) of
séction 30 shall be rejected.

(5) On the presentation of a nomination paper, the Returning
Officer shall satisfy himself that the names and electoral roll nuna-
bets of the candidate and his proposer and seconder as entered in the
nomination paper are the same as those entered in the electoral rolls:

Provided that the Returning Officer may—

(व) permif.any clerical error in the nomination paper in re-
gard to the said: names or numbers to be corrected in order to
bring them into conformity with the corresponding entries in
the electoral rolls; and

(9) where necessary, direct that any clerical or. printing
error in the said entries shall be overlooked.

(6) If at the time of the presentation of the nomination paper the
Returning Officer finds that the name of the candidate is not register-
éd in the electoral roll of the constituency for which he is the Return-
ing Officer, he shall for the purposes of sub-section (5) require the
person presenting the nomination paper to produce either a copy of
the electoral roll in which the name of the candidate is included or a
certified copy of the relevant éntries in such roll.

(7) Nothing in this. section shall prevent any candidate from being
nominated by more than one nomination paper for -election ir the

same constituency.

34. Deposits —(1) A candidate shall not be deemed to be duly no-
minated unless he deposits or causes to be deposited in the case of an
election to Parliament (other than a primary election) a sum of five
hundred rupees, in the case of.an election to the Legislature of a
State-a sum-of two -hundred.and fifty rupees, and in the case of a pri-
mary election a sum of fifty rupees: .

Provided that—

(a) where the candidate is a member of any of the Schedul-
ed Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, the amount tobe deposited



46
by him or on his behalf shall be two hundred and fifty rupees in
the ease of an election to Parliament (other than a primary

election), and one hundred and twenty-five rupees in case of an
election to the Legislature of a State;

(b) where a candidate has been nominated by more than
one nomination paper for election in the same constituency, not
more than one deposit shall be required of him under this sub-
section.

a 8 * क्र + es * * ae

35. Notico of nominations and the time and place for their
scrutiny —The Returning Officer shall, on receiving the nomination
paper under sub-section (1) of scetion 33, inform the person or per-
sons delivering the same of the date, time and place fixed for the
serutiny of nominations and shall enter on the nomination paper its
serial number, and shall sign thereon a certificate stating the date
on which and the hour at which the nomination paper has been de-
livered to him; and shall, as soon as may be thereafter, cause 0 be
affixed in some conspicuous place in his office a notice of the nomina-
tion containing descriptions similar to those contained in the nomi-
nation paper, both of the candidate and of the persons who have
subscribed the nomination paper as proposer and seconder,

36. Serutiny of nominations.—(1) On the date fixed for the scru-
tiny of nominations under section 30, the candidates, their election
agents, one proposer and one seconder of . each candidate, and one
other person duly authorised in writing by each candidate, but no
other person, may attend at such time and place as the Returning
Officer may appoint; and the Returning Officer shall give them: all
reasonable facilities for examining the nomination papers of all can-
didates which have been delivered within the time and in the man-
ner laid down in section 33.

(2) The Returning Officer shall then examine the nomination
papers and shall decide all objections which may be made to any no-
mination, and may either on such objection or on his own motion,
after such summary inquiry, if any, as he thinks necessary, refuse
any nomination on any of the following grounds: —

(a) that the candidate is not qualified to be chosen to fill the
seat under the Constitution or this Act; or

(b) that. the candidate is disqualified for being chosen to fill
the seat under the Constitution or this Act; or

(2) that.a proposer or seconder is disqualified from subscrib-
ing a nomination paper under sub-section (2) of section 33; or

47

{a} that there has been any failuve to comply with any of
the provisions of section 23 or section 34; or

(2) thet the signature of the candidate or any proposer or
seconder is not genuine or has been obtained hy fraud.

(3) Nothing contained in clause (2), clause (व) or clause (e} of
sub-section (2) shall be deemed to authorise the refusal of the nomi-
nation of any candidate on the ground of any irregularity in respect
of a nomination paper, if the candidate has been duly nominated by
means of another nomination paper in respect of which no irregula-
rity has keen committed.

कं % ® + * oF % रह के कक के के

(7) For the purposes of this section-~

{a) the production of any certified copy of an entry made in
the electoral roll of any constituency shall be conclusive evidence
of the right of any elector named in that entry to stand for elec-
tion or to subscribe a nomination paper, as the case may be, un-
less it. is proved that the candidate is disqualified under the Con-
stitution or this Act, or that the proposer or seconder, as the
case may be, is disqualified under sub-section (2) of section 33;

(b) where a person has subscribed, whether as proposer or
seconder, a larger number of nomination papers than there are
vacancies to be filled, those of the papers so subscribed which
have been first received, up to the number of vacancies to be
filled, shall be deemed to be valid.

37. Withdrawal of candidature.—(i) Any candidate may withdraw
his candidature by a notice in writing which shall contain such parti-
culars as may be prescribed and shall be subscribed by him and
delivered before three o’clock in the afternoon on the day fixed under
clause (c) of section 30 to the Returning Officer either by such can~
didate in person or by his proposer, seconder or election agent who
has been authorised in this behalf in writing by such candidate:

Provided that if that day is a.public holiday within the meaning
of section 25 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 (KXX of 1881)
or has been notified by the State Government as a day to be observ
ed as a holiday in Government offices in the State, the notice of
withdrawal of candidature shall be considered as having been deli-
vered in due time if it is delivered before three o’clock in the after-
noon on the next sueceeding day which is neither such a public holi-
day nora day so notified.

@ क्र as z *



46

38. Publication of nominations — ‘Th i hal
ह ] पे w~ The Returning Officer shail.
jumediately after the expiry of the period within which candida
pane ey Be withdraun under sub-section (1) df section 37, pre-
9 publish a list of valt tis in such मै
be news alid nominations in such manner ag may

39. Nomination of candidates at other elections.—(1) Any pers
any be nominated as a candidate for election te Gl a seat a the
the Lense ve tee By election! by the elected members of

a mbly of a State or by
electoral college for a Part C State or group oe such Stake ona oat
in the Legislative Council of a State to be filled by election pb: “he
members of the Legislative Assembly of that State, if he is wielified
to be chosen to fill that seat under the Constitution and this bot

(2) As soon as the notification ealling upon the elected membei
or tHe members of the Legislative Assembly of a State or the m m
bers of the electoral college for a Part C State or group of ouch
States to elect a member or members is issued under this Act, ‘th
कि authority in the case where such notification has heen
under section 12 or section 18 or u: isi
of this Part and the Election Commission in the cae whe go
notification has been issued under section 147 or section 151. shall
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint for such election हु

(a) the last: date for makin, inati i
§ Nominations which shall bi
date not later than the fourteenth day after the date of publica,
fen पं the first mentioned notification, nor earlier than the
ay after the date of publication of th ificati
this subcoctions @ notification under

(0) the date for the serutiny of nominati i
ations which shall 8६
a date not later than the seventh day after th:
ing nominations 'Y after the last date for mak-

(c) the Jast date for the withdrawal of candidatures which

shall be the third d: i"
nations; lay after the date for the scrutiny of nomi-

(@ the date on which a poll shall, if a,
हे ecessary, be ६;
whieh-shall be a date not earlier than ‘the seventh tay after the
last date for the withdrawal of candidatures.

(3). On the issue,of.a notification under sub-secti }
turning Officer for the election shall give public noties of tho intent.
ed. election in such form and manner as may be preseribed inviti हि
nominations of candidates for such election and specifying the lace
at which the nomination papers are to be delivered. pee

id) The provisions of sub-sections (2), (3), (4), (8) and (7) of
section 33 and sections 34 te 38 shail apply im relation te nominations
of candidates, deposits to ke made on such nominations and with-
drawal of candidatures at any such election as they apply in relation
to nominations of candidates, deposits to be made on such nomina-
tions and withdrawal of candidatures at elections in any constituency
other than Council of States constituency:

Provided that any person who is entitled te vole at any such
election as is referred to in sub-section (7) shall be qualified to sub-
scribe as proposer or seconder as many nomination papers at that
election as there are vacancies to be filled but no more:

Provided further that at the time of the presentation of the nomi+
mation paper, the Returning Officer may require the person present-
ing the same to produce either a eopy of the electoral rol in which
the name of the candidate is included or a certified copy of the rele-
vant entries in such roll:

Provided also that any reference in the said provisions—

(a) to the electoral roll of the constituency shall, unless the
context otherwise requires, be construed, in the case of an elec-
tion by the elected members or by the members of the Legisla-
tive Assembly of a State, as references to the list of elected
members or to the list of members, as the case may be,.of that
Assembly maintained under sub-section (1) of section 152 and in
the case of an election by the members of the electoral college
for a Part C State or group of such States as references to the list
of members of such electoral college maintained under sub-sec-
tion (2) of that section;

(0) to section 80, to section 31 and to sub-section (2) of sec-

tion 33 shall be construed as references to sub-section (2) of this
section, to sub-section (3) of this section and to the first proviso

to this sub-section respectively.
Cxaarter IT
Candidates and their agents

46. Appointment of election agemts.—(1) Every person nominated
as a candidate at an election shall before the delivery of his nomina-
tion paper under sub-section (1) of section 33 or under that sub-sec-
tion read with sub-section (4) of section 39, as the case may be, ap-
point in writing either himself or some one other person to be his

election agent.



36

(2) When a candidate appoints some person other than himself
to be his election agent he shall obtain in writing the acceptance
by such person of the office of such election agent.

a = x *

42. Revocation of the appointment, ox death, of an election
agent—(1) Any revocation of the appointment of an election agent,
whether he be the candidate himself or not, shall be signed by the
candidate, and shall operate from the date on which it is lodged
with the Returning Officer.

(2) In the event of such a revocation or of the death of an election
agent, whether that event occurs before or during the election, or
after the election but before a return of the candidate's election
expenses has been lodged in accordance with the provisions of sec-
tion 76, the candidate shall appoint forthwith either himself or seme
other person to be his election agent in the manner provided in
section 40, and shall give notice in writing of the appointment to
the Returning Officer.

43, Effect of default in appointment of election agent under sec»
tion 42.—(1) If the appointment of an election agent is revoked
without a new appointment being made, the candidate himself, shall
be deemed to have been appointed or reappointed, as the case may
be, his election agent.

(2) If the election agent (not being the candidate himself) dies
and a new appointment is not made on the day of the. death or on
the following day, the candidate shall be deemed to have appointed
himself his election agent as from the time of the death.

44, Duty of the election agent to keep accounts—Hvery election
agent shall, for each election for which he is appointed election
agent, keep separate and regular books of account, and shall enter
therein stich particulars of expenditure in connection with the elec-

tion as may be prescribed.

43, Other functions of the election agents——Every election agent
shall perform. such other functions in connection with each election
for which he is appointed election agent as are required to be
performed by or under this Act by such agent.

46. Appointment of polling agents.—A candidate who has © been
duly nominated under this Act and who has not withdrawn his
candidature in: the manner and within the time specified in sub-
section (1) of section 37, or in that sub-section read with sub-section
(4) of section 39, as the case may be, or his election agent may, at

5st

least three days before the commencement of the poll, appoint
in the preseribed manner such number of agents and relief agents as
may be prescribed to act as polling agents of such candidate at each

polling station provided under section 25 or at the ed under

sub-section (1) of section 29 for the poll, and when any such ap-
pointment is made, notice of the appointment shall be given im the
prescribed manner to such officer as may be prescribed.

41, Appeintment of counting agents-—-Any such candidate as is
mentioned in section 46 or his election agent may, before the com-
mencement of the counting of votes, appoint in the prescribed man-
nér ome agent and no more te be present as his counting agent at the
counting of votes, and when any such appointment is made, notice
of the appointment shall be given in the prescrihed marmer io the
Returning Officer.

a & ® * &

Cuapter UT

General procedure at elections

52. Death of candidate before poll—tIfi a candidate who has been
duly nominated under this Act dies after the date fixed for the
scrutiny of nominations and a report of his death is received by the
Returning Officer before the commencement of the poll, the Return-
ing Officer shall, upon being satisfied of the fact of the death of
the candidate, countermand the poll and report the fact to the
Election Commission and also to the appropriate authority and ali
proceedings with reference to the election shall be commenced anew
in all respects as if for a new election:

Provided that no further nomination shall be necessary in the
case of a candidate whose nomination was valid at the time of the
eountermanding of the poll: +

Provided further that no person who has under sub-section (1)
of section 37 given a notice of withdrawal of his candidature before
the countermanding of the poll shall be ineligible for being no-
minated as a candidate for the election after such countermanding.

58. Procedure in contested and uncontested elections.—(1) If the
number of candidates who were duly nominated and who have not
withdrawn their candidatures, in the marmer and within the time
specified in sub-section (1) of section 37, or in that sub-section read
with sub-section (4) of section 39, as the case may be, exceeds the
number of seats to be filled, the Returning Officer shall forthwith
publish in such form and manner as may be prescribed a list con-



52

taining the names in alphaketical order and addresses of candidates
as given in the nomination papers, together with such other parti-
culars as may be preseribed, and a poll shall be taken.

पु रू कं ® हि

(3) If the number of such candidates is less than the number of
seats to be filled, the Returning Officer shall forthwith declare all
such candidates to be elected and the appropriate authority shall,
by notification in the Oticial Gazette, cail upon the constituency
or the elected members or the members of the State Legislative
Assembly or the members of the electoral college concerned as the
ease may be, to elect a person or persons to fill the remaining seat
or seats before such date as may be appointed in this behalf by the
Election Commission and specified in the notification:

Provided that where the constituency or the elected members
er the members of the State Legislative Assembly or the members
of the electoral college having already been called upon under this
sub-section, has or have failed to elect a person or the requisite
number of persons, as the case may be, to fill the vacancy or vacan-
eles, the appropriate authority shall not be bound to call again upon
the constituency, or such members to elect a person or persons
until such date as the Election Commission may specify in this
behalf. -

54. Special procedure at elections in constituencies where seats
are reserved for Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes—(1) The
provisions of this section shall apply in relation to any election in
a constituency where the seats to be filled include one or more seats
reserved for the Scheduled Castes or for the Scheduled Tribes
(hereinafter referred to as “reserved seats”),

(2) Uf the number of candidates qualified to be chosen to fill the
reserved seats is equal to the number of such seats, all those candi-
dates shall be forthwith declared to be elected to fill the reserved
seats, and the procedure laid down in section 53 shall be followed
for filling the remaining seat or seats.

(3) If the number of candidates qualified to be chosen to fill the
reserved seats exceeds the number of such seats, but the total num-
ber of candidates is equal to the total number of seats to be filled,
the Returning Officer shall first select by lot, to be drawn by him in
such manner as he may determine, the candidates to be declared
elected to the reserved'seats out of the candidates qualified to be
chosen to fill-those seats and then declare the candidates so selected
to be duly electéd:to:-fill, the reserved seatg and thereafter declare
the remaining candidates to be duly elected to fill the remaining
seats. Se

SS

(4) If the number of candidates qualified to be chosen to fll tae
reserved seats exceeds the number of such seals, and the total num
ber of candidates also exceeds the total number of ig ta be filled,
the procedure laid down in sub-section (4) of se }
followed: and after the poll has been taken, the Returning Officer
shall first declare those who, being qualified to be chosen to All the
reserved seats, have secured the largest number of voles, io be
duly elected to fill the reserved seats, and then declare such of the
remaining candidates as have secured the larges: number of votes
to be duly elected to fill the remaining seats.

Tilustration—At an election in a constituency to fill four seats of
which two are reserved there are six candidates A, B,C, D, के and
¥, and they secure votes in descending order, A securing the largest
number. B, C and D are qualified to be chosen to fill the reserved
seats, while A, के and F are not so qualified. The Returning Officer
will first declare B and C duly elected to fill the two reserved seats,
and then declare A and D (not A and &) to fill the rermaining two seats.

(5) If the number of candidates qualified to be chosen to All the
reserved seats is less than the number of such seats—

(०) all those candidates shall be forthwith declared to be
duly elected to fill reserved seats;

(b) the procedure laid down in section 53 shall be followed
for filling the seats other than the reserved seats; and

(c) the appropriate authority shall, by notification in the
Oficial Gazette, call upon the canstituency to elect a person or
persons to fill the remaining yeserved seat or seats before such
date as may be appointed in this behalf by the Election Com-
mission and specified in the notification:

Provided that where a constituency having been already so called
upon has failed to elect a person or the requisite number of persons
to fill the reserved seat or seats, the appropriate authority shall not
ye bound to call again upon the constituency to elect a person or
persons to fill the vacancy or vacancies until such date as the Elec-
tion Commission may specify in this behalf.

(6) In this section, references to candidates shall be consirved
as references to candidates who were duly nominated and who
have not withdrawn théir candidatures in the manner and within
the time specified in sub-section (1) of section 37.

55. Eligibility of members of Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes
to hold seats not reserved for those castes or tribes— For the
avcidance of doubt it is hereby declared that a member of the

m 53 shall be |

:



Scheduled Castes or of the Scheduled Tribes shall not be disquali-
fied to hold a seat not reserved for members of those castes or tribes,

if he is otherwise qualified to hold such seats under the Constitution
and this Act,

& पु *

® रु

58. Fresh poll in the case of destruction, etc., of ballet ‘boxes;—
(1) If at any election any ballot box or boxes is or are unlawfully
taken out of the custody of the Returning Officer or of any presi-
ding officer, or is or are in any way tampered with, or is or are
either accidentally or intentionally destroyed or lost, the election to
which such ballot box or boxes relate shall be void, but onky in
respect of the polling at the polling station or stations provided
under section 25 or the place fixed under sub-section (1) of section

29 for the poll, as the case may be, at which such ballot box or boxes
was or were used and no further:

Provided that where a polling station has more than one polling
booth and any such ballot box as aforesaid was used at one of such
polling booths, the election to which such ballot box relates shall
be void only in respect of the polling at the polling booth at which
such box was used and no further, .

(2) Whenever the polling at any polling station or stations or at
the place fixed for the poll or at any polling booth shall become void
under sub-section (1), the Returning Officer shall, as soon as practicable
after the act or event causing such voidance has come to his knowledge,
report the matter to the appropriate authority and to the Election
Commission and shall, with the previous approval of the Election
Commission, appoint a day for the, taking of a fresh poll in. such or
every such polling station or in such place fixed for the poll or in
such polling booth as the case may be, and fix the hours during which
the poll will be taken, and shall not count the votes cast at such
election until such fresh poll shall have been completed.

(3) In every such case as aforesaid the Returning Officer shail
take a fresh poll in such or every such polling station or in such place
fixed for the poll or in such polling booth, as aforesaid on the day so
appointed by him, and shall notify the day so appointed and the
hours of polling so fixed by him in such manner as the Election Com-
mission may direct, and the provisions of this Act and of any rules
or orders made thereunder shall apply to every such fresh poll as
they apply to the original poll.

* * *: ” * * *

68. Vacation of seats when elected 0" both Houses of Parlia-

ment—(1) Any petson who is chosen a member of both the House
of the People and'the Council of States and who has not taken his

$5

seat in either House may, by notice in writing signed by him and
delivered to the Secretary to the Election Commission within ten
days from the date of publication in the Gazette of India of the
declarations that he has been so chos 7, if such publications
have been made on different dates, within ten days from the later
of such dates, intimate in which of the Houses he wishes to serve,
and thereupon, his seat in the House in which he does not wish to
serve shall become vacant,

* * & रू न * क्र

69, Vacation of seats by persons already members of one House
on election to other House of Parliament—(i} If a person who is
already a member of the House of the People and has taken his
seat In such House is chosen a member of the Council of States,
his seat in the House of the People shall, on the publication in the
Gazette of India of the declaration that he has been 80 chosen, be-
come vacant,

(2) If a person who is already a member of the Council of
States and has taken his seat in such Council is chosen a member
of the House of the People, his seat in the Council of States shall,
on the publication in the Gazette of India of the declaration that
le has been so chosen, become vacant.

70, Election to more than one seat in either House of Parliament
or in the House or either House of the Legislature of a State.
—If a person is elected to more than one seat in either House of
Parliament or in the House or either House of the Legislature of
a State, then, unless within the prescribed time he resigns all but
one of the seats, all the seats shall become vacant.

Cuaprer VII
Publication of election results and nominations,

71. Publication of results of elections to the Council of States and
of names of persons nominated by the President,—(1) After
‘the elections. held in pursuance of the notifications issued under
sub-section (1) of section 12, there shall be notified by the appro-
priate authority in the Official Gazette the names of the members
elected by the elected members of the “Legislative Assemblies of
the States and by the members of the electoral colleges for ‘the
various Part C States and group of such States at the said elections
together with the names of the persons nominated by tee es
dent to the Council under sub-clause (4) of clause (1) of article
or under any other provisions.



86

(2) Affer the elections held in any year in pursuance of the
notification issued under sub-section (2) of section 12, there shall
be notified by the appropriate authority in the Official Clazette the
names of the members elected by the elected members of the
Legislative Assemblies of the States and by the members of the
electoral colleges for the various Part C States and group of such
States at the said elections tegether with the names of any persons
nominated by the President to the Council under sub-clause {a)
of the clause (1) of article 80 or under any other provisions.

* & ® ® ® ® नि

72. Publication of resulis of primary elections for the constitu.
tion or reconstitution of electoral colleges for certain Part C States,
—Afier the elections held in pursuance of the notification or noti-
fications issued under section 13 for the first constitution or any
subsequent reconstitution of the electoral college for a scheduled
Part C State, there shall be notified by the appropriate authority
in the Official Gazette, as soon as may be after the date or the last
of the dates fixed for the completion of the said elections, the names
of the members elected for the various Council of States consti-
tuencies at the said elections and such notification shall be in addi-
tion to the publication of the declarations under section 67. ~

73. Publication of results of general elections te the House of
the People and of names of persons nominated by the President.—
After the elections held in pursuance of the notification or notifi-
cations issued under section 15 for the constitution of the House
of the People in due time or on the expiration of its duration or
on its dissolution, there shall be notified by the appropriate autho-
rity in the Official Gazette, as soon as may be after the date or the
last. of the dates fixed for the completion of the said elections, the
names of the members elected for the various Parliamentary consti-
tuencies at the said elections together with the names of persons, if
any, nominated by the President to that House under article 331
or under any other provisions, and such notification shall be in
addition to the publication of the declaration under section 67.

74, Publication of results ef general elections te the State Legis-
lative Assemblies and of names of persons nominated to such As-
semblies- After the elections held in pursuance of the notifica-
tion or notifications issued under section 17 for the constitution of
the Legislative Assembly of a State in due time or on the expira-
tion of its duration or on its dissolution, there shall be notified by
appropriate authority in the Official Gazette, as soon as may be
after the date or the last.of the dates fixed for the completion of
the said elections, the names of the members elected for the various
Assembly constituencies at the said elections together with the

S?

names of persons, if any, nominated by the Governor or Rajpra-

mukh, as the case y be, of the State under article 232 or under
any other provisions and such notification shall be in addition te
the publication of the declarations under section 67.

75, Publication of resulis of elections to the State Legislative
Councils and of names of persons neminated to such Councils.
(2) After the elections held in pursuance of the notifications issued
under sub-section (2) of section 18, there shall be notified by the
appropriate authority in the Official Gazette the names of the
members elected for the various Council constituencies and by the
rnaembers of the Legislative Assembly of the State at the said elec-
tions together with the names of the persons nominated by the
Governor or Rajpramukh, as the case may be, of the State under
sub-clause (e) of clause (8) of article 171:

{2) After the elections held in any year in pursuance of the
notifications issued under sub-section (2) of section 18 there shall
be notified by the appropriate authority in the Official Gazette the
names of the members elected for the various Council constituen-
cies and by the members of the Legislative Assembly of the State
at the said elections together with the names of any persons nomi-
nated by the Governor or Rajpramukh, as the case may be, under
sub-clause (९) of clause (3) of article 171.

(3) The notification of names under sub-section (1) or sub-sec-
tion (2) shall be in addition to the publication of the declarations
under section 67 and shali be made as soon as may be after the
last of the dates fixed for the completion of the elections under
sub-section (1) or, as the case may be, sub-section (2) of section 18,
and after the publication of the notification containing the names of
persons nominated by the Governor or Rajpramukh, as the case may
be, under sub-clause (६) of clause (3) of article 171.

CuapTer VIE
Election expenses

"6. Return of election expenses—(1) Within the prescribed
time after every election there shall be lodged with the Returning
Officer in respect of each person who has been nominated as a
candidate, a return of the election expenses of that person signed
wy him and his election agent.

(2) Every such return shall be in such form and shall contain
such particulars as may be prescribed, and shall be accompanied
by declarations in the prescribed form by the candidate and, his.



58

election agent made on oath ov solemn affirmation hefore a magis-
FS a ee

(8) Notwithstanding anything in this section, .where owing to
absence from India a candidate is unable to sign the return of elec-
tion expenses and te make the required declaration, the return
shail be signed and lodged by the election agent only and shall be
accompanied by a declaration by the election agent only, and the
candidate shall, within fourteen days after his return to India,
cause to be lodged with the Returning Officer a declaration made
on oath or solemn affirmation before a magistrate in such form as
may be prescribed,

7. Maximum election expenses, ete—The maximum seales of
election expenses at elections and the numbers and descriptions
of persons who may be employed for payment in connection with
elections shall be such as may be prescribed,

78. Application of this Chapter to certain elections.—Except so
far as may be prescribed, this Chapter shall not apply to an election
(other than a primary election) to fill a seat or seats in the Coun-
cil of States or to an election by the members of the Legislative
Assembly of a State to fill a seat or seats in the Legislative Coun-
cil of the State.

* * * = %

हि BL. Presentation of petitions ——(1) An election petition calling
in. question any election may be presented on one or more of the
grounds. specified in sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 100 and sec-
tion 101 to the Election Commission by any candidate at such
election or any elector in such form and within such time but not
earlier than the date of publication of the name or names of the
returned candidate or candidates at such election under section 67,
as may be prescribed.

* % * ea *

82. Parties te the petition.A petitioner shall join as respondents
to. his petition ail the candidates who were duly nominated at the
election other than himself if he was so nominated.

83. Contents of petition—(1) An election petition shall contain
a concise statement of the material facts on which the petitioner
relies and shall be signed by the petitioner and verified in the
manner laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act V of
1908) for the verification of pleadings.

59

(2) The petition shall be accompanied by « list signed and veri-

fied in like manner setting forth full partiowlars of any corrupt or
iegal practice which the petitioner alleges, Including as {mil a
statement as possible as to the names of the parties alleged to have
committed such corrupt or Wlegal practice and the date and place of
the commission of each suek practice.

(8) The Tribunal may, upon such terms as to costs and otherwise
as i¢ may direct at any time, allow the particulars ineluded in the
said list to be amended or order such further and better particulars
in regard to any matter referred to therein to be furnished as may
in its opinion be necessary for the purpose of ensuring a fair and
effectual trial of the petition.

84, Relief that may be claimed by the petitionax.—

a ea * &

(c) that the election is wholly void.

8%. Petition when to be dismissed.—lIf the provisions of section 81,
section 85 or section 117 are not complied with, the Election Com-
mission shall dismiss the petition:

Provided that if a person making the petition satisfies the Elec-
tion Commission that sufficient cause existed for his failure te pre-
sent the petition within the period prescribed therefor, the Election
Commission may in its discretion condone such failure.

Cuaprer Til
Trial of election petitions
86, Appointment of Election Tribunal—(1) If the petition is not

dismissed under section 85, the Election Commission shall appoint
an Election Tribunal for the trial of the petition.

(2) For the purpose of constituting such Tribunals the Election
Commission shall obtain from the High Court of each State (other
than Jammu and Kashmir)—

{a) a list of persons who are or have been district judges in
the State and who are in the opinion of the High Court fit to
be appointed as members of the Election Tribunals, and

(0) 2 list of advocates of that High Court who have been
in practice for a period of not less than ten years and who are
in the opinion of the High Court fit to be appointed as such
members, and shall maintain the lists by making such altera-
tions therein as the High Court may from time to time direct.



Go

(8) Every Tribunal appointed under sub-section (3) shall cone
sist of—

{a} a Chairman who shal! be either 4 person who is or hag
been a Judge of a High Court, or a person selected by the Blec-
tion Commission from the list maintained by it under clause (a)
of sub-section (2); and

(5) two other members of whom one shall be selected by
the Election Commission from the list maintained under
clause (a} of sub-section (2) and the other shall be selected by
it from the list maintained under clause (b) of that sub.
section:

Provided that where the petition for the trial of which a Pdbu-
nal is to be appointed is in respect of an election to the Legislative
Assembly or the Legislative Council of a State, no person whe
belongs to the judicial service of another State shall be selected for
appointment as a member of the Tribunal except with the consent
of the Government of the other State:

Provided further that nothing in this sub-section shall be deemed
to prevent the appointment of a Chairman of the Tribunal’ before
that' of the other members.

(4) If during the course of the trial, any member of a Tribunal ig
for any reason ‘unable to perform his functions or has to relinquish
his membership, the Election Commission shall appoint another
member in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (3), and
upon his joining the Tribunal the trial shall be continued ag if he
had been on the Tribunal from the commencement of the trial:

Provided that the Tribunal may, if it thinks fit, recall and re-
examine any of the witnesses already examined.

(5) References to the Tribunal in this Part shall, as respects
any matter to be done before the commencement of the trial, be
deemed to be references to the Chairman of the Tribunal,

(6) In this section, the expressions “district judge” and “judicial
service” have the same meanings as in article 236.

* * * * *

89. Attendence of Law officers—(1) The Tribunal may, in the
case of an election petition in relation to a primary election or to an
election to fill a seat in either House of Parliament, require the
Attorney-General of India or the Advocate-General of the State in

छा

which the election. has taken place or some person acting under the
instructions of the Attorney-General or such Advocate-Ceneral, and
im the case of an election petition in relation to am election to जी] a
seat in the House or either House of the ; ;
quire the Advocate-General of the State in which the election S
taken place or some person acling under his instructions, to attend
at the trial.

(2) The Attorney-General or the Advyocate-Greneral or the
person acting under the Instructions of the Attorney-General or the
Advocate-General, as the case may be, shall, when so required,
attend at the triel and shall take such part therein as the Tribunal
may direct.

90. Procedure before the Tribunal.—(7) The Tribunal shall, as
soon as may be, cause a copy of the petition together with a copy of
the list of particulars referred to in sub-section (2) of section 88 to
be served on each respondent and to be published in the Official
Gazette, and at any time within fourteen days afier _ suck publica-
tion, any other candidate shall, subject to the provisions of section
119, be entitled to be joined as a respondent.

(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act and of any rules made
thereunder, every election petition shall be tried by the Tribunal,
as nearly as may be, in accordance with the procedure applicable
under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act V of 1908), to the trial
of suits:

Provided that it shall be sufficient for the Tribunal to make .a
memorandum of the substance of the evidence of any witness
examined by the Tribunal and it shall not be necessary for the Tri-
punal to take down the evidence of any witness in writing at length
unless the Tribunal, is, on the application of any party or otherwise,
satisfied that there is any special reason for so doing:

Provided further that the Tribunal shall have the discretion to
refuse for reasons to be recorded in writing to examine any witness
or witnesses if it is of the opinion that their evidence is not
material for the decision of the petition or that the party tendering
such witness or witnesses is doing so on frivolous grounds or with a
view to delay the proceedings.

* * * & * *

(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 85, the Tribu-
nal may dismiss an election petition which does not comp!y with
the provisions of section 81, section 88 or section 117.

* * ® * *



a ee Reerimination when seat elaimed.— (1)

पु ”

Provided that the returned candidate or such. other party as
aforesaid shall net be entitled ६0 give such evidence unless he has,
within fourteen days trom the date of the publication of the . elec.
tion petition under section 90, given notice to the Tribunal of his in-
tention to do so and has also given the security and the further secu-
rity referred to in section 117 and 118 respectively. .

(2) Every notice referred to in sub-section (2) shall be accom.
panied by the statement and list of particulars required by section
88 in the case of an election petition and shall he signed and verified
in like manner.

98. Decision of the Tribunal At the conclusion of the trial of an
election petition the Tribunal shall make an order—

x % ra कर के

(8) declaring the election to be wholly void.

99. Other orders to be made by the Tribumal—(i) At the time
of making an order under section 98 the Tribunal shall also make
an order—

(6) where any charge is made in the petition of any cor-
rupt or illegal practice having been committed at the election,
recording---

* हि & * *

(it) the names of all persons, if any, who have heen
proved at the trial to have been guilty of any corrupt or
illegal practice and the nature of that practice, together
with any such recommendations as the Tribunal may think
proper 16 make for the exemption of any persons from any
disqualifications which they may have incurred in this

-connection under sections 141 to 143; and
* - * ® of *

(2) Any orcer as to costs under clause (b) of sub-section (1)
may include a direction for the payment of costs to the law officer
attending the trial in pursuance of any requisition of the Tribunal
under section 89.

160. Grounds fer declaring election to be void.—(1) If the Tribu-
nal is of opinion—
(a) that the election has not been a free election by reason

that the corrupt practice of bribery or of undue influence has
extensively prevailed at the election; or

83

(8) that the election has not bean a free election by reason
that coercion or intimidation has been exercised or resorted to
by any paztieular coramunity, group or s mon another com-
munity, group or section, to vote or not to vote in any partie
cular way at the election; or

(c) that the result of the election has been materially affect-
ed by the improper acceptanee or rejection of any nomination,

the tribunal shall declare the election to be wholly void.

Explanation.—Im clause (b) of this sub-section, the expression
“coercion or intimidation” means any interference or attempt to
interfere by whatever means with the free exercise of the tight to
vote or refrain from voting at an election, and includes a social or
economic boycott of members of a community, group or section, or
threat of such boycott, with intent to interfere with the free exercise
of such right by those members.

(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), if the 'Fribunal
is of opinion—

(a) that the election of a returned candidate has been pro-
cured or induced, or the result of the election has been material-
ly affected, by any corrupt or illegal practice; or

(0) that any corrupt practice specified in section 123 has
been committed by a returned candidate or his agent or by any
other person with the connivance of a returned candidate or his
agent; or

(९) that the result of the election has been materially affected
by the improper reception or refusal of a vote or by the recep-
tion of any vote which एंड vid, or by any non-compliance with
the provisions of the Constitution or of this Act or of any rules
or orders made under this Act or of any other Act or rules rela-
ting to the election, or by any mistake in the use of any pres-
eribed form,

the Tribnnal shall declare the election of the returned candidate to
be void.

(3) If in the opinion of the Tribunal, a returned candidate has
been guilty by an agent, cther than his election agent, of any corrupt
practice specified in section 123, but the Tribunal is satisfied—

{a) that no such corrupt practice was committed at the elec-
tion by the candidate or his election agent, and every such



64
torrupt practice was committed contrary ie the orders, and with-

out the sanction or connivance, of the candidate or his election
agent;

(8) that all sueh corrupt practices were of a trivial and
limited character or took the form of cusiomary hospitality which
did not affect the result of the election;

(ec) that the candidate and his eleetion agent took all reason-
able means for preventing the commission of corrupt ‘or illegal
practices at the election; and

(d) that in all other respects the election was free from any

corrupt or illegal practice on the part of the candidate or any
of his agents,

then the Tribunal may decide that the election of the returned
candidate is not void.

* Ea cy का हि क *

104. Difference of opinion among the members of the Tribunal—
If during the trial of an election petition there is a difference of
opinion among the members of the Tribunal on any matter or if at
the conclusion of such trial there is a difference of opinion among
them on any question regarding the orders to be made under section
98 or section 99, the opinion of the rnajority shall prevail, and thé
orders of the Tribunal shall be expressed in terms of the views of
the majority.

* * & oF + * a

~ 106, Transmission of order te the appropriate authority, ete., and
its publieations—As soon as may be after the receipt of any order
made by the Tribunal under section 98 or section 99, the Election
Commission shall forward copies of the order to the appropriate
authority and, in the case where such order relates to an election
(other than a primary election) tc a House of Parliament or to an
election to the House or a House of the Legislature of a State, also
to the Speaker or Chairman, as the case may be, of the House
concerned, and shall cause the order to be published in the Gazette
of India and in the Official Gazette of the State concerned.

107. Orders to take effect only on publicatien—-An order of the
Tribunal under section 98 or section 99 shall not take effect until
it published in the Gazette of India under section 106.

65
Cuapyen TV

Withdrawal and abatement af election petitions
® 2 * 2 _

iil, Report of withdrawal by Ube Tribunal हक the Election we
mmission --When en application tor withdrawal is granted by ee
Tribunal and no person has been substituted as petitioner um i
clause (c} of sub-section (3) of section 110, in place of the pasty
withdrawing, the Tribunal shall report ihe fact to the Election

mission. = *
ca * *

6

449. Security for costs from 8 vespondeni—No poem shal pe
entitled to be joined as a respondent under sub-section x de —
30 ‘unless he hag given such security for costs as the ‘Tribu: is

aieeet. a ¥ * &
PART Vil
CORRUPT AND ILLEGAL PRACTICES AND ELECTORAL OFFENCES

Cuaprer |

Corrupt practices

4123. Majer corrupt, practices.—The following shall -be deemed to

be corrupt practices for the purpeses of this Act: vomise by #
(7) Bribery, that is to say, any gift, offer or br ise by
candidate or his agent, or by any other person with econ
nV se of a candidate or his agent, of any gratification |
person whomsoever, with the object, directly, or jndirectly, 0

including—
(a) a person to stand or not to stand as, or to withdraw

i i 1 an election; of
from being, a candidate a |
(9) an elector to vote or refrain from voting af an elec-
tion, or as 2 reward to-—
(i) a person for having so sto
having withdrawn his candidature; or sea from
Ga) an elector for having voted or refraine
voting. . _ . -
Explonation—For the purposes of this clause the tenn cere
fieation” js not restricted to pecuniary gratifications oF हैं। tain=
; tions ‘estimable in money, and it includes all fo oes nat
me! at and all forms of employment for rower कं eee ot
inc de the payment of any expenses कक - coe या
th : Jection and duly © :
for the purpose of, any elecuon & !
of election expenses referred to in section 76.
* ¥

d or not stood, or for

*



66

(7) The ineurring or authorising by a candidate or his-agent of
expenditure, or the employment of any person by a candidate or nis
agent, in contravention of this Act or of any rule made thereunder,

(8) The obtaining or procuring or abetting or attempting to obtain
er procure by a candidate or his agent or, by any other person with
the connivance of a candidate or his agent, any assistance for the
furtherance of the prospects of the candidate's election from any
person serving under the Government of India or the Government
of any State other than the giving of vote by such person,

Explanation—For the purposes of this clause—

(व) a person serving under the Government of India shall
not include any person who has been declared by the Central

Government to be a person to whom the provisions of this clause
shall not apply;

(b) a person serving under the Government of any State shall
include a patwari, chaukidar, dafedar, zaildar, shanbagh, karnam,
talati, talari, patil, village munsif, village headman or any other
village officer, by whatever name he is called, employed in that
State, whether the office he holds is a whole-time office or not,
but shall not include: any person (other than any such village
officer as aforesaid) who has been declared by the State Govern-

ment to be a person to whom the provisions of this clause shall
not apply.

124, Minor corrupt practices.—The following shall also be deemed
to be corrupt practices for the purposes of this Act:—

* * * co *

(4) The making of any return of election expenses which is false
in any material particular, or the making of a declaration verifying
any such return.

= * a *

134, Breaches of official duty in connection with elections.—(1)

* कं क्र कक *

(3) The persons to whom this section applies are the Electoral
Registration Officers, Returning Officers, Assistant Returning Officers,
presiding officers, polling officers and any other person appointed to
perform any duty in connection with the preparation of an electoral
roll, the receipt of nominations or withdrawal of candidatures, or the
recording or counting of votes at .an election; and the expression
ee duty” shall for the purposes of this section be construed.

67

accordingly, but shall not include duties imposed otherwise then by
er under this Act or by or under the Representation of the People
Act, 1950 CALI of 1950).

& पु * * *

PART VIL
Disquanirications
Cuarrer I
Disqualifications for membership

139, Offences entailing disqualification —(i) है The following
offences shall entail disqualification for membership of Parliament
and of the Legislature of evety State, namely:—

* * ® न कर * *

(8) offences punishable under section 123 or clause {a} of
sub-section (2) af section 136 of this Act.
* * = # *
Cuapter IT
Disqualification for voting

141. Disqualification arising out of conviction and cormipt prac:
tices.If any person after the commencement of this Act—
(a) is convicted of an offence punishable with apse
under section 171E or section 171¥ of the Indian Penal Code ९
XLV of 1860), or of an offence punishable under section or
clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 136 of this Act or
* * * *

143. Disqualification arising out of failure to lodge विदेश a sees

tion expenses—Itf default is made in making the zen ° fas eer
i of any person who has been nominate
at tn eetion to which the provisions of Chapter vill हि Pat y
apply, or if such a return is found, either upon the trial of an a
tion petition under Part VI or by any court in judicial Proceedings
to be false in any material particular, the candidate and his €' e von
agent shall be disqualified for voting at any election for a Berioe o
five years from the date by which the return was require

lodged.

° % * e * *

146, Disqualification for holding certain offices—Any person who—

it ishable with im-
has been convicted of an offence punis i
prisoaraent under section 171E or section 171F of the Indian

|
|
]
j



68

Penal Code (Act XLV of 1860), or of an offence punishable under
section 135 or clause (¢) or sub-section (2) of section 136 of this
५ OF

हि (8) has been disqualified from exercising any electoral right
‘or a period of not less than five years on account of any corrupt
practices in connection with an election,

shall be disqualified for six
मु years from the dat ieti
or disqualification from— ste of such genie

(४) being appointed io, or acting in, any judicial office;

(ii), being elected to any office of any local authority when
the appointment to such office is by election or holding or .ex-
ercising any such office to which no salary is attached;

ii} being elected or sitting or voting a
a J
jocal autherity; or 8 as मे member of ny

(iv) being appointed or acting as a trustee of a public trust:

ne 0 fhe any disqualification under this section may be re-

vi yy the Election Commission tf

in weitine, ‘ot reasons to be recorded by it
* * * के *

148 Sageal vacancies. fn the electoral colleges for ‘certain Part ‘C
en the scat of a member elected to the ele

for a scheduled Part C State becomes vacant or is नर oes
or his election to such eléctoral college is declared void, the Election
Commission shall, by a notification in the Gazette of Tadia, call upon.
the Council of States constituency concerned to elect a person for
the purpose of filling the vacancy so caused before such date as may
be specified in the notification, and the provisions of this Act and
of the rules and orders made thereunder shall apply, as far“as may
be, in relation. to the election of a member to fill ‘such 3 vacaricy. ”
a * oo * *

PART X
MiscELLANEOUS
152. List of members of the State Legislative Assemblies and elee-
toral colleges and of elected members of the Coorg Legislative

Council to be maintained by the Returning Officers concerned.—
* * * के *

(2) The Retutning Officer for an ‘election by the members of the -

a: Ls college for 8 Part C State or group of such States to fill a

6g

geat of seats in the Council of States shall, for the plinposes of such
election, maintain in his office in the preseribed manner. and form
a list of members of that electoral college.
* x क्र के & = रह
153, Extension of Hime for completion of election. (1) Tt shall be
competent for the Election Coramission for reasons which. it cor-
siders sufficient te extend the time appointed by such Commission
wider the provisions of sub-section (1 or sub-section /(2):.0f seetion
12, ७0 ‘section 43, ox séetion 15, oF séetion 17 of sub-section: QP vor
ainkegeotion (2) ‘of Béction 16 oF under aty of the provisions of Fart
EX for Ee completion of any election.

. @) When the time for the completion of any election is so extend:
ed, the President or the Governor or Rajpramukh of the State.or
the Election Commission, as the case may be, shall by notification
in the Official Gazette, make the necessary amendments in the noti-
fleation issued ‘ih’ Pespett of such dlsction tinder any-of the provisions
referred to in sub-section (1).

* = * * *

458: Return or forfeiture of deposits —(@) Ha candidate by. whom
érred to in section 4 07 in that

or‘on whose behalf the deposit ref
section read with sub-section (4). of section 39 has been -made with-
draws his candidature in the manner and within the time specified
in sub-section (1) of section 37 or in that sub-section yead with the
gaid sub-seétion *(4),-or if the ‘iiomination of any such candidate is
rejected, the deposit shall be returned to the person by whom it was
made and, if any candidate dies pefore the corimencement of the
posit, if made by him, shall be ‘returned ‘to his ‘legal

poll, any such de;
representative or, if not made by the candidate, shall be returned to

the person by whom it was miade.
* * *

* @

ता behalf ‘of -a ‘candidate under sec-
yead with sub-section (4) of section 39
shall, where it is not forfeited under sub-section (2), be returned to
guch candidate or to the person who ‘has “made ‘the deposit on his
behalf, as the case may be, after the publication of the result: 6f ‘the
election in the Official Gazette: coe

‘Provided that if’a candidate'is duly nominated at 8 general elec-
tion in: more than one Parliamentary constituency or Council-of States
eonstittieney or Assembly constituency, not. more than one of. the
deposits made by him or on his behalf ghal! be returned, and the
remainder shall be forfeited to the appropriate authority:

“(4) ‘The deposit made ‘by
tion 34 or under that section

कक कक > लक तरल उ 5 जक ० hatte



%

Provided further that if a candidate ie duly nominated at an elece
tion in moré thar one Council constituency or at an election in a
Council constituency and an election by the members of the State
Legislative Assembly to fill seats in the State Legislative Council,
not more than one of the deposits made by him or on his behalé

shail be returned, and the remainder shall be forfeited tc the State
Government.

389, Staff of every loral authority to be made available for elec
tion work.—Every local authority in a State shall, when so request-
éd by the Election Commission or a Regional Commissioner appoini-
ed under clause (4) of article 324 or the Chief Electoral Officer of the
State, mad@ available to any Returning Officer such staff as may be

necessary for the performance of any duties in connection with an
election. हु

a a & *

&

Extracts from tHe GOVERNMENT oF Pant C Staves Act, 1951
(LIX or 1951)

* & ® e *

1. Qualification for membership of the Legislative Assembly.—A
person shall not be qualified to be chosen to All a seat in the Legis-
lative Asseinbly of a State unless he—

{a) is a citizen of India;

(0) is not less than twenty-five years of age; and

(०) (i) in the case of a seat reserved for the Scheduled Castes
or the Sceduled Tribes of that State, is a member of any of those
castes or tribes as the case may be, and is an elector for any
assembly constituency in that State; (६) in the case of any other
seat, is an elector for any Assembly constituency in that State,

Explanation—In this section, the expression “elector” in relation
to a constituency, means a person whose name is for the time being
entered in the electoral roll of that constituency.

8. Elections 10 the Legislative Assembly.—The provisions of Part
{ and Parts III to XI of the Representation of the People Act, 1951
CXLIII of 1951), and of any rules and orders made thereunder for the
time being in force, shall apply in relation to an election to the
Legislative Assembly of a State, as they apply in relation to an elec-
tion to the Legislative Assembly of a Part A State, subject to-such
modifications as the President may, after consultation with the Eleo-
tion Commission, by order direct,

ee ऊ#झः * * * e e 3

|
:
।
।
|
1


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951
and to make certain consequential amendments in the
Government of Part C States Act, 1951,

(Shri H. V. Pataskay, : ।
Minister in the Ministry of Law.) :

GIPD~--LAD— 360 LS—-2-8-55—1,750