, 
I As Im'RODUCED IN LOit SABHA ON 
,." ,. , 
," 8 'M" 1 \984 
Bm No. 38 of 1984 
THE MULTI-STATE' CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES BILL, 1984 
'ARRANGEMEN'P'OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
• 
PRELIMINARY 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Application. 
3. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
CEN'l'.RAL Rt:GI,STRAI.' AND REGISTHAnON OF SOCIETIES 
4. ,Central Registrar. 
5. Multi-5tate co-operative societies which may be r~gistered. 
6. Applic,ation for regis.tration., 
,,7. Registration. 
S. Registration certificate. . 
9. Amendment of bye-laws of Ii multi-State co-operative society. 
1~. When amendment of bye-laws comes into force. 
U. Change of name. 
12. Change of, address. 
13. Liability. 
14. Amalgamation or transfer of assets and liabilities, or division, 
. of multi-State co-operative, societies. 
15. Central Registrar. to prepare.scheme of amalgamation or reor-
ganisati(ln of co-operative bank in certain cases. 
16. Liability. of a co-operative bank to the Deposit Insurance and 
Credit Guarantee Corporation. 
17. CAncellation of registration certificate of mUlti-State co-operative 
societies in certain cases, 
18. Conversion of co-operative society into multi-State co-operative 
society. 
CHAPTER TIl 
M,MBERS OF MULTI-STATE CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIEs AND THEIR RIGHTS AND 
LIABILITIES 
19. PerSons who may become members. 
20, Members not to exercise rights till due payment made. 
21. Expulsion of members. 
, 

(ii) 
CLAUSES 
22. Votes of members. 
23. Manner of exercising vote. 
24. Restric:tions on balding of shares. 
25. Restrictions on transfer of shares or interest. 
26. Reqemption of shares. 
27. Transfer of fIl;terest on death of members. 
28 .. Liability of 'past member and estate of deceased member., . 
CHAPTER IV 
DIRECTION AND MANAGEMENT OFMULTI~STATE' CO-OPERATIVE SOCJETIJ:S 
29. General body, its constitution, poWers and ~ct~OD8. 
30. Annual general meeting of the general body. 
31. Special general meeting of the general body. 
32. Board of directors. 
33. Association of employees in the management decision making 
process. 
34. Disqualification for a. member of a board. 
35. Election of members of board. 
36. Holding of office in co-operative society. 
~ 
37. 1lestrictiom on holding of office. 
38. Payment of honorarium. 
39. Removal of elected members by general body. 
40. Removal of member by Central Registrar. 
41. Nominee of Centr~l Government or State Government on the 
board. 
42. Powers and functions of the board .. 
43. Meetings of the board. 
44. Chief Executive. 
45. P(,wers and functions of Chief Executive. 
46. Committees of the Board. 
47. Central Government's power to give directi?ns in the public 
interest. 
48. Supersession of board. 
49. 'Securing posseSSion of record~, etc. 
E'(). Constitution of body of person~ for preparation of list, etc. 
51. Acts of multi-State co-operative societies not to be invallca~ed 
by certain defects. 
CHAPTER V 
PRIVILEGES OF MULTI~ST~TE. CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES 
52. Multi-State co-operative society to be body corporate. 
'9 Charge and set~off, in respect of share or contribution or interest 
• of members. 

CLAUSES 
54. Share or contribution 'or interest not liable to attachment. 
55. Register of members. 
56. Admissibility of copy of entry as evidence. 
57. Exemption from compUlsory registration of instruments. 
58. Deduction from salary to meet mUlti-State co-operative society's 
claim in certain cases. ' 
59. Government aid to multi-State co-operative societies. 
CHAPTER VI 
PROPERTIES AND FUNDS OF MULTI-STATE CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES 
60. Funds not to be divided by way of profit. 
-61. Disposal of net prof).ts. 
62. IQvesttp.ent of funds. 
63. Restrictions on loans. 
64. Rest~ctionson borrowing. 
05. Restrictions on other transactions with non-members. 
66. Contributory provident fund . . . 
CHAPTER VII 
AunIT, INQUIRY, mSPECTION AND SURCHAHG!: 
67. Audit. 
68. Inspection of multi-State co-operative societies. 
69. Inquiry by Central Registrar. 
70. Inspection of books of indebted multi-State co-operative socie-
ties. ' 
71. Costs of inquiry and inspe~tion. 
72. 'RecOVery of costs. 
73. Repayment, etc. 
CHAPTER VIII 
SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES 
74. pisputes. 
75. Limitation. 
i6. Settlement of disputes. 
CHAPTER. IX 
" 
WINDING UP OF MULTI-STATE CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETtES 
'" 77. Winding up of multi-State co-operative societies. 
78. Winding up of co-operative banks at the direction of Reserve . 
Bank. ~ . 
79. Reimbursement to the Deposit Insurance CorpQl'ation by 
liquidator. 

(iv) 
CLAUSES 
SO. Liquidator. 
81. Powers of liquidator. 
82. Disposal of surplus assets. 
83. Priority of' contributions assessed by 'liquidator. 
84. Powe.l' 'of Central Registrar to cancel. regis~tion {)of a multi • .' 
State'co.~perative society. ' 
CHAPTER'X 
ExECUTION OF DECREES, ORDBRS AND DECISIONS 
85. Execution of decisions, etc. 
86. Execution of orders of liquidator. 
87. Attachment before award. 
88 .. Central Registrar or the person authorised 'by 'fUm to be' Ctvl 
court, for certain purposes. 
89. Recovery of s~ms, due to Govemmen~. 
CHA~Xl 
. 
ApPEAI~S AND REVISION 
90. Appeals. 
91. No appeal or revision in certain callel. 
92. Revision. 
93. Review. 
94. Interlocutory orders. 
CHAPTER Xll 
SOCIETIES WHICH BIlCOME MULTI. STATE CO-OPERATIVE SOCftTIU CONSIQU.IN'!' 
ON P.EORGANISATION ,OF STATBS 
,,'-.., , 
95. Co-operative societies functioning' immediately before' 'reorganilO' 
, sation of States. 
96. Offences. 
CHAPTER xIIt 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES, 
97. Cognizance of offences. 
CHAPTER lfiV 
MISCELLANEOUS 
, .. 
i . I 
98. Copy of Act, rules, and bye-laws, etc., to be open to inspeotion. 
99. Power to' exempt multi-State ,co-operative societies from condi-
tions as to registration. ," 
100. Liquidator to be public servant. 
101. Notice necessary ih suits. 
102. Certain Ac~ not to apply. 
103. Savings of existing multi-State co-operative IOciet.iti. 
,.I 

tv] 
" 104. Power to amend Second Schedule. 
105. Bar of jurisdiction of eourts. 
10,6. Powers of Civil Court. 
107. Indemnity. 
108. Opening of branches. 
109. Power to make rules. 
11.0. Repeal. 
'IHE FIRST SCHED~E . . 
THE SECOND SCH!DULE. 
'\ 

8m No. 38 of 1984 
THE MULTI-STATE CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES BILL, 1984 '. 
A 
BILL 
to consolidate and amc'nd thej law rclating to co-o,perat,tve societies with 
objects not confined to one State and serving the interests of 
members in more bhan one State. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-fifth Year of the Republic 
of India as foIlows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
!l l. (1) This Act may be called the Multi-State Co-operative Societies Short 
10 
Act, 1984. ' title. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. Thi'S Act shall apply to-
(a) all co-operative societies, with objects not confined to' 4')11(: 
State, which were incorporated before the commencement of this 
Act, 
extent 
and com-
mence-
ment. 
Applica-
tion, 
2 of 191.2. 15 (i) under the Co-operative Societies Act, 1~12, "or 
e of 1942. 
(ii) under any other law relating to co-operative societies 
in force in any State or in pursuance of the Multi-unit Co-
operative Societies Act, 1942, , 
and the registration of which has not 'been cancelled before such 
commencement; and ' .. 
'1:) (b) all multi-State co-operative societies. 

,~ DefinI-
tions. 
" 3. In this Act, unless the context oth1:!rwise requires,-
(a) "board" means the board of directors or the governing body 
, of a multi-State co-operative society by whatever name calred, to 
which the direction and! control, of the management of the affairs of 
the society is entrusted; . 5 
(b) "bye-laws" means the bye-laws for the time being in force 
which have been duly regis,tered under this Act, and includes amend~ 
ments· thereto which have been duly registered untler this. Act; , 
(c) "Central Registrar" means the Central Regist.rar of Co-
operative Societies appointed under sub-section (1) of section 4. and JO 
includes any officer empowered to exercise the powers of the Central .~ 
Regi'Strar under" sub-section (2) of t.hat section; ,1.1 
(d) "Chief Executive" means a Chief Executive of a multi~Stat. 
co-operative society appointed under section 44; 
, 
(e) 'Oleo-operative bank" means a multi-State cO-Qperative '5 .. 
society which undertakes banking business; 
(f) "co-operative principles" means the co-operative, principle~ 
specified in the 'First Schedule; 
(g) "co-operative society" means a society :registered or deemed 
to be. registered under any law relating to co-operative societies for ·~o 
the time being in force in any State; 
(h) "co-operative year", in relation to any multi-State c~ 
operative society or class of such societies, means the year. ending 
on the 30th day ~f June and where the accounts. Of such 'Society or 
class of such societies are, with the previous sanction of the Central 25 
Regi'5trar, balanced on any other day, the year endin~ on such day; 
(i) "Deposit Insuranee Corporation" means the Deposit 
Insurance and Credit .Cuarantee Cotporationestablished under 
section 3 of the Deposit Insurance Co,rporation Act· 1961; 47 of 1981 , 
(j) ~'memher" mean's a person joining in the applicatiol1 for the 30 
registration of a multi--8tate co-operative societ{y and 5nc1udes a 
person admitted to mem~t'Ship after such registration in accordance 
with the provisions of. this Ad, the rules and the bye-laws; 
(k) "multi·State co-operative .society" means a society registered 
or deemed to be registered under this Act and include! a national 35 
co-operative 'Society; 
(1) "multi-State co-operative ,SOCiety with limited liability" 
means a society having the liability of its members limited by its 
bye-laws to the . amount, if any, unpaid on <.th~ shares respectively, 'i 
held by them or to such amount. as they may, respectively, therebY'l.o 
undertake to contribute to the aBsets of the' society, in the event of 
its being wound up; 
(m) "national' co-operative society" ~ans a multi-State c~ 
'operative socie~ ~pecifted in the Second Schedule; 

'ol'~~ " .. 
" , 
I' 
,,"'<, i 
2 of 1934. 
5 
10 
3 
(n) "notification" means a notification published in the Official 
Gazette; 
(0) "officer" means a president, vice-president, chairman, vice--
chairman, managing director, secretary, manager, member of a 
board, treasurer, liquidator, an administrator appointed under 
section 48 and includes any other person empowered under thilS 
Act or the rules or the bye-laws to give directions in regard to the 
business of a multi-State co-operative society; 
(p) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules; 
(q) "Reserve Bank" means the Reserve Bank of India con-
stituted under the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934; 
(r) "rules" means the' rules made under this Act. 
CHAPTER II 
CENTRAL REGISTRAR AND REGISTRATION OF SOCIETIES 
15 4. (1) The Central Government may appoint a person to be the Central 
Central Registrar of Co~perative Societies and may appoint such other Regis-
persons as it may think fit to assist the Central Registrar. trar. 
(2) The Central Government may, by notification, direct that any 
power exercisable by the Central Registrar under this Act (other than 
20 the power of registration of a multi-State co-operative society) shall in 
relation to such society, and such matters as may be specified in the 
notification be exercisable also by any other officer of the Central Gov-
ernment or of a State Government as may be authorised by th~ CentrRI 
Government subject to such conditions as may be specified therein: 
Provided that no officer of a State Government shall be empowered 
to exercise such power in relation to a national co-operative society: 
Provided fu~her that no officer of a State Government below the 
rank of the Registrar of Co-operative Societies shall be empowered to 
exercise any power exercisable by the Central Registrar under section 87. 
5 (1) No multi-State co-operative society shall be registered under Multi-
30 this Act, unless the main objects of the society are to serve the int'?re~ts State co-
of members in more than one State. operative 
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), a multi-State co-
operative society, which has as its objects the promotion of the economic 
35 and social betterm~nt of ~ts .members through mutual aid in .accord~ce 
with the co-operative prmclples or a' multi-State co-opeI"atlve SOCl~t~ 
established with the object of facilitating the operations of other such 
societies or of co-operative societies or of both may he register'?d ullder 
this Act 
(3) The word "Limited" or its equivalent in any Indian language 
40 fl· St .. shall he suffixed to the name 0 every mu tl- ate co-operatIve 90ClCty 
regtstered under this Act with limited liability, 
societies 
which 
may be 
register-
ed. 

· .A1'~lica­
lion for 
reeistra-
tion, 
~ .. 
, 
6. (1) For the purposes of registration of a multi-State co-operative 
society under this Act, an application shall, be made to the Central 
Registrar in such form and with such particulars as may be prescribed. 
(2) The application shall be signed~ 
(a) in the case of a multi-Stateco-ope.rative 'society of which all 5 
the members are individuals, by at least fifty;persons from each of 
the States concerned; 
(b) in the cas~ of a multi-State co-operative society of which 
the members are co-operative societies, by duly authorised represen-
tatives on behalf of at least two such societies as are not registered 10 
in the same State; and 
(c) in the case of a multi-State co-operative society of which 
another multi-State co-operative society and other co-operative 
societies are members, by duly authorised representatives of each of 
such societies: 15 
',~ 
Provided that not less than two of the co-operative societies 
referred to in clause (b) or clause (c), as the case may be, shall be 
such as are not registered in the same State. 
(3) The application shall be accompanied by four copies of the 
proposed bye-laws of the multi-State co-operative 'Society and the persons 20' 
by whom or on whose behalf such application is made shall furnish such 
information in regard to the society as the Central Registrar may require. 
7. (1) If the Central' Registrar is sati'Sfied-
(a) that the application complies with the provisions of this Act 
and the rules; 
(b) that the proposed multi-State co-operative society satisfies 
the basic criterion that its objects are to serve the interest.s of_ 
members in more" than one State; 
(e) that thete is no other multi-State co-operative 
having similar area of operation and identical objects; 
society 
(d) 'that the proposed bye-laws are not contrary to the pro-
vIsions of this Act and the rules; and 
(e) that the proposed mUlti-State co-operative society has 
reasonable prospects of becoming a viable unit, 
he may register the multi-State co-operative society and its bye-laws. 35 

(2) Where the Central Registrar refuses to register a multi-State 
co-operative society, he shall communicate the order of refusal together 
with the reasons therefor, to such number of the applicants and in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 
5 (3) The application for registration shall be disposed of by the 
Central Registrar within a period of six months from the date of receipt 
thereof by him: 
Provided that if the Central Registrar is unable to dispose of the 
application within the period aforesaid, he shall make a report to the 
10 Central Gov~rnment stating therein the reasons for his inability to 
do so, and the Central Government may allow him such further period 
or periods as is considered necessary to dispose of such application. 
8. Where a m'Ulti-State co-operative society is registered under this 
Act, the Central Registrar shall issue a certificate of registration signed 
IS by him, which shall be conclusive evidence that the society therein men-
tioned is duly registered under this Act, unless it is provea that the 
registration of the society has been cancelled. 
9. (1) No amendment of any bye-laws of a multi-State cO-<lperative 
society shall be valid, unless such amendment has been registered under 
20 this Act. 
(2) Every proposal for such amendment shall be forwarded to the 
Central Registrar and if the Central Registrar is satisfied that the 
proposed amendment-
(a) is not contrary to the prOvisions of this Act or of the 
rules; 
(b) does not conflict with co-operative principles; and 
(c) will ,promote the economic in~erests of the members of the 
mUlti-State co-operative society, 
he .may register the amendment within a period of six months from 
30 the date of receipt thereof by him: 
Provided that if the Central Registrar is unable to register the amend-
ment within the period aforesaid he shall make a report to the Central 
Government stating therein the reasons for his inability to do so, and 
the Central Government may allow him such further period or periods 
35 as is considered necessary to register the amendment. 
(3) The Central Registrar shall forward to the multi-State co-opera-
tive society a copy of the registered amendment together with a certi· ~ 
ficate signed by him and such certificate shall be conclusive evidence 
that the amendment has been d'Uly registered. 
(4) Where the Central Registrar refu~es to .register an amendment 
40 of the bye-laws of a multi-State co-opera11ve society, he shall communi-
cate the order of refusal together with the reasons 1herefor to the Chief 
Executive of the society in the manner prescribed within seven days 
from the date of such refusal. 
Belistra-
tion c.rti 
flcat..'¥ 
Amend-
ment of 
bye-law!! 
of a 
multi. 
Stat.co-
operative 
lociety. 

"'hen 
. ·amenli· 
mentof 
bye-laws 
CIOmes 
into 
force. 
Change 
ofnam~. 
Changeo! 
address. 
Liability. 
10. An amendment of the bye-laws of a multi-State co-operative 
society shall, unless it is expressed to come into operation on a parti-
cular day, come into force on the day on which it is registered. 
11, (1) A multi-State co-operative society may, by an amendment of 
its bye-laws, change its name but such change shall not affect any right 5 
or obliga'.ion of the multi-State co-operative society or of any of its 
members or past members, and any legal proceedings which might have 
been continued or commenced by or against the multi-State co-operative 
society by its former name may be continu.ed or commenced by or against 10 
its new name. 
(2) Where a mul~i-State co-operative society changes its name, the 
Central Registrar shall enter the new name on the register of multi-
State co-operative societies in place of the former name and shall amend 
the cerHficate of registration accordingly. 
12. Every multi-State co-operative society shall have a principal place 15 
of business and an address registered in the manner prescribed to which 
all notices and communications may be sent and any change in the 
principal place of business of a multi-State co-operative society shall be 
made with the previous approval of the Central Registrar. 
13. (1) No multi-State co-operative society with unlimited liability 20 
shall be registered after the commencement of this Act: 
Provided that where a multi-unit co-operative society with un)fmited 
liability was functioning before the commencement of this Att, such 
a society shall exercise the option within a period of one year from such 25 
commencement either to continue to function as such or to convert itself 
Into a multi-State co-operative society with limited liability by following 
the procedure specified in sub-sections (2) to (4). 
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules, a multi-unit 
co-operative SOCiety may, by an amendment of its bye-laws, change the 30 
extent of its liability. 
(3) When a multi-uoit co-operative society has passed a resolution 
to change the extent of its liabUiy, it shall give notice thereof in writing 
to all its members and c.reditors, and, notwithstanding anything contained 
in the bye-laws or contract to the contrary, any member or creditor shall, 35 
during the period of one month from the date of se,rvice of the notice 
upon him, have the option of withdrawing his shares, deposits or loans, 
as the case may be. 
(4) Any member or credit~r who does not exercise his option within 
> the period specified in 'sub-section (3) shall be deemed to have assented 40 
to the change. 
(5) An amendment of a bye-law of a multi-unit co-operative society 
changing the extent of its liability shall not be registered or shall not take 
effect until either-
(a) the assent thereto of all members and creditors ha'S been 
qbtained, or .-·45 

., 
(b) all claims of members and creditors who exe.rcise the option 
referred to in sub-section (3) within ,the period specified therein have 
been met in full or otherwise satisfied. 
14. (1) A multi-State co-operative society may, with the prior con-
5suUation of the Central Registrar and by a resolution passed by a 
inajority of not less than two-thirds of the members present and voting 
at a general meeting of the society held for the pu.rpose,-
10 
(a) transfer its assets and liabilWes in whole or in part to any 
other multi-State co-operative society or co-operative society; 
(b) divide itself into two or more multi-State co-operative 
societies; 
(c) divide itself into two or inore co-operative societies. 
, (2) Any two or more multi-State co-operative societies may, with 
the prior consultation of the Central Registrar and by a resolution passed 
15 by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members present and 
voting at a general meeting of each 'Such society, amalgamate themselves 
and form a new multi-State co-operative society. 
(3) The resolution of a multi-State co-ope.rative society under sub-
section (1) or sub-section (2) shall contain all particulars of the transfer 
20 or division or amalgamation, as the case may be: ' 
Provided that in the case of a co-operative bank, the Central Registrar 
shall not accord approval to any such resolution without the previous 
sanction in writing of the Reserve Bank. 
(4) When a multi-State co-ope.rative society has passed a resollltion 
25 under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), it 'Shall give notice thereof in 
writing to all the members and creditors and, notwithstanding anything 
'conttained in the bye-laws or contract ,to the contrary, any member 0.1' 
creditor, shall, during the period of one month of the date of service of 
the notice upon him, have the option of withdrawing his shares, deposits 
30 or loans, as the case may be. 
(5) Any member or creditor who does not exercise his option within 
the period specified in sUb-section .(4) shall be deemed to have assented 
"to the proposals contained in the resolution. 
(6) (a) A resolution passed by a multi-State co-operative society 
35 under this section shall not take effect 'until the assent thereto of' all the 
members and creditors has been obtained. 
(b) The multi-State co-operative society shall make arrangements 
for meeting in full or otherwise satisfying all claims of the members 
40 and creditors who exercise the option within the period specified in sub-
section (4). 
(7) On reecipt of an application for the registration of new societies 
formed by division in accordance with the resolution passed under sub-
section (1) or of a new 'society formed by amalgamation in accordance 
with. the resolution passed under sub-section (2), ,the Central Registra.r, 
45 on being satisfied that the resolution has become effective under sub-
section (6) shall, unless for reasons to be recorded in writing he thinks 
fit to refuse so to do, register the new societies or society, as the case 
may be, and the bye-laws thereof. 
(8) On the issue of an' order under sUMection (7), the provisions of 
50 sectioIll 17 shall, so far as may be, apply to the multi-State co-operative 
society so divided or the multi-State co-operative societies so amaliamated. 
.. "", 
\ 
Amalia. 
mationor 
transfer 
of assets 
and 
liabilities. 
ordivl-
lion of' 
multi-
St.teco-
operative 
societies, 

Central 
Reaislrllr 
to prepare 
scheme 
of amal-
IIlmation 
orreoraa-
nisation 
of co-
operative 
bank in 
certain 
C1lses. 
Liability 
of a co-
operative 
bank to 
the 
Deposit 
Insurance 
and 
Credit 
Guarantee 
Corpora-
tion. 
Cancella-
tion of 
reaistra-
tion eer-
tiftC1lte 
of multi-
State c0-
operative 
societies 
In'Certain 
cases. 
(9) Where a resolution passed by a multi-State co-ope.rative society 
under this section involves Ithetransfer o~ any assets and liabilities, the 
resolution shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for 
the time being in force, be a sufficient conveyance ,to vest the assets and 
liabilities in the transferee without any further assurance. 5 
15. When an orde.r of moratorium has been made by the Central 
Government under sub-6ection (2) of section 4'5 of the Banking Regula-
tion Act, 1949 in respect of a co-operative bank, the Central Registrar, 
with the ,previous approval of the Reserve Bank in writing, may, during 
the period of moratorium, prepare a scheme- 10 
(a) for the amalgamation of the co-operative bank with any 
other cCH>perative bank; or 
(b) for the reorganisation of the co-operative bank. 
16. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 14 or any other 
provision of this Act, where a co-operative bank, being an insured bank 15 
within the meaning of the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee 
l'of 1949. 
Corporation Act, 1961, is amalagamated or reorganised and the Deposit 47 of 1961. 
Insuranc~ Co.rporation has become liable to pay to the depositors of the 
insured bank under sub-section (2) of section 16 of that Act, the bank 
with which such insured bank is amalgamated, or the new co-operative 20 
bank formed after such amalgamation, or, as the case may be, the insured 
bank or transferee bank shall be under an obligation to repay to the 
Deposit Insurance Corporation in the circumstances, to the extent \ and in 
the manner referred to in section 21 of the Deposit Insurance and Credit 
Guarantee Corporation Act, 1961. 25 
17. (1) Where the whole of the assets and liabilities of a multi-State 
co-operative society are tran'$fe.rred to another multi-State co-operative 
society or to a co-operative society in accordance with the provisions of 
section 14, the registration of the first-mentioned multi-State co-operative 
society shall stand cancelled and the society shall ~ deemed to have 30 
been dissolved and shall cease to exist as a corpo,rate body. 
(2) Where two or more multi-State co-operative societies are 
amalgamated into a new multi-State c~operative society in accordance 
with the provisions of section 14, the registration of each of the amalga-
mating societies 'Shall stand cancelled on the registration of the new 35 
Slociety, and each of the amalgamating societies shall be deemed to have 
been dissolved and shall cea&e to exist as a corporate body. 
(3) Where a r.~ulti-State cO-Gperative society divides itself into two or 
more multi-State co-operative societies or two or more co-ope,rative 
societies in accordance with the provisions of section 14, the registration 40 
of that society shall stand cancelled on the registration of the new SOCieties, 
. and that society shall be deemed to have been dissolved and shall cease 
to exist as a corporate body. 
(4) The amalgamation or division of multi-State co-operative 
societies sh'all not in any manner whatsoever affect any right or obliga- 45 
tion of the resulting multi-State co-operative society or societies or 
render defecti ve any legal proceedings by or against the multi-State 
co-operative society or societies, and any legal proceedings that might 
have been continued or commenced by or against the multi-State 

9 
co-operative society or societies, as the case may be, before the amalga-
mation or division may be continued or commenced by or against the 
resulting multi-State co-operative society or societies. 
18. (1) A co-operative society may, by an amendment of its bye-
5 laws, extend its jurisdiction and convert itself into a multi-State co-
operative society: 
Provided that no such amendment of bye-laws of a co-operative 
society shall be valid unless it has been registered by the Central Re-
gistrar. I I 
10 (2) (a) Every proposal for such amendment shall be forwarded to 
the Central Registrar. . 
(b) If the Central Registrar, after consulting the Registrar:. of Co-
operative Societies of the States concerned has satisfied himself that , 
such amendment fulfils the requirement of sub-section (2) of section 9, 
15 he may register the amendment within a period of six months from 
the date of receipt thereof by him:. 
Provided that if the Central Registrar is unable to register the 
amendment within the ~iod aforesaid, he shall make a report to the 
Central Government stating therein the reasons for his inability to do 
20 so, and the Central Government may allow him such further period or 
period'S as is considered necessary to register the amendment. 
(3) The Central Registrar shall forward to the co-operative society 
a copy of the registered amendment together with a certificate signed by 
him and such certificate shall be conclusive evidence that the amendment 
25 has been .registered. 
(4) Where the Central Registrar refuses to regi'Ster an amendment 
of the bye-laws of a co-operative society, he shall commun:cate the 
order of refusal together with the reasons therefor to the society in the 
manner ,prescribed within seven days from the date of refulal. 
30 (5) (a) Once the amendment of bye-laws has been registered by the 
Central Regisirar, the co-operative society shall, as from the date of 
registration of amendment, become a multi-State co-operative society. 
(b) The Central Registrar shall forward to the co-operative society 
a certificate signed by him to the effect that such society has been re-
35 giste.red as a multi-State co-operatiw society under this Act and also 
forward a coPy of the same to the Registrar of Co-operative'Societies of 
the State concerned. ' 
~c) The Re~istrar of Co-operative Societies referred to in clause (b) 
shall thereupon make an order directing that the society had, as from the 
40 date of registration by the Central Registra.r, ceased to be a society under 
the law relating to co-operatiV'E! societies in force in ,that State. 
CHAPTER m 
MEMBERS OF MULTI-STATE Co-OP~RATIVE SOCIBTIES AND THEIR RIGHTS 
AND LIABILrnES 
45 19. (1) No person shall be admitted as member of a multi-State co-
operative society except the following, namely:-
(a) an individual competent to contract under Igecti<m II Qf the 
Indian Contract Act, 1872; 
Conver-
sion of 
co-opera-
tive 
society 
into 
multi-
state co-
operative 
society, 
Persons 
who may 
become 
member!!, 

) 
:-,Members 
not to 
exercise 
rights 
ti1ldue 
payment 
made. 
10 
(b) any multi-State co-operative society or any c:o-operative 
society; 
(c) the Central Government; 
(d) a State Government; 
(e) the National Co-operative Development Corporation estab- 5 
lished under the National Co-operative Development CorPQration Act, 
1962; 
26 of 1962. 
(1) any other corporation owned or controlled by Government; 
(g) any Government company as defined in seetion 617 of the 
Companies Act, 1956; 
10 1 of 1956. 
(h) such class or classes of persons or association of persons as 
may be permit~ by the Central Registrar having regard to the 
nature and activities of a multi-State co-operative society. 
(2) Such number of individuals possessing such qualifications 
as may be prescribed may be admitted as members of the National Co-
operative Union of India Limited:, New Delhi. 15 
(3) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (2) and notwithst.anding 
anything contained ill sub-section (1), no individual shall be eligible for 
admission as a member of a national co-operative society. 
(4) Any person eligible for membership of a multi-State co-operative 20 
society may, on his application, be admitted as a member by such society. 
(5) Eve.ry application for admission as a member of a multi-Sta~ 
co-operative society 'Shall be disposed of by such society within a period 
of four months from the date of receipt of the application, and the 
decision of such society on the application shall be communicated to the ~5 
applicant within fifteen days from the date of such decision: 
Provided that if the application is not disposed of within the period 
aforesaid, or the 'decision is not communicated within a period of 
fifteen days of the expiry of the aforesaid period of fou.r month'S, the 
multi-State co-operative society shall be deemed to have made a decision, 30 
on the date of expiry of such period, refusing admission to the applicant. 
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section. the Central 
Government may, having regard to the fact that the interest of any 
~on or class of persons conflicts or is likely to confllct with the objects 
of any multi-State co-operative society or class of multi-State· co-operative 3Ci 
societies, by general or special order 'Published in t!te Official Gazette, 
declare that any person Or class of persons engaged in or carrying on any 
profeSSion, business or emplo)'!ment shall be disqualified from bt!ing 
admitted, or for continuing, as m-embers or shall be eligible· for member-
ship only to a limited extent of any specified multi-State co--operative 40 
society or class of multi-State. co-operativesocieties, so long as such 
person or persons to; or are engaged in or carrying on that profession, 
bu'siness or eml?loyment, as t.he case may be. 
20. No member of a multi-State co-operative society shall exercise 
the rights of a member, unless he has made such payments to the society 15 
in respect of membership, or has acquired 'Such interest in the society, 
as may be specified in the bye-laws. 

h 
n (1) A multi-State co-operative society may by resolution puaed 
by a majority of not less than two-thircbi of the 'members present and 
voting at a general meeting of members held for the purpose, expel 
a member fo.r acts which are detrimental to the proper working of the 
5 society: 
Provided that the member concerned shall not be expelled unless he 
has been given a reasonable opportunity of making representation ill 
the matter. 
(2) No member of the multi-State co-operative society who has been 
10 expelled under sub-section (1) shall be eligible for .re-admission u a 
member of that society, for a period of three years from the date of such 
expulsion: 
Provided that the Central Registrar may, on application of the multi-
State co-operative society and if satisfied that in the special circum-
15 stances of the case, it is necessary so to do in toe interests of the multi-
State co-opera1tive society, sanction the re-admission or admission within 
the said period, of any such member as a member of the said society. 
2%. Every member of a multi-State co-operative society, including a 
member Who is an employee of suchi society, shall have one vote in the 
20 affairs of the society: 
Provided that-
(a) a member who is an employee of such society. shall not be 
entitled to vote-
(i) at an election of a member of the boa.rd of such society; 
(i4) in any general meeting convened for framing the bye-
laws of SUch 'society or any amendments thereto: 
(b) in the case of an equality of votes, the Chairman shall have 
a second or casting vote; 
(e) where any of the authorities referred to in clauses (c) to 
(g) of sub-section (1) of sectio~l 19 is a member of a multi-State 
co-operative 'Society, each person nominated by such authority, on 
the board, in accordance with the provisions contained in this Act 
and the rules, shall have one vote; 
(d) a muIti-S~te co-operative Society, the members of which 
35 include co-operative societies or other multi-State co-operative 
societies, may provide for an equitable system of voting haviDg 
regard to the membership of, and the extent of business carried on 
by such co-operative societies, or multi-State co-ope.rative sOcietiel; 
and other relevant circumstances. 
40 23. Every member of a multi-State l.'O-operative. society shall 
exercise his vote in person and no member shall be pel'lDltted to vote by 
proxy: 
Provided that a multi-State co-operative society or ace-operative 
society which is a member of another multi-State .co-operative society, 
45 may, .ubject to the provisions of sub-section (3) of section 29 and the 
Expulsion "1. 
of 
members. 
Votes of 
members. 
Manner ~ 
olaser-
cisilll 
vote. 

.7-
lteItric-
tiona on 
holding 
ofsharea. 
Rcstric-
tlODaOD 
transfer 
otshares 
or I,. 
.... intertll t. . 
Redemp-
tloDot 
shares. 
'l'raDafer 
otlnter-
eaton 
death ot 
members. 
Llabllity 
otput 
',-member 
and-.tate 
of 
deceased 
~ember. 
! ·-1 
rules, appoint its representative to vote on its behalf in the affairs of 
that other society. 
24. No member, other than any of the authorities referred to in 
clauses (c) to (g) of sub-section (1) of section 19 or a multi-State c0-
operative society or a co-operative society, shall hold more than such 5 
portion of the total share capital of the society (in no case exceeding 
one-fifth thereof) as may be prescribed: 
Provided that the Central Gove,rnment may, by notification, specify 
in respect of any class of societies a higher or lower maximum than 
one-fifth of the share capital. 10 
25. The transfer of the share or interest of a member in the capital 
of a multi-State co-operative society shall be subject to such conditions 
as to maximum holding as are specified in section 24. 
26. Shares held in a multi-State co-operative seciety by any of the 
authorities referred to in clauses (c) to (g) of sub-section (1) of sectiOll 15 
19 shall be redeemable in accordance with the bye-laws of such multi-
State co-operative society and in a case where the bye-laws do not 
contain any provision in this regard, in such manner as may be agreed 
upon between the multi-State co-ope.rative society and 'Such authority. 
27. (1) On the death of a member, a multi-State co-operative society ~o 
may transfer the share or interest of the deceased m~mber to the perSOD 
nominated in accordance with the rules made in this behalf, or, if there 
is no person so nominated, to such person as may appear to the board to 
be the heir or legal representative of the deceased member, or pay to 
such nominee. heir or legal representative, as the case may be, a sum 25 
representing th4l value of such member's sha.re or interest as ascertained 
in accordance with the rules: 
Provided that no such transfer or payment shall be made except with 
the consent of the nominee, heir or legal representat.ive, as the case may 
k ~ 
(2) A multi-State co-operative society shall, unless within six 
months of the death of the member prevented by an order of a competent 
court, pay to such nominee, heir or legal rep,resentative, as the case may 
be, aU other moneys due to the deceased member from the society. 
(3) All transfers and payments made by a multi-State co--operative S5 
society in accordance with the provisions of this section shall be valid 
and effectual against any demand made upon the society 'by any other 
perao.n. 
Z8. (1) Su~ject to the provisions of sub-section (2), the liability of 
a past member or of the estate of a deceased member of a mulU-Btate 40 
co-operative society for the debts of the society as they existed,-
(II) in the case of a past member, on the date on which he 
ceased to be a member; 
(b) in the case of a deceased member, on the date of his death, 
fihall conttnu~ for , period of two ,.,..1'1 from such date. 45 

1~ 
(2) NotMthstanding anything contained in sub-section (i), 
where a mulU..state co-operative society is ordered to be wound 
up under section 77, the liability of a past member who ceased to be a 
member or of the estate of a deceased member who died within two y~ars 
5 immediately preceding the date of the order of winding up, shall continue 
until the, entire liquidation proceedings are completed, but such liability 
shall extend only to the debts of the society as they existed on the date 
of cessation of membership or death, as the case may be. 
10 
CHAPTER IV 
DIRECTION AND MANAGEMENT OF MULTI-STATE CO-OPERATIvE 
SOCIETIIlS 
29. (1) The general body of a multi-State co-operative society shall 
consist of all the members of such society: 
Provided that where the bye-laws of a multi-State co-operative society 
provide fo.r the constitution of a smaller b0dy consisting of delegates of 
members of the society elected or selected in accordance with such bye-
laws, that smaller body shall exercise such powers of the general body as 
may be prescribed or as may be specified in the bY,e-Iaws of the society. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the rules and the bye-Iawa, 
r20 the ultimate authority of a multi-State co-operative society shall vest in 
the general body of its members: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall affect the 
exercise by the board or any officer of a multi-State co-operative society 
of any power conferred on such board or such officer by this Act or the 
125 rules or the bye-laws. 
(3) Where in any, mt:eting of the general body or the board of a multi· 
State co-operative society, a co-operative society or another multi-State 
co-operative SOCiety is to be represented, such co-operative society or 
other multi-State co-operative society shall be represented in such 
30 meeting only ,through the Chairman or the Chief Executive o~ such co-
operative society or other multi-State co-operative society, as the case 
may be, and where there is no board of such co-op,e,rative society or other 
multi-State co-operative society, for whatever reasons, through the 
administrator, by whatever name called, of 'Such co-operative society or 
as other multi-State co-operative society. 
40 
30. (1) Every multi-State co-;operative society: shall, :witb.in such 
period as may be prescribed, after the close Of the year. call a general 
meeting of its members in the manner presc.ribed for the purpose of-
(a) consideration of the audit report and annual report; 
(b) disposal of net profits; 
(c) approval of the programme of activities tor tbe ensuing 
year; 
(d) amendment of bye-laws; --.. .... , .... 
(e) election, if any, of the members of the board, otber than 
~5 nominated members, subject to the provisions of section 35: 
Provided that the Central Registrar may, by general or special order, 
extend the period for holding such meeting for a further period not 
exceeding three months: . . ~. . ... II 
Genera1 
bod,.. 
consti-
tution, 
powc:r. 
and 
tunctIoa& 
Annual 
genet.l 
meetiftg 
of the 
general 
bod,.. 

, -
r Special 
itme'l'al 
meetine 
of the 
aeneral 
body. 
~1 Boardof 
directon. 
Asaocia-
tlon of 
employe .. 
in the 
manage-
ment 
decision 
making 
proeess. 
Diaquali-
.\ ftcalion 
r rOt a 
member 
or. 
board. 
14 
Provided further that if in the opinion of the Central Registrar no 
such extension is necessary or such meeting is not called. by ,the multi. 
State co-operative society within the ,extended period, if any, granted. by 
him, the Central Registrar or any person authorised by him in this behalf 
may call such meeting in the manner prescribed, and that meeting shall 5 
be deemed to be a general meeting duly called by the society and the 
Central Registrar may order that expenditure incurred in calling such 
a· meeting shall be paid out of the funds of the society or by such ~ 
or pel'sons who, in the opinion of the Central Registrar, was or were 
responsible for the refusal or failure to convene the general meeting. 10 
(2) At every annual general meeting of a multi-State co-operative 
society the Board shall lay before the society a statement showing the 
details of the loans or goods on credit, i~ any, given to any of the members 
of the board o.r to the spoUSe or a son or daughter of a member of the 
board during the preceding year or outstanding aJitainst him or against 15 
i;uch spouse or son or daughter of the member of the board. 
31. (1) The Chief Executive may, at any time, on the direction of the 
board, call a special general meeting of the society and shall call such 
meeting within one month after the receipt of a requisition in writing 
from the Central Registrar or from such member or members or a 20 
proportion of the total number of members, as may be provided in the 
bye-laws. 
(2) If a special genp.ral meeting of a multi-State co-o~ative society 
is not called in accordance with the requisition referred to in SUb-section 
(1). the Central Registrar or any person authorised by him in this behalf 25 
shall have the power to call such meeting and that meeting shall be 
deemed to be a meeting called by the Chief Executive in accordance 
with the provisions of that sub-eection and the Central Registrar may 
order that the expenditure incurred in calling such meeting shall b8 
paid out of th~ funds of the society or by such person o.r persons who. 30 
in the opinion of the Central Registrar, was or were responsible for the 
refusal or failure to convene the special gene.ral meeting. 
32. Subject to the provisions of this Act and. the rules there shall 
be a board of directors for every multi-State co-operative s~iety consist-
ing of such number of members as may be provided for under the bye- 35 
laws. 
33. Every multi-State co-operative society shall devise such procedure, 
as may be specified in /fue bye-laws o.r in the administrative 
instructions, for association of the representatives of employees of such 
multi-State co-operative societies at such level or bodies as may be 40 
specified in the bye-laws or the instructions issued in this regard, in the 
management decision maldng process. 
34. No mem:ber of any multi-8tate co-operative SOCiety or nominee 
of a member-society on a national co-operative society shall be eligible 
for being chosen as, or for being, a member of the board of such multi-
State co-operative society or national co-operative society or of any other 
co-operative society to which the multi-5tate Co-operative society is 
aftlUated, if such member-

25 of 1961. 
5 
15 
(4) has been adjudged by a competent court to be insolvent or 
of unsound mind; 
(b) is concerned Or participates in ,the profits of any contract 
with the socIety; 
(c) has been convicted for an offence involving moral turpitude; 
(d) holds any office or place of profit under the society: 
Provided that the Chief Executive or such full-time employee of 
the society as may be notified by the Central Government from time 
to time or a person elected by the employees of such society to 
10 represent them on the board of such society shall be eligible for befng 
chosen as or for being a member of such boardi 
15 
20 
35 
40 
(e) has been a member of the society for less than twelve 
months immediately preceding the date of such election or appoint-
ment; 
(f) has interest in any business of the kind carried on by the 
society of which he is a member; 
(g) has taken loan or goods on credit from the society of which 
he is a member, or is otherw;se indebted to such society and after 
the receipti of a notice of default issued to him by such society, has 
defaulted-
(~) in .repayment of such loan or debt or in payment of the 
price of the goods taken on credit, as the case may be, within 
the date fixed for such repayment or payment or where 'Such 
date is extended, which in no case shall exceed six months within 
the date SQ extended, or 
(ii) when such loan or debt or the price of goods taken on 
credit is to be paid in instalments, in payment of any tmtalment, 
and the amount in default or any part thereof has remained 
unpaid on the expiry of six months from the date of such default: 
Provided that a member of the board Who has ceased to hold 
office as such under this clause shall not be eligible, for a period of 
one year, from the date on whiCh he ceased to hold ofllce, for re-
election as a member of the board of the mUlti-State co-operaUve 
society of which he was a member or for election to the board of 
any other multi-State co-operative society; 
(h) is a person against whom any amount due under a decree, 
decision or order s pending recovery under this Act; 
(i) is retained or employed as a legal practitioner on behalf ot 
or against the mUlti-State co-operative society, or on behalf of or 
againflt any other multi-State co-operative society which is a member 
of the former society. 
Explana.tion.-For the purposes of this clause "legal practitioner" 
has the ~ame meaning as in clause (i) of sub-section (1) of secUon 
2 of the Advocates Act, 1961: 
45 (j) has been convicted for any offence under this Act. 

Eleetion 
of mem-
~Of 
. board. 
Holding 
of office 
in co-
operativ:e 
sOcdety. 
Restric-
tions on 
holding 
ofofllce. 
35. (1) The superintendence, direction and control of the preperation 
of the elef'toral rolls for, and tbe conduct of, elections of the members 
of the board of such multi-State co-operative societies or class of multi .. 
State co-operativc societies as the Central Government may, by general 
01' special order. notify, shall be vested in sucb returning officers as may 5 
be appointed by the Central Regi.crtrar in tbis behaU. 
(2) The vote at such elections shall be by secret ballot. 
(3) The term of office of the elected members of the board ~hal1 be 
such, not e~:ceeding three years from the date of election, as may be 
specifi.ed in the bye-laws of a multi-State co-operative society: 10 
Provided that the elected members shall continue to hold office till 
their successors are elected. or nominated under the provisions of this 
Act or the rules or the bye-laws and assume the charge of their office. 
(4) No person shall be eligible to be elected as a member of the 
board of a multi-State co-operative society unless he is a member of the 15 
general body of that 'Soc~ty. 
(5) The Central Government may make rules generally to provide 
for or to regulate matters in respect of elections of members of the board. 
36. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, no person shall 
be eligible to hold, at the same time, office of a president or chainrum 20 
or vice-president or vice-chairman on the board of more than one multi-
State co-operative society: 
Provided that any person holding, at the commencement of this Act, 
the office of a president or chairman or vice-president or vice-chairman 
in more than one multi-State co-operative society shall, within three 2; 
months from such commencement by notice in w.rlting signed by him, 
intimate the name of the multi-State co-operative society in which he 
wishes to 'serve and thereupon his office in the other multi-State co-
operative society in which he does not wish to serve shall become 
vacant: , 30 
"'-' 
Provided further that in default of such intimation within the period. 
r~red. to in the preceding proviso, his offices in all the multi-State co-
operative societies shall, at the expiration of the period aforesaid, become 
vacant. 
37. No person shall be eligible to hold the office of a president Or 95 
chairman or vice-president or vice-chairman on the board of a multi-
State co-operative society, after he has held the office as aforesaid during 
two consecutive terms, whether full or part: 
Provided teat a person who has ceased to hold the office of a president 
or chairman continuously for one full term of three years shall again 40 
be eligible for election to the offices aforesaid.. 
Explanation.-Where any person holding the office of the president 
or vice-president or chainnan or vice-chairman at the commencement 
of this Act is again elected to that office <lfter such commencement he , 
shall for the purpose of this section, t·e deemed to have held oftice lor 45 
one term before such election. 

17 
38. Honorarium may be paid to the elected chairman or president of 
the board out of the profits of the multi-State co-operative society in 
respect of specific services rendered by him. subject to such restrictions 
and condition's as may be prescribed. 
5 39. An electerl member of a board who has acted adversely to the 
interests of multi-State co-operative society may, on the basis of a report 
from the Central Registrar or otherwise, be removed from the board 
upon a resolution of the general body passed at its meeting by a majo.rity 
of not less than two-thirds of the members present and voting at the 
10 meeting: 
Provided that the memherl concerned shall not be removed unless he 
has been given a r'p.asonable opportunity of making representation in the 
matter. 
40. If in spite of cessation of office under cirC!Umstanees mentioned in 
15 section 34, ~tion 36, section 37 or section 39 a member of "he board 
reful'ies to vacate hi's office, the Central Registrar shall, by Ol'der in 
writing, remove him from such office. I 
41. (1) Where the Central Government ot a State Government has 
subscribed to the share capital of a multi-State co-operative society or 
10 has guaranteed the re-payment of principal and payment Of interest on 
debentures issued by a multi-State co-operative l;Iociety or has guaranteed 
the re-payment of principal and payment of interest on loans and ad-
vances to R multi-Stlite co-operatlve society, the Central GoV'8D.ment 0f 
the State Government in this behalf, as the case may be, or any person 
!:I5 au+hol'iqed h .. th~ Central C"rOvernment or the State Government, shall 
haVf~ thp right to nominate on the board such number of persons aft may 
be !,rescribed. ., • 
(2) The bye-laws of a multi-State co-operative society may provide 
for ,the nomination of person'l in excess of the limits prescribed under 
sub~tion (1). 
(3) A pe,rson nominated undpr this l'~tjon shall hold office during 
the pleasure of the Government by which he has been so nominated. 
42. (1) The board may exercise all such powers as may be necessary 
or exoecHent for the purp'l~e of carrving out its functions under this Act. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such 
S5 po·,ver shall include the power-
45 
(a) to admit members; 
(b) to :nte-pret the o.rg~nisational ohiectives and 'Set up speclfte 
goals to h 3chieved tow,lf(is these objectives; 
(c) to make perioiic appraisal of operation.; 
(d) to appoint a Chief Executive and such other employees of 
f!he society (out of the list of persons referred to in sectton 50) as 
are not required to b~ appointed by the Chief Executive; 
(e) to make provisions for re.~lating the appointment of em-
ployees of the multi-State co-operative society and the scates of pay. 
allowances and other conditions of service of, including di'Sciplinary 
action against, such employees; 
~ 
Payment .;\;«' 
of hono-
rarium. 
RemoVal 
of elected 
members 
by 
general 
body. 
Removal '. ofmem. 
ber by 
Central 
Registrar. 
No~ 
iltCe,u. 
tralGov_ 
ernment 
or State 
Govern-
ment 
On the 
board. 
Powers 
and 
functions 
of the 
board. 

Meetings 
of the 
board. 
ChIef 
.... ' ~ecutive. 
powers 
and 
.~ functions 
\cdChief 
a-uttve, 
)-
18 
(f> to approve ann'Ual and supplementary budget: 
(g) to acquire or dispose of immovable prope.rty; 
(h) to raise funds; 
(i) to sanction loans to the members; and 
(;) to take 'Such other measures or to do such other acts as may 
be prescribed or required under this Act. 
4.3. (1) The Chief Executive shall convene the meetings of the board 
at the instance of the chairman or president of the multi-State co-opera-
tive society. 
(2) The total numher of meetings of the board in a year and the 10 
venue of meetings may be such as may be prescribed: 
Provided that the board shall meet at least once in every quarter. 
ott. (1) There shall be a Chief Executive, by whatever designation 
called, of every multi-State co-operative society, to 'Qe appointed by the 
board and he shall be a full-time employee of such multi.State' co- 15 
operative society. 
(Z) The Chief Executive shall be a member of the board and of the 
~Uve Committee and such other committees or sUb-committee3 ~ 
maybe constituted under sub-section (1) of section 46. 
(3) The functional directors in national co-operative societies shall 20 
also be members of the board. 
(4) Where the Central Government has subscribed to the extent of 
more than one-baH of the share capital of a national co-operative society, 
it shall be obligatory on such a socip.ty to seek prior approval of the 
Central Govemment to the appointment of Chief Executive and the 25 
functional directors. 
45. The Chief Executive shall exercif'e the powers and discharge the 
functions, specified below, namely:-
(4) day-to-day management of the business of the multi-State 
co-operative society; SO 
(b) operating the· accounts of the multi-State co-operative 
, society and be respomrible for making arrangements for safe custody 
of cash; 
(e) signing .on the dOt!Uments for and on behalf of the multi-
State co-operative society; I 35 
(d)" making _arrangements for th~ proper maint~nance. of II 
various books and records of the multi-State co-operatJve SOCIety • 
and for the correct pr<epa.ration, timely submh;sion of periodical ,(, 
statements and returns in accordance with the provisions of this Act, '4.! 
the rules and tlie bye-laws; "i 
. 40 
(e) eollvenin~ mee1inJ:ts of the general body of the multi-State 
co-operative society. the board and the Executive Committee and 
othE:r cbmmlttees (\l" 'S'Ub-eommittees constituterl undpr !'lllb-ser1.lol1 
(1) of eectlon 46 and maintaining proper records for such meetings; 
(1) making appointments to posts in the multi-State co-operative 4' 
society in accordance with the rules made under clause (e) of sub- :> 
section (2)" of section 42 except the p )sts in relation to which the 
, ,:.t'v~:~' ." .< ~ 

19 
power of appointment vests in the board under clause (d) of that 
sub-section,' , ~...: 
5 
10 
. . (g) assisting the board in the fonnulation of policies ed objec.-
tives and planning; • 
(I,t), furnishing t~ the board ~riodiCal information necespry for 
appral'Smg the operatIons ami functions of the multi-State co-operative 
society; 
. (0 performing such other' duties,. and exercisillg such other 
powers, as may be prescribed or as may be specified in the bye-iaWl 
of the multi-State co-operative society, 
46. (1) 'The board may, 'Subject to such conditions as may be pn. 
cribed, constitute an Executive Committee and other committees or sub-
committees, as may be considered necessary, 
(2) The Executive Committee or other committee or sub-committee 
15 referred to in sub-section (1) shall perfot-m such functions as are assigned 
to it in accordance with the hye-Iaws of the' multi-State cn-operativ:! 
soc.iety. . 
47. If the Central Government is' satisfied that in tJJe public 
interest Or . for the purposes of sec.-uring proper implementation of co-
llo operative production and other developmental programmes approved or 
undertaken by the Central Gov~ment or to secure proper management 
of the business of the multi·State co-oparative 'Societies generally or for 
preventing the affairs of the multi-State co-operative society being con .. 
ducterl in a manner detrimental to the interests of the ll;).etnbers, any 
25 depositors or ereditors thereof, it is necessary to issue directions to any 
class of multi-State co-operative societies generany or to any multi-State 
co-operative society or societies in particular, the Central Government 
may isslle directions to them or t9 it, from time to time, and all such 
multi-State co-operative societies or the society >concerned, as the case 
30 may. be, shall be bound to comply with such directions. 
48. (1) If in the opinion of the Central Registrar the board of any 
multi-State co-operative society is persis~ntly making default or is negli-
gent in the performHnce of the duties imposed on it by thIs Act or the 
~ules or the -bye-laws or has committed any act which is prejudicial to 
35 the interests of the ~ociety or its members, or has omitted or faned to 
comply with any directions .ven to it under section 47 or 
that there is a stalemate in the constitution or funetions ot 
the board, the Central Registrar may, after giving the boaJ;'d 
n.n opportunity. to state its objections. if any, and considerin.~ 
40 the objections, if received, by order in. writing, remove the board 
and appoint one or more administrators, who need not be members of 
the society, to manage the affairs of the society for such period not ex-
ceeding one year, as may be specified in the order. which period' may, 
at tne discretion of the Central Registrar, be extended from time to tim~; 
45 so, however. that the aggregate period ~s not eX'Ceed two years. 
(2) The Centr<11 Registrar may fix such ;remuneration for the adminfs-
1rators. as he mav think fit and the remuneration shall be paid Otlt of the 
funds of th~ multi-State c~operative ~lety. 
(3) f'The administrator shall, 'Subject to the control of the Central 
.50 Registrar and to such instructions as he may from time to time give, 
have- power to ~xer.c~f' all or an~ of the functions of the board or of 
/ 
Com-
mittees 
of t'he 
board 
Central 
Govern-
ment's 
power to 
. live 
directions 
in the 
public 
Interest. 
Super-
session Of ¥ 
board. .. 

t -
Securing 
,JlCisleulon 
ofreeol'cis, 
etc:. 
'1 
' .... ,-. 
20 
any officer of the multi-State co.operative society .. and take all suCh 
actions as may be required in the interests of the ·so~iety. 
(4) Save as otherwise provided: in sub·section (5), the administrator 
shall, before the expiry of his term of office, arrange for the C?nstitution 
of a new .board in accGrdance with the bye-laws of the multi-State co· 5 
operative society. 
(5) If at any time during the period, the administrator is in office, 
the Central Registrar conside.rs it necegsary or expedient so to do, he 
may, by order in writing giving reasons therefor, direct the admini~trator 
to a;rrange for the constitution of a new board for such multi-State J 0 
ca.operative society in accordance with the bye-.laws of such 
soci~ and immediately on the constitution of such board,. the adminis-
trator shall hand over the management of such society to such newly 
constituted board and cease to function. 
(6) Where a . multi~tate co-operative society is ~ndebted to any 15 
financial institution, the Centr&l Registrar shall, before taking any ~ction, ' 
under sub-section (1) in r~ of tha.t society, consult the financial 
iDStitution. . 
, (7) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Central 
Registrar shall, in the case of a co~opera~ive bank, if so required in 20 
writing by the Reserye Bank in the public interest or for preventing the 
affairs of the ca.ope11ltive bank being cqp-ducted in a manner detrimental 
to the interesta of the depositors or for~~Securing the proper management 
of a co-operative bank, pass an order for the supersession of the board 
of that co-ope.rative bank and for the appointment of an administrator 
therefor for ,such period qr ,periods not exceeding five years in the 25 
aggregate as may from time to time be \;pecifted by the Reserve .Bank. 
49. (1) If-
«(I) the records (including registers 1lnd books of. accounts) of 
a multi-State ea.operative society' are likely to be tampered with or 30 
destroyed or the funds or other property of such society are likely 
to be misappropriated or misapplied; or 
(b) the board of a multi-State 'co-operative 'Society is reconstt. 
ruted at a general meeting of the society; or 
(e) the. board of a multi-State co-operati~ society is removed :$5 
by the Central Registrar under sub~ction (1), of section 48; or 
(d) a multi·State co-o~at1tF society ·is ordered to be wound; 
up under section 77 and the outgoing members of the board refuse 
to hand over charge, of the record'S and property of the society to 
those having, or entitled to receive. such charge, 40 
~e Central Registx:ar may apply to the magistrate within wh~e juris-
dIction . the multI-State co-operative society functions for 'secoJring 
the r~cords and p.roperty of the society. 
(2) On receipt of an appli<:ation under sub-section (1), the magistrate' 
may, ~y :a warrant, authorise any police officer not beloVi the rank of 
a sub.lnspector to enter and search any place where wch ret'Ords and 45 
property are kept or are believed to be .kept and to seize such records 
and property; and the records and, property so seizt!d shall be handed .. 
over to the. new board or administrator of the :tnulti.State' co-operative 
society or the liqUidator, as the case may be, 
(S) Every such search and seizure shall h~ ,made in accordan.ce· with. 50 
the provisions of the Code of Criminal Proce~uN. 1973. " . : . 
. '. 2 oH9'I'4.. 

21 
50. The Central Government shall- _ tCoionnS01fitU.' ,;;.( 
(a) constitute a body of persons in the manner prescribed for 
the preparation of a list of persons eligible for apPointment to the body of 
posts of Chief Executives and other managerial posts in national i:::~~ 
5 co-operative societies', ,the maximum p3y-scale of whicih exceeds paration 
such amount as may be prescribed; ot list, ' 
(b) make rules for regulating the recruitment, remuneration, etc. 
allowances and other conditions of service of officers and other 
einployees of nationalco-operative societies. 
10 51. No act Of a multi-State co-ope,rative society or of any board or 
~f an,y committee or of any o~cer of the 'Society shaU bed~med to be 
lnvahd by reason only of the existence of any defect in the procedure 
or in the co~stitution of the society or of the board or of the committee 
thereof or in the appointment or election of an oftloer or on the ground 
15 that such officer was disqualified. to hold office. 
CHAPTER V 
PRIvILEGllS OF MULTI-STATE Co..OPmATlVE SOCIE'nES 
52. The registration of a multi..state co-operative society shall render 
it a body corporate by the name under which it is .registered having 
~o perpetual succession alLd a commoo seal" and with power to hold 
property, enter into contract, institute and def,end suits and other legal 
proceedings and to do all things necessary for the pu.rposes for which 
it is constituted. 
t53. A multi-State co-operative society shall have a charge.on the 
!lt5 share or contribution or interest in the capital and on the deposits of a 
member or past or decessed member and on any dividend, 
I 
bonUs or profits payable to a member or past ,member or the estate of 
a deceased member in respect of any debt due from such member o.r 
past member, or the estate of such deceased member to the society, and 
30 may se~-off any sum cr,edited or payable to a member or past member 
or the estate of deceased member in or towards payment of any such 
debt.-
54. (1) Subject to the provisions of sectioft 53, the share f)r contribution 
or interest of a member or past or deceased member in the 
35 capital of a multi-State co-operative society lihall not be liable to attach-
ment o.r sale under any decree -or order of any court in respect of any 
debt or Jiability incurred by such member, and an official assigrieeor a 
,receiver under any law relating to insolvency shall not be entitled to 
or have any claim on such share or contribution o.r interest. 
40 (2) The reserve fund, or the bad debt reserves, or the provident 
, fund of the employees, of a multi-State co-operati~ society invested by 
such society in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules 
shall not be liable to attachment under any decree or order of a court 
in respect of any debt or liability incurred by the 'Society. 
55. Any register Qr list of members or shares kept by any multi-
45 State co-operative society shall be prima 'facie evidence of any of the 
following particulars entered therein, namely:-
(a) the date on which snyperson entered in such register 6r 
list became a member; 
Acts of 
multi-
State co-
operative 
locieties 
not to be 
JDvalidat-
ed by 
certain 
defects, 
Multi-
atateco-
operative 
lociety to 
be body 
cOrporate. 
Charle 
and 
set-off 
, \ 
:.-
in respect 
otshare 
orcontrJ-
bunon or 
4lterest 
otmem- .... 
ber •. 
.. 
Share or 
CODtri· 
butJoa 
or interelt 
not liable 
toattacb· 
mom. 
Kepler ol,~ 
mcmbm. 

?~dmlssl. 
tlnlty of 
copy of 
entrY" 
evidence. 
22 
(b) the date on which any such person ceased to be a member. 
56. (1) A copy of any entry in a book of a multi-State co-operative 
society regularly kept in the course of its business shall, if certified in 
such manner as may be prescribed. be received in any suit or legal pro-
ceedings as prima ftJCie evidence of ,the exi'$t\ID<:e of SUCh entry an~ shall 5 
be admitted as evidence of the matters, transactions and accounts 
therein recor.ded i~ every case wh~e, and to the 'Same exrent as, the 
original entry itse1f is admissible. 
{2) No officer of a multi-State co-operative society and no officer in 
whose office the books of a multi-State co-operative society are deposited 10 
,after liquidation shall, in any legal proceedIngs to whiCh the 'Society o.r 
the liquidator is not a party. be compelled to produce any of the 
society's books or' documents the contents of which can be prove:! under 
this section, or to appear as a witness to prove the matters, transactions 
and accounts therein recorded, except under an order of a court or an 15 
arbitrator made for a special cause. ' 
51. Nothing in clauses (b) and (c) of sub-section (1) of section 17 
of the Registration Act, 1908, shall apply to-
l~of 1908. 
Exemption 
from com-
pulIory~ 
gistration 
of ins-
trumonu. 
(a) any instrument relating to shares in a multi-State co-
operative society notwithstanding ,that the assets of the society 20 
consist in whole at' in . part of immovable property; or 
(b) any" debenture issued by any such society and not creating. 
declaring, assigning. limiting or' extinguishing any right, title or 
interest to or ·in immovable property, except in so far as it entitles 
the holder thereof to the security afforded by. a . registe{ed instru-
ment whereby the society has mortgaged, conveyed. or \ ot~erwise 25 
transferred the whole or p~t of its immovable property "or any 
interest therein to trustees upon trust for the benefit of the holders 
of such debentures; or 
(c) an endorsement upon or trander of any" debenture issued 30 
by any such society. 
"1edUCtiOD 58. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time 
from' '. being in force, a member of a mUlti-State co-operative society may 
salary to executive an agreement in favour of that society providing that his em-
=i-State ployer disbursing his salary or wages shall be competent to deduct every 35 
c:o-operatlft month from the salary or wages payable to him, such amount as may 
eoclety'. be specified in the agreement and to pay the amount so deducted to the 
clllim in society in satisfaction of any debt or other demand owing by the member 
certain to the society. 
caIeI. 
(2) On the execution of such agreement, the employer disbursing 40 
the salary or wages of the members shall, if 'so required by the multi-
State co-operative society by a requisition in writing and so long IrS 
the society does not intimate that the whole -of such debt or other 
demand has been paid, m8kethe deduction in accordance with the 
agreement and pay the amount so deducted to the soCiety within a 
periodot fourteen days of. the date on which deduction has been made. 45 
as if it were a P8,1't of the 'Salary or wages payable on the day as re-
'quired under the Payment of Wages Act, 1936, and such payment shall 
be valid dischlU'ge of the employer for his liability ,to pay the amount 
deducted. , . . 
'c 
.. of IInS, 

r •. __ 
'\ .. ~ .. 
(3) If after the receipt of a requisition made Wld<er sub-section (21), 
the employer disbursing the salary o,r wages of the member at any time 
fails to deduct the amOUll·t specified in the requisition from the· salary 
or wages payable to the member concerned or makes default in r~, 
5 mitting the amount deducted. to the multi-Stateco-operative society the 
society shall be entitled .to recove,r any such amount from such empioyer 
as arrears of land revenue and the amoUnt so due from such employer 
shall rank in priority in respect of the liability of such employer equal 
to that of the salary o.r wages in arrears, 
10 59. Notwitbstanding .a,'lything co_oed iu any law .Ior dIe.time 
being in force, the Central G01'enament Ol' a SbItc Government may, 
with a view to prome, 'jog co-operafive IDOvemelit,-
(a) subscribe to the share capital of a IDUlti-State co-openCife 
society; 
J 5 (b) pve loi\DS or make aclvantes to a muJd..s.t.e cCHpel'ltive 
llO 
society; 
(c)gu&I'antee the repayment of; principal aod payment 01 
iDIerest on 4ebeDtures issued by a multi-&ate co-oJlft1H:ive soci.)'; 
(d) ~ the repayment of s1we capital of ... nwl1i-State 
cO-Opet'8dve iOCiety and dividends thereon at sucb rates as ... y be 
apecified ~. the Central Govenuneot or tile State Govel'lllMtllt; 
ee)' guarantee tbe repayment of. principal aod payment ,of 
interest 08 Ioon5 and advances to a multi-State co-operaUve 8Odety; 
.(f) give financial a<;Sistance in any other form, locIucIing subsi-
dies, to ... multi-State co-operadve society. 
CHAPTER VI 
PROPERTIES A.NII FUNDS OF MULTI-STATE CO-OPEBATIVE SOCIJr1'IES 
60. (1) No part of the funds, other than net profits, of a multi-State 
co-operative society shall be divided by way of bonUs or dividend or 
30 othenvise distributed among its members. 
(2) The net profits of a multi-State co-operative society referred to 
in sub-section (1) in respect of a society earning profits shall be calcu-
lated by deducting from th.e gross profits for the year, aU interest accrued 
and accruing in relation to amounts which are overdue, establishment 
35 charges, interest payable on loans and deposits, audit fees, wotking 
expenses inclu,ding repairs, rent, taxes and depreciation, bonus payable to 
employees uncler the law relating to payment of bonus for the time being 
in fo,rce, and equalisation fund for such bonus, provision for payment of 
income-tax and making approved donations under the Income-tax Act, 
43 011961. 40 1961, development rebate, provision for d~velopment fund, bad debt 
fund, price fluctuation fund, dividend equalisation fund, share capital • 
.redemption fund, investment fluctuation fund, provision for retirement 
benefit;; to employees, and after providing for or writing off bad' debts 
and 106SeS not adjusted against any fund created out of profit: 
45 Provided that such society may, add to the net profits for the y~, 
interest accrued in the preceding years, but actually recovered dwinl 
the year: 
Prov'l'ded further that in case of such multi-State co-operative societies 
as do not have share capital, the surplus of income over expenditure 
shall not be treated as net profits and such S'LtTplus shall be dealt with 
50 in accordance with the bye-laws. . 
If' . 
Govern-
ment 
aid to 
multi-
State co-
operative 
societies, 
Funds 
not to be 
divided 
bywa, 
of profit. 

'1 
\ 
Invest-
mentor 
funds. 
.)-
61. (1) A multi-State co-operative society shall, out of . its net ~ts 
in any year-
(a) transfer an amount not less than twenty-five per cent. to 
the reserve fund; and 
(b) credit such portion, as may be pt'etleribed, to the co-operative 5 
education fund maintained by the National Co-operative Union of 
India Limited, New Delhi. 
(2) Subject to such conditio~s as may be prescribed, the ~alance of' 
the net profits may be utilised for all or any of the following pUrposes, 
namely: - . 10 , , 
(a) payment of dividend .to members on their paid\..up share 
capital at a .rate not exceeding the prescribed limit; 
(b) constitution of, or contributi~n to, sUClh special funds in-
cluding education funds, as may be sPecified in the bye-laws; 
.(e) donation of amounts not exceeding five per cent. of the r5 
net profits for any p111'pOSe connected with the development of • 
co-operative movement or charitable purpose as defined in section 
2 of the Chart table Endowments Act, 1890; 
(d) payment of ex gratia amount to employees of the mu1ti-
State co-operative society to the extent and in the manner specified 20 
in the. byl!-laws . 
. (3) The funds of a multi-Sta.e co-operative society shall not be 
utilised for. any political purpose. 
62. A multi-State CQo()perative society 
f~ 
maY' invest or deposit its 
25 
(a) in a co-operative bank, State co-operative bank, co-operative 
land mortgage bank, co-ope.rative land development bank or Central 
C<H>perative bank; or 
(b) in any of the securities specified in section 20 of the Indian 
6 of 1890. 
Tr,usts Act, 1882; or so2oflaaz. 
(Q in th.e shares or securities of any other multi-State c0-
operative society or any co-operative soeiet\Y; or' 
(d) in the shares, securities or assets of any other imtitution, 
with the previous apprQval of the Centra~ Registrar; or 
(e) with any bank; or :J5 
<f) . in such other mode as may be ,prescribed. 
Explanation.-In clause (e), "bank" means any banking com-
pany as ~fined in claule (c) of section 5 of the Banking Regulation 
Act, 1949, and includes,-
(i) the State Bank of India constituted under the State 40 
10 of IH9. 
'. 
Bank of India Act, 1956; 23011915. 
·t 
(ii) a subsidiary bank as defined in clause (k) of section 2 
of the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959; , 
. (iii) a corresponding new bank constituted under section 3 
of the· Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Under- 45 
38 of 1~59 . 
takings) Act, 1970 or a corresponding new bank constituted under Ii of 19'70. 
section 8 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer 
of Undertakings) Act, 1980. to tilING. 
" 

]0 of 1949. 
19 of 191J2. 
.. 
! . 
13. (1) A mu1U-State co-operatiw 'Society, other than a co-ope.ratlve 
bank, shall not make a loan- ., 
(a) to a member on the security of his share or on the security 
, of a non-member; or 
5 (b) to a non-member: 
Provided that with, the general or special sanction of the Central 
Registrar, a multi-State co-operat.ive ~ocietY' may I\'lake loans to another 
multi-State co-operative society. . 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in 'iu:b-section (1), a multil 
10 State co-operative society may make a loan to a depositor on .the security 
of his deposit. . 
84. A multi-State co-operattve society shall ret1E!ive deposits and 
loans only to such extent and unde-,r oguch conditions as may be specified 
in the bye-laws: 
15 Provided that a co-operative bank shalt be governed by the provisions 
of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949. . 
65. Save as provided in sections 6'3 and 64 the transaction of a multi· 
State co-operative s~iety With any person ~ther titan a member 'Shall 
be subject to such prohibitions and I restrictions. if any. as may be 
20 ptrescrN:>ed. 
66. (1) A multi-State co-operative socnety' having such numPer or 
class of emp]oye~ as may be prescribed may establish a contributory 
provident fund for the benefit of such emploYees.to which shall be 
credited 'all contributions made by the employees and the society in 
25 accordance with the bye~lawsof the I'Ociety. 
(2) Monies standing to the credit of any contributory provident fund 
established by a multi-State co-operative society under suh-'SeCtion (1) 
shall not- . .. 
(a) be used in the business of the society; 
30 (b) form part of the Qssets of the society; , 
(c) be liable tq attachment or 'be subject to any (,lther proce* 
of any court or other authority.. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything'contained in this section, a provident 
fund estabJi~hed by a mult-State co-operative society to which tbe 
35 prQv.fsions of the Emplo~' Provident Funds and MiscellaneoU8 ProvI-
sions Act. 1952. apply, 'shall be governed by that Act. 
CHAPl'ER VII 
AUDIT, INQUIRY, INSPECTION AND SURCHARGE 
~ 
Reatr1e-
tionson 
loans. 
Restrk-
tiona on 
borrow-
in,. 
Restrie-
UObson 
other 
transac-
tionswlth 
DOft-
members. 
Contribu-
tory pro-
vident 
fund. 
67. (1) The Centra1 Registrar shall audit, or caUSe to be audited 1JY Audit 
40 a person ,authorised by him by general. or 'Special orde.t'. in writing in 
this behalf. the accounts of every multi-81ate co-operative Aocfety at 
least once in each year . 
(2)'e audit und£'r su~tion' (1) shall include an examination of 
mrerdue debts, if any. the verification of tl'ie casH balance and securitieIJ, . 
:25 and a valuation of the assets :mrl liabiUties of the multi-State co-operative 
society, 
" 

Inspection 
of multi. 
~, State co_ 
J. -1-
o~rative 
societies. 
(3) The p~son auditing t.1re accounts of a multi-State co-operative 
society shall have free access to the..,books, accounts, papers, vouchers,. 
stock an~ other property of such society and shall be allowed to verify 
its cash balan.ce and securities. 
(4) The directors, managers, administrators and ()th~ officers of .t~ 5 
multi-State co-operative soci~ty shall furnish to the person auditing the 
accounts of the society all such infonnat1oh as to its transactions and 
working as such person may requi.re. 
(5) The Central Registrar or the person. authorised by him under 
sub-section (1) to audit th'e accounts of a mult1-State co-operative society I () 
shall have power. where neccssary-
(a) to summon at the time of the audit any officer,. agent, 
servant or member of the society, past or present, who, he has 
reason to believe can give valuable mformntion in regard to trans-
actions of the society or the manag(!mcnt of the affairs; and J 5-
(b) to require the production of any book or d~cument relating 
to the affairs of, or any cash or securities be~.onging to, the society 
by any officer. agent, servant, or member of the society in possession 
of 'Such books, do cum en ts. cash or securities and in the event of 
serioUs irregularities discovered duri.ng audit. to take them into 20 
custody. 
(6) If at the time of audit the accounts of a multi;State co-operative 
soci~ty are not complete, the Central Registrar or the per~n authorised 
by him under sUb-section (1) to aUdit may caU'se the accounts to be 
written up, at the expense of the society. 25 
(7) Audit fee, if any, due from any multi~tate co-Gperative society 
shall be determined by the Central Registrar and shall De recoverable 
in the sam~ manner us is provided.' in section 89. 
68. (1) The Central Registrar, or any person authorised by him by 
genehl or special order in, writ.ing in this behalf, may inspect a multi- 30 
State co-operative society. 
(2) (a) For the purpose 'of inspedtion unde~ sub-section (1), 'the 
Central ~egistrar or the person authorised by him under that sub-tsection 
shall at all times have access to all books, accounts, papers, vouchers, 
securities, stock and other property of that society and may, in the 3~ 
event of serious irregularities discovered during inspection, take them 
into custody and shall have power to verify th~ cash balance of the 
society and . subject to the general Ql" special order of the Central 
Registrar to call a meeting of the board and also a general meeting of 
the society wh~ such general meeting is, in his opinion, necessary. '40 
~'(b) Every officer or member of a multi-State co-operative society 
shall furnish such information with regard to the working of the 
society as the Central Registrar or the person making such inspection 
may require. 
15 
(3) A copy of the report 8f inspection und~.r this secti~n ~\o\'l be . 
communicated to the multi-State co-operative society within a period of 
three months from the date of completion of sllch inspection . 
• 

27 
68. (1) The Central Registrar may, of his own motion or on the 
application. of a majority Of the members of the board or of not less 
than one-third of the members, hold an inquiry or direct. some person 
authorised, by him by order .in writing in this behalf to hold an inquiry 
5 into the c~nstitution, working and financial condition of a multi-State 
co-operati v'e society. 
(2) The!' Central Registrar or the person authorised by him under 
sUb-section (1) shall have the following powe.rs, namely:-
(a) he shall at all reasonable times have free access to the books, 
10 accounts, documents, securities, cash and other properties belonging 
to or in the custody of the multi-State co-operative society and may 
summon any person in possession or responsible for the custody of 
any such books,accounts, documents, securities, cash or other pro-
perties to produce the same, at any place specified by him; 
15 
20 
• (b) he may, notwithstanding any rule 'or bye-law specifYPlg the 
period of notice for a general meeting of the multi-State co-operative 
society, .require the officers of the society to call a general meeting 
of the society by giving nO.tice of not less than seven Jays at such 
time and place 'at the headquarters of the society to consider such 
matters,as may be directed by him; and where the officers of the 
society refuse or fail to caB. such a meeting, he shall have power 
to call it hamself; 
(c) he may summon any person who is reasonably believed by 
him to have any knpwledge of the affairs of the multi-State co-opera-
25 tive society to appear before him at any place at the headquarters of 
the society or any branch there.of and may examine such person on 
oath. 
. 
(3) Any meeting called under dause (b) of sub-section (2) shall have 
all the po~crs of a general meeting of the society called under the bye-
JU laws of the society and its proceedings shall bf! regulated by such. bye-
laws. 
(4) . The Central Registrar shall within a period of three months of 
the date of receipt of the report, communicate' a brief summary of the 
report of the inquiry to the multi-State co-operative society. the financial 
35 institutions, if any to which the society is affiliated, and to the person or 
authority, if any, ~t whose instance the fnquiry iii made. ' 
70. (1) The Central Registrar shall, 011 the application of a creditor 
of a multi-State co-operative, society, inspect, or direct some person 
authorised by him by order in writing in this behalf to inspect, the 
40 books of the society: 
Provided that no such inspection shall be made 'unless the npplicant-
I..a) satisfies' the Central Registrar- that the debt is a sum then 
due, and that he has dem~nded payment thereof and has not received 
satisfaction withiil a reasonable time; and 
(0) depotiits with the Central Registrar such sum as security 
for the cost:; nf the prop·o..ed inspec.tion ad -the Central Registrar may .• require. 
IJl~pcc­
tiuno! 
books ot 
indebted 
multi· 
state co-
operative 
sodot!P~ ..".,{ 

'j' 
Costsot 
influlry 
an41ft. 
Ip4ICtion. 
ltflCCl\'ery 
of costs. 
Repay-
ment 
ete. 
• 
(2) 'i'he Central Registrar shall communicate the :result of any such 
'inSpection to the creditor. 
71. Where an inquiry ,is held under section 69 or an inspection is made 
under section 70, the Central Registrar may apportion the costs, or such 
, part of t.he 'Costs, as ~e may think fit, between the mlJ.lti-State co-operative 5 
society, the membel's or creditor demanding an inquiry ~ inspection, 
and the offirefs or former officers and the members or past members of 
that society: 
P.rovided that-
'(a) no order 1)£ apportionment of the costs shall be made -under 10 
this section unless the society or the person liable to pay the costs . 
. thereunder has' had a, reasonable opportunity of being heard; 
(b) the Central Registra.rshall state in writing Wlder his own 
hand the grounds on which the costs are apportioned. 
72. Any sum awarded by way of costs under section 71 may be re- I ~ 
covered, on application to a magistrate having jurisdiction in the place , 
where the person, f.rom whom the money i'S claimable, actually and, 
vo:Luntarily resid~ or ,carries on business, and such magistrate shall 
recover the same as if it were a fine imp0'5ed by himself. 
73. (1) ,If in the course of an audit, inquiry, inspectioll 0,1.' the winding :,z;) 
up of a multi-State co-operative society, it is found that any person, who 
is or was entI'l.ls~d with the organisa~on or management of such 'Society 
or who.is or has at any time been an officer or an employee of the society. 
luis made any payment contrary to this Act, the rules .or the bye-laws, . 
or has caused any deficiency in tl\'e assets of the society by breach of 25 
trust or wilful negligence Or has misappropriated or fraudulently retained 
any money or other property belonging to such. society, the Central 
Registrar may, of his own motion or on the application of ,the board, 
. liquidator or any creditor, inQuire himself or direct any person authorised 
by him, by an order in writing in this behalf, to inqUire into the conduct 30 
of su(!h person within a period o~ two years from the date' of the report 
of the audit, inspection OJ' inquiry or the· date of the order of winding 
-up, as the'ease may be: . 
Provided that w~ the Central Registrar is satisfied that sucl1 . 
i,n,qniryco.uld not be commenced during the period of two' years afore- 35 
said on account of fraud or concealment of facts make, or direct the 
inquiry to be made, within such period' not eXceeding six years from 
'the date of the report of the audit, inspection or inquiry or the date of 
the order o! winding up, as he may think fit. 
(2) Where aninq~y is'made ulld'<'!l' sub-section (l), the Central 40 
Registrar' may', after gtving ,the person concerned a reasonable oppor-
tunity of being heard, make an order requiring him to repay or restore 
the money or property or any part thereof, with interest at such rate, 
or to ftay contribution and costs or compensation to such extent as the 
C-entral R&gistrn,r l1,lIlY ~r~nsidcr jU~j; ,md ;quit.able. '45 

CHAJ;lTER VIIl 
SE'ITLEM&NT OF DISPUrES 
74. (1) "Notwithstanding /iUlything contained 10 any other law £o~ the Dilpu*. 
time being in force, if any djK'u~ (other than .8 dispute regarding dis-
5 ciplinary action taken by a mufti-Stateco-operat~e· society against its paid 
employee or an industr:al dispute as defined in clause (k) of seetion·2 of 
140f 1947. the Indu.strial Disputes Act, 1947) touching the con'3titution, management 
10 
• 
15 
1iI0 
or business of a multi-State co-operative society arises- . 
(a) among members, . past membe.rs and persons claiming 
through members, past members and deceased members, or 
(b) between a member, .past member or a person claiming 
through a member, past, member or deceased member and the multi-
State co-opera'tive society, its board or any officer, aglent or employee 
of the multi-State co-operative society or liquidator, past or present. 
or 
(c) between the multi-State co-operative society Or its board and . 
any past boa.rd, any officer, agent or employee, or any past officer, 
past agent or past employee or the nominee, heirs or legal represen-
tatives of any deceased officer, deceased agent or deceased employee 
of the multi-State co-overative society, or 
(d) between the multi~State co-operative society and' any othat 
rnulti-State co-operative society. between a multi-State co-o~ative 
society and liquidator of another IIlulti-State co-operative society 
or between the liquidator of one multi-State co-oPerative., society 
and the liquidator ot another mlJ.lti-State co-operative society, 
such dispute shall be referred to the Central Registrar fQr decision and 
no c~urt shall haVe juhsdiction to entertain any suit or other proceedings 
in respect of such dispute: 
Provided that all disputes in which a national co-operative society ia 
30 a party shall be refe,rred to the Cer:ttral Registrar or any officer em· 
powered to exercise Ithe powers of the Central Registrar . 
. (2) :ror the purposes of 8ub-section(1), the following shall be deemed 
to be d~sputes touching the constitution, management or the b11Sinew of 
a multi-State co-operative societYj name1y':-
35 (a) a claim by the mU1ti-State co-oper!1tive sociey for any debt 
45 
01' demand due to it from a member or the nom:ne!e, heirs or legal 
representatives of a creceased member, whether such debt or demand 
be admitted or not; 
(b) a claim by a surety against the principlil deb~ where the 
multi-State co-operative society has recov-ered from the surety any 
amount in respect of aay debt or dema!1d d'ue to it from the principal 
debtor as a result of the defaUlt of the principal debtor, whether 
such debt or demand is admijted or not; 
(c) any dispute arising:U; ~e~tl,W11h' ~ eletltio~ Qt'SDf 
~. ~u.Ji-~te ,~atiw ~. 

'7 
Limlta. 
. \ion. 
" 
settle-
mentof 
dispUtes. 
:,,4, 
~,-
. " ~:'1 ., ,', .. ~.: 
i 
(3) If nny question arises whether a dispute referred td tlie Central • Registrar is or is not a dispute touching'the constitution, m~agement or 
bUsiness ofa multi-State c~operative society, the decision thereon of the 
Central RegistrRr 'iiha11 be final and shall not be called in question in any 
~~ , 5 
. ~ 
75. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Limftation Act,' 
1963, bu.t subject to the specific provisions made in thi$ Act, tit; period of ~6 of 1963 . 
limitation in the case of a dispute referred to the Central Registrar 
~han,- . 
(a) when the dispute relates to the recovery of any swn includ- 10 
ing, interest thereon due to a multi-State co-operative society by a , ., 
member thereof, be compuUed. from the date on which such member 
,dies or ceases to be a member of ithe 'Society; , 
(b) save as otherwise provided in clause (c), when the dispute 
relates to any act or omission on the part of any of:the parties 15 
referred to in clause (b) or clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 
74, be six years from the date on which the act or omission, with 
reference to which the dispute arose, took place; 
(c) when the dispute relates to a multi-State co-operative society 
which has been ordered to be ,wound V-p under secti,on 77 or in 20 
respect of which an admini'strator has 'been appointed under section 
48, be six years from the date of the order issued under section 77 
or section 48, as the case may be; 
• 
(d) when -the dispute -is in respect of an election of an officer of 
a multi-State co-operative 'Society, be one month from the date of 25 
the declaration of the result of ,the election. 
(2) The period of limitation in the case of any dispute, except 
'those mentioned in sub-section (1), which are required to be referred to 
the Central Registrar shall be regulated by the provisions of the Limita-
tion Act, 1963, as if the! dispute were a suit and the Central Registrar a go 36 of 1963. 
civil court. 
(3) +iotwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and (2), 
the Central Registrar may admit a dlispute after the expiry of the period 
of limitation, if the applicant satisfies the Central Registrar that he had 
sufficient cause for not rt!ferring the dispute within such pe~iod. 35 
76. (1) The Central Reg,istrar may, on receipt. of the reference ;.0£ 
dispute under section 74-· 
(0.) elect to decide the dispute himself; or 
• (b) tranosfer it for disposal to any other person' who has been 
invested by the Central Go~.rnment with pOwers in that behalf. 
(2) The Central Registrar may withdraw any reference transferred 
under clause (b) of sub-section (1) and' decide it hhnselfor refer the 
~~ for ~ecis!on td any ffl.!erjUsOq whcl has been in~~d by the Ce'n .. 
frat Governm~n~ wfth power~ lJ1tltafbe~'aff. , , ' ,',.... .. 
", ,.... er,'" ," .. ,..' 

''I of 1981. 
, 
47 of 1961. 
(3) The Ceri.tral Registrar or any other person to whom a dispute is 
referred for decision under this section may, pending the decision. of the 
dispute, make such interlocutory orders as he may deem necessary in the 
interest of Justice. 
-CHAPTER IX 
WINDING UP OF MULTI-STATE Co-oPERATIVJIJ socIEn~ 
77. (1) If the Central-Registral', after nn inquiry has been held under 
section 6!} or. an inspection has been made under section 70, or 
on receipt of an application made by not less than three-fourths of the 
10 member~ of a multi-State co-operative'society, is of opinion that the 
'society ought tl) be wound up, ~e may, after giving ,the society a reason-
able opportUl}.ity of making its representations, by order, direct it· to be 
wound up. 
(2) The Central Registrar may, of his own motion and after giving 
15 the multi-State co-operative society a reasonable opportunity of making 
its representations, make an order directing the winding up of the multi-
State co-operative society- . 
(a) where it is a condition of the registration of the soc:ety that 
the society shall consist of at least fifty members and the number·of 
20 members has been reduced to less than fifty; or " 
(b) where the multi-State co-operative society has not com-
menced working within a period of six months of the date of its 
registration or such extended' period as the Central Registrar may 
allow in this behalf or has ceased to flUlction in accordance with co-
25 operative principles. 
(3) The Centrd Registrar may cancel an order for the winding up 
of a multi-State co-operative society, at any time, in anY' case where, in 
his opinion, the- society should continue to exist. 
(4) A copy of ~-Ilch order shall be communicated by registered post. 
30 'to the multi-State co-operative society and to the financial institutions, 
if any, of which the society is a member. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, no c~operative 
bank shall be wound up except with the previous sanction in writing of 
the Reserve Bank. 
35 78. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained ·elsewbet'e in 
this Act, the Central Registrar ,shaLl make an order for the wlndJag up 
of a co-operative bank, if so required by the Reserve Bank in the cir-
cumstances mentioned in section 13D of the Deposit Insurance aDd 
Credit Guarantee Corporation Act, 1961. 
40 79 .. Where a co-operative bank, being an insured bank wit:hin the 
meaning of the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation Act, 
1961 is wound up and the Deposit Insurance . Corporation ~as become 
llabie to the depositors of the in~Ul'ed bank under sU~lon (1) of 
. 16 f tha" Act the DepoSlt Insurance Corporation shall be re-secbon 0 U , th ci ta· . b d b the llquidator or such other persoll in e rcums neeli, 
4a = t:S:x.te~ and in tb'8 manner provided in section Il Q( ~. At:t. • 
Wind-
ing 
up of 
multi-
Stat.eco-
operative 
societies. 
Winding 
up of cO-
ope .... tive 
hlUlks at 
thediree-
tum of 
Relerve 
Bank_ 
Reim-
bursement 
to the...J 
Deposit 
Insurance 
Corpora-
tionby 
UqlU4t\qt. 

". . Liquidation. 
.. 
lh;. (1) Where the Central Registrar has made an order under sec\..Jn 
77 for the winding up of a multi-State co-operative society, the Central 
Registrar may appoint a liquidator for the purpose ll'1d fix his remunera-
tion . 
(2) A liquidator shall, on appointment, take ,into his custody or uJ.lder 5 
his control all the property, effects and actionable claims to 
which the multi-State co-operative society is or appears to be 
, , entitled and shall take such steps as he may deem necessary or expedient 
Powers of 
1IIpidatcII. 
'. . ..... .'. 
to prevent loss or deterioration of, or damage to, such property, effects 
and claims and he may carry on the business of th~ mu11i-State co-opera- 10 
tive society so far ~ may be necessary ,with the previous approval of t~e 
Central Registrar. ' " 
(3) Where an appeal is preferred under clause (k) of sub-section 
(1) 9f section 90, an order for the wjnding up o~ a rpuW-State co-operative 
society made under section 77 shall not operate thereafter until ,the order 15 
is confirmed in appeal: 
Provided that ,the liquidator shall continue to have custody or control 
of the property, effects and actionable claims mentioned in sub-'Section 
(2) an~ have authQ.tity to take the steps referred to in that sUb,;.section. 
t4) Where an order for the winding up of a multi~State co-operatiye 20 
society is set aside in appeaL, the property, effacts and actionable claims 
of the society shall re-vest in the society. 
81. (1) Subject to any rules made in this behalf, the whole of the 
assets of a multi-State' co~perative society In respect of which an order 
for winding up has '~n made, shal1 vest in the liquidator appointeO 25 
under section 80 from the date on which the order takes effect and the 
liqUidator shall have ;power to realise such assets by 'Sale or otherwise. 
(2) Such liquidator shall also have p~wer, subject to the conkol of 
the Central Registrar-
(a) to institute and def~nci suits and other legal proceedings on 30 
behalf of the multi-State co-operative ~ociety by the name of his 
office; , , 
(b) to determine from time to time the contribution (including 
de~ts Que and costs of liqufdation) to be made or remainmg to be 
ina(le by the members or past members or by the estates or nominees, 35 
heirs or legal representatives of deceased members ox by any oftlcera 
or fonnerofficers, to the assets of the multi-State co-operative 
~~; . 
(c) to investigate all claims against the multi-State co-operative 
samet, a~d'Subject to the provisions of ,this Act, to decide questions 40 
of prlarity arising between claimants; 
- (d) ,to pay cla-ims against'the multi-State co-operative society, 
In.cluding interest up to the date of winding up according to their 
respective priorities; if any, an full or rateably, as the assets of the 
society may ,permit; the 'surplus; if any, remaining afw payment 4-5 
of ~,-<:1aiJns, being ,applie~in:,.payment of interest from the c1a1e of 
\ eUCb orde.r of 'winding up at a rate fixed by him bUt nd.t e:KceediD~ 
the contract rate in my caSe; '"'I 
I' 

5 
10 
15 
• 
,-;l to determ.i ... :~,~! what persons and in what propo.rtions the 
costs of the.liqutdation are to be borne~ 
(f) to determine whether any person is a member, past member 
or nominee of a deceased member: . 
(gr to give 'Such directions in .regard to the collection and distd-
bution 01 the assets of the multi-State cd-operative society as may 
appear, td him to be necessary· for winding up the. affairs of that 
society; 
(h) to carry on the business of the multi:..state cO-:-Operative 
society so far a's may be neces$ary for .the ;beneftcial winding up of 
the same; . 
(i) to make any compromise o.r arrangentent with creditors or 
persons claiming to be creditors or having or alleging to have any 
claim, present' OJ,' future, whereby the multi-State co-operative 
society may be rendered liable; 
(j) to make any comp.romise or arrangement ~ith an:' person 
between wllom and the multi-State co-operative society there exi'Sts 
any dispute and to refer any such dispute for decision; 
(k) after consulting the members of the multi-State co-operative 
society, to jiispose of the surplus, if any, remaining after paying the 
claims against the society, in such manner as may be prescribed; 
(l) to compromise all calls or liabilities to calls and debts' and 
liabilities capable of resulting in debts,· and all claims, present or 
future, certain or contingent, subsisting or alleged to be subsisting 
between the, multi-State co-operative society and a . contributory 
01' ,other debtor or person apprehending liability to the 
multi-State \::o-operative soci~ty and all questions in any way relating 
• to or affecting the assets. or the winding up of the society on such 
terms as may be agreed and take any security for the, discharge ot 
any s\lch call. liability, debt or claim and give a complete discharge 
in respect thereof. 
(3) When .the affairs of a multi-State co-operative society hay~ been 
wound up, the liquidator shall make a report to the Central Regbtrar 
and depo'sit the recordt; of the society in such place as the 'Central 
35 Registrar may. direct, 
82. The surplus ~ssets. as shown in the report of a Uqutdaoor of a 
multi-Btate co-operative society which is wound up,- ' 
(a) fuay. if the bye-laws o( the multi-State co-operative ''SOCiety 
specify the purpose for which surp!lUs shall be utUfsed. be utiUsed 
bv the Centnd Registrar for the said pUI'J'9se, and . ~ 
(b) if the bye-laws aforesaid do not specify the purpose, be 
divided by the Central Registrar, with the pl'cvious sanction of the 
Central Government, :1rno~,gst, the member:;, of such multi.S~ate 
ro'-.oVC'l"afiw se'cje~' in ~lId'1 manner B:; may be .p~~., ,;: 

Priority 
ofcaatr1-
13. Notwithstanding anything contamt:d in any law relating to in-
1 40:1.. trib tion assessed l.... a liquidator shall rank next to 'SO veney .iIle con u ,"'1 ,1 1 
debts d~e to the Central Governm'!nt or a State Government or a oca 
>",," ' buttons ·assessed' 
byliqui-
dator. 
Power of 
Central 
Registrar 
to aance' 
reg/atra-
tionofa 
multi-
State cO-
operative 
socJet;,. 
becu-
.... tionof .' 
'1 
\ 
Qeeisions, 
eic. 
Execu-
tiq~ot 
orde~sof 
Jiqwutor'. 
Attach-
ment 
\ bef0t:e 
~ward. 
tor. 
authority in accordance with the order of priority in insolvency p.ro<,'ecd-
jngs. 5 
M. (1) The Central Registrar may, after considering the report of the 
liquidatar made to him under sub-section (3) of section 81, order the 
regiitration of the multi-State co-operative society to be cancel~ed and 
on such cancellation, that society shall stand dissolved. 
(2) An order passed under sub-section (1) shall be comm~lcated by 10 
registered post to the president of the mu1ti.st~te Co-oper~t1Ve society 
and to the fJnancJal institutions.. if any, of whIch the SOcIety was a 
member. 
CHAPTER X 
Exlx:trrION OF DIJCRIIES, ORDERs AND DECISIONs 
85. EverY decision or order made under s';!ction '30. section 31, 
seetion 73, section 76. section 90, section 92 or section 93 shalt, if not 
cai-ried out,- . 
IS 
(4) on a certificate signed by the Central Registrar or any 
person authorised by him in writing in this behalf, be deemed to be 110 
a dec:ree ot a civU court and shall be executed in the same manner 
as if it wer.e a decree of such court; 'or 
(b) where the decision or order provides for the recovery of 
money, be executed according to the law for the time being in force 
for the recovery of arrears of land revenue: ' R~ 
Provided that any application for the recovery in such manne.r· ot 
any: sum 'shall be made-
(0 to the Collector ~nd shall. be accompani~ by a certificate 
sispled by the Central Registrar or by any person authorised by 
him in writing in this behalf; ',' 30 
(if) wit.hin twelve years from the date fixed in the decision 
or order and if no such date is fixed, .from the' date of the decision 
or order, as the case may be; or 
(c) be executed 'by the Central Regilitrar or any person autho-
r~, by him in writing in this behalf, by attachment and sale or 35 
sale without attachment of any property of the person or a multi. 
State co-operative society against whom the decision or order has 
been made . 
. , .. 
• :' Every order made by the liquidator under section 81 shall be 
executed according to the law for the time being in force for the recovery 40 
of arrears of land revenue. . 
,87. (1) Where th~ Central Registrar is satisfied that a party to anY' 
reference ma~e to him qnde.r section 74 with inten t to defeat or delay 
the execution of any decision that may be passed thereon is about to-
(4) disp~se of the' who~e or any part of the property; or 45 
, ~b) re.m~ve the whole or any part of the property from its 
~tll\g'1lftCUlCts," • ' 

35 
the Central Registrar may, unless adequate 'Security is furnished, direct 
conqitional attachment of the said property or such part theh!of as he 
thinks necessary. 
(2)' The attachment under sub..section (1) shall be executed by a 
5 civil court having jurisdiction ip . the same way as an attachment order 
passed by it..~elf and shall have, the same effect as such order. 
88. The Central Registrar or any person authorise<;t by him in writing 
in this behalf shall be deemed, when exercising any powers under this 
Act for the recovery of any amount by: the attachment and sale or by 
10 sale without attachment of any property, or when passing any orders on 
any application made to him for such recovery or for taking a step-ln~aid 
of such recovery, to be a civil court for the purposes of article 186 of the 
36 of 1963. ~ Schedule to the Limitation Act, J 963. 
l;.il-
~, 
I . 
" 
St. (1) All sums due from a m~lti-State co~operative society, or from 
• 15 an oftlcer or member or past member of a multi-State co-operative society, 
to the Central Gov,rnment or ,a State Government, including any 
cost awarded tll the Central Government or the State Government, as 
the case may be, under any provision of this Act, may, on a certificate 
,issued by the Central Registrar in this behalf, be recovered in the same 
ao manner as arrears of land revenue. 
(2) Sums due from a multi-State cO-0P,8rative society to the Central 
Governm.ent or 11 State Government and recoverable under sub-section 
(1) may be recovered. firstly trom the property Of the society and 
secondly from the m~mbers, pat members' or the estates of deCeased 
.15 members, subject to the limit of their liability: ' 
Provided that the liability of past members and the estate of deceased 
members shall in all cases be subject to the provisions of section 28. 
CHAPTER XI 
APPEALS AND REVISION 
50 10. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 91., an appeal shall lie 
under. this section ngainst-
fa) an order made by the Central Registrar under 'SUb~secti9n 
(2) of section 7 refusing to register a multi-State co-operative 
society; 
(b) an order made by the Central Registrar under SUb-section 
35 (4) of section 9 refusing to register an amendment of the bye-law. 
of a multi-State co-operative society; 
(c) a decision of a multi-State co-operative society refusing or 
deemed to be refusing under sub-sectipn (5) of section 19 to 
admit any person as a member of the society who is ot~e;rwlse duly 
40 qualified; for membership under tne bye-laws of the socIety; 
(d) a decision of a multi-State co-operative society u~der sub-
section (1) of section 21 expelling any of its members; 
(e) a decision of a multi-:State co-operative society removing an 
elected member of a board under section 39; 
45 <I> an order made by the Central RegiRtrar under section 40 
removing a member from his oftlce~ 
, (g) an order made by .~he Central Registrar under section 48 
superseding the board of directors of a multi-State co-operative 
~" 
50 society; L. . 
Central 
.. Rt-Klstrlr 
or ftle 
person 
author!s-
edby 
him to 
be civil 
court to.r 
certain 
P!Jrposel 
...... '. 
,i 
Recovery 
of .unu ;~ 
duetn , 
Govern-
ment. 
Appeal. 

'if 
\ 
No appeal 
nrrevi-
sion in 
eertatn 
r.a~e!l. 
\., l.R· .• . 1V1~lOn. 
36 
(h) an order made by the Central Registrar under section 71 
apportioning the costs of an inquiry held under section 69 or an 
inspection made under section 70; 
(i) an order made under sub-section (2) of section 73; 
(j) a decision or order made under section 76; 
(k) an oIder made by the Central Registrar under section 77" 
directing the winding up of a m1llti-State co-operative society; 
(l) an order made by the liquidator of a multi-State co-operative 
society under section 81; 
(m) an ~r~r under section 87 directing attachment of prope~ty 
before award. 
(2) An appeal against any decision or o.rder wuier su~ (l)j 
shall be made within sixty days from the date of such decision or order,-, . 
5 
10 
(a) if the decision or order was made by the Cent.ral Registrar, 
to the prescribed authority; J 5 
(b) if the decision was made by a muLti-State co-oper.ative 
society (other than a national co-operative society), or a liquidator 
of such society, to the officer who is empowered to exercise the 
powers of the Central Registrar under sub-sect~on (2) of section 4j 
ot 
(c) if the decision was made by a national co-operative society 20 
or a liquidator of such society, to the Central Registrar appointed 
under sub-section (1) of section 4. 
(3) 'nle appellate authority may, if satisfied that the appellant was 
prevented by sufficient cause from preferring the appeal within the 
period of sixty days, admit the appeal within· such further period not 25 
exceeding sixty days as that authority may deem fit. 
(4) In disposing of an appeal under this section, the appellate 
authority may, after giVing the'parties a reasonable opportunity of making 30 
their representations, pass such order thereon as that authority may 
defiD1 ftt. 
• • . (5) The decision or order of the : appellate authority on appeal 
shall be final. • • . 
91. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, where with the 
previous sanction in writing of, or on requisition by, the Reserve Bank, '35 
a co-operativ.e bank- . 
(a) is being wound up; or 
(b) in resp~t of which a 'Scheme lof amalgamation or reorga-
nisation is given effect to; or . 40 
(c) in respect of which a~ order for the supersession of the 
board and the appointment of an administrator therefor has been 
made, 
no appeal, revision or review thereagainst shall lie or be permiR!lible, 
and the sanction or requisition of the Reserve Bank shalL not he liable 
. to be call~ in question. 45 
92. (1)· Subject to the provisions Of section 91, the Central Govern-
ment may, of its own motion or on an application, call for and examine 
the records of any proceedings in which no a.ppeai lies to· the appellate 
authority under section 91 for the pUI"pose of satisfying itself as to the 50 
legality C!lr propriety of any decision or order made under this Act and 11 

37 of 1956. 
1n any case it shall appear to the Central Government that ally sUCh 
decision or order should be modified annulled or revised or remitted. 
for reconsi.c;leration, the Central Gover~ment may, after giving the par~ 
to be a1Iected thereby co reasonable opportunity of bemg heard, pas:; 
:such order thereon as it may deem fit: 
Provided that the application' to the Central Government for the 
exercise Of the power Wlder this section shall be pre1~red within ninety 
dB.ys from the date on which the .decision or order to which the appli~ 
catton relates was communicated to the applicant: 
10 Provided .further that the Central G<>vernment may, if satisfied that 
the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from malq,ng the appli-
cation within the said period of ninety days, admit the applIcation after 
the expiry of the said period. 
(2) The Central Government may suspeIi'd the execution of the 
'5 deCISion or orde.r pending ,the exercise of its power under sUb-section (1) 
in respect thereof. 
(3) The Central Government may award costs in proceedings under 
th1s section to be paid out of the funds of the multi-State c~operative 
J(\ciety concerned or by such party to the ~pplication for revishn "as the 
20 Central Government may deem fit. 
83. ,(1) The appellate authority'unde.r section 90 may, on the appli- Review. 
~ation of any party interested, :review its own order in any case and 
pass in reference thereto such order· as it thinks fit: 
Provided that no such application shall bt! entertained unless the 
. 25 . appellate authority is satisfied that there has been a discovery of new 
and important matter or evidence which after exercise of due diligence 
was not within the knowledge of the applicant or could not be produced 
by him at the time when the order was made or that there has been 
some mistake or error apparent on the face of the record or for any 
So other sufficient reason: ' 
Provided further that no such order shall be made Wlder this \tub-
Rction unless notice has been given to .all interested parties and they 
have been afforded a reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
(2) An application for review under sub-section (1) by any party 
35.hall be made within thirty days from the date of communication of 
rbe order of the appellate authority 'Sought to be reviewed. 
M. Where an appeal is made under section 90 or where the Cent.ral In~r1o­
Government calls for the records of a case under section 92, the ,;ulory 
appellate authority or the Central Government, as the case may be, may, order •. 
4-:> iu order to prevent the ends of justice being def~ated, make, B.uch inter-
locutory orders, including an order of stay, pendma the declSlon of the 
appeal or revision as such authority or the Central Government may 
deem fit. 
41 
CHAPTER XII 
SocIETIES WHICH BECOME MtJIm-8'l'ATE CO·OPl!'oRATIVE SOClEms 
. CONSJrQUENT ON REOBGANlSATION OF STATES 
eG. (1) Wh~re by virtue of the provisions of Part II ?f the 
::itat R organisation Act, 1956, or any other enactment relatmg to 
es i e t' of States, any coroperative society which lmmedJately 
reorg an sa Ion . t' tak la h d i.... b'......ho 50 before the day on which the reorg8lll8& Ion es pee, a ~D 0 l--wt 
.-
Co-opera-
tive 
1OCWt1e1 
f1mc:tion-
Inl; 

immediately 
before 
reorgani· 
"ation of 
states. 
38 
confined to one State becomes as from tthat day, a multi-Sta~ 
co-operative society, it shall be de~m.ed to be a multi-State co-operative 
society registered under the corresponding provisions of ,this ~ct and ~he 
bye-laws of such 'society shall, in so far as they are not mconslStent WIth 
the provisions of this Act, continue to be in force until altered. or re- 5 
scinded. 
(2) If it appears to the Central Registrar or any; officer authori~ in 
this behalf by the Central Gov~ent (hereafter in. this sec!ion 
referred. to as the authorised officer) that it is necessary or expedient 
to reconstitute or reorganise any society referred. to in sub-section (1)\ 10 
the Central Registrar or the authorised officer, as the case may be, may, 
with the previous approval of the Central Government, place before a 
meeting of the general body of tha.t society, held in such manner as 
may be prescribed, a scl1eme for the reconstitution or reorganisation, 
including propasals reg*ding- 1 5 .. 
(a) the formation of new multi-State co-operative societies and 
the transfer thereto in whole or in part of the assets and liabilities 
, ' of that society, or 
(b) the transfer, in whole or in part, of the assets and liabilities 
of that socie,ty ,to any other multi-State co-operative society in sw 
existence immediately before the date of that meeting of the general 
body (hereafter in this section referred to as the existing multi-
State co-operative society). ' 
(3) If the scheme is sanctioned by a resolution passed by a majority 
of the members present at the said meeting, either without modifications 2r. 
ur with modifIcations to which the Central Registrar ~ the authorised ~ 
officer agrees, he shall certify the scheme and upon 'Such certification, 
the scheme shall, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained 
. in any law, regulation or bye-laws for the time being in force, be bind-
ing on all the societies affected by the 'SCheme as well as the share- . 
holders and creditors of all "'such societies. ' 30 
(4) If the scheme is not sanctioned under sub-section (3), the 
Central R.egistrar or the authorised. offi~ may refer the scheme to such 
Judge of 'the appropriate High. Court, as may be nominated in this 
behalf by the Chief Justice thereof, and the decision of that Judge in 35 
regard to the scheme shall be final and shall. be binding on aU the 
societies aiected. by the scheme as well as the shareholders and credi-
tors of all such societies. 
ExpZanatiOn.-In this rub-section, "apprQpriate High Cow't" means 
the High Court within the local limits of Whose jurisdiction the prinCipal 40 
place of business of the multi-State co-operative society is situated. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section where a 
scheme under sub-section (2) includes any proposal :reg~rding the 
transfer of the assets and liabilities of any multi-State co-operatfve 
SOCiety referred to in clause (b). thereof, the scheme shall not be binding 45 
on such multi-State co-operative society or the shareholders and 
c,reditors thereof, unless the proposal regarding such transfer is accepted 
by that multi-State co-operative society by a resolution passed 
by a majllrity of the members present at a meeting of its general body. 

, 
81 
,CHAPTER XIII 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 
H. (1) A multi-Siate Co-operative society or an officer or member 
thereof wilfully making a false retW'n or fUI'tli.;shing false information, 
.} or any person wilfully or withput any reasonable excuse disobeying 
any summons, requisitIon or lawful written order ~ued under the pr0-
visions of this Act, o.r wilfully not furnishing any information required 
from him by a person authorised in this behalf under It he provisions 
of this Act, shall be Ipunishable with fine which, may. extend to two 
10 hundred rupees. 
, ' 
(2) Any employer who without sufficient cause, fails to pay ,to a 
multi-State co-operative society the amount deducted by _ him under 
section 58 within a period of fourteen days from tlte date on which such 
deduction is made, shall, without prejudice to any &ction that may be 
15 taken agairu;t him under any other -law for the time being in force, be 
punishable with fine which may eX'tend to five hundred rupees. 
Offences. 
(.~) Any officer or custodian who wilfullY'! fails to hand over custody pI' 
of books, accounts, documents, records, cash, 'Security and othar property 
belonging to a multi-State co-operative society -of which he is an officer 
20' or custodian, to a person entitled under section 49, section fr1, section 68, 
section 69 or section 80 shall be punishable with fine which may: extend 
to two hundred rupees and in the case of a continui\lg breach, with a 
further fine which l:Q.ay extend .to five hundred rupees for every day 
during which the breach is continued after conviction for the first such 
breach. . 
~5 
97. (1) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a, 
Judicial Magistrate of the first c1as~ shall try any offence under this 
Act. 
(2) No prosecution shall be instituted under this Act without the 
30 previous sanction of the Cent;ral Registrar and such sanction shall ~ot 
be given without giving to the person concerned a reasonable opportumty 
COini-
zanceof 
o1rences. 
to represent his case· ~.,.. 
CHAPTER XIV 
MISCELLANEOUS 
_ .. 98. Every multi-State co-operative s~ciety shall keep a copy of this 
3;) ul and'ts bye laws and also a list of its members, open to Act, the r es 1 • • te ed address 
inspection free of charge at alll'easo~ble ,times at the regas r 
of the society. 
99. (1) Notwithstanding anything. contadinedf inreasotW8 !c~: r~:: 
b general or Special or er, or 40 Government may,. y -' h ditions if any as may be specified . h' d subJect to suc con " f h t ere~n, an ulti-State co-operative society or class 0 . sue 
th~e~n exempt any f ~h requirement of this Act relating to regt~ra-, 
SOCIetIes from any 0 e I , 
tion. 
Copy of 
Act, 
rules, 
and bye-
laws, etc., 
to be 
open to 
inspection. 
Power to 
exempt 
multi-
State co-
operative 
societi~,J 
from 
conditiorul 
as to 
reptn-
tion. 

..... Uquida-
tor to be 
p,abllc 
aervant. 
Notice 
necessary 
in suits. 
Certain 
Acts not 
to apply. 
'1 .. 
'Savings 
of exist.,; 
tngmulti-
State co-
operati"e 
sociries. 
(2) (a) The Central Government may, by general or special order 
and for .reasons to be recorded therein,-
(i) exempt any multi-State co-operative society Or any class of 
such societies from any of the provisiOns of this- Act or of the .rules; 
or 5 
(it) direct that such provisions shall, apply to such society or 
class of societies with such modification!:! not affecting the substance 
thereof as may be specified in' the order: ' 
Pl'ovlded that no order shall be made undel' sub-clause (ii) so 
as to prejudice the interests of such society or class of s~ch societies 10 
without a reaSonable opportunity being given to make representation 
in the matter. 
(b) Every order made under clause (a) shall be published in the 
. Official Gazette. 
100. Any person appointed as liquidator under the provisions of this J 5 
Act shall, be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of 
section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. 45 Qf 1860. 
101. No ~uit shall be instituted against a multi-State co-operativo 
society or any of its officers in re~ect of any act touchina the constitutlOn, 
management or the business of the SOCiety until the expiration of ninety 20 
days next after notic,e in writing has been delivered to the Central 
Registrar or left at his office, stating the cause of actioD, the name, des-
cription and place of residence of the plaintiff and ,the relief which he 
claims, and the plaint shall contain a statement that &uch notice has 
,been so deli~ed or left. 
102. (l) Th,e provisions of the Companies Act, 1956 -and the Mono-
polies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969 shall not apply to multi-
State co-operative societi~. 
(2) The multi-State co-operative, societies registered or deemed to 
be registered under the provisions of this Act shall not Indulge in mono- ~ 
polistic and restrictive trade practices, as defined in the Monopolies ane! -0 
Restrictive Trade Pl·actices Act, 1969. 
, ' 
103. (1) Every multi-State co-operative society existing immediately 
before the commencement of this Act which has' been registered under 
l' of 1956, 
Mof 1969. 
Mof 1",. 
the Co-operative Societies Act, 1912 or under any other Act .relating to 
co-operative societies iri force, in any State Or in pursuance of the 35 ~ of 1911 
provisions of the Multi-unit Co-operative Societies Act, 1942, shall be 6 of lM2.. 
deemed. to. be registered under the cQITesponding provisions of ,this Act. 
and the bye-laws of such society) shall in so far as they are not incon-
sistent with the provisions of this Act, or the rules, continue to be :in 4<-
force until altered or rescinded. 
(2) All appointments, rules and orders made, all notifications and 
notices issued and all suits and other proceedings instituted under any 
of the Acts referred to in sub-section (1) shall, in so far as they are not 
inconsistent with the provision'S of this Ad, be deemed to have been 
respectively made, issued. and instituted under this Act, save that an 45 
orde.r made cancelling the registration of a multi-State co-.operative 
society, shall be deemed, unless the society has already been finally 
liquidated, to be an .order made under section 77 for its being wound up. 

41 
104. (1) If the Central Government is satisfied that any multi-State 
co-operative society should be designated as a national co-operative 
society or any national co-operative sOciety specified in the Second 
Schedule should be omitted from the said Schedule, it may, by notifica-
5 tion, amend the said Schedule so as tq include the.rein such multi-State 
co-operative society or exclude therefrom such national .co-operative 
society, and. thereupon the said Schedule shall be deemed to have been 
amended accordingly. 
(2) A copy of every" notification made under sub-section (1). shall 
lObe laid before each House of Parliament as soon as may be after it is 
made. . 
105. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act no court shall have 
jurisdiction in respect of- ' 
(a) the registration of a mUlti-State co-operative society or its 
15 bye-laws or or an amendment of the bye-Iawsi 
(b) the removal of board of directors; 
'(c) any dispute required under section 74 to be referred to the 
Central Registrar; and 
(d) any matter concerning the winding up and the dissolution 
20 of a multi-State co-operative society, 
(2) While a multi-State co-operative society is being wound up, no 
suit or 'other legal proceedings relating to the business of such society 
. shall 'be proceeded with or instituted against the liqUidator or 
against the society or any member thereof, except by leave of the 
25 Central Registrar and subject to such terms and conditions as he may 
impose. 
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no decision or order made 
unde.r this Act shall be questioned in any court. 
106. (1) In exercising the functions conferred on him by or under 
'::\0 this Act, the Central Registcar, or any other person deciding a dispute 
under section 76 and the liquidator of a multi-State co-operative society 
ahd n', person entitled to audit, inspect or h,?ld an inquiry under this Act, 
• of 1808. shall have all the powers of a civil court, while t.rying a suit, under ·the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, in respect of the following matters, 
3~ namt;IyI:-
. (a) summoning and enforcing the n1tendanae of any person 
and examining him on oath: 
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document; 
(e) proof of facts by affidavits; and 
40 (d) issuina com~lssions for examination of witnesses. 
(2) In the case of an afftdavit, any officer appointed by. the Central 
Registrar, or any other person deciding a dispute or the l1quidator, as 
the case may be, may administer oath to the deponent. 
107. No .. 'Suit, prosecution or other Ie.gal . pI'oceedin~s shall lie agai~t 
45 the Central Registrar or any person sub~rdinate to hfIm ortha~ti~~ on hlds 
authority or against any other person, 1':1 respect 0 any mg In goo 
faith done or purporting to have been ~one under this Act. 
108. (1) Notwithstanding anyth~ contained to the contrary in any 
1 1 t· t operative societtes in force in a State, a multi-State aw re a In,!" 0 co- . 
. t' '" . t not being a co-operatdve bank. may' open branches 50 co-opera lYe sOCJe y,'.. , ' 
I f busine"s in any place In Indla. or paces 0 ". . 
, 
Power to 
amend 
Second 
Schedule. 
Barot 
jurisdic-
tlonol ' 
courts, ' 
Powers 
ot civil 
Court 
Indem-
llity. 
Open-
ineot 
bran-
ches. 

Power to 
make 
rules. 
, 
"+~""" •. -
(2) Where 'f! mUlti-State co-OperaUve ' society operis wanches or 
places of business in any state under sub-section (1) I the Registrar of 
Co-operative Societies in such State shall not exercise any jurisdiction 
in relation to such branches or places of business nor shall call for any 
returns or information therefrom. 
5 
188. (1) The Central Government may,by notification, make rules 
to carry out the provisions of this Act. . 
(2) In particular, and' without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rulles may provide for aU or any of the following 
matters, ~amely:- 10 
(i) the form to be used, the particulars to be given and the 
conditions to be complied with in the making of applicattons under 
section 6 for the registration of a multi-State co-operative society 
and the procedure in the matter of such applications; 
(ii) the number. of the applicants and the manner in which the r 
order of refusal to register a multi-State co-operative society and 5 
its bye-laws shall be communicated under sub-section (2) of section 
7; 
(iii) the manner in which the order of refusal to register any 
amendment of the bye-laws shall be communicated under sub- 20 
section (4) of section 9 and section 18; 
(iv) the procedure and .conditions for change in the extent of 
. the liability of a multi-State co-operative society under section 13. 
(v) the matters in respect of which a multi-State co-operative 
society may make bye-laws and the procedure to be followed,25 
in making, altering and abrogating bye-laws under section 9, or 
'Section 18 and the condition~ to be satisfied prior to such making, 
alteration or abrogation; 
(vi) the conditions to be complied with under section 19 by 
persons applying for adinission as members, f~r the election and ~o 
admissiolt of members and the payment to be made and the interest 
to be acquired before the exercise of the right of membership; 
(vii) the number of individuals who may be admitted as mem-
bers of the National C<H>perative Union of India Limited, New 
Delhi as required by section 19 and their qualifications; 
(viii) the withdrawal and expUlsion of' ~embers and the pay- % 
ments, if any, to be, made to members who withdraw or are expelled 
and the liability of past members or the estates of' deceased 
members; 
(ix) the votes oC members, as required by section 22; . 4 0 
(x) the maximum number of shares of a multi-State co-
operative: society which may, subject to the provisions of 'Section 24. 
be held by a member; 
(xi) the constitution and powers of a smaller body representing 
the general body under section 29; 45 
(xii) general meet~ngs of the members under section 30 the 
period within which such meeting be called and the procedure at 
such meetings and the powers to be exercised by: such meetings; / 
(xiii) the proportion of individuals and multi-State co-operative 
societies in the constitution of the board of directors and the general ~ . 
body under section 32; , . I .' • ---...-...., 

.... -... .., 
r(~t1) tlie election of members ot the boards underaection 315 
and nomination of members to such boards, under section .61, 
the appointment or election ot Omeel'S and the POW81'8 to be 
~ and the duties to be perfonned by the boards and other 
5 .... j 
'(zv) the restrictions and conditions subject to which honora-
rlum may be paid under .ection 38 to the elected chairman' or 
. 'pnlident of the board of directors for serviees rendered; 
'em) the additional measures and acts which may be taken or, 
10 as the case may be, done by the board under section 42; , 
'(zeit) the number of meetings of the board, the venue of such 
IDM'tiDga and the number of committees or sub-committees for 
purpotea' of sections 43 and 46; .. 
(mtt) the appointment and regulation of work entrusted to 
15 !*'IOn. Np1aefng the board in pursuanee of section 48; 
em) the constitution of a body of persons under section 50 tor 
tOe prtparation of a list of persons eligible tor appointment to the 
poI1a of Chief Executives and other management pasts in national 
eb-GpeIratrve socletles and the amount of the maximum pa,...le 
20 appllcable to such posts; 
35 
45 
'(:) , t1ie recruitment, remuneration, allowances and other 
CODditlona of service ot oftlcers and other employees of national c0-
operative looeties under section 50; 
... 
(.ui) prohibiting a multi-State co-operative society from elect-
ing a defaulting membe,r, or a representative of defaulting member-
society, on its board: 
'(=:ii) the returns to be submitted by a multi-State co-operative 
IOCiety to :the CentraL Registrar, the persons by whom and the form 
m which such returns shall bewb~itted and in case of failure to 
wbmtt any such returns, the levy of expenses 0' p~paring it: 
(~i) tlie persons by whom and the form in which copies of 
entries in books of multf-State co-operative 'SOcieties may be certlfted 
UDder sectlon 56 and the charges to be levied for the supply of such 
eoptes: 
"(mt1)" the terms and conditions on which the Central Govern-
nient may make share-capital contribution or give financial or other 
aatsiance to multi-State co-operative societies under section 59 and 
the tenna and conditions on which the Central .Government may 
paruitee the, "ayment of the principal or interest on debentUrel 
fllued bv multi-State co-operative socie~e<J or 109n 3 or deposfts 
~ by "them; , 
- .. '(=:o):t1te proeedure to be followed in proceedings before the 
Central Re~8trar or" "other persons decfdinll( dispute!'! ineludin!1. the 
appointment of a ~rdian for a -party to the df&l)1lte who is a mmOl' 
or who, by reason of unsoundness of mind 'ot' mental infirmity, is 
,mca"able of protecting his interests, and the levy of eXJlenses 
relating to such proceedings; 

(xxvi) ithe mode in which the value of a deceased member', 
share or interest shall be ascertained and the nomination of a perlOn 
to whom such share or interest may be paid or transferred; 
(xxvii) the paymen~ to be made and conditions to be compUed 
With by members applying for loans, the period for which any loaDJ 5 
may be made and the maximum amount which may be lent to any 
members; 
(xxviii) the formation and maintenance of reserve funds and 
other funds under section 61 and the" objects to which such funds 
may be applied, and the investment of any funds und~ the control 10 
of a multi-State co-operative society under section 62:" 
(xxix) the conditions under which profits may be "distributed 
under section 61 to the members of a multi-State CO-GpEU'ative socl.ety 
and the maximum rate at dividend which may be paid by multi-
State co-operative societies; 15 
(xx.r) the. prohibitions and restrictions subject rOO. which multi-
State co-operative societies may, under section 65, transact business 
with person'S who are not members; 
(xxxi) t~ accounts and books to be kept by a multi..state co-
operative society and the audit of such accounts and the charges, if 110 
any, to be made for such audit under section 67 and the periodical 
publication of a balance-sheet showing the assets and liabiUties of 
a mulU-Stale co-operative society; 
'(xx.rii) the calculation and writing off of bad debts by multi-
State .co-operative sOcleties; 25 
(xxxiii) the appointmeIl.t of persons for settlement of disputes 
under section 76; 
(Xx.riv) the procedure to be followed by a liquidator appointed 
under section 80 in respect of provisions of section 81; 
(~xv) the manner in which the surplus assets may be dividlld 
amongst the membP.rs of 1he multi-Stat;e co-operative society under 30 
section 82; 
85; 
(zz.rvi) the procedure for execution of decisions .under section 
. (xzxvii) the procedure to be followed in presenting and dispos-
Ing of appeals under section 90: 35 
(xxxviii) the issue and service of pro~esses and for proof of 
service thereof; . 
(xxxix) the manner of, effecting attac~ent; 
(:elY the custody, pregervation and sa1e of property under attacb-
ment; 4-0 
(orti) the iftV'e8tigation of claims by persons other than the 
defaulter to any right or intere.t in the attached pr()pel"ty, and the 
postponement of sale pending such investigation; 
(xlii) the inunediate sale of parish able articles; 
. (xliii) the inspection of documents in the office of tbe Central 4-5 
RegIstrar. or of a~y othe~ officer or ~uthority and the levy of fees 
for grantlng cp.rtIfied copIes of tee same; 

·.UM2. 
45 
(xliv) the manner in which funds may be raised by a multi-State 
co-operative society or a class of multi-State co-operative societies 
by me~ of shares or debentures or otn~ise and the quantum of 
funds so raised:. 
5 I (xlv) the procedure under 'section 95 for .reconstitution and re-
organisation of societies which become multi-State co-operatiw 
societies consequent on reorganis~tion of a State; 
(xlvi) the methods of communicating or publishing any decision 
or orcJer required to be communicated or published under this Act or 
10 the rul.; 
(xlvii) the' manner and the periodicity of returns of pendin~ 
cases of registration of multi-State co-operative societies and amend-
ments of bye-laws to be sent by the Central Registrar to the Central 
Government; . 
1·5 (xlviii) an~ other matter which is required to be, or may be, 
prescribed . 
. ~; 
. ..' (3) Everyrul~ made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may ... 1.<,. 
.... be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in 
session, for a total period of thirty days which may be ~omprised. in 
20 one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immed:iately following th~ session or the successive 
aessions . aforesaid, both Hous~ in making any modification to the 
rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule 
~. shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no et!ect. 
·25 as the case may be; 'So, however, ,that any such modification or annulment 
aha11 be without prejudice to the validity of anything previouslY done 
under that rule. 
110. The Multi-unit Co-operative Societies Act, 1942. is hereby .,.. 
repealed. 

THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
[See section 3 (1) ] 
Co-operative principles 
1. Membership of a multi-State co-operative society (hereafter in this 
Schedule referred to as the society) should be voluntary and open, 5 
without any social, political, or religious di'Scrimination, to all persoDa 
who can make use of its services. 
2. In a society other than that with institutional membership, indivI-
dual member should enjoy equal rights of voting-bne member, one 
t "JiJI."i.ai.IO vo e. ," ,-,.. -
3. (i) Surplus or savings, if any, arising out of the operations of b 
1iIOC1ety belong to the society as a whole, and no individual member hu 
a claim to the surplus. . 
(ii) The surplus .should be utilised for all or any of the following pur .. 
poses, namely:- 15 
(a) providing for development of ,the business ot the soclety; 
(b) providing services for th8'-common enjoyment ot members; 
(e) distribution among the members in proportion to their trans-
actions with the society; 
. 
, 4. The society should undertake education of its members, oftlce- 120 
Qearers and employees and the general public regarding the prlJ1clplla 
and practice ot co-operation. 
5. The society should actively co-operate in every pracUcal waywtth 
other co-operative societies at local, national or international levels. 
6. The share capital of a society shall receive stric.tly limited rate of 25 
interest (that is to 'SaYi dividend). . 
7. The affairs of a society should be administered by the managemat 
In accordance with democratically expressed will Of the members. 
8. The management of the, society is accountable to its own membca. 
THE SEcOND SCHEDULE 
[See sections 3 (m) and 104] 
Lis of national Co-operative societies 
1. National Co-operative Land Development Banks Federation Limited, 
Hyclerabad. . : 
~ . --~ 

47 
2. National Federation of State Co-operative Banks Limited, Bombay. 
S. National Co-operative Union of India L~ted, New Delhi. 
4. National Agricultural Co-operative Marketing Federation of IBdia 
Limited, New Delhi. 
5 5. National Co-operative Consumers' Fede.ration of India Limited, New 
Delhi. 
6. National Federation of Co-operative Sugar Factories Limited, New 
Delhi. 
7. National Federation of Industrial Co-operatives Limited, New 
10 Delhi. 
8. National Co-operative Housing Federation Limited, New Delhi. 
9. Indl;ln Farmers' Fe.rtiliser Co-operative Limited, New Delhi. 
10. All India Federation of Co-operative Spinning Mills Limited, 
Bombay. 
15 11. All India Industrial Co-operative Banks' Federation. Limited, 
Bangalore. 
12. National Co-operative DlIiry Federation of India Limited, New 
Delhi. 
120 
13. Petrofils Co-operative Limited, New Delhi. 
14. National Heavy Enginee.ring C<>-operative Limited, New Delhi. 
15. The All India Handloom Fabrics Marketing Co-operative Society 
Limited, Bombay. -
16. The NatiOllal Federation of Urban Co-operative Banks and. Cl'edit 
Societies Limited, New Delhi. 
17. Krishak Bharati Co-operative Limited, New Delhi. 
18. National Federation of Fishermen's Co-operative Limited, Bombay. 
19. National Fede.ration of Labour Co-operatives Limi1led,. New 
Delhi. . ~ t 
20. National CO-0P,erative Tobacco Growers' Federation Limited, AnaDd. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Co-operative societies with objects not confined to one State and 
8e1'Ving the interests of members of more thanolle State are at present 
governed by the provisions of the Multi-unit co-operative Societies Act, 
1942-A Central Act. This i'S only an enabling legislation facilitating 
the incorporation, regulation and winding up of multi-unit (State) c0-
operative societies under the provisions of the Co:-operative Societies 
Act of the State where the principal place of business of any such 
society is located. As a result, different multi-unit co-aperative societies 
are governed by diffe.rent co-operative laws in the country. 
2. Since 1942, far-reaching changes have occurred in the organiu-
tiona! structure, overall size and operations, etc., of multi-unit co-operative 
societies. A number of .national leveL co-ope.rative societies and :federa~ 
tions, promoted :by co-operatives in the country have come up with the 
assistance of the Central and State Governments. These feder.atioos 
and societies are engaged in diverse spheres of co-operative activity. 
The provisions in. the co-operative laws in different States gOvern1ne 
these multi-State societies tend to vary from one another. ThUa the 
lack of uniformity and the inadequacies in the existing arrangements 
,have rendered it necessary to replace ihe existing legislative frame-
work of such co-operatives by a common comprehensive Central legisla· 
tion and providing for a Central Authority to be responsible for their pro-
motion, registration and supervision. The present Multi-State Co-
operative Societies Bill,. framed. in the l~ght of the recommendations of 
the Expert Commitee on Multi-State Co-operative Societies Legislation 
and in consultation with the State Governments, seeks to achieve this 
objective and is intended to facilitate .the further development and more 
effective functioning of multi-State co-operative societies. 
3. The proposed law will extend to the whole of India including 
Jammu and Kashmir. The present Multi-Unit Co-operative Societies 
Act, 1942 does not extend to Janunu and Kashmir,. 
4. The scope ot the Bill is divided into several parts on the U8Ual 
tines of co-operative legislation in the States providing, among other 
things, for the appointment of Central Registrar, registration of multi-
State co-operative societies, members' ·rights and liabilities, management 
of co-operatives, privileges of multi-State co-operatives, their properties 
and funds, audit, inquiry, inspection, settlement of disputes, winding up 
. and cancellation o~ registration of multi-State co-operative societies etc. 
5. Some of the proviSions contained in the State co-operative' laws 
and Which have been 'irritants' to non-official leadership of the co-
operative rnovenlent have not been inducted in the- Bill. The Bill 
~~ T\('t cnnt..aJl\ .~~ • ., ". ... ~'!t'l~on for cQmpulsory amendment of 'bve-Jijllr.!\ 

4.9 
or for compulsory amalgamation or division of societies. Nor does the 
proposed Bill contemplate any powe.rs to Government nominees to veto 
the resolution of board of management of societies. ~ objective is 
that while the autonomy of the co-operative should be supported and 
. respected, the administrative arrangements for inspection; monitoring 
and audit of these societies are strengthened to ensil1:e that the societies 
function with responsibility to tpeir constituents and the community. 
RAO BlRENDRA SINGH.. 
NEW DBLm; 
The 20t;h MaTch, 1984. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION ·OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. L. l101Z/1/80-L&M, dated the 19th April, 1934 from 
Rao Birendra Singh, Minister of Agriculture to the Secretary-General, 
Lok Sabha.] 
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the 
Bill to consolidate and amend the law relating to co-operative societies 
with objects and confined to one State and serving the 'interests of mem-
bers in mor~ than one State, recommends the introduction of the Bill in 
Lok Sabha under clause (1) of article 117 of the Constitution and ita 
consideration under clause (3) of that article. 

Notes on c14uses 
Cl"u.~e 1.-This clause inter aUa seeks to extend the provisions of the 
Bill to the whole of India including the State of Jammu and Kashmir. 
Cl4uae 2.-As the subject relating to Co-operative Societies falls 
within the jurisdiction of ,the State, only those societies whose objects 
ex:tetld beyond one State come under the purview of the proposed Bill 
and the types of 'Societies that would ,be covered have been speeijled in 
the Bill itself. 
C14use 3.-This clause relates to definitions of various words ind ex· 
p.l'etsions used in the Bill. 
CI&u.se ol-ProvisioB has been made under this clause for the appoint-
ment of a Central Registrar with a proper 'Scheme of delegation of 
powers to any officer of the CentraL Government or the State Govern-
mSlt. 
CZ&u.e 5.-It provides that no multi·State co-operative society shall 
he registered unless ita main object is sUch as to render it necessary to 
serve the in~1:i of memberS in more than one State. 
Cl4u.su 6, 7 and S.-These clauses provide for making an application 
for the registration of a multi.-State c(H)perative society, disposal of 
iiuch application by the Central Registrar and for the issue of registration 
certificate when registered. -
Cl4'Wes 9 (1M lO.-These clauses deal with the procedure for the 
amendment of bye.laws ~f a multi-State co-operative society and its 
cODlDD8n~t. " 
Clause. 11 and 12.-These clauses prescribe ,the procedure for change 
of name or adress of the multi·State co-operative society. 
~ 13.-This clause provides" that only a multi-Statc co-operativc 
society with limited liability shall be registered. 
Cla.u.se H.-It deals with the procedu.re for amalgamation, transfer of 
assets and liabilities or division of multi-State co-operative societies. 
C14~s 15 and 16.-These clauses deal with preparation Of a "me 
for the amalgamation or reorganisation of a multi-State. co-operatlve bank 
with the previous a.pproval of the Reserve Bank of India. 
Clau.se 17.-The certificate of registration of a multi-State co-operative 
society shall stand cancelled in he circumstances as laid down hi this 
clause. ' "' " ".~ 
ClG-use l8.-It prescribes the procedure for conversion of a State 
based co-operative society into a multi-State co-operative society. 
Clame 19.-The persons who are eligible to become members of a 
multi..state co-operative society have been enume.rated in this claU'de. 

51 
. ;;Cluse 2O.-This clause provides for the members not to exercise their 
rIg s as members till due payment is made by, them. 
Clause 21.-~s clause deals with the procedure for expulsion of 
members of multi-State co-operative 'Society. 
Clause 22.-Under this clause every member of a multi-State co-
opera.tive so~iety shall have one vote in the affairs of the society. 
Certam multI-State co-operative societies the members of which include 
co-operative societies or other multi-State co-ope.rative societies may 
provide for an equitable system of voting. • 
Clause 23.-Thi-s clause provides for the manner in which a member 
can exercise his vote. 
Clauses 24 to 28.-These clauses deal with the restrictions on transfer 
of shares or interests; redemption of shares and the manner in which the 
shares may be redeemable; transfer of share or interest on the death of 
a member to the person nominated or if no person is nominated, to the 
heir or legal representative of the deceased member and the liability 
of a past member and the estate of a deceased member for the debts 
of the society. 
Clause 29.-This clause provides for the general body of a multi-State 
co-operative SOCiety and for its constitution, powers and functions. It 
also provides that a co-operative society which is a member of a multi-
State co-operative society shaI.1 be represented in the latter only through 
its Chairman or the Chief Executive and where there is no Chairman 
or the Chief Executive, the Administrator, so that its participation in the 
general body of the multi-State co-operative society is effective. 
Clauses 30 and 31.-These clauses provide for the annual general 
meeting and special ~neral meeting of the gene.ral body of a multi-
State co-operative society. 
Clause 32.-This clause provides for Board of Directors for every 
multi-State co-operative societies. 
Clause 33.-This clause seeks to associate the representatives of the 
employees of the multi-State co-operative societies in the management 
decision making process. 
Clause 34.-The disqualifications for members of the Board of 
Directors of a multi-State co-operative society have been specified in 
this clause. 
C1a'use 35.-This clause provides for the preparation of electo~al :reUs 
f l..J.t· n of the member'S of the Board and thelr terms for the purp-ose 0 e t"1' 10 " . ,."., . 
of office, etc. . 
u es 36 and 37.-No person shall hold office of Chairman ~r 
C.la s . Chairman Or Vice-President in more than one multI-
PreSIdent, VIC~ . t and shall not be e1jgible to hold such office State co-operhtIve SOCle y 
for more than two consecutive term!. . 
. ltd Chairman or President of multI-State cO'-
Clause 38.-The ~:~ e paid' honorarium in respect of specific services operative society cou e 
rendered by him under this clause. 
and 4O-These clauses relate to removal of electe" 
Clauses 39 . 1 body and by th~ Central Registrar. plembel'l by the g~t1er!} .,: ' ' ' 

· ...... -,. 
~ 
Clause 41.-Where the Government has subscribed to the share-
capital of a multi-State co-operative society it can nominate such num-
ber of nominees on the Board of Directors of a co-operative society as 
may be specified by the rules. 
Clauses 42 and 43.-These clauses provide for powers and functions 
of the Board and also provide that the Board shall meet at least once in 
every quarter. 
Clauses 44 and 45.-Where the Central Government has made sub-
stantive contribution to the share-capital of a national co-operative 
society exceeding fifty per cent., the prior approval of the Central Govern-
ment would be necessary for the appointment of Chief Executive and 
functional Directors. The powers and functions of the Chief Executiye 
have been enumerated in clause 35. 
Clause 46.-This clause provides for the constihltion of executive 
committee and other committees or sub-Committees of the Board. 
CZau.se 47.-This clause empowers the Central Government to give 
directions to multi-State co-operative societies in public interest or in 
the interest of proper implementation of the developmental programmes. 
Clause 48.-It provides that the Board of a multi-State co-operative 
society could be superseded by the Central Registrar if that Board 
persistently makes default or is negligent in the performance of its 
duties or commits any act which is prejudicial to the interests of the 
society or its members. The total period of supersession is not to exceed 
two years. 
Clallse 49.-This clause provides for securing possession of records, 
property, etc., of a multi-State co-operative society, by· the order of a 
Magistrate, where such records are likely to be tampered with or des-
troyed or the properties likely to be mis-appropriated or mis-applied, 
under the circumstance5 enumerated in this clause. 
Clause 50.-This clause provides that the selection of the Chief 
Executive and other managerial posts in national co-operative societies 
shall be made through a body of persons constituted in that behalf. 
CZau.'le 51.-This clause provides that no defect in the constitution of 
a multi-State co-operative society, etc., makes the acts of such society, 
etc., invalid. 
Clause 52.-This clause confers corporate status on a multi-State co-
operative society after its registration. 
Clauses 53 to 59.-The prOvisions in theSe clauses confer certain pri-
vileges on multi-State co-operative societies. Such societies are 
afforded exemption from· compulsory registration of instruments (vide 
clause 57). Clause 58 gives the facility to such a society for deduction 
of amounts from the salary of a member of multi-State co-operative 
society to meet the c1aims of such a societ~ An enabling provisiori" has 
been incorporated in clause 59 to facilitate Govemment aid to mtdti .. 
State co-operative societies, 

Clause 60.-This clause provides that no part of the funds other 
than the net profits of a multi-State co-operative society shall be divided 
by way of bonus or dividend, etc. 
CIa'use 61.-This clause relates to the disposal of net profits and con-
tributions to statutory funds. 
Clause 62.-The modes of investments of funds of a multi':'State co-
operative society have been laid down in this clause. 
Clauses 63 td 65.-These clauses lay down restrictions on loans, 
deposits and loal'l5 to be received and other transactions with non-mem-
bers by multi-State co-operative society. 
. Clause 66.-This clause provides for the establishment of a Contributory 
Provident Fund for the benefit of the employees of the multi-State co-
operative society having such number or class of employees as may be 
prescribed. 
CM-use 67.-This clause empowers the Central Registrar to audit or 
cause to be audited the accounts at every multi-State co-operative society 
at least once in each year. 
Clau.'J€ 68.-The Central Registrar or any person authorised by him 
may inspect a multi·State co-operative society. 
Clauses 69 to 73.- These clauses provide for an inquiry to be held by 
the Central Registrar into the constitution, working and financial condi-
tion of a multi-State co-operative society and also to inspect or authorise 
some person to inspect the books of the society on the application of 
creditor of the SOCiety. It is also provided that where inquiry is held or 
inspection made, the Central Registrar may apportion the cost between 
the concerned members or creditors and the society and such cost may 
be recovered on an application to a Magistrate having jurisdiction. It is 
also provided for repayment or restoration of the money or property 
with interest or to pay contribution and costs or compensation as the 
Central Registrar may consider just and equitable in C8'Ses where any 
payment has been made contrary to the provisions of the Bill 
Clauses 74 to 76.-These clauses lay down the procedure for St!ttle-
ment of disputes touching the constitution, management or business of a 
multi-State co-operative society, the person who shall decide the dis-
putes and the period of limitation in relation to such dispu ..... 
Clauses 77 to 84.- These clauses provide for the winding up of a 
multi-State co-operative society, appointment of a Liquidator for such 
society and the powers and responsibilities of Liquidator. 
Clauses 85 to 89.-'nl.ese clauses provide for the procedure for execu-
tion of decrees, orders and decisions made under various clauses of the 
Bill. Clause 89 provides that the sums due to Governmen~ shall be 
recovered in the same manner as arrears of land revenue. 
Clauses 90 to 94.-These clauses make provision for appeals, revision, 
review and interlocutory orders. 
Clause 95.- This clause specifies detailed procedure to be followed in 
respect of societies which become multi-State co-operative societiee 
consequent on reorganisation of the States. 

· ........ ...... ,-. 
52 
Clause 41.-Where the Government has subscribed to the share-
capital of a multi-State co-operative society it can nominate such num-
ber of nominees on the Board of Directors of a co-operative society as 
may be specified by the rules. 
Clauses 42 and 43.-These clauses provide for powers and functions 
of the Board and also provide that the Board shall meet at least once in 
every quarter. 
Clauses 44 and 45.-Where the Central Government has made sub-
stantive contribution to the share-capital of a national co-operative 
society exceeding fifty per cent., the prior app.roval of the Central Govern-
ment would be necessary for the appointment of Chief Executive and 
functional Directors. The powers and functions of the Chief Executi~ 
have been enumerated in clause 35. 
Clause 46.-This clause provides for the constitution of executive 
committee and other committees or sub-Committees of the Board. 
Clause 47.-This clause empowers the Central Government to give 
directions to multi-State co-operative societies in public interest or in 
the interest of proper implementation of the developmental programmes. 
CZa11..<;e 48.-Jt provides that the Board of a multi-State co-operative 
society could be superseded by the Central Registrar if that Board 
persistently makes default or is negligent in the performance of its 
duties or commits any act which is prejudicial to the interests of the 
society or its members. The total period of supersession is not to exceed 
two years. 
Cla1Lse 49.-This clause provides for seC'Uring possession of records, 
property, etc., of a multi-State co-operative society, by the order of a 
Magistrate, where such records are likely to be tampered with or des-
troyed or the properties likely to be mis-appropriated or mis-applied, 
under the circumstances enumerated in this clause. 
Clause SO.-This clause provides that the selection of the Chief 
Executive and other managerial posts in national co-operative societies 
shall be made through a body of persons constituted in that behalf. 
ClatL.'!e 51.-This clause provides that no defect in the constitu~ion of 
a multi-State co-operative society, etc., makes the acts of such society, 
etc., invalid. 
Clause 502.-This clause confers corporate status on a multi-State c0-
operative society after its registration. 
Clauses 53 to 59.-The provisions in theSe clauses confer certain pri-
vileges on multi-State co-operative societies. Such societies are 
afforded exemption from· compUlsory registration of instruments (vide 
clause 57). Clause 58 gives the facility to such a society for deduction 
of amounts from the salary of a member of multi-State co-operative 
society to meet the claims of such a societ:,\. An enabling provisiori' has 
been incorporated ;n clause 59 to facilitate Government aid to m~1ti .. 
State co-operative societies, 

Clause 60.-This clause provides that no part of the funds other 
than the net profits of a multi-State co-operative society shall be divided 
by way of bonus or dividend, etc. 
CIa'use 61.-This clause relates to the disposal of net profits and con-
tributions to statutory funds. 
. ClatUe 62.-The modes of in~estments of funds of a multi~State co-
operative society have beert laid down in this clause . 
. Clauses 63 td 65.-These clauses lay doWn restrictions on loans, 
deposits and loans to be received and other transactions with non-mem-
bers by multi-State co-operative society. 
. Clause 66.-TbiB clause provides for the establishment of a Contributory 
Provident Fund for the benefit of the employees of the multi-State co-
operative society having such number or class of employees as may be 
prescribed. 
C'1Ia.use 67.-Tbis clause empowers the Central Registrar to audit or 
cause to be audited the accounts of every multi-State co-operative sCiciety 
at least once in each year. 
Cla'iJ.Se 68.-The Central Registrar or any person authorised by him 
may inspect a multi-State co-operative society. 
Clauses 69 to 73.- These clauses provide for an inquiry to be held by 
the Central Registrar into the constitution, working and financial condi-
tion of a multi-State co-operative society and also to inspect or authorise 
some person to inspect the books of the society on the application of 
creditor of the society. It is also provided that where inquiry is held or 
inspection made, the Central Registrar may apportion the cost between 
the concerned members or creditors and the society and such cost may 
be recovered on an application to a Magistrate having jurisdiction. It is 
also provided for repayment or restoration of the money or property 
with interest or to pay contribution and costs or compensation as the 
Central Registrar may consider just and equitable in cases where any 
payment has been made contrary to the provisions of the Bill. 
Clauses 74 to 76.-These clauses lay down the procedure for St!ttle-
ment of disputes touching the constitution, management or business of a 
multi-State co-operative society, the person who shall decide the dis-
putes and the period of limitation in relation to such dispu*M 
Clauses 77 to 84.- These clauses provide for the winding up of a 
tnulti-State co-operative society, appointment of a Liquidator for such 
society and the powers and responsibilities of Liquidator. 
Clauses 85 to 89.- These clauses provide for the procedure for execu-
tion of decrees, orders and decisions made under various clauees of the 
Bill. Clause 89 provides that the sums due to Governmen~ shall be 
recovered in the same manner as arrears of land revenue. 
Clauses 90 to 94.-These clauses make provision for appeals, revision, 
review and interlocutory orders. 
Clause 95.-This clause specifies detaile? procedure to ~ follow~d in 
respect of societies which become multl-State co-operative soCletiee 
consequent on reorganisation of the States. 

54 
Clauses 96 and 9'i.-These clauses relate to offences and penait1es irl 
case of filing false return;; or furnishing false iniormation, etc.. Clause 97 
provides that no court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magtstrate or a 
Judicial Magistrate of the First Class shall try such offences and no 
proseC'ution shall be instituted wjthout the previous sanction of the 
Central Registrar. 
Clause 98.-Under this clause a copy of the legislation, rules, bye-
laws, etc .. is to be kept open for inspection free of charge. 
Clause 99.-This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to 
exempt any multi-State co-operative society 01' claaa of such societiell 
from any of the provisions of the Bill. 
Cla'use 100.-A person appointed as a LiqUidator under the pro-
visions of the Bill shall be deemed to be a public .. rvant within the 
meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. 
Clause 101.-This clause provides that no suit can be instituted 
against a multi-State co-operative society or any or t. officers unless a 
notice is given to the Central Registrar. 
Clause 102.-This clause provides that the provistona of the CJ)mpanies 
Act, 1956 and the Monopolies and Restrictive Traae ~ractices Act, 1969, 
shall not apply to a mUlti-State co-operative socieu. 
Clause 103.-Under this clause the existing multi-S~ate co-operative 
societies shall be deemed to be registered under ·th. provisions of the 
proposed legislation. .J 
Clause 104.-This clause seeks to empower the Central {1overnment 
to include in or to exclude from the list of the naUanal co-operative 
societies specified in the Second Schedule, any national co-operative 
society by, notification, and al'8o provides that every such notification shall 
be laid before Parliament. 
Clause l05.-The jurisdiction of courts has been barred in respect of 
certain matters relating to the registration, winding up and the dissolu-
tion of a multi-State co-operative society. 
Clause l06.-This claruse confers certain powers of a civil court on 
the Central Registrar or any other person deciding the dispute. 
Clause l07.-This clause provides that no suit, etc., shall lie against 
the Central Registrar or his subordinates for anything done in good faith. 
Clause lOB.-This clause seeks to empower a multi-State co-operative 
society to open branches or places of business any where in India. 
Claw;e l09.-This clause empowers the Central Government to make 
rules for carrying out the provisions of this legislation and enumerates 
various matters for which rules may be made and also provides for laying 
the same before Parliament. 
Clause llO.-This clause repeals the Mul~i-unit Co-operative Societies 
A~1~. , 
I!, I 
The· First Schedule.-In this Schedule co-ope.rative principles have 
been enumerated. . 
The Second Schedule.-This Schedule contains the liat of national co-
operative societies. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDuM 
The Multi..state Co-operative Societies Bill, 1984 s';ks .to replace the 
existing Multi-unit Co-operative Societies Act, 1942. Except for some 
additional expenditure that may arise under clauses 4 and 35 of the Bill, 
no other new expenditure is envisaged by reason of the passing of the 
Bill. 
2. Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the appointment of Central 
Registrar of Co-operative Societies and other persons to assist him. 
PresenUy, one of the officers in the Ministry of Agriculture has been 
designated as Central Registrar in an ex officio capacity. Some snleton 
supporting staff has also been provided to assist the Central Registrar. 
SimultaneClLlSly some of the powers of the Central Registrar have also 
been delegated to the State officers. With the passing of the Bill, how-
ever, the Central Registrar will have to assume greater responsi'Jilities 
in relation to multi-State co-operative societies. This will necessitate a 
full-time Central Registrar with other officers and supporting staff to 
assist him in the discharge of the statutory functions unde.r the various 
provisions of the Bill. To begin with, the following additional posts 
will be needed: 
Posts Number or 
pOSts 
Scale or 
pay 
_.- .. ------------------ ---
Gatt/lld Call,.ry : 
Central Registrar 
Joint Central Regiatrar 
Assistant Director 
Senior Penoual Assiltant 
Nrm Gatttlld CIJ/IPJ I 
Senior Technical Assistant 
Araistant 
Stenographer Orade 'C' 
Lower Divillon Clerks 
PeON 
One 
one 
one 
one 
one 
onc 
onc 
two 
two 
RI. 11115°'11'150 
R,. 15QO-1800 
RI_ 7oo-ISClo 
Rs. 650-1040 
RI. 5500900 
RI. 4115400 
RI. 415 .. 800 
Ra. 860-400 
lb. ,9f;.gSSI 
, . 3 Clause 35 of the Bill lays down that the election .of the l~lernbers 
. d f directors of such multi-State co-operatlve socxeties or of the boar 0 • b tifted i al I f multi-State co-operative societies as may e no .n a gener 
c ass 0 . d hall be held under the superintendence, dl,l'ection and 
or speCIal or er, S i officers as may be appointed by the Central 
control of such return ngount of expenditure that might be involved on 
Registrar. The exact admat this stage. The additional expenditure may this cannot be assesse 
be around Rs. 10,000 in a year. 
.- .... ,. 
55 . -~: ..... ,.. .. ! ", . 

56 
4. Clause 59 of the Bill provides for financial assistance to multi-State 
co-operative societies in the form of share capital, loans and advances, 
subsidies and guarantees. The system envisaged in this pl'ovisiolt is 
already in vogue and no additional expenditure to the Government is 
envisaged. 
5. The development of mUlti-State co-ope.rative societies is ali approved 
plan scheme. An amount of Rs. 200 lakhs has been included in the 
budget of the Ministry for the financial year 1984-85 in respect of this 
'Scheme. The expenditure involved and referred to in the preceding 
paragraphs together with expenditure on the existing staff wil1 hi 
accommodated within the budget allocation for the year. Suitabl~ 
provision will also be made for the subsequent years. 
6. The Bill does not involve any non-recurring expenditurf. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA'l'ION 
Clause 109 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules to carry out the provisions of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause 
(2) of this clause enumerates the matters with respect to which rules 
may be made under this clause. These matters relate, in.ter alia to the 
procedure to be followed for the registration of multi-State co-operative 
societies; the conditions to be complied with by persons applying for 
admission as members of a multi-State co-operative society; the maxi-
mum number of shares of multi-State co-operative society which a 
member may hold; the election or nomination of membe.rs to the Boards, 
the terms and conditions on which the Central Government may make 
share-capital contributions and conditions on which the Central Govern-
ment may guarantee the payment of the prineipal or interest, etc. 
The aforesaid matters relate to procedure and administrative t&etail 
and it is not practicable to provide them in the Bill itself. The de~la­
tjon of legislation power is, therefore, of a normal character. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL· 
to consolidate and amend the law relating to co-operative societies with 
objects not confined to one State and serving the interests of mem-
bers in more than one State. 
(Roo Birencira Singh, 
Minister of Agriculture.) . , 

- 3 -
24. Page 50, line 26,-
for "adress" ~ "address" 
25. Page 50, lIne 6, from bottom,-
for "he" read 
26. Page 52, line 13,-
"the" 
for "clause 35" ~ "clause 45" 
27. Page 57, line 9,-
after "shares of" insert "a" 
~ DELdI' , 
Ms,y 54 1984-
vaIsakha 15, 1906 (Saka) 

11. Pabe 27, Ilne 22,-
f2£ "hamself" 
12. Page 29, liLe 33,-
2 
aft er "or" omi t "the" 
13. Pa~e 29, line 3,,-
"himself .1 
for "sociey" _read "society" - . 
14. Page 32, in the marginal heading to cla~se 80,-
f2!: ItLiqu1datfon~1 read "Liquidator." 
15. Page 34, in the marginal heading to clause 87,-
aft er " award." 2.!!E:.! "tor. It 
16 • Page 35,-
against'line 13, insert the marginal citation,-
~. 
"36 .f 1963." 
17. Page 35, line 13,-
omit "36 of ~963" 
18. Page 40, in the marginal headlng to clause 103,-
for. "socities" read "societies" 
19. Page 42, line 46,-
for "meetlngS" 'read "meeting" 
20. Page 45, l~ne 8,-
for "methods" read "method" 
Page 46, line 32,-
for "Lis" ~ "List" -
22. Page 48, line 2 from bottom,-
!2E "inducted" read "included" . 
23.. Page 49, line 4 frem .bottom,-
~ "objects and" read "objects not" 

LOK &ABBA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
Tf:I.l!; NULTI-STAl'E CO-OPE:EtATIVB S,OCIETIES BILL, 19d4 
(To be/As introduc·ed in Lok Sabha) 
1. Page 6, line 32,-
ill "llabiliy" "11abi1i ty" 
2. P~ge 7, line 41,-
"reeclpt" "receipt" 
3. Page 8, line 17,-
"amaJ.ag amat ed " read - "amaJ.gamated" 
4. Page 13, in the marginal heading to clause 29,-
after "body," insert "its" 
5. Page 15, line 37,-
for - "s" "1s" 
6. Page 16, line 1,-
f2!:. "preperation" ~ "preparation" 
'1. Page 21, line 26,-
!Q! "decessed" !:.!!!f! "deceased" 
E. Page 22, line 34,-
for "executive" read "execute" .- -
9. Page '22,-
against line 48, 1n the marginal c~tation,­
!Qr "4 of 1.916." ~ "4 of 1936." 
10. Page 23, l~ne 18,-
\ !2!. "socity" ~ "society" 
,,' 
• 
P.T .CJ. 