Bill No. 38-F of  2010
ORIGINAL
THE PETROLEUM AND MINERALS PIPELINES
(ACQUISITION OF RIGHT OF USER IN LAND)
AMENDMENT BILL, 2011
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT—
LOK SABHA  ON 12TH DECEMBER , 2011
RAJYA SABHA ON 21ST DECEMBER , 2011)
ASSENTED  TO
ON 12TH JANUARY, 2012
ACT NO. 9 OF 2012

2
THE PETROLEUM AND MINERALS PIPELINES (ACQUISITION OF
RIGHT OF USER IN LAND) AMENDMENT BILL, 2011
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT)
 A
BILL
 further to amend the Petroleum and Minerals Pipelines (Acquisition of Right of User in
Land) Act, 1962.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Petroleum and Minerals Pipelines (Acquisition of
Right of User in Land) Amendment Act, 2011.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by  notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 38-F of  2010

2. For sections 15 and 16 of the  Petroleum and Minerals Pipelines (Acquisition of
Right of User in Land) Act, 1962, the following sections shall be substituted, namely:—
"15. (1) Whoever wilfully obstructs any person in doing any of the acts authorised
by section 4 or section 7 or section 8 or wilfully fills up, destroys, damages or displaces
any trench or mark made under section 4 or wilfully does any act prohibited under
section 9, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a  term which may extend to six
months or with fine or with both.
(2) Whoever wilfully makes or causes to make any unauthorised connection
with or removes, destroys, damages or displaces any pipeline laid under section 7, or
wilfully  inserts any device to extract petroleum product or minerals from such pipeline,
or wilfully disrupts supplies being made through the pipeline, shall be punishable with
rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years and shall also  be liable
to fine.
(3) If any person convicted of an offence under sub-section (2) is again convicted
of an offence under the same provision, he shall be punishable with rigorous
imprisonment for the second and for every subsequent offence for a term which shall
not be less than three years but which may extend to ten years:
Provided that the court may, for any adequate and special reasons to be mentioned
in the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than three years.
(4) Whoever, with the intent to cause or knowing that he is likely to  cause
damage to or destruction of any pipeline laid under section 7, causes by fire, explosive
substance or otherwise damage to the pipeline being used for transportation of
petroleum products, crude oil or gas with the intent to commit sabotage or with the
knowledge that such act is so imminently dangerous that it may in all probability cause
death of any  person or such bodily injury likely to cause death of any person, shall be
punishable with rigorous imprisonment which shall not be less than ten years but may
extend to imprisonment for life or death.
16. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973, an offence falling under sub-sections ( 2), (3) and ( 4) of section 15 shall be
deemed to be cognizable and non-bailable within the meaning of that Code.
16A. Where any petroleum product together with any tool, vehicle or any item
used in committing any such offence under sub-section ( 2) or sub-section ( 4) of
section  15 are seized under this Act in the reasonable belief that such petroleum
product  has  been stolen from the pipeline laid under section 7, the burden of proving
that they are not stolen property shall be, in case where such seizure is made from the
possession of any person,—
(i) on the person from whose possession the property was seized, and
(ii) on the person who claims to be the owner thereof, if any person other
than the person from whose possession the stolen property was seized.
16B. When any proceeding taken under this Act, or in consequence of anything
done under this Act, a question arises as to whether any petroleum product is the
property of the corporation, the Court shall presume, unless the contrary is shown,
that  such petroleum product belongs to the corporation.
Penalty.
50 of 1962.
Certain
offences to
be
cognizable.
Burden of
proof in
certain cases.
Substitution of
new sections
for sections
15 and 16.
2 of 1974.
Presumption
regarding
property.
2

Provisions as
to bail.
Section 438
of the Code
of Criminal
Procedure,
1973 not to
apply.
16C.  (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973, no person accused of an offence punishable under sub-section (4) of section 15
shall, if in custody, be released on bail or on his own bond unless—
(a) the Public Prosecutor has been given an opportunity to oppose the
application for such release; and
(b) where the Public Prosecutor opposes the application, the court is
satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for believing that he is not guilty of
such offence and that he is not likely to commit any offence while on bail.
(2) The limitations on granting of bail specified in sub-section (1) are in addition
to the limitations under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 or any other law for the
time being in force on granting of bail.
(3) Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to affect the special
powers of the High Court  regarding bail under  section 439 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973.
16D. Nothing in section 438 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  shall apply
in relation to any case involving the arrest of any person on an accusation of having
committed an offence punishable under  sub-section (4) of section 15.”.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.
3

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Petroleum and Minerals Pipelines (Acquisition of Right of User
in Land) Act, 1962.
————
(As passed by the Houses of  Parliament)
GMGIPMRND—3841RS(S3)—16-01-2012.