Short title.
THE  CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020
By
SHRI. A. GANESHAMURTHI,  M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  The Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2020.
2.  For article 120 of the Constitution, the following article shall be substituted,
namely:—
"120. Notwithstanding anything in Part XVII, but subject to the provisions of
article 348, business in Parliament shall be transacted in Hindi or in English:
Provided that the Chairman of the Council of States or Speaker of the House of
the People, or person acting as such, as the case may be, shall—
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
   Bill No. 38 of  2020
Substitution of
new article for
article 120.
Language in
which Business
in Parliament to
be transacted.
5

2
(i) permit a member to give notice under different class of business in
accordance with the Rules of procedure framed under article 118, in any of the
languages specified in the Eighth Schedule;
(ii) permit any member who cannot adequately express himself in Hindi or
in English to address the House in one of the languages specified in the Eighth
Schedule;
(iii) cause all business transacted in Parliament translated into all
languages specified in the Eighth Schedule and circulated to members; and
(iv) make available simultaneous interpretation facilities in all languages
specified in the Eighth Schedule when any member addresses the House in
Hindi or in English or in any other language.".
5
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is a Union of States. Hundreds of languages are spoken in the country.
Many of these languages are ancient and older than some of the languages spoken
all over the world.
Our Parliament consists of representatives from twenty-eight States and eight
Union territories. The representatives may speak different languages, but their goal
is to represent the people who have elected them.
At present business in Parliament is transacted in Hindi and English. All
parliamentary documents and papers are translated and printed in both the versions.
A member has an option to give a letter/notice in either language.
However, as English or Hindi is neither the mother tongue nor a medium of
learning of majority of the members of Parliament, they cannot express themselves
adequately in Hindi or in English. Though, there is a provision for simultaneous
interpretation of proceedings of Parliament in some of the languages included in
the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution, but the main point is that the business of
the House should be transacted in all the languages included in the Eighth Schedule
to the Constitution so as to enable all other members to understand the views
expressed. All the Parliamentary papers should be translated and made available in
all the languages included in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution. This will
ensure meaningful participation of all members in the debates during discussion  in
the House.
The European Union Parliament has facility of simultaneous interpretation in
twenty-three languages for seven hundred and thirty-six members. The possibility
of adopting this initiative of European Union by the Indian Parliament should be
explored as almost equal number of representatives, speaking different languages
are elected to it.
Ours in the largest democracy in the world and any arrangement which
increases and improves the functioning of the representatives in the legislature will
only strengthen the already strong and vibrant democracy.
Languages should not be a barrier in the functioning of democracy. A child
learns to speak in his mother tongue, grows speaking his mother tongue and studies
in his mother tongue. Therefore, mother tongue of elected representatives to be
used in the highest body of the country.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Constitution with a view to enable
transaction of proceedings of Parliament in all the languages included in the Eighth
Schedule to the Constitution.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW D ELHI; A. GANESHAMURTHI
January 17,  2020.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for simultaneous interpretation facilities and for
translation and distribution of all parliamentary papers in all languages included in
the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution. As such, the Bill, if enacted, will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual
recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is likely to be involved
from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely
to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India.
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * *
120. (1) Notwithstanding anything in Part XVII, but subject to the provision
of article 348, business in parliament shall be transacted in Hindi or in English:
Provided that the Chairman of the Council of States or Speaker of the House
of the People, or person acting as such, as the case may be, may permit any member
who cannot adequately express himself in Hindi or in English to address the House
in his mother-tongue.
(2) Unless Parliament by law otherwise provides, this article shall, after the
expiration of a period of fifteen years from the commencement of this Constitution,
have effect as if the words "or in English" were omitted therefrom.
* * * *
5
Language to be
used in
Parliament.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri A. Ganeshamurthi, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—5286LS(S3)—17.0 2.2020.