- ॥2 MAY 2006

As InTRODUCED IN Lox SABHA

Bill No. 38 of 2006

THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED TRIBES) (UNION TERRITORIES)
ORDER (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006

By
DR. P. P. KOYA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) (Union Territories) Order, 1951.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) (Union Territories) Short title.
Order (Amendment) Act, 2006.

2. Inthe Schedule to the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) (Union Territories) Order, Amendment of
1951, in PART 1, —Lakshadweep, the following provisos shall be inserted at the end, Part | of
namely:— Constitution

(Scheduled

“Provided that the children who are born to local scheduled tribe inhabitants of Tribes) (Union
Lakshadweep in any other place in the mainland on India on account of cases referred by we te
the competent medical authority for safe delivery of the children by such inhabitants shall j है
be deemed to be born in the islands if such children are brought back to the islands for
inhabitation soon after their birth:


axe YAM $ है 2
Provided further that the President may, by order, notify any authority as competent
medical authority for the purposes of this part:

Provided also that the children who are born to the local Scheduled Tribe of
Lakshadweep in any other place in mainland of India on account of the employment of the
parents, or on account of bonafide travel or tour outside the islands by the parents, or on
account of pursuing of higher education outside islands shall be deemed to have been born
in the islands if such children are brought back to the islands for inhabitation soon after
their birth.”.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

According to “PART I.—Lakshadweep” in the Schedule to the Constitution
(Scheduled Tribes) (Union Territories) Order, 1951, the inhabitants of the Laccad: ive, Minicoy
and Amindivi Islands who, and both of whose parents were born in the Union territory are
deemed to be Scheduled Tribes. As per this definition a large number of children who are
born to local Scheduled Tribe inhabitants of Lakshadweep in any other place in the mainland
of India due to valid medical reasons being referred by competent medical authority for safe
delivery of the children and who are brought back to the islands for inhabitation soon after
their birth are not covered under the existing rules. Moreover, certain Scheduled Tribes
parents from Lakshadweep are employed outside the territory and in case any child is born
outside Lakshadweep and even if the parents go back to the islands for permanent
inhabitation are also not treated as Scheduled Tribes under the existing rules. The
classification of the children of the same parents on the basis of place of their birth is
irrational , arbitrary and unconstitutional. Representations were received/submitted that
Part I of the Schedule to the said Order is creating difficulties for certain islanders who were
born on the mainland on account of non-availability of adequate medical facilities in the
islands. Since, the said Order provides that the person has necessarily to be born in the
islands for being deemed to be a Scheduled Tribe, such person who is born outside the
islands to the inhabitants of islands for valid medical or employment reason is not treated as
Scheduled Tribe.

As far as Lakshadweep is concerned, no particular community was selected as a
Scheduled Tribe and all the inhabitants in the Union territory irrespective of the community
or religious affiliation are being treated as Scheduled Tribes in view of their socio-economic
backwardness and extreme poverty arising out of isolation from the mainland. Itmay not be
appropriate to deny Scheduled Tribe status to such persons who were born on the mainland
for medical or employment reasons and have been brought back to the islands soon after
their birth.

The islands which constitute Union territory of Lakshadweep are very small in
geographical areas and scattered in the Arabian sea with very poor surface connectivity
and it takes several months to cover even the inhabited islands of Lakshadweep. Having
understood these glaring facts all the local inhabitants of Lakshadweep have been conferred
the status of Scheduled Tribes irrespective of their castes, creed and religions.

In view of above, it is urgently required that the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes)
(Union Territories) Order, 1951 be suitably amended to provide immediate relief to local
inhabitants by conferring the status of Scheduled Tribes to all such children born on the
mainland for medical or employment reasons to parents belonging to Lakshadweep.

The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objects.

New Deut; P.P.KOYA
March, 6, 2006.

wo


है ANNEXURE

EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED TruBEs) (UNION TeRRiTORIES) 08080, 1951
C.0.33

In exercise of the powers conferred by clause (1) of article 342 of the Constitution of
India, as amended by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, the President is pleased
to make the following Order, namely:—.

RE ; ee eae

THE SCHEDULE
PART I.—Lakshadweep

RK

Throughout the Union territory:—

Inhabitants of the Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands who, and both of
whose parents, were born in those islands.

eee ee coord mK


i LOK SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) (Union Territories) Order, 1951.

(Dr: PP Koya, MP)

MGIPMRND—6794LS(S3)—21-04-2006.