1
Short title.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
SHRIMATI DARSHANA VIKRAM JARDOSH, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2017.
2.  In article 323B of the Constitution, in clause (2),—
(a) after sub-clause (h), the following sub-clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(ha) compensation for motor vehicle accidents;"; and
(b) in sub-clause ( i), for the words "sub-clauses ( a) to ( h)", the words "sub-
clauses (a) to (ha)" shall be substituted.
Bill No.  38 of  2017
Amendment
of article
323B.5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
A huge number of accident compensation claim cases are pending in various Courts
and such cases are mounting every day. Currently, disposal of a motor vehicle accident
compensation claim case takes a very long time thereby frustrating the interests of the
victims of such accident. In most of the cases drivers loose their life and their aggrieved
dependent family members face greater difficulties for survival as they do not receive
compensation in time. There is a need to impose a constitutional obligation on the appropriate
Legislatures to establish tribunals for adjudication of cases relating to settlement of claims of
compensation arising out of motor vehicles accidents.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Constitution with a view to empower the
appropriate Legislatures to provide for the adjudication by tribunals of settlement of claims
of compensation arising out of motor vehicle accidents.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; DARSHANA VIKRAM JARDOSH
February 1,  2017.
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * *
323B. (1) The appropriate Legislature may, by law, provide for the adjudication or trial
by tribunals of any disputes, complaints or offences with respect to all or any of the matters
specified in clause (2) with respect to which such Legislature has power to make laws.
(2) The matters referred to in clause (1) are the following, namely:—
(a) * * * * * *
* * * * * *
(h) rent, its regulation and control and tenancy issues including the right, title
and interest of landlords and tenants;
(i) offences against laws with respect to any of the matters specified in sub-
clauses (a) to (h) and fees in respect of any of those matters;
(j) any matter incidental to any of the matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to (i).
* * * * * *
3
Tribunals for
other
matters.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shrimati Darshana Vikram Jardosh, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4484LS(S3)—01-03-2017.