THE INDIAN INSTITUTES OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
BILL, 2013
——————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
——————
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title and commencement.
2. Declaration of certain institutions as institutions of national importance.
3. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
T
HE INSTITUTES
4. Establishment and incorporation of Institutes.
5. Effect of incorporation of Institutes.
6. Objects of Institute.
 7. Powers and functions of Institutes.
8. Institute to be open to all races, creeds and classes.
9. Institute to be not-for-profit legal entity.
CHAPTER III
E
STABLISHMENT OF INSTITUTES IN PUBLIC-PRIV ATE PARTNERSHIP MODE
10.  Institute in public-private partnership mode.
11.  Establishment of Institute fully funded by Central Government.
CHAPTER IV
THE AUTHORITIES OF INSTITUTES
12. Board of Governors.
13. Term of office of, vacancies among, and allowances payable to,  members of Board.
14. Powers and functions of Board.
15. Senate.
16. Powers and functions of Senate.
17. Research Council.
18. Director.
19. Other Committees and authorities.
20. Review of performance of Institute.
Bill No. 38 of  2013
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

CHAPTER V
ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
CLAUSES
21. Grants by Central Government.
22. Fund of Institute.
23. Statutes.
24. Statutes how to be made.
25. Ordinances.
26. Ordinances how to be made.
27. Annual accounts and balance sheet.
28. Books of account to be maintained by Institute.
29. Appointment of auditors.
30. Annual report of Director.
31. Annual meeting of Board to consider statement of accounts.
32. Annual statement of accounts of Institutes fully funded by Central Government.
33. Annual report of each Institute.
CHAPTER VI
T
HE COUNCIL
34. Council of Institutes.
35. Term of office and allowances payable to members of Council.
36. Functions of Council.
CHAPTER VII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
37. Acts and proceedings not to be invalidated by vacancies, etc.
38. Returns and information to be provided to Central Government or State Government.
39. Powers of  Central Government to issue directions.
40. Institute to be public authority under Right to Information Act.
41. Power of Central Government to make rules.
42. Transitional provisions.
43. Power to remove difficulties.
44. Laying of rules and notifications.
THE SCHEDULE.
(ii)

THE INDIAN INSTITUTES OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
BILL, 2013
A
BILL
to declare certain institutions of information technology to be institutions of national
importance with a view to develop new knowledge in information technology and to
provide manpower of global standards for the information technology industry
and to establish other Institutions of Information Technology and to provide for
certain other matters connected with such institutions or incidental thereto.
B
E  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1.  ( 1) This Act may be called the Indian Institutes of Information Technology
Act, 2013.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. Whereas the objects of the institutes mentioned in the Schedule are such as to make
them institutions of national importance, it is hereby declared that each such institute is an
institution of national importance.
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Declaration of
certain
institutions as
institutions of
national
importance.
Bill No. 38  of  2013
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
3.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appointed day” means the date of establishment of the Indian Institute of
Information Technology established under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 4;
(b) “Board”, in relation to any Institute, means the Board of Governors referred
to in sub-section (1) of section 12;
(c) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Board appointed under
sub-section (2) of section 12;
(d) “Council” means the Council  established under sub-section ( 1) of
section 34;
(e) “Director” means the Director of the Institute;
(f) “existing Institute” means the Institute mentioned in column (3) of the
Schedule;
(g) “industry partner” means an individual, or a trust established under the
Indian Trusts Act, 1882, or company established under the Companies Act, 1956, or
society formed and registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860, or a
combination of one or more of such industry partner, having interest in the information
technology industry or related areas, and providing, under a scheme of the Central
Government, funds for capital investment for establishment of an Institute and for its
maintenance;
(h) “Institute” means any of the institutions mentioned in column (5) of  the
Schedule and such other Institutes established under section 10 or section 11;
(i) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the
expression “notify” shall be construed accordingly;
(j) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(k) “public-private partnership mode” means such partnership under a scheme
of the Central Government which provides for establishment of Institute involving
collaboration between the Central Government, State Government and the industry
partner;
(l) “Schedule” means the Schedule  to this Act;
(m) “Senate”, in relation to any Institute, means the Senate thereof;
(n) “Statutes” and “Ordinances”, in relation to any Institute, mean the Statutes
and Ordinances of that Institute made under this Act.
CHAPTER II
T
HE INSTITUTES
4. ( 1)  ( a) On and from the commencement of this  Act, every existing Institute,
shall be a body corporate by the same name as mentioned in column ( 5) of the
said Schedule.
(b) On and from the appointed day, any other Institute of Information Technology as
may be established under section 10 or section 11 shall be a body corporate by such name as
the Central Government may notify.
Definitions.
Establishment
and
incorporation
of Institutes.
2 of 1882.
1 of 1956.
21 of 1860.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(2)  Every existing Institute or any Institute established under clause ( b) of sub-
section (1) shall have perpetual succession and a common seal, with power, subject to the
provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and
immovable, and to contract, and shall, by  its name, sue or be sued.
5. On and from the date of commencement of this Act,—
(a) any reference to any existing Institute in any contract or other instrument
shall be deemed as a reference to the corresponding  Institute mentioned in column (5)
of the Schedule;
(b) all properties, movable and immovable, of or belonging to every existing
Institute shall vest in the corresponding Institute mentioned in column (5) of the
Schedule;
(c) all the rights, debts and other liabilities of every existing Institute shall be
transferred to, and be the rights and liabilities of, the corresponding Institute
mentioned in column (5) of the Schedule;
(d) every person employed by any existing Institute, immediately before such
commencement, shall hold his office or service in the corresponding Institute mentioned
in column (5) of the Schedule,  by the same tenure, at the same remuneration and upon
the same terms and conditions and with the same rights and privileges as to pension,
leave, gratuity, provident fund and other matters as he would have held the same if this
Act had not been enacted and shall continue to do so unless and until his employment
is terminated or until such tenure, remuneration and the terms and conditions are duly
altered by the Statutes:
Provided that if the alteration so made is not acceptable to such employee, his
employment may be terminated by the Institute in accordance with the terms of the
contract with the employee or, if no provision is made therein in this behalf, on payment
to him by the Institute of compensation equivalent to three months’ remuneration in
case of permanent employees and one month’s remuneration in the case of other
employees:
Provided further that any reference, by whatever form of words, to the Director,
Registrar or other officer of any existing Institute mentioned in column (3) of the
Schedule in any law for the time being in force, or in any instrument or other document,
shall be deemed as a reference to the Director, Registrar or other officer of  the
corresponding Institute mentioned in column (5) of the Schedule;
(e) every person pursuing any academic or research course,  immediately before
such commencement in any existing Institute, shall be deemed to have registered with
the corresponding Institute mentioned in column (5) of the said Schedule at the same
level of course in such Institute;
(f) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted by or against the existing
Institute, immediately before such commencement, may continue by or against the
corresponding Institute mentioned in column (5) of the Schedule.
Effect of
incorporation
of Institutes.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
6. The objects of every Institute shall be to––
(a) emerge as one amongst the foremost institutions in information technology
and allied fields of knowledge;
(b) advance new knowledge and innovation in information technology and
allied fields to empower the nation to the forefront in the global context;
(c) develop competent and capable youth imbued with the spirit of innovation
and entrepreneurship with the social and environmental orientation to meet the
knowledge needs of the country and provide global leadership in information
technology and allied fields;
(d) promote and provide transparency of highest order in matters of admission,
appointment to various positions, academic evaluation, administration and finance.
7. Subject to the provisions of this Act, every Institute shall exercise the following
powers and  functions, namely:—
(a) to provide for instructions in such fields of knowledge relating to information
technology and allied areas as the Institute may think fit, for the advancement of
learning and dissemination of knowledge;
(b) to lead, organise and conduct research and innovation in information
technology and allied fields of knowledge in such manner as the Institute may think fit,
including  collaboration or association with any other Institute, educational institution,
research organisation or body corporate;
(c) to hold examinations and grant degrees, diplomas and other academic
distinctions or titles and to confer honorary degree;
(d) to institute teaching, research or other academic positions, required by the
Institute with such designations as it may deem fit, and to appoint persons on tenure,
term or otherwise to such positions;
(e) to appoint persons working in any other Institute or educational institution
or involved in research of significance in any industry as adjunct, guest or visiting
faculty of the Institute on such terms and for such duration as the Institute may
decide;
(f) to create administrative and other posts and to make appointments thereto;
(g) to make provision for dissemination of knowledge emerging from research
and for that purpose to enter into such arrangements, including consultancy and
advisory services, with other institutions, industry, civil society or other organisations,
as the Institute may consider necessary;
(h) to determine, specify and receive payment of fees and other charges, as the
Institute may deem fit, from students and any other person, institution or body corporate
for instructions and other services, including training, consultancy and advisory
services, provided by the Institute;
(i) to deal with any property belonging to, or vested in, the Institute in such
manner as the Institute may deem fit for advancement of the objects of the Institute:
Provided that no land or other immovable property shall be disposed of by the
Institute without the prior approval of the Central Government:
Provided further that where the land for the Institute has been provided free of
cost by a State Government, such land may be disposed of only with the prior approval
of such State Government;
Objects of
Institute.
Powers and
functions of
Institutes.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
45
40

5
(j)  to receive gifts, grants, donations or benefactions from the Government and
to receive bequests, donations and transfer of movable or immovable properties from
testators, donors or transferors, as the case may be;
(k) to establish and maintain such infrastructure as may be necessary;
(l)  to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions, prizes and
medals; and
(m) to do all such things as may be necessary, incidental or conducive to the
attainment of all or any of the objects of the Institute.
8. (1) Every Institute shall be open to all persons of either sex, irrespective of caste,
creed, race, religion, disability, domicile, social or economic background.
(2) Admissions to every course or programme of study in each Institute shall be based
on merit assessed through transparent and reasonable criteria disclosed through its
prospectus, prior to the commencement of the process of admission by such Institute:
Provided that every such Institute shall be a Central Educational Institution for the
purposes of the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Act, 2006.
9. Every Institute shall be a not-for-profit legal entity and no part of the surplus, if any,
in revenue of such Institute, after meeting all expenditure in regard to its operations under
this Act, shall be invested for any purpose other than for the growth and development of
such Institute or for conducting research therein.
CHAPTER  III
E
STABLISHMENT OF INSTITUTES IN PUBLIC-PRIV A TE PARTNERSHIP MODE
10. (1) A State Government may establish an Institute under this Act.
(2) For the purposes of establishment of an Institute in the public-private partnership
mode, a State Government shall identify an industry partner for collaboration and
submit a proposal to the Central Government in such form and manner as may be
prescribed.
(3) The Central Government shall examine the proposal on the basis of such criteria as
may be prescribed and such criteria shall include the following, namely:—
(a) the investment of capital required for establishing the proposed Institute
and its phasing;
(b) the expertise and standing of the industry partner referred to in sub-section (2)
in the field of information technology;
(c) the assessment of the capability, financial and other resources of the
industry partner to support the Institute;
(d) the availability of adequate land free of cost for establishment of the
Institute;
(e) the availability of, or the commitment of the State Government to make
available, adequate physical and social infrastructure at the proposed site for
establishment of the Institute;
(f) the commitment of the concerned State Government  and the industry partner
for supporting the Institute after its establishment.
(4) The Central Government with the concurrence of  the concerned State Government
may suggest modifications to the proposal submitted to it under sub-section (2), if any.
Institute to
be open to all
races, creeds
and classes.
Institute to
be not-for-
profit legal
entity.
Institute in
public-private
partnership
mode.
5 of 2007.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

6
(5) The Central Government shall, on acceptance of the proposal with modifications, if
any, under sub-section (4), enter into a memorandum of understanding or an agreement with
the concerned State Government and the industry partner for the establishment of the
proposed Institute, subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder.
(6) Every memorandum of understanding or agreement referred to in sub-section (5)
shall contain,—
(a) the  investment of capital in establishment of the Institute, the respective
shares in such  investment of capital of the Central Government, the concerned State
Government and the industry partner, and the phasing of such capital investment over
a period of five years;
(b) the first Statutes of the Institute;
(c) the commitment of the Central Government, the concerned State Government
and the industry partner in ensuring autonomy to the proposed Institute.
(7) Where a proposal submitted by the State Government under sub-section (2) is not
acceptable to the Central Government, it shall communicate its decision to that State
Government, specifying the reasons for such decision.
11. (1) The Central Government may establish an Institute fully funded by it.
(2) Nothing contained in section 10 shall apply to an Institute established by the Central
Government under sub-section (1).
CHAPTER IV
T
HE AUTHORITIES OF INSTITUTES
12. (1) The Board of Governors of each Institute shall be the principal executive body
of that Institute.
(2) The Board of Governors of each Institute shall consist of the following members,
namely:—
(a) a Chairperson, to be appointed by the Institute as provided in
sub-section (3);
(b) two persons from the industry in the field of information technology, to be
appointed by the Institute as provided in sub-section ( 5);
(c) two persons from leading research laboratories having research interests in
the field of information technology, to be appointed by the Institute as provided in
sub-section (6);
(d) two persons having special knowledge or practical experience in respect of
education or engineering, to be appointed by the Institute as provided in sub-section
(6);
(e) two persons from amongst faculty members of the Institute to be nominated
by the Chairperson in consultation with the Director and two senior most  Deans of
the Institute;
(f) the Director of the Indian Institute of Technology located in the zone in which
the Institute is located, ex officio;
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, “zone” shall have the same meaning
as assigned to it in  the Explanation to section 11 of the Institutes of Technology Act, 1961;
(g) the Vice-Chancellor of a University in the State, to be nominated by the State
Government in which the Institute is located, ex officio;
Establishment
of Institute
fully funded
by Central
Government.
Board of
Governors.
59 of 1961.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

7
 (h) one person to represent the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes to be
nominated by the State Government;
(i) the Director of the National Institute of Technology of the State in which the
Institute is located, ex officio;
(j)  two senior most Deans of the Institute;
(k) the Director of the Institute who shall be its Member-Secretary.
(3) The Chairperson shall be appointed by the Institute from a panel of three names
recommended by a Search-cum-Selection Committee consisting of—
(a)  a nominee of the Central Government who shall be a person of eminence in
academia in the field of engineering or science;
(b)  a nominee of the State Government who shall be a person of eminence in
academia in the field of information technology; and
(c)   a nominee of the Central Government, in case of an Institute fully funded by
the Central Government, or by the industry partner, in case of an  Institute established
in the public-private partnership mode, to represent industry.
(4)  The Director of the Institute shall be the convenor of the meetings of the Search-
cum-Selection Committee but shall not participate in its deliberations.
(5)  A member of the Board referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (2) shall be appointed
by the Institute on approval of a specific name by the Board from a panel of names
recommended by the Central Government, in case of an Institute fully funded by the Central
Government, or by the industry partner, in case of an Institute established in the public-
private partnership mode.
(6)  A member of the Board referred to in clause (c) or clause (d) of sub-section (2) shall
be appointed by the Institute on approval of a specific name by the Board from a panel of
names recommended by the Council.
13.  (1)   Save as otherwise provided in this section, the term of office of the Chairper-
son or any other member of the Board, other than an ex officio member, shall be for a period
of five years from the date of his  nomination.
(2) The term of office of an ex officio member shall continue so long as he holds the
office by virtue of which he is a member.
(3) The term of office of a member nominated under clause (e) of sub-section (2) of
section 12 shall be  for a period of two years from the date of his nomination.
(4) A member of the Board, other than an ex officio member, who fails to attend three
consecutive meetings of the Board, shall cease to be a member of the Board.
(5)  Members of the Board shall be entitled to such allowances, as may be specified in
the Statutes, for attending meetings of the Board or as may be convened by the Institute.
14. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board of every Institute shall be
responsible for the general superintendence, direction and control of the affairs of the
Institute and shall have the power to frame, amend, modify or rescind the Statutes and the
Ordinances governing the affairs of the Institute to achieve the objects specified in
section 6.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section ( 1), the Board shall have the
following powers, namely:-—
(a
) to decide questions of policy relating to the administration and working of
the Institute;
Term of office
of, vacancies
among, and
allowances
payable to,
members of
Board.
Powers and
functions of
Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

8
(b) to make  Statutes governing the administration, management and operations
of the Institute;
(c) to examine and approve the annual budget estimates of the Institute;
(d) to examine and approve the plan for development of the Institute and to
identify sources of finance for implementation of the plan;
(e) to establish departments, faculties or schools of studies and initiate
programmes or courses of study at the Institute;
(f) to create teaching and other academic posts, to determine the number of such
posts and emoluments thereof and to define the duties and conditions of service of
teachers and other academic staff:
Provided that the Board shall not take action otherwise than on consideration of
the recommendations of the Senate;
(g) to provide, by the Statutes, the qualifications, criteria and processes for
appointment to teaching and other posts in the Institute;
(h) to fix, by the Statutes, fees and other charges payable for pursuit of courses
or programmes in the Institute;
(i) to exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be
conferred or imposed by this Act or the Statutes.
(3) The Board may, subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, delegate
such powers and functions to the Senate, the Research Council, or to the Director or other
officer of the Institution as the Board may deem fit.
(4) The Board shall conduct an annual review of the performance of the Director
with specific reference to his leadership in the achievement of the objects of the
Institute.
(5) The Board shall in exercise of the powers and discharge of functions strive to
provide autonomy in academic matters to the Senate and departments or faculties or schools,
as the case may be.
(6) Where in the opinion of the Chairperson, the situation is so emergent that an
immediate action needs to be taken in the interest of the Institute, the Chairperson  in
consultation with the Director,  may, after recording the reasons  for his opinion, issue such
order, as he thinks fit:
Provided that such orders shall be submitted for ratification of the Board in the next
meeting.
15.  (1) The Senate of every Institute shall consist of the following persons, namely:–
(a) the Director of the Institute who shall be the Chairperson of the Senate;
(b) heads of all departments, faculties or schools, as the case may be, comprising
the Institute;
(c) Deans in charge of academic, research and student affairs in the
Institute;
(d) six members of faculty from amongst the Professors of the Institute to be
nominated by the Board;
(e) three persons of eminence  in the field of education having knowledge of
inter-disciplinary field, to be nominated by the Board;
Senate.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

9
(f)  three persons of eminence from the fields of  research in information technology
or related fields, to be nominated by the Board;
(g) such other persons to be nominated by the Board  to provide representation
in such fields of knowledge or technology which, in its opinion, are not adequately
represented.
(2) The term of office of an ex officio member shall continue so long as he holds the
office by virtue of which he is a member.
(3) The term of office of a member nominated under clauses (d) to (f) of sub-section (1)
shall be for a period of three years from the date of his nomination.
(4) A member of the Senate under clauses ( d) to ( f) of sub-section ( 1) who fails
to attend three consecutive meetings of the Board, shall cease to be a member of the
Board.
16. ( 1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances,  the
Senate shall be the principal academic body of the Institute and shall have the power to
enact, amend or modify the Ordinances governing academic matters and the affairs and
welfare of students of  the Institute.
(2)  Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), the Senate shall have the
following powers, namely:—
(a) to specify the criteria and procedure for admission to courses or programmes
of study offered by the Institute;
(b) to recommend the Board to institute teaching and other academic posts,
determination of  their  number and emoluments and defining the duties and conditions
of service of teachers and other academic posts;
(c) to recommend the Board about commencement of new programmes or courses
of study;
(d) to specify the broad academic content of programmes and courses of study
and to suggest  modifications, if any;
(e) to specify the academic calendar and approve grant of degrees, diplomas and
other academic distinctions or titles;
(f) to exercise such other powers and discharge such other functions as may be
assigned to it, in the Statutes,  by the Board.
17. (1) Every Institute shall establish a Research Council comprising of the Director
and such other members, as may be specified in the  Statutes by the Board.
(2) The Research Council of every Institute shall—
(i) interface with research funding organisations, industry and civil society to
identify potential areas for research;
(ii) organise and promote research in such Institute or in collaboration with any
institution of higher learning or research laboratories;
(iii) assist teachers in obtaining funding from external sources for research
projects prepared by them;
(iv) provide, out of the funds placed at its disposal by the Board, research
resources and grant assistance for research projects proposed to be undertaken by
teachers in such Institute;
Powers and
functions of
Senate.
Research
Council.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

10
(v) provide for incubation of technology applications emerging from research
and to protect and utilise the intellectual property obtained from research in the Institute;
(vi) make provisions for research and advisory services and for that purpose
enter  into such arrangements with  other  institutions, industry, civil society or other
organisations and enable the research to be disseminated to industry and society
through such arrangements;
(vii) exercise such other powers and perform such other functions as may be
assigned to it by the Statutes.
18.  (1) The Director shall be the principal executive officer of every Institute and shall
be responsible for implementation of the decisions of the Board and Senate and for the day-
to-day administration of the Institute.
(2)  The Director shall exercise such other powers and discharge such other duties as
may be assigned to him by this Act or the Statutes or Ordinances or delegated by the Board
or the Senate.
(3) The Director shall be appointed by the Board from a panel of names recommended
by a Search-cum-Selection Committee consisting of—
(a) the Chairperson of the Board;
(b) the Director of the Indian Institute of Technology of the zone in which the
Institute is located;
(c) the nominee of the Central Government, in case of an Institute fully funded
by the Central Government, who shall be a person of eminence in academia in the field
of information technology;
(d) three nominees, one each from   the Central Government,  the concerned State
Government, each of whom shall be a person of eminence in academia in the field of
information technology, and a nominee of the industry partner from the information
technology industry, in the case of  an  Institute established in the public-private
partnership mode.
(4) The Director shall, except on account of resignation or removal, hold office for a
period  of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office.
(5) The Director may, by notice in writing under his hand addressed to the Chairperson,
resign from his office.
(6) The Director may be removed by the Board on proven charges of misbehaviour or
misconduct:
Provided that the Director shall not be removed from his office, except by an order made
by the Board after an inquiry instituted in this behalf by the Board, and after giving him a
reasonable opportunity of being heard:
Provided further that where the institution of an inquiry or removal of the Director is
being considered by the Board, the Director shall refrain himself from the proceedings of the
Board.
(7) The Board may remove the Director from office, if it is dissatisfied with the
functioning of the Institute after review of the affairs of the Institute under sub-
section (6).
(8) The Board shall initiate the process of appointment in respect of any vacancy due to
arise  for  the post of Director on completion of tenure before a period of six months from the
date of arising of such vacancy:
Director.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

11
Provided that the process of appointment shall be completed before such vacancy
arises.
(9) Where any casual vacancy  has occurred for the post of Director, the process of
appointment in respect of such vacancy shall be completed within a period of three months
from the date of such vacancy.
19. (1) The constituion, powers and functions of the other authorities as may be
declared by the Statutes shall be such as may be provided by the Statutes.
(2) The Board may constitute such Committees, as it may deem fit, for efficient
management of affairs of the Institute.
20. (1) Every Institute shall, within seven years from the date of establishment and
incorporation of such Institute under this Act and thereafter at the expiration of every fifth
year, constitute, with the prior approval of the Central Government, a Committee to evaluate
and review the performance of such  Institute in achievement of its objects during the said
period.
(2) The Committee constituted under sub-section ( 1) shall consist of members of
repute in academia or industry, from relevant fields of  teaching, learning and research in
such Institute.
(3) The Committee shall assess the performance of Institute and make recommendations
on—
(a) the extent of fulfilment of the objects of the Institute mentioned in section 6
and its contribution to the society;
(b) the promotion of transformational research and its impact on industry or
society;
(c) the advancement of fundamental research;
(d) the establishment of the Institute as amongst the global leaders in the area of
information technology;
(e) the extent of achievement of social equality through education and research
in the Institute; and
(f) such other parameters as the Board may consider necessary and specify.
(4) The Board shall consider the recommendations  referred to in sub-section (3) and
take such action as it may deem fit:
Provided that the recommendations of the Committee along with an explanatory
memorandum on the action taken or proposed to be taken, specifying the reasons thereof,
shall be submitted to the Central Government or to the State Government in case of an
Institute established under section 10 in the public-private partnership mode and the Central
Government or  the State Government, as the case may be, shall cause such  recommendations
to be laid before each House of Parliament or the State Legislature.
(5) The Central Government shall have the power to give such directions, emanating
from the recommendations of the Committee, on policy relating to national purposes, as it
may deem fit, and the Institute shall comply with such directions:
Provided that if any dispute arises as to whether the direction is a question of policy
relating to national purpose or not, the decision of the Central Government shall be
final.
Other
Committees
and authori-
ties.
Review of
performance
of Institute.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

12
CHAPTER V
ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
21.  ( 1) The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament
by law in this behalf, make to each Institute, which is fully funded by the Central Government,
grants of such sums of money as are required for supporting the Institute for its operation,
management and maintenance.
(2) The Central Government shall provide to each Institute, including Institutes
established in the public-private partnership mode, grants of such sums of money as are
required to meet the expenditure on scholarships or fellowships instituted by it, including
scholarships or fellowships for students from socially and educationally backward classes
or categories of citizens enrolled in such Institute.
22.  (1) Every Institute shall maintain a fund to which shall be credited—
(a) all monies provided by the Central Government or the State Government or
industry partner, as the case may be;
(b) all fees and other charges received by the Institute;
(c) all monies received by the Institute by way of grants, gifts, donations,
benefactions, bequests or transfers;
(d) all monies received by the Institute from utilisation of intellectual property
arising from research conducted or provision of advisory or consultancy services by
it; and
(e) all monies received by the Institute in any other manner or from any other
source.
(2) The fund of every Institute shall be applied towards meeting the expenses of the
Institute including expenses incurred in the exercise of its powers and discharge of its duties
under this Act, furtherance of research in the Institute or in collaboration with other educational
institutions or industry and for capital investment aimed at the growth and development of
the Institute.
23. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the conferment of honorary degrees;
(b) the formation of departments of teaching;
(c) the fees to be charged for courses of study in the Institute and for admission
to the examinations of degrees and diplomas of the Institute;
(d) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions, medals and prizes;
(e) the term of office and the method of appointment of officers of the Institute;
(f) the qualifications of teachers of the Institute;
(g) the classification, the method of appointment and the determination of the
terms and conditions of service of teachers and other staff of the Institute;
(h) the constitution of pension, insurance and provident funds for the benefit of
the officers, teachers and other staff of the Institute;
(i) the constitution, powers and duties of the authorities of the Institute;
(j) the establishment and maintenance of halls and hostels;
(k) the conditions of residence of students of the Institute and the levying of
fees for residence in the halls and hostels and or other charges;
Grants by the
Central
Government.
Fund of
Institute.
Statutes.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

13
(l) the allowances to be paid to the Chairperson and members of the Board;
(m) the authentication of the orders and decisions of the Board;
(n) the meetings of the Board, the Senate, or any Committee, the quorum at such
meetings and the procedure to be followed in the conduct of their business; and
(o) any other matter which is required to be or  may be specified by Statutes or in
respect of which provision is to be made by Statutes.
24. (1) The first Statutes of each Institute shall be framed by the Board with the prior
approval of the Central Government and a copy of the same shall be laid, as soon as may be,
before each House of Parliament.
(2) The Board may, from time to time, make new or additional Statutes or may amend
or repeal the Statutes in the manner provided in this section.
(3) Every new Statute or addition to the Statutes or any amendment or repeal of
Statutes shall require the previous approval of the Central Government.
25. Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the Ordinances of every
Institute may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the admission of the students to the Institute;
(b) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees and diplomas of the
Institute;
(c) the conditions under which students shall be admitted to the degree or
diploma courses and to the examinations of the Institute, and shall be eligible for
degrees and diplomas;
(d) the conditions of award of the fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions, medals
and prizes;
(e) the conditions and mode of appointment and duties of examining bodies,
examiners and moderators;
(f) the conduct of examinations;
(g) the maintenance of discipline among the students of the Institute; and
(h) any other matter which by this Act or the Statutes is to be or may be provided
for by the Ordinances.
26. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this section, Ordinances shall be made by the
Senate.
(2) All Ordinances made by the Senate shall have effect from such date as it may direct,
but every Ordinance so made shall be submitted, as soon as may be, to the Board and shall
be considered by the Board at its next meeting.
(3)  The Board shall have power by resolution to modify or cancel any such Ordinance
and such Ordinance shall from the date of such resolution stand modified accordingly or
cancelled, as the case may be.
27.  ( 1) At every annual meeting of the Institute, the Director shall lay before the
Board—
(a) a balance sheet as at the end of the financial year;
(b) a statement of income and expenditure for that period.
(2) Every balance sheet and statement of income and expenditure of such Institute
shall give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of such Institute as at the end of the
financial year and shall, subject to the provisions of this section, be in such form as may be
prescribed and in accordance with such general instructions and accounting standards as
may be prescribed, or as near thereto as circumstances admit.
(3) Where the statement of income and expenditure and the balance sheet of the
Institute do not comply with the accounting standards, the Institute shall disclose in its
statement of income and expenditure and balance sheet, the following, namely:—
Statutes how
to be made.
Ordinances.
Ordinances
how to be
made.
Annual
accounts and
balance sheet.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

14
(a) the deviation from the accounting standards;
(b) the reasons for such deviation; and
(c) the financial effect, if any, arising due to such deviation.
Explanation.––For the purposes of this section, the expression “accounting standards”
means the standards of accounting recommended by the Institute of Chartered Accountants
of India constituted under the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949.
28. (1) Every Institute shall keep proper books of account with respect to—
(a) all sums of money received and expended by it and the matters in respect of
which the receipt and expenditure take place;
(b) the assets and liabilities of the Institute;
(c)  the properties, movable and immovable of the Institute.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), proper books of account shall not be deemed
to be kept with respect to the matters specified therein, if such books are not kept—
(a)  as are necessary to give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the
Institute and to explain its transactions; and
(b)  on accrual basis and according to the double entry system of accounting.
29.   (1) The Board of every Institute shall, before the expiry of three months prior to
the end of the financial year, without prejudice to the provisions contained in the Comptroller
and Auditor General’s (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971 or any other law
for the time being in force containing provisions for audit of accounts by the Institutes,
appoint an auditor or auditors, on such remuneration, as it thinks fit, to scrutinise the balance
sheet and the statement of income and expenditure of such Institute.
(2)  No person appointed as auditor or persons in the employment of such auditor shall
have any direct or indirect interest, whether pecuniary or otherwise, in any matter concerning
or related to the administration or operations (except being enrolled as students) of the
Institute.
(3) The provisions of section 226 of the Companies Act, 1956 on the qualifications and
disqualifications of auditor shall apply,  mutatis mutandis,  for appointment of an auditor
under this Act.
(4) Every auditor of each Institute shall have such powers and perform such duties as
the auditor may think necessary for the performance of his duties as an auditor and as are
available to, or are required of, such auditor under the Companies Act, 1956.
30.  (1) There shall be attached to every statement of accounts laid before the Board of
each Institute, a report by its Director, with respect to—
(a) the state of affairs of such Institute;
(b) the amounts, if any, which it proposes to carry  to any surplus reserves in its
balance sheet;
(c) the extent to which understatement or overstatement of any surplus of income
over expenditure or any shortfall of expenditure over income has been indicated in the
auditor’s report and the reasons for such understatement or overstatement;
(d)  the productivity of research projects undertaken by the Institute measured
in accordance with such norms as may be specified by any statutory regulatory
authority;
(e) appointment of the officers and teachers  of the Institute; and
Books of
account to be
maintained by
Institute.
Appointment
of auditors.
1 of 1956.
Annual report
of Director.
38 of 1949.
56 of 1971.
1 of 1956.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

15
(f)  benchmark and internal standards set by the Institute, including the nature of
innovations in teaching, research and application of knowledge.
(2) The report of the Director shall also include a statement showing the name of the
five officers and other employees of the Institute who received the highest remuneration
(including allowances and other payments made to such employee) during the preceding
financial year and the contributions made by such employees during the financial year.
(3) The statement referred to in sub-section (2) shall indicate whether any such employee
is a relative of any member of the Board or Senate of the Institute and if so, the name of such
member and such other particulars as may be required.
(4) The Director shall also be bound to give the complete information and explanations
in its report on every reservation, qualification or adverse remark contained in the auditors’
report.
31. (1) The statement of accounts, including the balance sheet and the statement of
income and expenditure, the auditor’s report, the report of the Director and other documents
required to be annexed or attached with such statement, shall be brought before the  Board
in its meeting at such time immediately, but not later than three months, from the conclusion
of the financial year.
(2) A copy of every statement of accounts (including the balance sheet, statement of
income and expenditure, the auditors’ report and every other document required to be annexed
or attached to balance sheet) which is to be laid before the Board of each Institute shall, not
less than twenty-one days before the date of the meeting, be sent to every member of the
Board.
(3)  After the statement of accounts referred to in sub-section (1) has been laid before
the Board of each Institute, such balance sheet, statement of income and expenditure and
other documents shall be published and placed on the website of such Institute.
32.  ( 1) The statement of accounts of each Institute, which is fully funded by the
Central Government, shall be audited by such auditor as may be appointed in this behalf by
the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(2)  The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any person appointed by him in
connection with the audit of the accounts of each Institute, which is fully funded by the
Central Government, shall have the same rights, privileges and authority in connection with
such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India has in connection with the audit
of the Central Government accounts, and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the
production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and
to inspect the offices of the Institute.
(3)  A copy of the statement of accounts including the balance sheet and the statement
of income and expenditure, the auditor’s report, the report of the Director and other documents
required to be attached with such statement, shall be submitted to the Central Government,
and that Government shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid before each House
of Parliament.
33. ( 1) The annual report of each Institute shall be prepared under the direction of
the Board, which shall include, among other matters, the steps taken by the Institute towards
the fulfilment of its objects and an outcome based assessment of the research being undertaken
in such Institute, and  be submitted to the Board on or before such date as may be specified
and the Board shall consider the report in its annual meeting.
(2)  The annual report as approved by the Board shall be published and placed on the
website of the Institute.
Annual
meeting of
Board to
consider
statement
of
accounts.
Annual report
of each
Institute.
Annual
statement of
accounts of
Institute fully
funded by
Central
Government.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

16
(3)  The annual report of each Institute which is fully funded by the Central Government
shall be submitted to the Central Government who shall, as soon as may be, cause the same
to be laid before each House of Parliament.
CHAPTER VI
THE COUNCIL
34.  (1)  With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification,
specify in this behalf, there shall be established for all the Institutes specified in column (5)
of the Schedule, a central body to be called the Council.
(2)  The Council shall consist of the following members, namely:––
(a) the Minister in charge of the Ministry or Department of the Central Government
having administrative control of the technical education, ex officio, as Chairperson;
(b) the Minister  in charge of technical education of  State Governments of such
States where the Institutes are located, ex officio;
(c) the industry partner of each of the Institutes established in the public-private
partnership mode;
(d) the Chairpersons of each of the Institutes, ex officio;
(e) the Directors of each of the Institutes, ex officio;
(f)  four persons to be nominated by the Central Government, one each to represent
the Ministry concerned with finance, technical education, science and technology
and information technology;
(g)  three persons from the information technology industry to be nominated by
the Council, from a panel comprised of two names recommended by each Institute;
(h) three persons of eminence in research in information technology to be
nominated by the Council, from a panel comprised of two names recommended by
each Institute;
(i)  three persons to represent persons of eminence from academia or civil society
to be nominated by the Council, from a panel comprised of two names recommended
by each State Government of such States where Institutes are located.
(3)  The Council shall have a Secretariat with a Secretary to be appointed in such
manner as may be prescribed.
(4)  The Council may constitute a Standing Committee of the Indian Institute of
 Information Technology Council to assist the Council in discharge of its duties and
responsibilities.
(5)  The expenditure on the Council shall be met by the Central Government.
35. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this section, the term of office of a member of the
Council, other than an ex officio member, shall be for a period of three years from the date of
nomination.
(2) The term of office of an ex officio member shall continue so long as he holds the
office by virtue of which he is a member.
(3) The members of the Council shall be entitled to such other travelling and such
other allowances, as may be prescribed, for attending meetings of the Council or its Committees.
Council of
Institutes.
Term of
office and
allowances
payable to
members of
Council.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

17
36.   (1) The Council shall coordinate the activities of all the Institutes.
(2)   Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), the Council shall perform the
following functions, namely:—
(a) to recommend to the Central Government, the institution of scholarships
including   research and for the benefit of students belonging to the Scheduled Castes,
the Scheduled Tribes and other socially and educationally backward classes
of citizens;
(b) to recommend to the Central Government, proposals for establishment of
new Institutes of Information Technology in the public-private partnership mode;
(c) to deliberate on such matters of common interest to Institutes as may be
referred to it by any Institute;
(d) to perform such other functions as may be referred to it by the Central
Government or any State Government:
Provided that nothing in this section shall derogate the powers and functions vested by
law in the Board or Senate or other authorities of each Institute.
(3) The Chairperson of the Council shall ordinarily preside at the meetings of the
Council and in his absence any other member, chosen by the members present from amongst
themselves at the meeting, shall preside at the meeting.
CHAPTER VII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
37. No act of the Council, or any Institute or Board or  Senate or any other body set-up
under this Act or the Statutes, shall be invalid merely by reason of––
(a)  any vacancy or defect in the constitution thereof; or
(b)  any irregularity in its procedure not affecting the merits of the case; or
(c)  any defect in the selection, nomination or appointment of a person acting as
a member thereof.
38. (1) Every Institute shall furnish to the Central Government such returns or other
information with respect to its policies or activities as the Central Government may, for
the purpose of reporting to Parliament or for the making of policy, from time to time
require.
(2)   Every Institute, established in the public-private partnership mode, shall furnish to
the State Government in which such Institute is located, such returns or other
information with respect to its policies or activities as that Government may, for the purpose
of reporting to the concerned State Legislature or for the making of policy, from time to time
require.
39. The Institute shall carry out such directions as may be issued to it from time to time
by the Central Government for the efficient administration of this Act.
40.  The provisions of the Right to Information Act, 2005 shall apply to each Institute,
including Institutes established in the public-private partnership mode, as if it were a public
authority defined in clause (h) of section 2 of the Right to Information Act, 2005.
Functions of
Council.
Acts and
proceedings
not to be
invalidated by
vacancies,
etc.
Returns and
information
to be
provided to
Central
Government
or State
Government.
Powers of
Central
Government
to issue
directions.
Institute to
be public
authority
under Right
to Informa-
tion Act.
22 of 2005.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

18
41. (1)  The Central Government may, by notification make rules for carrying out the
provisions of this Act.
 (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the form and manner in which the State Government  shall  submit proposal to
the Central Government under sub-section (2) of section 10;
(b) the criteria for examination of  the proposal  of the State Government under
sub-section (3) of section 10;
(c) the form of balance sheet and statement of income and expenditure, and the
accounting standards under sub-section ( 2) of section 27;
(d) the manner of appointment of Secretary  under sub-section (3) of section 34;
(e) the travelling and such other allowances payable to the members of the
Council for attending meetings of the Council or its Committees under sub-section (3)
of section 35;
(f)  any other matter which is to be or may be, prescribed or in respect of which
provision is to be made by the Central Government by rules.
42. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act––
(a) the Board of every Institute functioning as such immediately before the
commencement of this Act shall continue to  function until a new Board is constituted
for that Institute under this Act, but on the constitution of a new Board under this Act,
the members of the Board holding office before such commencement of this Act shall
cease to hold office;
(b) every Senate constituted in relation to every Institute before the
commencement of this Act shall be deemed to be the Senate constituted under this Act
until a Senate is constituted under this Act for that Institute, but on the constitution of
the new Senate under this Act, the members of the Senate holding office before the
commencement of this Act shall cease to hold office;
(c) the Statutes, Ordinances, rules, regulations and bye-laws of each existing
Institute as in force, immediately before the commencement of this Act, shall continue
to apply to the corresponding Institute in so far as they are not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act until the first Statutes and the Ordinances are made under this
Act.
(2) The Central Government may, without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1),
if it considers necessary and expedient to do so,  by notification, take such measures which
may be necessary for the transfer of the existing Institute mentioned in column ( 3) of the
Schedule to the corresponding Institute mentioned under column (5) of the Schedule.
43. (1)  If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions or give
such directions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be
necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of the
period of three years from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament.
Power of
Central
Government
to make
rules.
Transitional
provisions.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

19
44. Every rule made and every notification issued by the Central Government under this
Act, shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made or issued, before each House of
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree
in making any modification in the rule or notification or both Houses agree that the rule or
notification should not be made or issued, the rule or notification shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule or notification.
Laying of
rules and
notifications.
5
10

THE  SCHEDULE
[See section 4(1)]
Sl. Name of the State Name of the existing Location Name of the Institute
No. Institute incorporated under
this Act
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
1. Uttar Pradesh Indian Institute of Allahabad Indian Institute of
Information Technology Information
Allahabad,  being a society T echnology,
registered under the Allahabad.
Societies Registration Act,
1860 (21 of 1860)
2. Madhya Pradesh Atal Bihari Vajpayee Gwalior Atal Bihari Vajpayee
Indian Institute of Indian Institute of
Information Technology Information
and Management, T echnology and
Gwalior,  being a society Management, Gwalior.
registered under the
Societies Registration Act,
1860 (21 of 1860)
3. Madhya Pradesh Pandit Dwaraka Prasad Jabalpur Pandit Dwaraka
Mishra Indian Institute of Prasad Mishra Indian
Information Institute of
Technology, Design and Information
Manufacturing, Jabalpur, Technology, Design
being a society registered and Manufacturing,
under the Societies Jabalpur.
Registration Act, 1860
(21 of 1860)
4. Tamil Nadu Indian Institute of Kanchee- Indian Institute of
Information Technology puram Information
Design and Technology Design
Manufacturing, and Manufacturing,
Kancheepuram,  being a Kancheepuram.
society registered under the
Societies Registration Act,
1860 (21 of 1860)
20
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

21
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Education is a key element for developing human resources and contributing to the
growth of the society. From relatively small beginning, the Indian information technology
industry has emerged as a strong and credible force which is now recognised as a major
constituent of the global information technology services industry. In order to provide
manpower of global standards for the information technology industry to cater the needs of
emerging areas of knowledge economy, education and training, information technology is
a prerequisite.
2. At present, there are four Indian Institutes of Information Technology (IIITs)
established by the Central Government under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of
1860) at Gwalior, Allahabad, Jabalpur and Kancheepuram. To meet the challenges of the
Indian information technology industry, the Ministry of Human Resource Development
intends to establish twenty new Indian Institutes of Information Technology on Public
Private Partnership (PPP) basis. The partners in setting up the Indian Institute of Information
Technology would be the Ministry of Human Resource Development, the concerned State
Government where such Indian Institute of Information Technology will be established and
the industry as conceived under the Scheme formulated by the Central Government in this
behalf.
3. The main objective in establishing Indian Institutes of Information Technology is
to set up a model of education which can produce world class human resource in the field
of information technology. These institutions are conceived as self sustaining, research-led
institutions contributing significantly to the global competitiveness of key sectors of the
Indian economy and industry with application of information technology in selected domain
areas.
4. The Indian Institutes of Information Technology Bill, 2013 seeks to declare the four
existing Indian Institutes of Information Technology, funded by the Central Government, as
Institutions of National Importance and to provide for the establishment of other Institutions
of Information Technology.
5. The notes on clauses explain in detail the various provisions contained in the Bill.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW DELHI; M.M. PALLAM RAJU
The 4th December, 2012.

Notes on clauses
Clause 1.—This clause provides for the short title and commencement of the proposed
legislation.
Clause 2.—This clause deals with declaration of certain institutions as institutions of
national importance.
Clause 3.—This clause provides for definitions of various expressions used in the
proposed legislation, which, inter alia , include “appointed day”, “existing Institute”,
“industry partner”, “public-private partnership mode”, etc.
Clause 4.—This clause relates to establishment and incorporation of Institutes. Sub-
clause (a) of clause (1) of the said clause provides that on and from the commencement of
the Act—(a) every existing Institute, shall be a body corporate by the same name as
mentioned under column (5) of the said Schedule; (b) on and from the appointed day, any
other Institutes of Information Technology as may be established under section 10 or
section 11 shall be a body corporate by such name as the Central Government may, notify.
Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that every existing  Institute referred to in clause
(a) or the Institutes established under clause (b) of sub-section (1) shall have perpetual
succession and a common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire,
hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by
the said name, sue or be sued .
Clause 5.—This clause provides for effect of incorporation of Institutes. It provides
that on and from the date of commencement of this Act:—(a) any reference to any existing
Institute in any contract or other instrument shall be deemed as a reference to the
corresponding Institute mentioned in column (5) of the Schedule; (b) all properties, movable
and immovable, of or belonging to every existing Institute shall vest in the corresponding
Institute mentioned under column (5) of the Schedule; (c) all the rights, debts and other
liabilities of every existing Institute shall be transferred to, and be the rights and liabilities
of, the corresponding Institute mentioned in column (5) of the Schedule; 
(d) every person
employed by any existing Institute, immediately before such commencement, shall hold his
office or service in the corresponding Institute mentioned  in column (5) of the Schedule, by
the same tenure, at the same remuneration and upon the same terms and conditions and
with the same rights and privileges as to pension, leave, gratuity, provident fund and other
matters as he would have held the same if this Act had not been enacted and shall continue
to do so unless and until his employment is terminated or until such tenure, remuneration
and the terms and conditions are duly altered by the Statutes. However, the sub-clause
provides that if the alteration so made is not acceptable to such employee, his employment
may be terminated by the Institute in accordance with the terms of the contract with the
employee or, if no provision is made therein in this behalf, on payment, to him by the
Institute of compensation equivalent to three months’ remuneration in case of permanent
employees and one month’s remuneration in the case of other employees. The said sub-
clause further provides that  any reference, by whatever form of words, to the Director,
Registrar or other officer of any existing Institute mentioned in column (3) of the Schedule,
in any law for the time being in force, or in any instrument or other document, shall be
deemed as a reference to the Director, Registrar or other officer of 
the corresponding Institute
column (5) of the Schedule;  (e) every person pursuing,  any academic or research course
immediately before such commencement in any existing Institute, shall be deemed to have
registered with the corresponding Institute mentioned in column (5) of the said Schedule at
the same level of course in such Institute; (f) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted
by or against the existing Institute, immediately before such commencement, may continue
by or against the corresponding Institute mentioned in column (5) of the Schedule.
22

23
Clause 6.—This clause deals with objects of Institutes. It provides that the objects of
every Institute shall be to––(a) emerge as one amongst the foremost institutions in
information technology and allied fields of knowledge; (b) advance new knowledge and
innovation in information technology and allied fields to empower the nation to the forefront
in the global context; (c) develop competent and capable youth imbued with the spirit of
innovation and entrepreneurship with the social and environmental orientation to meet the
knowledge needs of the country and provide global leadership in information technology
and allied fields; (d) promote and provide transparency of highest order in matters of
admission, appointment to various positions, academic evaluation, administration and
finance.
Clause 7.—This clause deals with powers and functions of Institutes. It provides
that subject to the provisions of this Act, every Institute shall exercise the following powers
and perform the following functions— (a) to provide for instructions in such fields of
knowledge relating to information technology and allied areas as such Institute may think
fit, for the advancement of learning and dissemination of knowledge; (b) to lead, organise
and conduct research and innovation in information technology and allied fields of knowledge
in such manner as the Institute may think fit, including collaboration or association with
any other Institute, educational institution, research organisation or body corporate; (c) to
hold examinations and grant degrees, diplomas and other academic distinctions or title and
to confer honorary degree; (d) to institute teaching, research or other academic positions,
required by the Institute with such designations as it may deem fit, and to appoint persons
on tenure, term or otherwise to such positions; (e) to appoint persons working in any other
Institute or educational institution or involved in research of significance in any industry as
adjunct, guest or visiting faculty of the Institute on such terms and for such duration as the
Institute may decide; (f) to create administrative and other posts and to make appointments
thereto; (g) to make provision for dissemination of knowledge emerging from research and
for that purpose to enter into such arrangements, including consultancy and advisory
services, with other institutions, industry, civil society or other organisations, as the Institute
may consider necessary; (h) to determine, specify and receive payment of fees and other
charges, as the Institute may deem fit, from students and any other person, institution or
body corporate for instructions and other services, including training, consultancy and
advisory services, provided by the Institute; (i) to deal with any property belonging to, or
vested in, the Institute in such manner as the Institute may deem fit for advancement of  the
objects of the Institute and no land or other immovable property shall be disposed of by the
Institute without the prior approval of the Central Government and where the land for the
Institute has been provided free of cost by a State Government, such land may be disposed
of only with the prior approval of such State Government; (j) to receive gifts, grants,
donations or benefactions from the Government and to receive bequests, donations and
transfer  of movable or immovable properties from testators, donors or transferors, as the
case may be; (k) to establish and  maintain such infrastructure as may be necessary;  (l) to
institute and award fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions, prizes and medals; and (m) to do
all such things as may be necessary, incidental or conducive to the attainment of all or any
of the objects of the Institute.
Clause 8.—This clause provides that each  Institutes shall be open to all races,
creeds and classes. Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that every Institute shall be
open to all persons of either sex, irrespective of caste, creed, race, religion, disability,
domicile, social or economic background. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that
admissions to every course or programme of study in each Institute shall be based on merit
assessed through transparent and reasonable criteria disclosed through its prospectus,
prior to the commencement of the process of admission by such  Institute. However, every
such Institute shall be a Central Educational Institution for the purposes of the Central
Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Act, 2006.
Clause 9.—It provides that every Institute shall be a not-for-profit legal entity and no
part of the surplus, if any, in revenue of such Institute, after meeting all expenditure in

24
regard to its operations under this Act, shall be invested for any purpose other than for the
growth and development of such Institute or for conducting research therein.
Clause 10.—This clause relates to Institute in public-private partnership mode. Sub-
clause (1) of the said clause provides that a State Government may establish an Institute
under this Act. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that for the purposes of
establishment of an Institute in the public-private partnership mode, a State Government
shall identify an industry partner for collaboration and submit a proposal to the Central
Government in such form and manner as may be prescribed. Sub-clause (3) of the said
clause provides that the Central Government shall examine the proposal on the basis of
such criteria.  However, such criteria for examination shall include — (a) the investment of
capital required for establishing the proposed Institute and its phasing; (b) the expertise
and standing of the industry partner referred to in sub-section (2) in the field of information
technology; (c) assessment of the capability, financial and other resources of the industry
partner to support the Institute; (d) availability of adequate land free of cost for establishment
of the Institute; (e) availability of, or the commitment of the State Government to make
available, adequate physical and social infrastructure at the proposed site for establishment
of the Institute; (f) commitment of the concerned State Government and the industry partner
for supporting the Institute after its establishment. Sub-clause (4) of the said clause provides
that the Central Government with the concurrence of the concerned State Government may
suggest modifications to the proposal submitted to it under sub-section (2), if any.
Sub-clause (5) of the said clause provides that the Central  Government shall, on acceptance
of the proposal with such modifications as may be concurred in by the State Government,
enter into a memorandum of understanding or an agreement with the concerned State
Government and the industry partners for establishing proposed Institute subject to the
provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder. Sub-clause (6) of the said clause  provides
that every memorandum of understanding or agreement referred to in sub-section (5) shall
contain,— (a) the investment of capital in establishment of the Institute, the respective
shares in such investment of capital of the Central Government, State Government concerned
and the industry partner, and the phasing of such capital investment over a period of five
years; (b) the first Statutes of the Institute; (c) the commitment of the Central Government,
the concerned State Government and the industry partner in ensuring autonomy to the
proposed Institute. Sub-clause (7) of the said clause provides that where the proposal
submitted by the State Government under sub-section (2) is not acceptable to the Central
Government, it shall communicate its decision to the State Government, specifying the
reasons for such decision.
Clause 11.—This clause relates to establishment of  Institute by the Central
Government .  Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that the Central Government may
establish an Institute which shall be fully funded by it. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause
provides that nothing contained in section 10 shall apply to such an Institute as the Central
Government may establish under sub-section (1).
Clause 12.—This clause deals with the Board of Governors. Sub-clause (1) of the said
clause provides that the Board of Governors of each Institute shall be the principal executive
body of that Institute. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that the Board of Governors
of each Institute shall consist of the following members—(a) a Chairperson, to be appointed
by the Institute in the manner provided in sub-section (3); (b) two persons from the industry
in the field of information technology, to be appointed by the Institute in the manner
provided in sub-section (5); (c) two persons from leading research laboratories having
research interests in the field of information technology to be appointed by the Institute as
provided in sub-section (6) ; (d) two persons having special knowledge or practical experience
in respect of education or engineering to be appointed by the Institute as provided in sub-
section (6); (e) two persons from amongst faculty members of the Institute to be nominated
by the Chairperson in consultation with the Director and two senior most Deans of the
Institute; (f) Director of the Indian Institute of Technology located in the zone in which the
Institute is located, ex  officio; (g) Vice-Chancellor of a University in the State to be nominated

25
by the State Government in which the Institute is located, ex officio; (h) one person to
represent the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes to be nominated by the State
Government; (i) Director of National Institute of Technology of the State in which the
Institute is located, ex  officio; (j) two senior most Deans of the Institute; (k) Director of the
Institute who shall be its Member-Secretary.
 Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that the Chairperson shall be appointed by
the Institute from a panel of three names recommended by a Search-cum-Selection Committee
consisting of — (a) a nominee of the Central Government who shall be a person of eminence
in academia in the field of engineering or science; (b) a nominee of the State Government
who shall be a person of eminence in academia in the field of information technology; (c) a
nominee of the Central Government, in case of an Institute fully funded by the Central
Government, or by the industry partner, in case of an Institute established in the public-
private partnership mode, to represent industry. Sub-clause (4) of the said clause provides
that the Director of the Institute shall be the convenor of the meetings of the Search-cum-
Selection Committee but shall not participate in its deliberations.Sub-clause (5) of the said
clause provides that a member of the Board referred to it in clause (b) of sub-section (2) shall
be appointed by the Institute on approval of a specific name by the Board from a panel of
names recommended by the Central Government, in case of an Institute fully funded by the
Central Government, or by the industry partner, in case of an Institute established in the
public-private partnership mode. Sub-clause (6) of the said clause provides that a member
of the Board   referred to in  clause (c) or clause (d) of sub-section (2) shall be appointed by
the Institute on approval of a specific name by the Board from a panel of names recommended
by the Council.
Clause 13.—This clause deals with term of office of, vacancies among, and allowances
payable to, members of the Board. Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that save as
otherwise provided in this section, the term of office of the Chairperson or any other
member of the Board, other than an ex officio member, shall be for a period of five years from
the date of his nomination. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that the term of office
of an ex officio member shall continue so long as he holds the office by virtue of which he
is a member. Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that the term of office of a member
nominated under clause (e) of sub- section (2) of section 12 shall be for a period of two years
from the date of his nomination. Sub-clause (4) of the said clause provides that a member of
the Board, other than an ex officio member, who fails to attend three consecutive meetings
of the Board, shall cease to be a member of the Board.  Sub-clause (5) of the said clause
provides that members of the Board shall be entitled to such allowances, as may be specified
in the Statutes, for attending meetings of the Board or as may be convened by the Institute.
Clause 14.—This clause deals with powers and functions of  the Board. Sub-clause (1)
of the said clause provides that subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board of every
Institute shall be responsible for the general superintendence, direction and control of the
affairs of the Institute and shall have the power to frame, amend, modify or rescind the
Statutes and the Ordinances governing the affairs of the Institute to achieve the objects
specified in section 6. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that without prejudice to
the provisions of sub-section (1), the Board shall have the following powers
(a) to decide questions of policy relating to the administration and working of the Institute;
(b) to make Statutes governing the administration, management and operations of the
Institute; (c) to examine and approve the annual budget estimates of the Institute; (d) to
examine and approve the plan for development of the Institute and to identify sources of
finance for implementation of the plan; (e) to establish departments, faculties or schools of
studies and initiate programmes or courses of study at the Institute; (f) to create teaching
and other academic posts, to determine the number and emoluments of such posts and to
define the duties and conditions of service of teachers and other academic staff and the
Board shall not take action otherwise than on consideration of the recommendations of the
Senate; (g) to provide, by the Statutes, the qualifications, criteria and processes for
appointment to teaching and other posts in the Institute; (h) to fix, by the Statutes, fees and

26
other charges payable for pursuit of courses or programmes  in the Institute; (i) to exercise
such other powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred or imposed  by this
Act or the Statutes. Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that the Board may, subject
to the provisions of this Act and   the Statutes, delegate such powers and functions to the
Senate, the Research Council, or to the Director or other officer of the Institution as the
Board may deem fit. Sub-clause (4) of the said clause provides that the Board shall conduct
an annual review of the performance of the Director with specific reference to his leadership
in the achievement of the objects of the Institute. Sub-clause (5) of the said clause provides
that the Board shall in exercise of the powers and discharge of functions strive to provide
autonomy in academic matters to the Senate and departments of faculties or schools, as the
case may be. Sub-clause (6) of the said clause provides that where in the opinion of the
Chairperson, the situation is so emergent that an immediate action needs to be taken in the
interest of the Institute, the Chairperson in consulation with the Director, may,  after recording
the reasons for his opinion, issue such order as he thinks fit and such orders shall be
submitted for ratification of the Board in the next meeting.
Clause 15.—This clause relates to Senate. Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides
that the Senate of every Institute shall consist of the following persons — (a) the Director
of the Institute shall be the Chairperson  of the senate; (b) heads of all departments,
faculties or schools, as the case may be, comprising the Institute; (c) Deans in charge of
academic, research and student affairs in the Institute; (d) six members of faculty from
amongst the Professors of the Institute to be nominated by the Board; (e) three persons of
eminence in the field of education having knowledge of inter-disciplinary field, to be
nominated by the Board; (f) three persons of eminence from the fields of research in
information technology or related fields to be nominated by the Board; (g) such other
persons to be nominated by the Board to provide representation in such fields of knowledge
or  technology which, in  its opinion, are not adequately represented.  Sub-clause (2) of the
said clause provides that the term of office of an ex officio member shall continue so long as
he holds the office by virtue of which he is a member. Sub-clause (3) of the said clause
provides that the term of office of a member nominated under clauses (d) to (f) of sub-
section (1) shall be for a period of  three years from the date of his nomination. Sub-clause
(4) of the said clause provides that a member of the Senate under clauses (d) to (f) of sub-
section (1), who fails to attend three consecutive meetings of the Board, shall cease to be a
member of the Board.
Clause 16.—This clause relates to powers and functions of Senate. Sub-clause (1) of
the said clause provides that subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the
Ordinances, the Senate shall be the principal academic body of the Institute and shall have
the power to enact, amend, modify  the Ordinances governing academic matters and the
affairs and welfare of students in the Institute. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides
that without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), the Senate shall have powers –
(a) to  specify the criteria and procedure  for admission to courses or programmes of study
offered by the Institute; (b) to  recommend  the Board to institute  teaching and other
academic posts, determination of the number and emoluments of such posts and defining
the duties and conditions of service of teachers and other academic posts; (c) to recommend
to the Board about commencement of new programmes or courses of study; (d) to specify
the broad academic content of programmes and courses of study and to suggest
modifications therein;  (e) to specify the academic calendar and approve grant of degrees,
diplomas and other academic distinctions or titles; (f) to exercise such other powers and
discharge such other functions as may be assigned to it, in the  Statutes, by the Board.
Clause 17.—This clause relates to Research Council. Sub-clause (1) of the said clause
provides that every Institute shall establish a Research Council comprising of the Director
and such other members as may be specified, in the Statutes, by the Board. Sub-clause (2)
of the said clause provides that the Research Council of every Institute shall —  (i) interface
with research funding organisations, industry and civil society to identify potential areas
for research; (ii) organise and promote research in such Institute or in collaboration with

27
any institution of higher learning or research laboratories; (iii) assist teachers in obtaining
funding from external sources for research projects prepared by them; (iv) provide, out of
the funds placed at its disposal by the Board, research resources and grant assistance for
research projects proposed to be undertaken by teachers in such Institute; (v) provide for
incubation of technology applications emerging from research and to protect and utilise the
intellectual property obtained from research in the Institute; (vi) make provisions for research
and advisory services and for that purpose enter into such arrangements with other
institutions, industry, civil society or other organisations and enable the research to be
disseminated to industry and society through such arrangements; (vii) exercise such other
powers and perform such other functions as may be assigned to it by the Statutes.
Clause 18.—This clause relates to Director. Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides
that the Director shall be the principal executive officer of every Institute and shall be
responsible for implementation of the decisions of the Board and Senate and for the day-to-
day administration of the Institute. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that the
Director shall exercise such other powers and discharge such other duties as may be assigned
to him by this Act or the Statutes or Ordinances or delegated by the Board or the Senate.
Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that the Director shall be appointed by the Board
from a panel of names recommended by a Search-cum-Selection Committee consisting of
(a) the Chairperson of the Board; (b) the Director of the Indian Institute of Technology of
the zone in which the Institute is located; (c) the nominee of the Central Government, in case
of an Institute fully funded by the Central Government,  who shall be a person of eminence
in academia in the field of information technology; (d) three nominees, one each  from  of
the Central Government, the  concerned   State Government, each of  whom shall be a person
of eminence in academia in the field of information technology, and a nominee of the  industry
partner from the information technology, in case of an Institute established in the public-
private partnership mode.  Sub-clause (4) of the said clause provides that 
the Director shall,
except on account of resignation or removal, hold office for a period of five years from the
date on which he enters upon his office.
 Sub-clause (5) of the said clause provides that  the
Director may, by  notice in writing under his hand addressed to the Chairperson, resign from
his office.
 Sub-clause (6) of the said clause provides that the Director may be removed by
the Board on proven charges of misbehaviour or misconduct. However, the said sub-clause
provides that the Director shall not be removed from his office, except by an order made by
the Board after an inquiry instituted in this behalf by the Board, and after giving him a
reasonable opportunity of being heard and where the institution of an inquiry or removal of
the Director is being considered by the Board, the Director shall refrain himself from the
proceedings of the Board. Sub-clause (7) of the said clause provides that the Board may
remove the Director from office, if it is dissatisfied with the functioning of the Institute after
review of the affairs of the Institute in the manner provided in sub-section (6). Sub-clause (8)
of the said clause provides that 
the Board shall initiate the process of appointment in
respect of any vacancy due to arise for the post of  Director on completion of tenure before
a period of six months from the date of arising of such vacancy and the process of
appointment shall be completed before such vacancy arises.
 Sub-clause (9) of the said
clause provides that where any casual vacancy has occurred for  the post of Director, the
process   of appointment in respect of  such vacancy shall be completed within a period of
three months from the date of such vacancy.
Clause 19.—This clause deals with  other  committees and authorities. Sub-clause (1)
of the said clause provides the constitution,  powers and functions of the other authorities
as may be declared by the Statutes shall be such as may be provided by the Statutes. Sub-
clause (2) of the said clause provides that the Board may constitute such committees, as it
may deem fit, for efficient management of affairs of the Institute.
Clause 20.—This clause deals with review of performance of Institute. Sub-clause (1)
of the said clause provides that every Institute shall, within seven years from the date of
establishment and incorporation of such Institute under this Act and thereafter at the
expiration of every fifth year, constitute, with the prior approval of the Central Government,

28
a Committee to evaluate and review the performance of such Institute in achievement of its
objects during  the said period. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that the Committee
constituted under sub-section (1) shall consist of members of repute in academia or industry,
from   relevant fields of teaching, learning and research in such Institute. Sub-clause (3) of
the said clause provides that the Committee shall assess the performance of Institute and
make recommendations on—(a) the extent of fulfilment of the objects of the Institute
mentioned  in section 6, and its contribution to the society; (b) the promotion of
transformational research and its impact on industry or society; (c) the advancement of
fundamental research; (d) the establishment of the Institute as amongst the global leaders
in the area of information technology; (e) the extent of achievement of social equality
through education and research in the Institute; (f) such other parameters as the Board may
consider necessary and specify. Sub-clause (4) of the said clause provides that the Board
shall consider the recommendations referred to in sub-section (3) and take such action, as
it may deem fit and the recommendations of the Committee along with an explanatory
memorandum on the action taken or proposed to be taken, specifying the reasons thereof,
shall be submitted to the Central Government or to the State Government in case of an
Institute established under section 10 in the public-private partnership mode and the Central
Government or the State Government,  as the case may be, shall cause such recommendations
to be laid before each House of Parliament or  the State Legislature. Sub-clause (5) of the
said clause provides that the Central Government shall have the power to give such
directions, emanating from the recommendations of the Committee, on policy relating to
national purpose, as it may deem fit, and the Institute shall comply with such directions and
if any dispute arises as to whether the direction is a question of policy relating to national
purpose or not, the decision of the Central Government shall be final.
Clause 21.—This clause deals with  grants by Central Government. Sub-clause (1) of
the said clause provides that the Central Government may, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, make to each Institute, which is fully funded by the Central
Government, grants of such sums of money as are required for supporting the Institute for
its operation, management and maintenance. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that
the Central Government shall provide to each Institute, including Institutes established in
the public private partnership mode, grants of such sums of money as are required to meet
the expenditure on scholarships or fellowships instituted by it, including scholarships  or
fellowships for students from socially and educationally backward classes or categories of
citizens enrolled in such Institute.
Clause 22.—This clause relates to fund of Institute. Sub-clause (1) of the said clause
provides that every Institute shall maintain a fund to which shall be credited—(a) all monies
provided by the Central Government or the State Government or industry partner, as the
case may be; (b) all fees and other charges received by the Institute; (c) all monies received
by the Institute by way of grants, gifts, donations, benefactions, bequests or transfers;
(d) all monies received by the Institute from utilisation of intellectual property arising from
research conducted or provision of advisory or consultancy services by it; (e) all monies
received by the Institute in any other manner or from any other source. Sub-clause (2) of the
said clause provides that the fund of every Institute shall be applied towards meeting the
expenses of the Institute including expenses incurred in the exercise of its powers and
discharge of its duties under this Act, furtherance of research in the Institute or in
collaboration with other educational institutions or industry and for capital investment
aimed at the growth and development of the Institute.
Clause 23.—This clause relates to Statutes. It provides that subject to the provisions
of this Act, the Statutes may provide for all or any of the following matters—(a) the
conferment of honorary degrees; (b) the formation of departments of teaching; (c) the fees
to be charged for courses of study in the Institute and for admission to the examinations of
degrees and diplomas of the Institute; (d) the institution of fellowships, scholarships,
exhibitions, medals and prizes; (e) the terms of office and the method of appointment of

29
officers of the Institute; (f) the qualifications of teachers of the Institute; (g) the classification,
the method of appointment and the determination of the terms and conditions of service of
teachers and other staff of the Institute; (h) the constitution of pension, insurance and
provident funds for the benefit of the officers, teachers and other staff of the Institute;
(i) the constitution, powers and duties of the authorities of the Institute; (j) the establishment
and maintenance of halls and hostels; (k) the conditions of residence of students of the
Institute and the levying of fees for residence in the halls and hostels and of other charges;
(l) the allowances to be paid to the Chairperson and members of the Board; (m) the
authentication of the orders and decisions of the Board; (n) the meetings of the Board, the
Senate, or any Committee, the quorum at such meetings and the procedure to be followed in
the conduct of their business; and (o) any other matter which is required to be or may be
specified by Statutes or in respect of which provision is to be made by Statutes.
Clause 24.—This clause relates to Statutes how  made.  Sub-clause (1) of the said
clause provides that the first Statutes of each Institute shall be framed by the Board with the
prior approval of the Central Government and a copy of the same shall be laid,  as soon as
may be,  before each House of Parliament. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that
the Board   may, from time to time, make new or additional Statutes or may amend or repeal
the Statutes in the manner provided in this section. Sub-clause (3) of the said clause
provides that every new Statute or addition to the Statutes or any amendment or repeal of
Statutes shall require the previous approval of the Central Government.
Clause 25.—This clause deals with Ordinances. It provides that subject to the
provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the Ordinances of every Institute may provide for
all or any of the following matters — (a) the admission of the students to the Institute;
(b) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees and diplomas of the Institute; (c) the
conditions under which students shall be admitted to the degree or diploma courses and to
the examinations of the Institute, and shall be eligible for degrees and diplomas; (d) the
conditions of award of the fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions, medals and prizes; (e) the
conditions and mode of appointment and duties of examining bodies, examiners and
moderators; (f) the conduct of examinations;  (g) the maintenance of discipline among the
students of the Institute; and (h) any other matter which by this Act or the Statutes is to be
or may be provided for by the Ordinances.
Clause 26.—This clause deals with Ordinances how  made.  Sub-clause (1) of the said
clause provides that save as otherwise provided in this section, Ordinances shall be made
by the Senate.  Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that all Ordinances made by the
Senate shall have effect from such date as it may direct, but every Ordinance so made shall
be submitted, as soon as may be, to the Board and shall be considered by the Board at its
next meeting. Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that the Board shall have power by
resolution to modify or cancel any such Ordinance and such Ordinance shall from the date
of such resolution stand modified accordingly or cancelled, as the case may be.
Clause 27.—This clause relates to the annual accounts and balance sheet. Sub-
clause (1) of the said clause provides that at every annual meeting of the Institute, the
Director shall lay before the Board – (a) a balance sheet as at the end of the financial year;
(b) a statement of income and expenditure for that period. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause
provides that every balance sheet and statement of income and expenditure of such Institute
shall give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of such Institute as at the end of the
financial year and shall, subject to the provisions of this section, be in such form and in
accordance with such general instructions and accounting standards as may be prescribed,
or as near thereto as circumstances admit. Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that
where the statement of income and expenditure and the balance sheet of the Institute do not
comply with the accounting standards, the Institute shall disclose in its statement of income
and expenditure and balance sheet, the following — (a) the deviation from the accounting
standards; (b) the reasons for such deviation; and (c) the financial effect, if any, arising due
to such deviation.

30
Clause 28.—This clause deals with books of account to be maintained by Institute.
Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that every Institute shall keep proper books of
account with respect to—(a) all sums of money received and expended by it and the matters
in respect of which the receipt and expenditure take place; (b) the assets and liabilities of the
Institute; (c) the properties, movable and immovable of the Institute. Sub-clause (2) of the
said clause provides that for the purposes of sub-section (1), proper books of account shall
not be deemed to be kept with respect to the matters specified therein, if such books are not
kept—(a) as are necessary to give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Institute
and to explain its transactions; and (b) on accrual basis and according to the double entry
system of accounting.
Clause 29.—This clause deals with appointment of auditors. Sub-clause (1) of the
said clause provides that the Board of every Institute shall, before the expiry of three
months prior to the end of the financial year, without prejudice to the provisions contained
in the Comptroller and Auditor-General’s (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act,
1971 or any other law for the time being in force containing provisions for audit of accounts
by the Institutes, appoint an auditor or auditors, on such remuneration as it thinks fit, to
scrutinise the balance sheet and the statement of income and expenditure of such Institute.
Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that no person appointed as auditor or persons
in the employment of such auditor shall have any direct or indirect interest, whether pecuniary
or otherwise, in any matter concerning or related to the administration or operations (except
being enrolled as students) of the Institute. Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that
the provisions of section 226 of the Companies Act, 1956 on the qualifications and
disqualifications of auditor shall apply mutatis mutandis for appointment of an auditor
under this Act. Sub-clause (4) of the said clause provides that every auditor of each Institute
shall have such powers and perform such duties as the auditor may think necessary for the
performance of his duties as auditor and as are available to, or are required of, such auditor
under the Companies Act, 1956.
Clause 30.—This clause deals with annual report of Director. Sub-clause (1) of the
said clause provides that there shall be attached to every statement of accounts laid before
the Board of each Institute, a report by its Director, with respect to —  (a) the state of affairs
of such Institute; (b) the amounts, if any, which it proposes to carry to any surplus reserves
in its balance sheet; (c) the extent to which understatement or overstatement of any surplus
of income over expenditure or any shortfall of expenditure over income has been indicated
in the auditor’s report and the reasons for such understatement or overstatement; (d) the
productivity of research projects undertaken by the Institute measured in accordance with
such norms as may be specified by any statutory regulatory authority; (e) appointment of
the officers and teachers of the Institute; (f) benchmark and internal standards set by the
Institute, including the nature of innovations in teaching, research and application of
knowledge. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that the report of the Director shall
also include a statement showing the name of the five officers and other employees of the
Institute who received the highest remuneration (including allowances and other payments
made to such employee) during the preceding financial year and the contributions made by
such employees during the financial year. Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that
the statement referred to in sub-section (2) shall indicate whether any such employee is a
relative of any member of the Board or Senate of the Institute and if so, the name of such
member, and such other particulars as may be required. Sub-clause (4) of the said clause
provides that the Director shall also be bound to give the complete information and
explanations in its report on every reservation, qualification or adverse remark contained in
the auditors’ report.
Clause 31.—This clause provides that annual meeting of Board to consider statement
of accounts. Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that the statement of accounts,
including the balance sheet and the statement of income and expenditure, the auditor’s
report, the report of the Director and other documents required to be annexed or attached
with such statement, shall be brought before the Board in its meeting at such time immediately,

31
but not later than three months, from the conclusion of the financial year. Sub-clause (2) of
the said clause provides that a copy of every statement of accounts (including the balance
sheet, statement of income and expenditure, the auditors’ report and every other document
required to be annexed or attached to balance sheet) which is to be laid before the Board of
each Institute shall, not less than twenty-one days before the date of the meeting, be sent
to every member of the Board. Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that after the
statement of accounts referred to in sub-section (1) has been laid before the Board of each
Institute, such balance sheet, statement of income and expenditure and other documents
shall be  placed on the website of such Institute.
Clause 32.—This clause provides for annual statement of accounts of Institutes fully
funded by the Central Government. Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that the
statement of accounts of each Institute, which is fully funded by the Central Government,
shall be audited by such auditor as may be appointed in this behalf by the Comptroller and
Auditor- General of India. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that the Comptroller
and  Auditor-General of India and any person appointed by him in connection with the audit
of the accounts of each Institute, which is fully funded by the Central Government, shall
have the same rights, privileges and authority in connection with such audit as the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India has in connection with the audit of the Central
Government accounts, and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of
books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect the
offices of the Institute. Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that a copy of the statement
of accounts including the balance sheet and the statement of income and expenditure, the
auditor’s report, the report of the Director and other documents required to be attached with
such statement, shall be submitted to the Central Government, and that Government shall,
as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid before each House of Parliament.
Clause 33.—This clause deals with annual report of each Institute. Sub-clause (1) of
the said clause provides that the annual report of each Institute shall be prepared under the
direction of the Board, which shall include, among other matters, the steps taken by the
Institute towards the fulfilment of its objects and an outcome based assessment of the
research being undertaken in such Institute, and be submitted to the Board on or before
such date as may be specified and the Board shall consider the report in its annual meeting.
Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that the annual report as approved by the Board
shall be published and placed on the website of the Institute. Sub-clause (3) of the said
clause provides that the annual report of each Institute which is fully funded by the Central
Government shall be submitted to the Central Government who shall, as soon as may be,
cause the same to be laid before each House of Parliament.
Clause 34.—This clause deals with Council of Institutes. Sub-clause (1) of the said
clause provides that with effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification,
specify in this behalf, there shall be established for all the Institutes specified in column (5)
of the Schedule, a central body to be called the Council. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause
provides that the Council shall consist of the following members — (a) the Minister in
charge of the Ministry or Department of the Central Government having administrative
control of the technical education, ex officio, as Chairperson; (b) the Minister in charge of
technical education of State Governments of such States where the Institutes are located,
ex officio; (c) the industry partner of each of the Institutes established in the public-private
partnership mode; (d) the Chairpersons of each of the Institutes, ex officio; (e) the Directors
of each of the Institutes, ex officio ; (f) four persons to be nominated by the Central
Government, one each to represent the Ministry concerned with finance, technical education,
science and technology and information technology; (g) three persons from the information
technology industry to be nominated by the Council, from a panel comprised of two names
recommended by each Institute; (h) three persons of eminence in research in information
technology to be nominated by the Council , from a panel comprised of two names
recommended by each Institute; (i) three persons to represent persons of eminence from

32
academia or civil society to be nominated by the Council,  from a panel comprised of two
names recommended by each State Government of such States where Institutes are located.
Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that the Council shall have a Secretariat with a
Secretary to be appointed in such manner as may be prescribed. Sub-clause (4) of the said
clause provides that the Council may  constitute a Standing Committee of the Indian Institute
of Information Technology Council to assist the Council in discharge of its duties and
responsibilities. Sub-clause (5) of the said clause provides that the expenditure on the
Council shall be met by the Central Government.
Clause 35.—This clause provides  the term of office and allowances payable to
members of Council. Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that save as otherwise
provided in this section, the term of office of a member of the Council, other than an
ex officio member, shall be for a period of three years from the date of nomination. Sub-
clause (2) of the said clause provides that the term of office of an ex officio member shall
continue so long as he holds the office by virtue of which he is a member. Sub-clause (3) of
the said clause provides that the members of the Council shall be entitled to such other
travelling and such other allowances, as may be prescribed, for attending meetings of the
Council or its Committees.
Clause 36.—This clause deals with functions of Council. Sub-clause (1) of the said
clause provides that the Council shall coordinate the activities of all the Institutes. Sub-
clause (2) of the said clause provides that without prejudice to the provisions of sub-
section (1), the Council shall perform the following functions— (a) to recommend to the
Central Government, the institution of scholarships including  research and for the benefit
of students belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and other socially
and educationally backward classes of citizens; (b) to recommend to the Central Government,
proposals for establishment of new Institutes of Information Technology in the public-
private partnership mode; (c) to deliberate on such matters of common interest to Institutes
as may be referred to it by any Institute; (d) to perform such other functions as may be
referred to it by the Central Government or any State Government and nothing in this
section shall derogate the powers and functions vested by law in the Board or Senate or
other authorities of each Institute. Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that the
Chairperson of the Council shall ordinarily preside at the meetings of the Council and in his
absence any other member, chosen by the members present from amongst themselves at
the meeting, shall preside at the meeting.
Clause 37.—This clause deals with  acts and proceedings not to be invalidated by
vacancies, etc. It provides that no act of  Council, or any Institute or Board or Senate or any
other body set-up under this Act or the Statutes, shall be invalid merely by reason of —
(a) any vacancy or defect in the constitution thereof; or (b) any irregularity in its procedure
not affecting the merits of the case; or (c) any defect in the selection, nomination or
appointment of a person acting as a member thereof.
Clause 38.—This clause deals with returns and information to be provided to Central
Government or State Government. Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that every
Institute shall furnish to the Central Government such returns or other information with
respect to its policies or activities as the Central Government may, for the purpose of
reporting to Parliament or for the making of policy, from time to time require. Sub-clause (2)
of the said clause provides that every Institute, established in the public-private partnership
mode, shall furnish to the State Government  in which such Institute is located, such returns
or other information with respect to its policies or activities as that Government may, for the
purpose of reporting to the concerned State Legislature or for the making of policy, from
time to time require.
Clause 39.—This clause deals with powers of Central Government to issue directions.
It provides that the Institute shall carry out such directions as may be issued to it from time
to time by the Central Government for the efficient administration of this Act.

33
Clause 40.—This clause provides that the  Institute to be a public authority under
Right to Information Act, 2005. It provides that the provisions of the said Act shall apply to
each Institute, including Institutes established in the public-private partnership mode, as if
it were a public authority defined in clause (h) of section 2 of the said Act.
Clause 41.—This clause relates to power of Central Government to make rules. Sub-
clause (1) of the said clause provides that  the Central Government may, by notification
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause
provides that in particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters— (a) the form and manner in
which the State Government shall submit proposal to the Central Government under sub-
section (2) of section 10; (b) the criteria for examination of the proposal of the State
Government under sub-section (3) of section 10; (c) the form of balance sheet and statement
of income and expenditure and the accounting standards under sub-section (2) of section
27; (d) the manner of appointment of Secretary under sub-section (3) of section 34; (e) the
travelling and such other allowances payable to the members of the Council for attending
meetings of the Council or its Committees under sub-section (3) of section 35; (f) any other
matter which is to be or may be, prescribed or in respect of which provision is to be made by
the Central Government by rules.
Clause 42.—This clause relates to transitional provisions. Sub-clause (1) of the said
clause provides that notwithstanding anything contained in this Act––(a) the Board of
every Institute functioning as such immediately before the commencement of this Act shall
continue to  function until a new Board is constituted for that Institute under this Act, but
on the constitution of a new Board under this Act, the members of the Board holding office
before such commencement of this Act shall cease to hold office; (b) every Senate constituted
in relation to every Institute before the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to be the
Senate constituted under this Act until a Senate is constituted under this Act for that
Institute, but on the constitution of the new Senate under this Act, the members of the
Senate holding office before the commencement of this Act shall cease to hold office;
(c) until the first Statutes and the Ordinances are made under this Act, the Statutes, the
Ordinances, the rules, regulations and  bye-laws of each Institute as in force, immediately
before the commencement of this Act, shall continue to apply to the corresponding  Institute
in so for as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act. Sub-clause (2) of the
said clause provides that the Central Government may, without prejudice to the provisions
of sub-section (1), if it considers necessary and expedient, by notification, take such measures
which may be necessary for the smooth transfer of the existing Institute mentioned in
column (3) of the Schedule to the corresponding Institute mentioned under column (5) of
the Schedule.
Clause 43.—This clause deals with power to remove difficulties. Sub-clause (1) of the
said clause provides that if any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act,
the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions
or give such directions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to
be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty and no such order shall be made under
this section after the expiry of the period of three years from the date of commencement of
this Act. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that every order made under this section
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
Clause 44.—This clause deals with laying of rules and notifications. It provides that
every rule made and every notification issued by the Central Government under this Act,
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made or issued, before each House of Parliament,
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session
or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making
any modification in the rule or notification or both Houses agree that the rule or notification
should not be made or issued, the rule or notification shall thereafter have effect only in
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule or notification.

34
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Sub-clause (1) of clause 4 of the Bill provides that every existing Institute  mentioned
in column (3) of the Schedule shall be a body corporate by the corresponding name as
mentioned in column (5) of the Schedule. The four existing Indian Institutes of Information
Technology are centrally funded for meeting their expenditure. During the 11th Plan period
these Institutes were sanctioned grants-in-aid to the tune of Rs. 649.86 crore for meeting
their recurring and non-recurring expenditure.
2. Sub-clause (1) of clause 10 of the Bill provides for establishment of an Institute.
Sub-clause (2) provides that for the purpose of establishing an Institute in the public-
private partnership mode, a State Government shall identify an industry partner for
collaboration and submit a proposal to the Central Government in such form and manner as
may be prescribed. The financial requirement for setting up of these Institutes is estimated
at Rs. 2808.71 crore (Rs. 2558.71 crore, for non-recurring expenditure, Rs. 200 crore for
recurring expenditure and Rs. 50.00 crore, for faculty development expenditure) during the
nine years commencing from the financial year 2012-13.
3. Clause 21 of the Bill, inter alia, provides that the Central Government may grant
such sums of money, as are required by such Institute or Institutes fully funded by the
Central Government, for supporting the Institute for its operation, management and
maintenance, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf. The clause
further provides that the Central Government shall provide to each such Institute, including
Institutes established in the public-private partnership mode, grants of such sums of money
as are required to meet the expenditure on scholarships and fellowships instituted by it,
including scholarships or fellowships for students from socially and educationally backward
classes or categories of citizens enrolled in such Institute. The expenditure would be met
from the Consolidated Fund of India through the budgetary provision under the Department
of Higher Education of the Ministry of Human Resource Development.

35
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 24 of the Bill empowers the Board to frame, with the prior approval of the
Central Government, the first Statutes of each Institute. A copy of such Statutes shall be
laid before each House of Parliament.
2. Clause 26 of the Bill empowers the Senate of each Institute to make Ordinances
consistent with the provisions of the Act and the Statutes. The matters in respect of which
such Ordinances may be made relate, inter alia, to the admission of the students to the
Institute; the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees and diplomas of the Institute;
the conditions under which students shall be admitted to the degree or diploma courses
and to the examinations of the Institute, and shall be eligible for degrees and diplomas; the
conditions of award of the fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions, medals and prizes; the
conditions and mode of appointment and duties of examining bodies, examiners and
moderators; the conduct of examinations; the maintenance of discipline among the students
of the Institute; and any other matter which by this Act or the Statutes is to be or may be
provided for by the Ordinances.
3. Sub-clause (1) of clause 41 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make
rules for carrying out the provisions of the Act. Sub-clause (2) specifies the matters  in
respect of which such rules may be made. These matters relate to (a) the form and manner in
which the State Government shall submit proposal to the Central Government under sub-
section (2) of section 10; (b) the criteria for examination of the proposal of the State
Government under sub-section (3) of section 10; (c) the form of balance sheet and statement
of income or expenditure and the accounting standards under sub-section (2) of section 27;
(d) the manner of appointment of Secretary under sub-section (3) of section 34; (e) the
travelling and such other allowances payable to the members of the Council for attending
meetings of the Council or its Committees under sub-section (3) of section 35; (f) any other
matter which is to be or may be, prescribed or in respect of which provision is to be made by
the Central Government by rules.
4. Sub-clause (1) of clause 43 of the Bill empowers the Central Government, by order
published in the Official Gazette, to make such provisions or give such directions not
inconsistent with the provisions of the Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty and such an order is not to be made after the expiry of a period of
three years from the date of commencement of the Act and that such order shall be laid
before each House of Parliament.
5. Clause 44 of the Bill provides that every rule made and every notification issued by
the Central Government are  required to be laid before each House of Parliament.
6. The matters in respect of which the Statutes, Ordinances or rules may be made
pertain to matters of procedure and administrative details for which it is not practicable to
make any provision in the Bill. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal
character.

LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to declare certain institutions of information technology to be institutions of national
importance with a view to develop new knowledge in information technology and to
provide manpower of global standards for the information technology industry
and to establish other Institutions of Information Technology and to
provide for certain other matters connected with such institutions
or incidental thereto.
—————
(Shri M.M. Pallam Raju, Minister of Human Resource Development)
GMGIPMRND—5460LS(S4)—07.03.2013.