THE SPECIAL COURTS FOR WOMEN BILL, 2018
By
 DR. UDIT RAJ, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for constitution of special courts for women and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Special Courts for Women Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) 'appropriate Government' means in case of a State the Government of that
State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill NO. 38 of  2018
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Definitions.

2
(b) 'offence' means any offence committed against a woman including rape,
criminal assault, mental injury and sexual harassment at any place or in any form or by
any means either physical, verbal or any other way, or any dowry related cases where
the sufferer is a woman; and
(c) 'prescribed' means prescribed by rules made under the Act.
3. (1) The appropriate Government shall set up sufficient number of special courts to
deal exclusively with matters arising out of atrocities or offences committed against women.
(2) Every special court shall consist of a Principal Judge and such number of other
Judges to be appointed  by the appropriate Government as it may deem fit.
4. ( 1) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Principal Judge,
unless he,—
(a) is, or has been, a judicial magistrate; or
(b) has, for at least two years, held the office of the Judge of the special court;
and has, for at least five years, been associated with women's cause.
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Judge, unless he,—
(a) is, or has been, a judicial magistrate; or
(b) has, for a period of not less than five years, been practising law, and has, for
at least five years, been associated with women's cause.
(3) Every Principal Judge and other Judges of a special court in a Union territory shall
be appointed by the President.
(4) Every Principal Judge and other Judges of a special court in a State shall be
appointed by the Governor of the State concerned.
(5) At least half of the total number of Judges of a special court shall be reserved for
women.
5. (1) In the event of occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the Principal Judge of
a special court by reason of his death, resignation or otherwise, the senior most Judge of that
court shall act as the Principal Judge until a new Principal Judge, appointed in accordance
with the provisions of this Act to fill such vacancy, enters upon his office.
(2) If the Principal Judge is unable to discharge his functions owing to his absence
from duty due to any reason, the senior most Judge of that special court shall discharge the
functions of the Principal Judge until the Principal Judge resumes his duties.
6. Every Principal Judge and other Judges shall hold office for a period of five
years from the date on which he enters upon his office or until he attains,—
(a) in the case of the Principal Judge, the age of sixty-five years, and
(b) in the case of any other Judge, the age of sixty years whichever is earlier.
7. Every Principal Judge or a Judge may, by notice in writing under his hand
addressed to the President in case he is a Principal Judge or a Judge of a special court in a
Union territory or to the Governor, in case he is a Principal Judge or a Judge of a special court
in a State, as the case may be, resign from his office:
Provided that the Principal Judge or any other Judge shall, unless he is permitted by
the President or the Governor, as the case may be, to relinquish his office sooner, continue to
hold office until the expiry of three months from the date of receipt of such notice or until a
person duly appointed as his successor enters upon his office or until the expiry of his term
of office, whichever is the earliest.
Establishment
of special
courts for
women.
Qualification
for
appointment
as Principal
Judge and other
Judges of
special court.
Senior most
Judge to act as
a Principal
Judge or to
discharge his
functions in
certain
circumstances.
Resignation.
Term of Office.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
8. The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of
service including pension, gratuity and other retirement benefits of the Principal Judge or
a Judge of special court shall be such as may be prescribed:
Provided that neither the salary and allowances nor the other terms and conditions of
service of the Principal Judge or a Judge of a special court shall be varied to his disadvantage
after his appointment.
9. Every Principal Judge shall exercise such financial and administrative powers
over the special court as may be vested in him in such manner as may be prescribed.
10. The appropriate Government shall determine and provide categories of the
officers and other employees required to assist a special court in the discharge of its functions.
11. Save as otherwise expressly provided in this act, every special court shall
exercise all the jurisdiction, powers and authority exercisable immediately before that day by
all courts except the concerned High Court and the Supreme Court in relation to all matters of
offences or atrocities committed against women under the Indian Penal Code, 1860 or any
other law for the time being in force relating to women.
12. Every special court constituted under this Act shall have the same powers to
hold any inquiry as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 and in
a criminal court under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
13. On the date of coming into force of this Act, the jurisdiction, powers and authority
in relation to any offences or crimes or atrocities committed against women, shall be
exercisable by a special court and no other court except the High Court concerned and the
Supreme Court shall have, or be entitled to exercise any jurisdiction, powers or authority in
relation to such offences or crimes or atrocities committed against women.
14. Every suit or other proceeding pending before any other court or any authority
immediately before the date of coming into force of this Act, being a suit or proceeding the
cause of action wherein it is based, is such that it would have been if it had arisen after such
constitution, within the jurisdiction of such a special court, shall stand transferred on that
date to such special court:
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to a suit or other proceedings
pending in a High Court or the Supreme Court.
15. The appropriate Government shall make necessary arrangements and provisions
for free legal aid to women  for meeting the cost of litigation in special courts.
16. Every case in special court shall be heard on daily basis and disposed of at the
earliest but in any case not later than six months from the date of filing of the suit in the court.
17. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case  may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Salary,
allowances and
other
conditions of
service of the
Principal
Judge and
other Judges.
Financial and
other powers
of the
Principal
Judge.
Staff of the
special court.
Jurisdiction,
power and
authority of
special courts.
Powers of
special courts.
Exclusion of
jurisdiction of
cases of special
court except
the High Court
concerned and
Supreme Court.
Transfer of
pending cases.
Free legal aid to
women.
Disposal of
cases by special
courts.
Power to make
rules.
45 of 1860.
5 of 1908.
2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
In our society, atrocities against women are increasing day by day as a result of which
cases of atrocities against women are piling up in court. The delay, by courts in disposing of
the cases add to the woes of  hapless women. By the time the courts give their judgement, the
life of the women becomes miserable. Ordinary courts take unduly long time for deciding the
cases. Therefore, it is proposed to set up special courts for women to exclusively deal with
cases against women expeditiously.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI;
January 31, 2018. UDIT RAJ
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of  the Bill provides that every State Government and Union territory
administration shall set up sufficient number of special courts to deal exclusively with matters
arising out of atrocities committed against women. Clause 8 provides for payment of salaries
and allowances to the Principal Judge and other Judges. Clause 10 provides for appointment
and provision of officers and staff required for special courts. Clause 15 provides for free
legal aid to women. The expenditure in respect of special courts in States will be met out of
Consolidated Funds of the respective States. The expenditure in respect of special courts for
Union territories shall be met out of the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely that an amount
of rupees one thousand crore will be involved for setting up special courts in Union territories
and by way of grants of States per annum  from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 17 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. Since the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for constitution of special courts for women and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
—————
(Dr. Udit Raj, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—3995LS(S3)—07.02.2018.