Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
THE NON-RESIDENT INDIANS (VOTING RIGHTS AND WELFARE)
BILL, 2007
By
SHRI C.K. CHANDRAPPAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for voting rights and setting up of a National Commission for Non-Resident
Indians for the purpose of providing assistance to them in the countries
where they reside and work and for matters connected
 therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the  Non-Resident Indians (Voting Rights and Welfare)
Act, 2007.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
TO  BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 38 of  2007
Definitions.
5

2
(ii) "Commission" means the National Commission for Non-Resident Indians
set up under section 5;
(iii) “Committee” means the non-resident Indian Coordination Committee set
up under section 9;
(iv) “Corporation” means the Non-Resident Indians Rehabilitation Corporation
set up under section 4;
(v) “Fund” means the non-resident Indian Assistance Fund set up under
section 8;
(vi) “non-residnet Indian” means any person who is a citizen of India and who
stays abroad for employment or for carrying on any business or vocation outside
India; and
(vii) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, for the time being in force,
every non-resident Indian shall have right to vote in all elections to the House of the People,
legislative assemblies of the States/Union Territories and local bodies.
4. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Non-Resident Indians Rehabilitation
Corporation in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Corporation shall have a fund to which shall be credited all monies received
from the non-resident Indians by way of investment in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The fund shall be used for projects aimed at rehabilitation of the non-resident
Indians including projects relating to housing, health care, education or tourism.
5. (1) The Central Government shall, within three months from the commencement
of this Act, set up a National Commission for Non-Resident Indians.
(2) The Commission shall consist of:
(i) an eminent person having special knowledge or practical experience in the
field of welfare of non-resident Indians who shall be nominated by the Central
Government as Chairman;
(ii) three members of Parliament of whom two shall be from Lok Sabha and one
from Rajya Sabha, to be nominated by the Presiding Officers of the respective Houses;
(iii) three members of Legislative Assemblies of the States from where a large
number of non-resident Indians are working abroad, to be nominated by the Central
Government;
(iv) one eminent lawyer to be nominated by the Central Government; and
(v) one eminent journalist to be nominated by the Central Government.
(3)  The Commission shall have a term of office of three years.
(4) The salaries and allowances payable to and other conditions of service
of the Chairman and other members of the Commission shall be such as may be
prescribed.
(5) The Commission shall have its head office in New Delhi.
(6) The Central Government shall provide such number of officers and staff to the
Commission as is required for its efficient functioning.
(7) The salaries and allowances payable to and other conditions of service of the
officers and staff of the Commission shall be such as may be prescribed.
6. The Commission shall perform the following functions, namely:—
(i) make recommendations to the Government regarding formulation of a welfare
policy for the non-resident Indians;
(ii) study the problems being faced by the non-resident Indians and suggest
measures to overcome them;
Right to vote
for non-
resident
Indians.
Non-Resident
Indians
Rehabilitation
Corporation.
National
Commission
for Non-
Resident
Indians.
Functions of the
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(iii) take steps for the promotion of social, economic and cultural interests of
the non-resident Indians;
(iv) work out a method in coordination with other authorities for enabling non-
resident Indians to exercise their right to vote during elections to the House of the
People, Legislative Assemblies of the States and local bodies;
(v) work in coordination with the Embassies and High Commissions of India
to solve the problems of the non-resident Indians in those countries; and
(vi) act as nodal agency for all issues relating to non-resident Indians.
7. The Commission shall submit an annual report on its functioning to the
President who shall cause it to be laid in each House of Parliament not later than a
period of thirty days from the date of its submission to the President.
8. (1) The Central Government shall set up a Fund to be known as the Non-Resident
Indians Assistance Fund.
(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute to the Fund
in such ratio as may be prescribed.
(3) Such other sums as may be received by way of donation, contribution or assistance
from non-resident Indians or otherwise shall also be credited to the Fund.
(4) The Fund shall be used for meeting the expenditure incurred in the implementation
of measures undertaken for the welfare of non-resident Indians.
9. (1) Every Embassy/High Commission of India shall constitute a Non-Resident
Indian Coordination Committee to be headed by an officer not below the rank of First
Secretary and two other officers having such qualifications as may be prescribed:
Provided that at least one of the members of the Coordination Committee shall have
knowledge of the mother tongue of the non-resident Indians living in that country.
(2) The Committee shall keep the details of all the non-resident Indians living in that
country.
(3) The Committee shall render all assistance to the non-resident Indians in case of
any problem including problem relating to their jobs, health care or in completion of all
formalities in case of death.
(4) The Committee shall also render legal assistance to the non-resident Indians
whenever required.
10. (1) The appropriate Government shall designate the Block Development Officer as
the Nodal Officer in every Block of  the country to maintain a register for the citizens going
abroad containing such details as may be prescribed.
(2) It shall be the duty of every citizen going abroad for residence or work to register
himself with the Nodal Officer appointed under sub-section (1).
11. (1) The appropriate Government shall appoint an officer not below the rank of
District Collector in every district to compile the details of all the citizens residing within their
respective jurisdiction and going abroad for residence or work and forward the same to the
respective Embassy or High Commission of India, as the case may be, for information.
(2) It shall be the duty of every Nodal Officer so designated under sub-section (1)
of section 10 to forward to the District Collector the details of citizens going abroad for
residence or work in such manner as may be prescribed.
12. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of the Act.
Commission
to submit an
annual
report.
Non-
Resident
Indians
Assistance
Fund.
Every
Embassy/
High
Commission
to constitute
a non-
resident
Indian
Coordination
Committee.
Block
Development
Officer to
keep details
of citizens
going abroad.
District
Collector to
compile and
forward the
details of
citizens going
abroad to
Embassies/
High
Commis-
sions.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
There are millions of Indians working all over the world in different walks of life.
They are the non-resident Indians (NRIs) whose contribution to our economy cannot be
over-emphasized.
There are eminent scientists, information technology experts, engineers, doctors,
nurses, teachers and large number of workers, both skilled and unskilled, among them.
Their problems are varied and many. There is no comprehensive legislation for tackling
their problems. This Bill is an attempt in that direction.
They are living in a foreign country and in case of any difficulty, they have to fend
for themselves. If they fall ill, there is nobody to take care of them. If, unfortunately, they
die, so many formalities have to be completed that their kins have no clue. Moreover, in
case of any legal wrangle, they have no idea whom to approach for help. In case of their
working conditions, pay, medical care, etc., there are many complaints and there is no
mechanism with our foreign missions to take care and attend to them.
On the other hand it is unfortunate that there is no mechanism in our country to
keep record of citizens going abroad for work. In the absence of any data, it becomes
difficult to formulate any policy for their welfare. Besides, the non-resident Indians have
also been making demand that they be given right to vote.
In view of the above, it is proposed in the Bill to provide them right to vote and
to set up a National Commission for non-resident Indians which will have mandate to work
for the welfare of non-resident Indians. In addition, a non-resident Indians Assistance
Fund is also proposed. It is also proposed to set up a Coordination Committee in every
Embassy/High Commission of India with the purpose of looking after the welfare of the
Indian citizens living there.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW D ELHI; C. K. CHANDRAPPAN
February 19, 2007
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a Non-Resident Indians
Rehabilitation Corporation. Clause 5 provides for setting up a National Commission for
Non-Resident Indians. Clause 6 provides that the Commissions shall study the problems
being faced by the non-resident Indians and take steps for tackling them. Clause 7
provides that the Commission shall submit an annual report to the President. Clause 8
provides for the setting up of Non-Resident Indians Assistance Fund. Clause 9 provides
for the constitution of Coordination Committee in every Embassy/High Commission
for providing assistance to the Indians living in those countries. Clause 11 provides that
the District Collector shall forward the details of Indian citizens going abroad for work
to Embassies/High Commissions concerned. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring
expenditure of rupees one hundred crore will be involved.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
5
\\SERVER5\BILL_2007/LOK SABHA/1070LS

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 12 empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the
purposes of the Bill. Since the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for voting rights and setting up of a National Commission for Non-Resident
Indians for the purpose of providing assistance to them in the countries where they
reside and work and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri C.K. Chandrappan, M.P . )
MGIPMRND—1070LS(S5)—14-03-2007.