As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

1 | MAR 2005

Bill No. 38 of 2005

THE COMPULSORY REGISTRATION OF RELIGIOUS
CONVERSIONS BILL, 2005
By
Suri KASHIRAM Rana, M.P.

A
a BILL
to provide for compulsory registration of religious conversions in the country.
_ WHEREAS it is expedient to provide for registration of religious conversions in India for
purposes;
BE it is enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1, (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Registration of Religious Conversions

)$,
(2) It extends to the whole of India.

डर

91010 tithe,
extent and

commencement.


2

(3) This section shall come into force at once and the remaining provisions of the Act
shall come into force within a period of one year from the date of publication of this Act in the
Official Gazette, in such areas and on such dates which may be different for different areas as
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

Definitions. 2. In this Act unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) "Conversion" or "reigious conversion" or "change of faith" means the
voluntary act of changing, converting, adopting or altering the religion of birth or
faith or belief and mode of religious practice by any person who has completed the
age of 18 years, by requisite religious rites, customary ceremony, legal citation or by
anv other form or manner, so prevailing in the Community, caste, society and includes
re-conversions;

(0) "memorandum" means 8 memorandum of conversion provided for in
section 5;

(c) "priest" means any person who solemnises conversion either under any
religious authority or social sanction or custom,

(d) "Register" mearis 4 Register of Conversions maintained under this Act;
(2) "Registrar" means a Registrar of Conversions appointed under this Act,

(0 "Registrar-General" means the authority so appointed by the Central
Government for the States and Union territories under this Act.

Appointment 3. (1) The Central Government may appoint a Registrar-General for each of the

of Registrar- States and Union territories for purposes of this act.
General and

Registrars. (2) The Central Government may appoint such number of persons as it thinks fit to be
Registrars of Conversions for such local areas in a State or Union territory as it may
specify from time to time.

Every — 4. After the date on which the provisions of this Act have been brought into force in
egies hi any area as provided under sub-section (3) of section 1, every conversion in such area shail
ewes be registered in the manner provided in section 5.

Memorandum 5. (1) Every person proposing to change or alter the religion of his birth, or customary
of conversion. faith or religious practice by conversion to another religion or faith, of his own will and by
his voluntary choice, shall prepare and sign a memorandum in such form as may be prescribed -
by the Central Government and shall deliver or send by registered 90४ the said memorandum
in triplicate to the Registrar of the area 60 days before the date of proposed conversion.

(2) The memorandum shall also be signed by the officiating priest, or head of the
religious institution or the person who is authorised to perform the ceremony or rites at the
time, date and place of conversion ceremony mentioned in the said memoradum.

(3) The memorandum shail be accompanied by a fee of rupees five.

Register of 6. (1) The Registrar shall maintain a register of conversions.
conversions
and action on (2) On receipt of the memorandum the Registrar shall file the same in the Register.

memorandum. हे ॥ |
(3) The duplicate copy of the memorandum shall be sent to the Registrar-General, after

the expiry of the period of 60 days, as provided under sub-section (1) of section 5, with the
intimation of date, time and place of actual conversion as provided in sub-section (3) of
section 7.

(4) The third copy of the memorandum shall be sent within 15 days from the date the

- memorandum is delivered to or received by the Registrar for information to the religious
head, chief priest, community organisation, social body or recognised mission of the religion
of faith from which or out of which the person proposes to seek conversion.


3

(5) The Registrar-General shall from time to time nominate such persons, priests,
organisations, institutions, missions, etc. for that area or for the State or States or Union
territories to whom the information of conversion of the person referred to in sub-section (1)
of section 5 shall be furnished.

7. (1) After the expiry of the period of 60 days as provided in sub-section (1) of section

_5, the person presenting the memorandum shall be entitled to effect the act of conversion

which shall be completed within a period of 45 days from the date of expiry of the 60 days’
period.

(2) The person so converted shall deliver or send by registered post an intimation of

0 conversion in such form as may be prescribed by Central Government, duly signed by
himself, the officiating priest and three witnesses, to the Registrar.

(3) The Registrar shall, on receiving the intimation of conversion,—
(a) file the same in the register and make an entry of the conversion so effected;

(5) issue a certificate of conversion to the person presenting the memorandum;
and

(c) send one copy of the memorandum with the entry of conversion to the
Registrar-General as provided under sub-section (3) of section 6.

8. The Register maintained under this Act shall be open to inspection and certified
copies of extracts therefrom shall be given by the Registrar to any person who applies for the
same on payment of a fee of rupees two for each such copy.

9. No conversion in any area or the State or Union territory to which this Act applies
shall be invalid solely by reason of the fact that it was not registered under this Act or that
the memorandum or the intimation of conversion was not delivered or sent to the Registrar
or that such memorandum or intimation of conversion was defective, irregular or incorrect:

Provided that such conversion shall not be accepted as proof for any service under
the Central or the State Government or otherwise and shall not entitle the person so converted
to any benefits, reservation, special privilege, rights, scholarships and such other benefits
as may be given by the Central or the State Government to a person of that particular religion
to which the person claims to be converted, unless the certified copy of the conversion is
produced. |

19. Any person, who will fully avoids or neglects to deliver or send the memorandum
as required by section 5 and the intimation of conversion under section 7 or makes any
statement in such memorandum or intimation of conversion which is false in any material
particular and which he knows or has reason to believe it to be false, shall on conviction be
punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees.

11. Any Registrar, who fails to file the memorandum pursuant to section 6 or the
intimation of conversion under section 7, shali on conviction be punished with rigorous
imprisonmént for a term which may extend to three months or with fine which may extend to
five hundred rupees or with both.

12. Any person secreting, destroying or dishonestly altering the register or any part
thereof shall, on conviction, be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
two years and shall also be liable to fine.

i3. Every Registrar shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of
section 21 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.

Conversion
when
becomes
complete.

Register to be
open to
public
inspection.

Non-
registration
not to
invalidate
conversion.

Penalty for
neglecting to
comply with
provisions of
sections 5, 6
or 7 or for
making false
Statement in
memorandum.

Penalty for

failing to file
memorandum
or intimation.

Penalty for
secreting,
destroying or
altering
register.

Registrar to
be a public
servant.


Power to
make rules.

4

14. (/) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette and

to the conditions of previous publication, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this
Act. । |

(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—

(a) the duties and powers of the Registrar;

(5) forms of the memorandum of conversion and the intimation of conversion,

the forms and manner in which registers or records required to be kept by or under this
Act shall be maintained;

(c) the custody in which the registers and records are to be kept and the
preservation of such registers and records; and

(d) provision to enable the Registrar to be present if, needed, at the time of
actual conversion.

(3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, maintain a list
of religious heads, chiefs, priests, missions, recognised religious authorities, societies, etc,
in the State as well as community organisations, social institutions or bodies of recognised
castes, setcs, faiths or communities to whom a copy of memorandum of conversion is to be
sent as provided under sub-section (4) of section 6.

(4) Every rule, made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall, from the date of publication of a notification in the Official
Gazette of such decision, have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the
case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice
to the validity of anything previously done or omitted to be done under that rule.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Compulsory Registration of Religious Conversions Bill, 2005 has been brought
forward for the purpose of registering all the religious conversions in the country. Such a
record or statistics of conversions would be of a great value for many purposes, such as at
the time of census, social work, research, etc. Further, the Bill serves another valuable
purpose viz., it will give the person seeking conversion a sufficient time to exercise his free
will and take a voluntary decision. The Bill does not propose to interfere in any way with the
right of every citizen to choose his own religion. Thus, the Bill is of great social importance
and, therefore, necessary in larger public interest.

In recent times, religious conversions have taken place on “mass scale” under
circumstances which leave doubts about those conversions being not voluntary nor out of
free will nor a genuine change of faith. Such incidents can become a major problem of law
and order or communal hatred or religious conflicts. The Bill gives full right to every individual
to choose his own religion and also sets out a method for registering it and make it foolproof
against any undue compulsion like financial, social, political, domestic or educational, or
inducement like job or any other such benefits and enticements. This Bill will thus, if enacted,
Serve a great social purpose and the current need of the time in the country.

New DELHI: KASHIRAM RANA
February 10, 2005



FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for appointment of Registrar-General and Registrars inthe —

States and the Union territories. Clause 6(1) provides for maintenance of registers by the —

Registrars. Appointment of these officers and their offices are likely to involve a recurring ©
expenditure of about rupees fifteen lakh annually from the Consolidated Fund of India.

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees ten lakh is also likely to be involved. 3


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Governmeni to make rules for carrying out the
purposes of this Bill and in particular in regard to certain matters which include the duties
and powers of the Registrar, the forms of memorandum of conversion and the intimation of
conversion, the forms and manner in which registers or records are required to be maintained,
the custody in which the registers and records are kept, and the provision to enabie the
Registrar to be present at the time of actual conversion. The matters in respect of which such

rules may be made are matters of procedure or administrative details. The delegation of
legislative power is thus of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL |
_ to provide for compulsory registration of religious conversions in the country. ;

(Shri Kashiram Rana, M.P.)

MGIPMRND—4494LS—28.02.2005.