THE BAN ON COW SLAUGHTER BILL, 2014
By
SHRI YOGI ADITYANATH, M.P.
A
BILL
to prohibit the slaughter of cow and its progeny.
WHEREAS article 48 of the Constitution enjoins on the State to organise agricultural
and animal husbandry on modern and scientific lines and in particular to take steps for
preserving and improving the breeds and prohibiting the slaughter of cow and its progeny.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Ban on Cow Slaughter Act, 2014.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, "cow" includes a bull, bullock, ox,
heifer or calf.
Short title
and com-
mencement.
Bill No.  38  of  2014
Definition.5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force or
any usage or custom to the contrary, no person shall slaughter or cause to be slaughtered or
offer or cause to be offered for slaughter any cow in any place.
4. No person shall sell or offer for sale or cause to be sold beef or beef products in any
form for any purpose.
5. Any person who contravenes the provisions of sections 3 or 4 shall be punished
with imprisonment which may extend to ten years or with fine which may extend to rupees
one lakh or with both.
Prohibition
of slaughter
of cow.
Prohibition
of sale of
beef.
Punishment.
5

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Article 48 of the Constitution enjoins on the State to organise agricultural and animal
husbandry on modern and scientific lines and in particular to take steps for preserving and
improving the breeds and prohibiting the slaughter of cow and its progeny. In view of the
consideration that the cow and its entire progeny must be saved to provide milk, as well as
manure, it becomes imperative to impose complete ban on cow slaughter.
N
EW DELHI; YOGI  ADITYANATH
June 25, 2014.

GMGIPMRND—760LS(S3)—01-07-2014.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to prohibit the slaughter of cow and its progeny.
————
(Shri Yogi Adityanath,  M.P .)