1
THE COMPULSORY IMPARTING OF MORAL EDUCATION IN
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS BILL, 2016
By
DR. MANOJ RAJORIA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory imparting of moral education in educational institutions
upto secondary level in the country and for matters connected
therewith or  incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Imparting of Moral Education in
Educational Institutions Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
Short title,
extent  and
commencement.
Bill No.  38 of  2016
Definitions.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(b) “Council” means the Advisory Council constituted under section 7;
(c) “educational institution” means any school imparting education upto
secondary level;
(d) “moral education” means education based on teaching of good principles
and values cherished for years such as regard and respect for elders, parents, teachers
and guardians and setting reasonable standards of virtues and reinforcing discipline
among students with a view to enable them to distinguish between right and wrong;
and
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. From such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
specify, moral education shall be compulsorily imparted in all educational institutions upto
secondary level.
4. The appropriate Government shall, immediately after issuance of notification under
section 3, issue directions for compulsory imparting of moral education in all educational
institutions, within its jurisdiction.
5. The appropriate Government shall derecognize an educational institution, which
does not comply with the provisions of section 3:
Provided that any such derecognition shall be done only after giving such educational
institutions a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
6. Subject to such rules, as may be prescribed, the appropriate Government shall
cause to appoint such number of teachers with such qualifications as may be specified, for
imparting moral education to students upto secondary level.
7. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish
an Advisory Council in each district in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Council shall consist of such number of  persons, as may be prescribed, which
shall include persons having specialized knowledge of moral principles, values and
experience of teaching moral education.
(3) The Council shall:—
(a) take steps to encourage media, non-Governmental organizations and other
agencies in providing moral education in educational institutions; and
(b) coordinate with the appropriate Government and educational institutions
with a view to ensure effective implementation of the provisions of the Act.
8. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the provisions of this Act, shall
apply to a minority educational institution only if the management of such institution
conveys to the appropriate Government their willingness to impart moral education in their
institution.
9. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by  Parliament   by law
in this behalf,  provide adequate funds to the State Governments for  carrying out the
purpose of this Act.
10. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force, but save as aforesaid the
provisions of this Act, shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other law for the
time being in force.
Compulsory
moral
education in
educational
institutions.
Appropriate
Government
to issue
directions for
compulsorily
imparting
moral
education.
Derecognition
of educational
institutions.
Appointment
of teachers
for imparting
moral
education.
Establishment
and functions
of Advisory
Council.
Act to apply
to minority
educational
institutions in
certain
situation.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to
make rules.
5
10

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In the modern age, there has been a sharp decline in the values which were cherished
and practiced from the time immemorial in Indian society. There was a time when moral
education used to be an essential component of the education system at gurukuls and such
other centres. As a result, pupils grew stronger both intellectually and spiritually and influenced
society as well as the State by their significant contributions. However, with the passage of
time, we are losing our great values with the result that we tend to become hypocrite and it is
reflected in our day-to-day brawls between teachers and students, disrespect to elders and
cases of abandonment of old-aged parents by their own offsprings. This trend must be
checked urgently.
A child learns from whatever he observes around and, therefore, society, parents and
the State owe a duty to create an atmosphere in which children may have all round
development. Moral education has become need of the day. Today, there is no dearth of the
news items covering incidents of rape of a daughter by her own father, molestation and eve
teasing of minor girls, killing of old parents by their own sons, threatening of teachers by
their students, etc. It is commonly said that the children are the future of the nation and
custodian of moral value of society. So, it becomes all the more important to inculcate in
children moral values and ideals right from the early stage of childhood. Preparing a conducive
atmosphere to learn moral values will have salutary effect on minds of school going children
and when they will grow mature they can easily distinguish between the right and the wrong.
It is felt that voluntary action to promote moral values will not have the desired impact unless
moral education is imparted compulsorily in all the educational institutions.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MANOJ  RAJORIA
February 11, 2016.

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 6 of the Bill provides for appointment of teachers for imparting moral education.
Clause 7 provides for establishment of Advisory Councils, which shall include persons
having special knowledge of moral principles, values and experience of teaching moral
education. Clause 9 provides that Central Government shall provide funds for the purposes
of teachers and infrastructure. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees five
hundred crore will be required for the purpose.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees five hundred crore will also be
required.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory imparting of moral education in educational institutions upto
secondary level in the country and for matters connected therewith or
 incidental thereto.
————
(Dr.  Manoj Rajoria,  M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4263LS(S3)—29.02.2016.