1
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 38 of  2012
THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012
By
SHRI ARJUN MEGHWAL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code,1860.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2012.
(2) Explanation 1 to section 377 shall be deemed to have always been in force
notwithstanding anything contained to the contrary in any other law for the time being in
force or any judgement, order or decree of any court.
2. In section 377 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, the existing Explanation shall be
numbered as Explanation 2, and before Explanation 2 as so numbered, the following
Explanation shall be inserted, namely:—
"Explanation 1.—For the purposes of this section, the expression "carnal intercourse
against the order of nature" shall include consensual homosexual act of adults and such act
shall be deemed to be an unnatural offence under this section.".
Amendment
of section 377.
45 of 1860.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Recently, there have been repeated attempts for decriminalisation of homosexuality or
gay sex by the Courts while interpreting the provisions of section 377 of the Indian Penal
Code, 1860. In its recent judgement, the Hon'ble Delhi High Court, while legalizing consensual
homosexual activities between adults, observed that the essence of section  377 goes against
the fundamental rights of the citizens and if not amended, the said section would violate
articles 14, 15 and 21 of the Constitution. The Court clarified that the provisions of section
377 of the Code will continue to govern non-consensual penile non-vaginal sex and penile
non-vaginal sex involving minors. The Court also observed that the clarification will hold till,
of course, Parliament chooses to amend the law to effectuate the recommendation of the Law
Commission of India in its 172nd Report.
It is felt that the Hon'ble Court has erroneously interpreted the provisions relating to
human rights enshrined in the Constitution in their application to cases of consensual
homosexual acts of adults. No Constitution would perhaps permit and justify such kinds of
unnatural acts on the grounds of protecting human rights and rule of equality. The human
rights and rule of equality enshrined in our Constitution aim at providing dignified life to the
masses as a whole as well as to individual citizens. However, any presumption that these
provisions permit and justify consensual homosexual activities, which are against the order
of the nature, would amount to an offensive interpretation and needs to be undone. With this
interpretation the Court might have helped a small section of citizens but this interpretation
by the Court has overlooked and ignored not only the feelings and sentiments of a large
number of citizens of this country but also the basic tenets of thousand years old Indian
civilization. Several social and religious organizations have continuously been protesting
against gay-sex and terming it as an illegal, immoral and against the ethos of Indian Culture.
It is, therefore, high time that the provisions of section 377 of the Code be affirmed as they
existed before the Delhi High Court judgement by declaring the consensual sexual act between
persons of same sex as an unnatural offence.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; ARJUN MEGHWAL
March 27, 2012.
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
(ACT NO. 45 OF 1860)
* * * * *
377. Whoever voluntarily has carnal intercourse against the order of nature with any
man, woman or animal, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation.—Penetration is sufficient to constitute the carnal intercourse necessary
to the offence described in this section.
* * * * *
3
Unnatural
Offences.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860
————
(Shri Arjun Meghwal, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—44LS(S3)—17.04.2012.