CLAUSES 
To D D1'1'RODVCIID IN LoJt SAPA 
Bill No. ,9 of 1"5· 
THE CARDAMOM BILL, 1965 
.. 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRBI.JMTNARY 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Declaration as to expediency of control by the Union. 
3. Definitions. 
CHAPTER n 
THE CARDAMOM BOARD 
4. Establishmen .. and constitution of the Board. 
5. Acts or proceedings of Board or its Committees not to be in-
validated. 
6. Salary and allowances of Chairman. 
7. Executive officers of the Board and other staff. 
8. Committees of the Board. 
9. Functions of the Board. 
10. Dissolution of the Board. 
CHAPI'ER nI 
RmGISTRATION or OWNERS OF CARDAJ40M J:sTATI'S 
11. Registrat~ of owners of cardamom. estates. 
12. Power of State Government to make rules. 
13. Returns to be made by registered owners. 
CHAPTER IV 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
CLAUSES 
14. Imposition of a cess on cardamom exported. 

15. Payment of proceeds of cess to the Board. 
__ l_6. __ Grants and loans by the Central Government. ---- ---- .. --~--.----
17. Constitution of the Fund. 
, 1'8. Bonowing powers of the Board. 
19. Accounts ~~ aqdtt. 
CHAPTER V 
CoNTaQI. BY CBN'1'B4L GQVJ:IUfMDtT 
20. Power to control price and c:listribution of cardamom. 
21. Power to prohibit or c~ntrol imports and exports of cardamom. 
22. Directions by Government. 
CHAPTER VI 
MlscBu.ANEOus 
23. Penalty for making f8Ise returns. 
24. Penalties for obstructing and officer or member of the Board 
in the discharge of his duties arid for failure to produce boob 
and records. 
25. Penalty £Of contravention ~f order relating to COIltrol of 
~c, etc, .! 
26. Other penalties. : 
27. Offences by companies. 
28. Jurisdiction of court. 
29. Previous sanction of Central Government. 
30. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
31. Power to delegate. 
32. Suspensi~of operation of Act. 
33. Power of Central Government to make rules. 

To BII: IN'l'BODUCKD IN Lolt SdB'A 
------------- -
5 
BJU No,.", O'I"1:_J 
THE CARDAMOM BILL, 196$ 
.A 
BIlL 
to provide 1M the developm.n.t under th.~ ~l iii W t1ilflHi of tM 
Cardamom industry. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixteenth Year ef the 
Republic of India as follows:-
:- , CHAPTER I 
PllELIMINARY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Cardamom Act, 1965. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India; 
j -
Sbart 
title, 8%-
Provided that it shall hot apply to the State of Jammu and tent and 
Kashmir except to the extent to which the provisions of this Act co~. 
relate to the control of export of cardamom frOm Iltdia and import cemen 
lO thereof ~to I~a. . 
(3} It shall come into forc~ On. such date as tbe Central Govern-
ment may, by notiftc:ation in the Oftlcial Gqette, a~pottit: 
/ 

Declara-
tIoDuto 
upedl-
aqof 
eoatrolby 
tbeUDloIL 
2 
Provided that different dates may be appointed for di1ferent 
provisions of this Act., 
Z. It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the public interest 
that the Union should take under its control the cardamom industry. 
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(4) "Board" means the Cardamom- Board established under 
section 4; : 
(b) "cardamom" means the fruit of cardamom plant and 
includes green cardamom, bleached cardamom, bleachable white 
cardamom, sun-dried cardamom, cardamom seeds, J»Wd~req IQ 
cardamom and oU extracted from cardamo~; 
(c) "cardamom plant" means the cardamom plant ELET~ 
TABlA CAImAMOMUM MATON and any other plant which 
the Board may, by notification in the Gazette of India, ~eclare to 
~ I cardamom plant for the purposes of this ~ct; I~ 
Cd) "Chairman" m~ tile C~an gf the Board, 
ee) "dealer" means a dealer in cardamom. 
(f) "Director" means \he: Director of Cardamom Develop. 
ment appointed under section 7; 
(g) "estate" me~ an area administered as one unit whidl 20 
contains land planted with cardamom plants; 
I ""ell. ~. (h) "export" and "import" mean rel!,Pfi!Ctively taking out of 
or bringing into India by land, sea or ait; 
(i) "owner", in relation to any land planted with cardamom 
plants, includes-..: 25 
(i) any agent of the owner; and 
(ii) a mortagagee, lessee or other person in actual 
possession of the land; 
(;) ~bed" means prescribed by rulee made under 
tiPs Act; 30 

3 
(k) "registered estate" means an estate in respect of which 
an owner is registered under sub-section .(1) of section 11 and 
includes any estate in respect of which an owner is required to 
be registered under the provisions of that sub-section; 
S (l) "registered owner" means an owner of a registered 
estate, who has been, or is required to be, registered under sub-
section (1) of section 11; 
(m) "year" means the period of twelve months beginning 
with the 1st day of Septemp~~, ~nd ending with the 31st day of 
10 August next following. ~ ... 
CHAPTER II 
THE CARDAMOM BOARD 
4. (1)' With effect from such date as the Central Government may. lDItabUsh· 
by notification in the Otficial Gazette, specify ill this behalf, there ment aDd 
J S. shall be established for the pqrposes of this Act a Board to be called ~:r::::':h. 
the Cardamom Board. ~ . 
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, 
having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power to ac-
quire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, 
~O and to contract, and shall.by the said name sue and be sued. 
21 
(3) The Board shall consist of the following members, namely:-
(a) a Chairman to be appointed by the Central Government; 
(b) the Director of Cardamom Development ex otJicioj' 
(c) 'three Members of ParHament of whom two shall be 
elected by the House of the People and one by the Council of 
States; 
(d) three members to represent respectively the Ministriee 
of the Central Government dealing with-
(i) commerce, 
(ii) agriculture, and 
(iii) finance; 

Acts or 
proce~ 
ingsof 
Board or 
its Com-
mitteesnot 
to be in-
validated 
I 
4 
(e) such number of other members not exceeding fifteen 
as the Central Government may think expedient, to be appointed 
---by that Government by notification in the OfficliiGazette from 
among persons who are in its opinion capable of representing-
(i) the Governments of the principal cardamom-grow- S 
ing States; 
(ii) the cardamom-growing interests; 
(iii) the cardamom trade interests; 
(iv) the interests of labour; 
(v) the consumers; and 
(vi) such other persons or class of persons who, in the 
opinion of thta Central Government, ought to be represented 
on the Boar~. 
(4) The number of persons to be appointed as members from 
each of the categories specified in clause (e), of sub-section (3), the 15 
term of office of the members of the Board other than the mem .. 
ber referred to in clause (b) of that sub-section, and the manner of 
lllling vacancies among, and the procedure to ·be followed in the 
discharge of their functions by, the members of the Board shall be 
such as may be prescribed. ;ao 
(5) Any omcer of the Central Government, not being a member 
of the Board, when deputed by that Government in this behalf shall 
have the right to attend meetings of the Board and take part in the 
proceedings thereof but shall not be entitled to vote. 
5. No act or proceeding of the Board or any Committee apPointed 2 S 
by it under section 9, shall 'he invalidated merely reason of-
I 
(a) any vacancy in, or any' defect in the constitution of, the 
Board or such Committee, or 
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a 
member of the Board or such Committee, or 30 
(c) any irregUlarity in the procedure of the Board or such 
Committee not affecting the merits of the case. 

« 
5 I '.4 
.. The Chairman sbalI be entitled to 811m .....,. aDd. aII8waaees Salary anti 
aDd SIKh cODditiGas of service in respect of leave, peDSioa, provident allowance. 
-- - had ad other_matters.u may, &om time to time, be hed by the of Chair-
Central Government. man. 
5 7. (1) The Central Government shall appoint a Director of Carda- Executive 
mom Development to exercise such powers and perform such duties omc.. 
under the Chairman as may be prescribed or as may be delegated to ~ UIe· 
him I by the Chairman. Oth-: and 
(2) The Central Goverrunent shall appoint a Secretary to the 
10 Board to exercise such powers and perform such duties under the 
Chairman a,s may be prescribed or as may be delegated to him by 
the Chairman. 
(3) Tile Director and the Secretary shaD be eDtitlei to such sa~­
ies and allowances and be pvemed by such conditions of service re-
IS gardine leave, pension, provident fund and other IIl8tters as IDIlY 
be fixed by the Central Government. 
(4) SI:lbject to such control and restrictions as may be prescribed, 
the Board may appoint such other officers and employees as may be 
Dece5Sary for the emcient performance of its functiOlUl amd ~ay them 
20 such salaries and allowances as it may determine from to tiD;l~: 
PEovided that all officers and other employees of the Directorate 
of Cardamom Development and Marketing (other than the Dh;ector) 
who hold office as such immediately before the date referred to in. 
su))..section (1) of sectioa 4 shan be deemed to have been appointed 
25 as o8icers or employees of the Board with eJlect from tlaat ut. aDd 
every such officer and employee shan hold his office by the same 
tenure, at the same remuneration and upon dae same terms ond con-
ditions and with the same rights and privileges u to pension, leave, 
provident fund and other matters as he would have held the same 
30 if dais Act had not 'been passed, and shall cOiltinue' to do so ualess 
and until his employment is terminated or until such tenure, re-
muneration and terms and conditions are altered by tfle Board with 
the approval of the Central Government: 
Provided further that if ,the alteration so made is not Kceptable 
3S ~ aDy such oftlcer or employee, his employment may be temaiDated 
by the Board in accordance with the terms of the conflnct, if any, 
with such officer or employee or, if there be no such e..-ct, OD 
payment to him by the Board of compensation. equivalent to three 
mooths' remuneration in the case of permaneBt employees and ODe 
40 month's remuneration in the case of other employees. 
staft. 

(5) The Chairman, the Director, the Secretary and other em-
ployees of the Board shall not undertake any work unconnected with 
_____ th.= .. e.ir _duJi~_Ul!cier this Act. except with the permission of the Central 
Government. I, 
Commit- 8. (1) The Board may appoint such Committees as may be neces- S 
tees of the suy for the efficient discharge of its duties and performance of its 
Board. functions under this Act. 
Functions 
of the 
Board. 
(2) The Board shall have the power to co-opt as members of any 
Committee appointed under sub-section (1) such other number of 
persons who are not members of the Board, as it may think 8t. 10 
9. (1) It Shall be the duty of the Board to promote, by such mea-
sures as it thinks fit, the development under the control of the Cen-
tral Government of the cardamom industry. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-
section (1), the measures referred to therein may provide for- IS 
(a) promoting co-operative efforts among growers of car-
dmnom; 
(b) ensuring remunerative retums to growers of carda-
mom;: 
(c) financial or other assistance for improved methods of 20 
cultivation aDd processing of cardamom, for replanting carda-
mom and for extension of cardamom growing areas; 
(d) regulating the sale and export of cardamom and stabi-
lisation of prices of cardamom; I, 
(e) training in cardamom testing and fixing grade standards 25 
Of card~m; 1 • 
(f) increasing the consumption in India and ~laewhere of 
cardamom and carrying on propaganda for that purpose; 
(g) registering and licensing of brokers (including auc-
tioneers) of cardamom and persons engaged in the business of 30 
cardamom; 
(h) improving the )Ilarketing of cardamom in India i and 
elsewhere; 

1 
(i) collecting statistics from growers, dealers end auell other 
persons 88 may be prescribed on any matter relating to_the car-
damom industry; the publishing of statistics so' collected or por~ -- -
tions thereof or extracts therefrom; 
S (;) securing better working conditions and the provisions 
and improvement of amenities and incentives for workers; and 
(k) such other matters as may be' prescribed. 
(3) The Board shall perform its functions under this section 1D. 
accordance with and subject to such rules as may be made by the 
10 Central Government. 
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in 'the om- DiaIolu-
cia! Gazette, direct that the Board shall be dissolved from such date tion of the 
and for such period as may be specified in the notification. Board. 
(2) When the Board is dissolved under the provisiOns of sub-sec-
IS tion (1),-
(a) all members, notwithstanding that their term of ofBce 
has not expired, shall, from the date ofd1sso1utioD, vacate their 
offices as such members; 
(b) all powers and duties of the Board stiaU, d1ll'iDc the 
20 period of dissolution, be exercised and performed by lOch per-
SOIl or persoDS as the Central GovemmeBt may appoint in this 
behaU; 
(c) all funds and other property vested in the Board ahall, 
during the period of dissolution, vest in the Central Govern-
25 ment; and 
30 
(d) as soon' as the period of dissolution expires, the Board 
shall be reconstituted in accordance with the prOvisions of this 
~t. I 
CHAPTER III 
REGISTRATION OF OWNERS OF CARDAMOM ESTATES 
11. (1) Every owner of land planted with cardamom plants, wbe- Relistra-
ther such land is comprised in one estate or more than one estate, tioD of 
shall before the expiration of one month from the date on which he OWDderl of , car amom 
first -became owner of such estate or estates or before the expiration estates. 
3S of three months from the date of ~oming into 'force of this section, 
whichever is later, apply to the registering oftlcer appointed 1D. this 
behalf by' the State Government to be registered as an owner in res-. 
peet of each estate owned. by him: 
__ KQRI.BlLS-2. --- .... ---- - .. -

8 
ProVided tbat the State Government may for suftlcient reason 
-- -extend the-time-limit for registration by such period 88 it think, fit. 
Power of 
State Gov-
ernment 
to make 
rules. 
Returns 
tob. 
made by 
reptered 
owners. 
Imposition 
of a cess 
on carda-
mom ex-
ported 
(2) Registration once made shall continue to be in force until it 
is cancelled by the registering officer. 
12. (1) The State Government may, by notiflcation'in the Oftlcia1 S 
Gazette, make rules to carry into eftect the provisions of section 11. 
. (2) Without prejudice to the generality of'the 'foregoing power, 
such rules may prescribe the form of the application for registra-
tion and for cancellation of registration, the fee payable on such 
applications, the particulars to be included in such applications, the 10 
procedure to be followed in granting and cancelling registration, the 
registers to be kept by registering offieers, and the supply by regis-
tering ofticers of information to the Board. 
13. (1) A registered owner shall furnish to the Board at the pres-
cribed times and in the prescribed manner such returns as'may be IS 
prescribed. I 
.. 
(2) The Board may authorise an officer to visit any 
estate at any time to verify the accuracy of I any return 
made under this section or to ascertain the productive capacity of the 
~~ ~ 
CHAPTER IV 
.' .. 
FINANCE ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
14. (1) There.shall be levied on all cardamom which is exported, 
a cess for the piuposes of this Act at such rate not exceeding two 25 
per cent. ad valorem as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Ofticial Gazette, fix. 
(2) TIle cess levded under sub-section (1) shall be in addition to 0201 
any cess or duty leviable on cardamom under any other law for the 
time being in force. 
30 
(3) The provisions of the Customs Act, 1962, and the rules and 
regulations made thereunder, including those relating to refunds and 

9 
exemptions from duty, shall, as far as may be, apply in relation to 
__ the levy and collection of the cess leviable under sub-section (1) as 
they apply in relation to the levy and cdllection of a duty of custoJDa 
under that Act or those rules and regulations. 
s 15. The proceeds of the cess levied 1DIder seetion 14 shaD first he Payment 
credited to the Consolidated Fund of India and the Central Govem- ='::-Of 
ment may, if Parliament by appropriation made by law in this behalf cess to the 
so provides, pay to the Bo:tTd from. time to time from oat of such Board. 
proceeds, after deductiD( the expenses of collection, II1lch sums of 
10' money as it may think fit for "Jng utilised for the purposes of this 
Act. 
Grants 16. Thp. Central Government may. after due appropriation made and lDaDl 
by Parliament by law in thi!ll behalf. pay to the Board by way of by the 
crants or loans such sums of money as the t!en'tral Government DUly Central 
consider necessary. :0:-
IS 1'1. (1) There shall be formed a Fund to be called the Cardamom Coaadtutloa 
Fund and there shall be credited thereto- of the PUDCI 
20 
(4) tlie proceeds of the"cess made over to the Board by tlie 
Central Government; 
(b) all fees levied and collected In respect of lfcenses faued 
under this Act; : 
(c) any other fee that may be levied and collected by the 
Board under this Act or the rules made thereunder; 
(d) any grants nr loans that may be made by the 
Central Government for the purposes of the Fund; 
(e) any grants or Joans that may be made by any instftu-
tion for the purposes of this Act; 
2S (f) all sums realised by the Board in carrying out the 
measures referred to in section 9. 
(!) The Fund shall be applied-
(a) for meeting the salaries, a1lowanees and other r~lIlUnf;l .. 
f atlQn Of th~ om~I'§ ~C! ~~ber emplo1~es of the Board; 

10 
~. 
(b) for meeting the other administrative expenses of the 
Board; 
(c) for meeting the cost of the measures referred to in 
section 9; 
(d) for repayment of any loans from the Central Govern- 5 
ment or from any institution. 
Borrowln, 18. SUbject to such rules .aa-.may be made in this behalf, the Boud 
:w:r:::. shall have power to borrow on the security of the Cardamom Fun" or 
e 0 any other asset for carrying out the purposes of this Act, 
AccouDtII· 19. (1) The Board shall maintain proper accounts and other 
andauct. relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts, in- ,~ 
eluding the profit and loss account anc! the balance-sheet in such 
form as "may be prescribed by the Central Goa!emment in eO:QSulta. 
tion with the Comptroller aDd Auditor-G:!neral of In<Ua. 
(2) The accounts of the Boarct shall be audited by the Comptroller I, 
and Auditor-General of India at such intervals as may be specified 
. by him and any expenditme incurred in· cennection with such audit 
shall be payable by the Board to the Comptroller. and . Auditor-
General. 
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any per- 20 
son appointed by him in connection· with the audit of the accounts 
of the Board shall have the same rights and privileges and authority 
in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-
General b;ls in connection wit.b..tPe audit of Government accounts, 
and in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of 2, 
books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers 
and to inspect any of the offices of the Board:-
(4) The accounts of the Board as certified by the Com~er and 
Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by him in 
this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government and that Government shaU ~Q 
cause the same to be laid before each HO\lle ot r(l1'~e.nt. 

II 
CHAPTER V 
CON'l'ROL BY CDTRAL ~ 
20. (1) The Central Government may, by order notifted in the Pewer to 
Official Gazette, fix in respect of cardamom of any description speci- co~trol 
fted therein- pnce and 
dtstribu-
(a) the maximum price or the minimum price, Or the tion of 
S maximum and minimum prices, which may be charged by a cardamom. 
grower of cardamom OI!-:rcaniamom dealer, wholesale or utail, 
whether for the Indian market or for export; 
(0) the maximum quantity which may in one transqctlon 
be sold to any person. 
10 (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the powers conferred 
by sub-section (1), any order made thereunder may provide-
(4)' for requiring pel'BOns engaged in'the production, supply 
or distribution of, or trade and eommeree in, cardamom to main-
tain and produce for inspection such books, accouni8 and recorda 
I S relating to their business ~d 00 furnish such infonnation relat. 
ing thereto as may be specified in the- order; 
(b) for such other matters, 'including , in' particular the' 
entering and search cd premises, vebicl'es, vessell and· . aircraft, 
the seizure by a person authorfsed to mde sucltaearch, 'of carda-
20 mom in respect of which such person has ~ason to beU~v~ t~at 
a contravention of the order has been, ,is bei~g or is 'abOut to be 
committed. ' 
n. (1-) The Central Government may, bv order published in the Powerto 
Official Gazette, make provision for nro'l,ibiting restricting or Gther- ~~t or 
25 wise colltrolling the ,import oP1xport of cardamom. either generally ':;o~ 
or in speeified masses of cases. and 
(2) All goods to which any order under sub-section. (1) applies 
shall be deemed to be goods of which the import or export has be~!n 
:52 of 1962 prohibited or restricted unde,r section 11 of the Customs Act, 1962, 
30 and all the provisions of that Act shall have effect accordingly. 
(3) If any pe1'9OD contravenes any order made under SUb-aectioD 
(1), he shall, without prejudice to any confiscation 01' penalty to 
Which he m:ly be liable under the provisions of the Customs Act, 1962, 
exportabf 
cardamom. 

Directicma 
by Gov-
ernment. 
Penalty. for 
making 
false re-
turns. 
Penalties 
forobt-
tructingan 
oflleer or 
member of 
the BoIlTCt 
futhe 
discharge 
ofhls 
ctuUesand 
forfallure 
toproduee 
boob and 
records. 
12 
as applied by Bub-section (2), be punishable with Imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to one year or with fine or with both . . -- "_ .. -_. 
zz. The Board shall carry out such directions as may be issued to 
it from time to time by the Central Government for the emcient ad-
ministration of this Act. 
CHAPTER VI 
~us 
Z3. Any perso~ being required by or under this Act to furnish 
any return fails to furnish such return or furnishes a return contain-
ing any particular which is false and which he knows to be false or 10 
does not believe to be true shalt be punishable with fine which may 
extend to five hundred rupees. 
24. Any person wh~ 
(a) obstructs any member authorised by the Chairman in 
writing or anY' omcer or other employee of the Board authorised IS 
bv it in this behalf or any person authorised in this behalf bv 
thp. Central Government ,or by the Board, In the eXP.rCfRe of Any 
'POWer confe~, or in the discharge of any duty im!,osed, on him 
by or under this Act; or 
(b) havin~ control over or eustody of any aecount bM1r or 20 
ather record. fafls to produce lueh book or reec.rd when required 
to do so by or under this Act, 
shall be punishable with impriscmment which may extend to six 
months, or with fine which may extend to one thousan~ rupees, or 
with both. 25 
Penalty for ZS. (1) If any person contravenes any order made under section 
eontraven- 20, he shan be puni~hable with imprisonment for a term which may 
ti:: of -extend to six months~ with fine which may extend to one thousand 
~:,: rupees, or with both: and the property in respect of which the order 
control of has 'been contravp.ned or such part thereof as the Court may deem fit. 30 
price etc. shall be forfeited to the Central Government. 
(2) Any person who attempts to contravene, or abets the contra-
vention of, any order under section 20 shall be deemed to have con-
traven'eod that order. 
26. Whoever contravenes or attempts to contravene or abets the 35 Other 
penalties. contravention of the provisions of this Act or of any rules made therp.~ 

13 
tinder other than the provisions, punjshment for the contravention ----- . 
whereof has been provided, for m sections 21, 23, 24 and 25, shad he 
punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six months, or 
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both, 
5 and in the case of a continuing contravention with an additional 
fine which may extend to fifty rupees for every day during which 
which such contravention continues after conviction for the first such 
contravention. 
%7. (l).;;;.Where an offence under this Airt has been Committed by Offence. 
10 a company, every person who at the time the offence was committed b:mcom-
was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the con- P eL 
duct of the business of the company as well as the company shall be 
deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to bt: pruceeded 
against and punished accordingly: 
I S Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render 
any such person liable to any punishment, if he proves that the oftence 
was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due 
diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(2) Notwifhstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where 
20 an offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it 
is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any 
director, manager, secretary or other o1ficer shan also be deemed to be 
guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
25 punished accordingly. 
ExpZanation.-For the purposes of this section-
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a 
firm or other association of individuals; and ~ 
30 
*"'-;1 
(b) "director", in relation to e firm, means a partner in the 
firm. 
28. No court inferior to that of a Presidency Magistrate or a Jurilc:tic-
MaaijOltrate of the first class shall try any offence punishable under tion of 
&AY court. 
this Act. 
zg. No prosecution for any offence punishable under this Act shall Prevlou. 
be instituted except with the previous sanction of the Central Gov- lofanCction 1 3S antra ernment. Govern-
ment 

· Protec-
tion of 
action 
taken in 
,ood 
faith. 
Power to 
delegate. 
4 
" " 
30. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie agains' __ .. _ 
the Government, or the Board or any committee appointed by it, or 
any member of the Board or such committee, or any oftlcer or em-
ployee of the Government or the Board or any other person authorised 
by the Government or the Board, for anything which is in good faith S 
done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules made there-
under. 
.... ,. 3~. The Central Government may, by order notified in the Oftlcial 
Gazette, direct that any power exercisable by it under this Act may 
also be exercised, in such cases and subject ·tie such conditione, if any, 10 
as may be specified in the order, by such oftlcer or authority as may 
be specified therein. 
Suspension 32. (1) if the Central Government is satisfied that circumstances 
~f op;~ have arisen rendering it necessary that certain of the restrictions 
on t. imposed by this Act should cease to be imposed or if it considers it 15 
Power of 
Central 
Govern-
mentto 
make 
rules. 
necessary or eKpedient so to do in the public interest, the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, suspend or 
relax to a specified extent, either indefinitely or for such period 81 
rna, be specified in the notificatiQn, the operation of all or any.of the 
provisions of this Act. . 20 
(2) Where the operation of any provision of this Act has under 
sub-section (1) been suspended or relaxed indefinitely, such sus-
pension or relaxation may at any time while this Act remafna in 
force be removed by the Central Government by notification in the 
Official Gazette. 25 
33. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. 
-t't'(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing • power, 
such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, 
namely:- 30 
(a) the remuneration and other allowances payable to the 
each of the categories specified in claUSe (e) of lub-section (3) 
of section 4, the term of office and other conditions' of service of 
the members flf the Board and the procedure to be fonowed in 
the I discharge of their functions by, and the manner of fllllng 35 
vacancies among such members; 
(b) the circumstances in which. and the authority by whkll. 
a member of the Board 'may be removed; . 

~ .' 
s 
10 
I, 
(C), the ~rocedure to be followed at meetings. of the Board 
~~ Committees thereof for the conduct of busiDess 'aDd; the 
number of members' which shall form a quorum at a meeting; 
(d) the maintenance by the Board of recorda of buainea 
h'DSact~ by the Board and the submluion of copies thereof to 
the Central Government; 
(e) the holding of a minimum number ot meetings of the 
Board every year; 
<I> the powers of the Board, its Chairman the Director t . 
and Committees of the Board, with respect to the tnOurrihg of 
expenditure; 
(g) the conditions. subject to which the Board may incur 
expenditure outside India; I, 
(h) the preparation of budget estimates of receipts and ex-
IS penditure of the Board and the authority by which the'estimates 
are to be sanctioned; 
(i) the form and the 'manner in which the accounts should 
be kept by the Board; 
(i) the deposit of the funds of the Board' in 'banb and th~ 
20 investment of such funds; 
35 
(k) the conditions subject to which the Board may borrow; 
(1) the conditions subject to which and the manner in which 
contracts may be entered into by or on behalf of the Board; 
(m) the delegation to the Chainnan or Director or mem-
bers or oftlaers of the Board of any of the powers and duties. of 
the Board under this Act; 
(n) the staff which may "be employed by the Board and the 
pay and allowances and leave and other conditions of service of 
officers (other than those appointed hy the Central Government) 
and other employees of the Board; 
(0) the additional matters in respect of which the Board 
may undertake measures in the discharge of its functions; 
(p) the travelling and other allowances of members of the 
Board end of Committee3 thereot; 
(q) The remuneration and other allowances payable to the 
person or persons referred to in claUJe (b) of sub-section (2) 
of section 10; 
~8(B) L .S. 3 

16 
(r) the maintenance of the registers and other:records of the 
----- -Board and its various Committees· , 
(.) the appointment by the Board of agents to discharge 
on the behalf any of it's functions; 
(t) the form of, and the particulars to be contained in, any S 
returns or reports to be made to the Board under this Act; 
(u) the form of and the manner of making application for 
licences issued by the Board, the fees pa)"lble for such applica-
tion and the procedure Ito be followed In granting, and the con-
ditions governing, such licences; 10 
(v) the collection of any information or statistics in respect 
of cardamom; I 
(10) any other matter (other than a matter specifted in sec-
tion 12) which is to be or may be prescribed or provided for by 
rules under this Act. . IS 
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government uncier this sec-
tion shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament whilE\:it is in senion for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two IUCCel8ive 
aessions, and if, before the expiry of the session in which it i8 80 laid 20 
or the session immediately fonowing, both Houses agree in making 
any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule 
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 25 
validity of anything previously done under that rule. ' 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The annual production of cardamom, a plantation crop grown 
mainly in the billy regions of Kerala, Mysore and Madras, is at 
present of the order of 3,000 tonnes of which about 65 to 70 per cent. 
is exported, earning around Rs. 3 crores of foreign exchange tor 
the country. In the World trade in this commodity, India has a 
near monopoly. It is thus a plantation commodity with a preponder-
ant "export angle. A substantial increase in foreign. exchange earn .. 
ings through Cardamom exports can be brought about by undertak-
ing suitable measures of assistance to planters for development of 
their plantation and by proper arrangements for the marketing and 
export of this commodity. 
Export prices of cardamom have been widely fluctuating over the 
years. This 1IJlcertainty of prices has resulted in planters of carda-
mom, most of whom are small growers with inadequate ftnancia1 
resources of their own, being unable to maintain and develop their 
plantations on sound lines. Leading Associations of Cardamom 
planters have been representing that to help the cardamom growers 
in realizing fair returns for their produce and the induStry to cfe:. 
velop on sound and progressive lines, a statutory Board Ihould be 
set up for undertaking measures of assistance for development aDd 
activities relating to proper marketing of the commodity. 
In order to maintain steady export prices, secure better retur'Iw 
for the producers and increase the foreign exchange earninp from 
Cardamom exports, certain interim measures were taken. These 
interim measures gave some relief to the cardamom growers and 
helped to arrest the downward trend of prices and increue uport 
prices of cardamom. Need, however, still exists for long-term. 
measures for looking after the m~keting aspects of capdemom. with 
• view particularly to increase its export potential and for assistance 
to the growers for development purposes. The Cardamom Develop-
ment and Marketing AdVisory Committee, which wu set up b1 
February, 1963, also recommended the early constitution of a statu-
tory Board for Cardamon for looking after the development aDd 
marketing aspects of the industry. After careful con.1derat1oD, 
Government. of India has come to the conclUlion that •• tatutory 
Board to be known as the Cardamom Board should be set up. The 
Ii , 

II 
Board is proposed to be constituted, among others, with the repre-
sentatives of the -growers of cardamom, exporters of cardamom and 
-- Governments of the cardamom producing states. It is proposed to 
vest the Board with adequate powers to undertake suitable measures 
for development of the Cardamom Industry, such as the promotion 
of eo-operatives of the small growars, grant of loans to planters for 
,improved methods of cultivation, processing,replanting and exteaa-
ions, undertaking marketing activities with a view to incraase the a-
port ,potential of the commodity, operating price support measures, 
:8upplying machiner:y and equipment on hire-purchase basis -to .plan-
ters, assisting planters in the procurement of fertilizers, pesticides 
and other allied objectives. The object of the Bill is io take.powers 
for setting up a statutory Board fOICardamom mainly with a view 
to enable it to undertake the activities mentioned ·above. 
NEW DELHI; 
'The '7th J\lay, 1965. 
MANU:BH.Al SHAH. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Cardamom Bill, 1965, provides for the control by the Union of 
the Cardamom Jndustry and, for that .,urpoae, ,proplHll to establish 
• Cardamom'Soard and to levy a cess at a rate Dot exceeding two 
per cent. lid t)alo1'em on all cardamom exported. . 
2. Under clause 4(3) read with clause 6 of the Bill, the Board 
will have a Chairman who will have to be paid auch salary and 
allowances 81 -may' be determined by the ,Ceotral Government. 
Under clauses 7 (1) and. 7 (2), a Director of Cardamom Development 
-and a Secretary to the Board have to be appomteQ for exercising 
such powers and performing such duties under the Chairman as 
,may be prescribed. Under clause 7 (3), the Director and Secretary 
will have to be .,aid such salary and allowances as may be deter-
mined by the Central Government. Under clause 7 (4), the Board 
;may appoint such officers and employees as may be necessary for the 
efficient performance of its functions and pay them such salaries and 
allowances as it may determine from time to time. Provision has 
also been made for the making of rules in regard to the payment 
of travelling and other allowances to the members of the Board and 
of its committees ahd the payment of remuneration to any perIOn or 
persons appointed to perform the functions of the Board during th. 
period of its dissolution. 
3. It is not possible at the present stage to indicate px:ecise1y what 
expenditure will be incurred on the proposed Cardamom. Board. It 
is, however, estimated that initially the expenditure will not ex-
ceed Rs. 3 lakhs per annum. 
4. Clause 16 of the Bill provides for grants of loans to be paid 
to the Board by the Central Government. The amount of such pay-
ments will depend on the level of the actual proceeds of the cess on 
cardamom and alle amounts required by the Board to meet ita ex-
penses, taking into account the scope of its activities. It Js. there-
fore, not possible to determine the exact amount of expenditure 
that is likely to be incurred in this behalf. The amount of the grant 
to be giVP.D by Government is, however, expected to be within the 
realisations from the cess. No such expenditure will, in any cue, 
be incurred without due appropriation made by Parliament by Jaw 
lD this behalf. 

MEMORANDUM BEGARDING DELiGATED LEGISLATION--· 
Clause 12 of the Bill empowen the State Government to make 
rules to give effect to the provisiODS of clause 11 regarding registra-
tion of owners of cardamom estates and in particular for prescrib-
in, the form of application for registration and the fee payable on 
luch application, for cancellation of registration, etc. 
Clause 33 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to 
make Nles to carry out the purposes of, the Bill. The matten in res-
pect of which rules may be made relate, among others, to the term 
of omce and other conditions of service of the members of the 
Board, the procedure to be followed at meetings of the Board and 
committees thereof, the travelling and other allowances payable to 
members of the Board and its committees, the fonn and the manner 
in which the accounts of the Board are to be maintained, the de-
posit and investment of the funds of the Board aDd other matters 
of a procedural or administrative nature. 
The matters in respect of which provision may be made in the 
rules framed by the State Government and the Central Government 
are gener~ly matters of procedure or detail. The delegation of 
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 
I 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the development under the control of the 
Union of the Cardamom Industry. 
(Shri Manubhai Shah, 
Minister 0/ Commeru.) 