8m NO.3' of I".! 
THE EXTRADITION BILL, 1961 
(As INTRODUCED IN LaIC SABRA 
ON 7TH AUGUST, 1961) 

s 
BID No. 39 of I", 
THE EXTRADITION BILL, 1961 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA) 
A 
• 
BILL 
to consolidate and amend the law relating to the e~radition of 
fugitive crim.inals. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twelfth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Extradition Act, 1961. 
. (2) It extends to the whole of India. 
(3) It shall come into farce on such date as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
10 (a) "commonwealth country" means a.. commonwealth coun-
try specified in the First Schedule and includes-
(i) the Republic of Ireland; and 
(ii) every constituent part, colony or dependency of any 
commonwealth country specified in the First Schedule 011: 
• 15 the Republic of Ireland; 
(b) "conviction" and "convicted" do not include or refer to 
a conviction which under foreign law is a conviction for 
contumacy, but the term "person accused" includes a person so 
co~.icted for contumacy; 
Short title, 
cztcnt and 
c:ommeDCC • 
ment. 
DdbUtioaa. 

* (e) "extradition oftence" means-
(i) in relation to a foreign State, being a treaty State; 
an offence provided for in the extradition treaty with that 
State; 
(ii) in relation to a foreign State other than a treaty 5 
State or in relation to a commonwealth country to which 
Chapter III does not apply, an offence which is specified in, 
or which may be specified by notification under, the Second 
Schedule; 
(iii) in relation to a commonwealth country to which 10 
Chapter III applies, an offence which is specified in, or which 
may be specified by notification under, the Tlmd Schedule; 
(d) "extradition treaty" meana a treaty or agreement made 
. by India with a foreign State relating to the extradition of 
fugitive criminals, and includes any such treaty or agreement IS 
made befare the 15th day of August, 1947, vW'tich extends to, 
and is b~dizls on, India; 
(e) "foreign State" means any State outside India other 
than a QOmmonw~alth country, and includes every constituent 
part, colony or dependency of such State; 20 
<f) "fugitive criminal" means an individual who is accused 
or ccnvicted of an extradition offence committed within the 
jurisdiction of a foreign State or a commonwealth country and 
is, or, is. ~qted to be, in some part of India; 
(g) "magistrate" m~ a magistrate' of the first class or a 2S 
preside~ n18gistrate; 
(h) "notified order" means an order notified in the 0ftlcia1 
Gazette; 
(i) "p~esqibed" meaJ)s. prescribed by rules madie, uaQer this 
Act; and 30 
(1) ''treaty SteW' means a foreign State with which an 
extradition treaty is in operation. 
Application 3. (1) The Centxal Government may, by notified order, direct 
of Act. that aU ~aAY. of the provisions of this Act other than Chapter III 
shall app1y- . 3S 
(4) to su~h foreign State or part thereof; or 
(b) to su.ch commonwealth country or part thereof to 
w.bil;h. Chaper· II~ does not apply; 
as may be specified in the order. •. 

I 
(2) The Central Government may, by the same notifted order u 
is referred to in sub-section (1) or any subsequent notified order, 
restrict such application to fugitive criminals found, or suspected to 
be, in such part of India as may be specified in the order. 
S (3) Where the notified order relates to a treaty State,-
(a) It shall set out in full the extradition treaty with that 
State; 
(b) it shall not remain in force for any period longer than 
that treaty; and 
(0 (c) the Central Government may, by the same or any 
subsequent notified order, render the application of this Act 
subject to such modifications, exceptions, conditions and quali-
fications as may be deemed expedient for implementing the 
treaty with that State. 
T S (4) Every notified ord~r made under this seetion shall be laid 
30 
3S 
before each House' of Parliament, as 80011 as may be, after it is made . 
.(. A fugitive criminal shall uot be surrendered or retomed to Restriction. on 8urren-a foreign State or commonwealth country- • der. 
(a) if the offence in respect of whiCh his surrender is 
sought is of a political character or if he proves to the satisfac-
tion of the magistrate or court before whom he may be produced 
or of the Central Government that the requisition or warrant 
for his surrender has, in fact, been made with a view to try or 
punish him for an offence of a political character; 
(b) if prosecution for the offence in respect of whlch his 
. surrender is sought is according to the law of that State or 
country barred by time; 
(c) unless provision is made by the law of the foteignState 
or commonwealth country or in the extradition treaty with the 
foreign State or extradition arrangement with the commonwealth 
country, that the fugitive criminal shall not, until he has been 
resorted or has had an opportunity of returning to India, be 
detained or tried in that State or country for any offence com-
mitted prior to his surrender or return, other than the .extradi-
tion offence proved by the facts on which his surrender or 
return is based; 
(d) if he has been accused of some offence in India, not 
being the offence for which his surrender or return is sought, 
or is undergoing sentence under IBny conviction in India until 

after he has been disch8ll'ged, whether by acquittal or on 
expiration of his sentence or otherwise; 
(e) Ualltil after the expiration of fifteen days from the date 
of hiB being committed to prison by the magistrate. 
CHAPl'ER n 
ExTRADmON OF I'l1GITIVE ClUMINALS TO FOREIGN STATES AND TO 
COMMONWEALTH COUNTBIES TO WHICH CHAI'TZR III DOES NOT 
APPLY 
5 
llequilitlOD 5. A requisition for the surrender of a fugitive erim.inal of a 
for IUl'- foreign. State or a commonwealth country may be made to the Central 10 
reader. Government-
Order for 
maailterial 
inquiry. 
(4) by a diplomatic representative of the foreilll State or 
commonwealth countlry at Delhi; or 
(b) by the Government of that foreign State or common-
wealth country communicating with the Central Government [s 
through its diplomatic representative in that State; 
and if neither of these modes is convenient, the requIsition shall be 
made in such other mode as is settled by arrangement made by the 
Government of the foreign State or commonwealth country with 
the Government of India. 
6. Where such requisition is made, th,e Central Government may, 
if it thinks fit, issue an order to any magistrate who would have had 
jurisdiction to inquire into the offence if it had been an offence 
committed within the local limits of his jurisdiction, directing him 
to inquire into the case. 2S 
7. On receipt of an order of the Central Government under sec-lalUe of warrant for tion 6, the magistrate shv 11 issue a warrant for the arrest of the 
arrat. fugitive criminal. 
Proc:edure 
before 
mqiltrate. 
8. (1) When the fugitive criminal appears or is brought before 
the magistrate, the magistrate shall inquire into the case in the same 30 
manner and· shall have the same jurisdiction and powers, as nearly 
as may be, as if the case were one triable by a court of session or 
High Court. . 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provi-
sions, the magistrate shall, in particular, take such evidence as may 3S 
be produced in support of the requisition of the foreign State or 
commonwealth country and on behalf of the fugitive criminal, 

5 
including any evidence to show that the offenee ot which the 
fugitive criminal is accused or has been convicted is an offence of 
political character or is not -an extradition o1fence. 
(3) If the magistrate is of opinion that a prima facie case is not 
, made out in support of the requisition of the foreign State or Com-
monwealth country, he shall dischBlrge the fugitive criminal. 
(4) If the magistrate is of opinion that a prima facie case i!I 
made out in support of the requisition of the foreign State or com-
monwealth country, he may commit the fugitive criminal to prison 
10 to await the orders of the Central Government, and shall report 
the result of his inquiry to the Central Government; and shall for-
ward together with such report, any written statement which the 
fugitive criminal may desire to submit for the consideration of the 
Central Government. -
15 9. If, upon receipt of the report and statement under sub-section Surrender 
(4) of section 8, the Central Government is of opinion that the fugi- g:{:.,~;:e 
tive criminal ought to be surrendered to the foreign State 0Ir com-
monwealth country, it may issue a warrant for the custody and 
removal of the fugitive criminal and for his delivery at a place to 
20 be named in the w8llTant. 
10. (1) Where it appears to any magistrate that a person within Pow~r of 
the local iimits of his jurisdiction is a fugitive criminal of a foreign :'fs~~~te 
State or commonwealth country, he may, if he thinks fit, issue a warrln~ of 
f h f h h in! . arrest ID 
warrant or t e arrest 0 t at person on sue ormatIon or com- certain 
25 plaint and on such evidence as would, in his opinion, justify the issue cases. 
of a warrant if the offence of which the person is accused or has been 
convicted had been committed within the local limits of his juris-
diction. 
(2) The magistrate shall forthwith report the issue of a warrant 
30 under sub-section (1) to the Central Government and shall far-
ward the information, complaint and the evidence or certified copies 
thereof to that Government. 
(3) A person arrested on a warrant issued under sub-section 
(1) shall not be detained for more than three months unless within 
35 that period the magistrate receives from the Central Government 
an artier made with reference to such person under section 6. 
11. (1) In any proceedings against a fugitive cn. 'minal of a foreign Rvc_ccd ipt in e I ence 
State or commonwealth country under this Chapter, exhibits and of exhibits, 
depositions (whether received or taken in the presence of the per- ~:ti~~~~ 
40 son against whom they are used 0Ir not) and copies thereof and documents 
oftlcial certificates of facts and judicial documents stating facts may, ~ic~t~~hen-
if duly authenticated, be received as evidence. thereof 
.-

I 
(2) Warrants, depoaitioDS or statements on oath, which purport 
to have been issued or taken by any court of justice outside India 
or copies thereof, certificates of, or judicial documents stating the 
facts of, conviction before any such court shall be deemed to be 
duly authenticated if- 5 
(4) the warrant purports to be signed by a judge, magis-
trate or officer of the State Or country where the same was 
issued or acting in or for such State or country; 
(b) the depositions or statements or copies thereof purport 
to be certified, under the hand of a judge, magistrate or ofticer [0 
of the State or country where the same were taken, or acting 
in or for such Stafle or country, to be the origfnal depoeitionl 
or statements or to be true copies thereof, as the case may 
require; 
(c) the certificate of, or judicial document stating the fact IS 
of, a conviction pul'pOl"1S to be certifted by a judge, magi8trate 
01' oftlcer of the State or country where the conviction took: 
place or acting in or for such State; 
(d) . the warrants, depositions, statements, copies, certificates 
and judicial documents, as the case may be, are authenticated .20 
by the oath of some witness or by the oftlcialseal of a minister 
of the State or country where the same were respectiVely issu-
ed, taken or given. 
Cbapte1r not 12. Nothing contained in this Chapter shall apply to fugitive m-to app y to • 
common- mmals of a commonwealth CO\Dltry to which Chapter m applies. 25 
wealth 
countries 
to Which 
Chap,ter 111 
applies. 
CHAPTER TIl 
RETURN OF FUGITIVE CRIMINALS TO COMMONWBM:ftl COtJ'NTlUG W1TII 
EXTRADITION ARRANGEMENTS 
~Plication 13. (1) This Chapter shall apply only to any such commonwealth 
o Chapter. country to which, by reason af an extradition arrangement emerecl 30 
into with that country, it may seem expedient to the Central Gov-
ernment to apply the same. 
(2) Every such application shall be 'by notified order, and the 
CentTal Government may, by the same or any subaequet'lt order, 
direct that this Chapter and Chapters I, IV and V shall, in relaticm 35 
to any such commonwealth eountry, apply subject to such modifl· 
cations, exceptions, coMitions and qualificatiOns as it may think 

At to specify in the ordar f~ the purpocpe of implementing the 
arrangement. 
(3) Every notified order made under this section shall be laid 
before each House of Parliament, as soon as may be, after it is 
S made. ..' 
101. Where a fugitive crimiDal of any commonwealth country to Lia?llity ?f 
which this Chapter applies is found in India, he shall be liable to ~r~~I~e;~ 
be apprehended and returned in the manner provided by this common-
h ,wealth COUD-
Chapter to t at commonwealth country. triee to be 
apprehended 
and 
returned. 
10 15. A fugitive criminal may be apprehended in India under an Endorsed. 
endorsed warrant or a provisional warrant. and provi-sional 
warrants, 
16. Where a warrant has been issued for the apprehension of a Endorsed 
fugitive 'criminal in any commonwealth country to which this warrant for 
Chapter applies and such fugitive criminal is, or is suspected to be, :f~~~ef~gi_ 
IS in India, the Central Government may, if satisfied that the warrant tive crimi-
. was issued by a person having lawful authority to issue the same, nal. 
endorse such warrant in the manner prescribed, and the warrant so 
endorsed shall be sufficient authority to apprehend. the person named 
in the warrant and to bring him before any magistrate in India. 
2(' 17. (1) Any magistrate may issue a provisional warrant for the Provisional 
apprehension of a fugitive criminal from any common wealth coun- warra~t for 
try to which this Chap.tar applies who is, or is suspected to be, in :r!n~{en­
or on his way to India, on swili information and under sueh circum- fu!'it!ve 
st Id 'h' .. . tif th' f t 'f crlm1l1al. ances as wou ,m IS OpInIOn, Jus y e Issue 0 a warran , 1 
2S the offence- of which the fugitive criminal is accused had been 
committed withia his jurisdiction and such warrant maY'be execut-
ed accordingly . . 
(2) A· ~trat~ issuinl a. pro.visiCNllll wurant shaH ferthwith 
aend a report of the issue together with the informa.tion or· a certi-
30 fled copy thereof to the Central Government, aDd· the Centra) Gov-
munent may, if it thinks fit, discharge the penon apprehended 
under such warrant. 
(3) A fugitive criminal apprehended on a provisional. warrant 
may, from time to time, be remanded for such lI'eascmable time, not 
3$ exceeding seven days at anyone time, as UAder the drcumstaD.ces 
seems re~fie for the production of an endorsed warrant. 

De~l~ wit.h 18. If the magistrate, before whom a person. apprehended under 
:r~~,v:'h:- this Chapter is brought, is satisfied that the endorsed warrant for 
apprehend- the apprehension of the fugitive criminal is duly authenticated and 
ed. that the offence of which the person is accused is an extradition 
Rcturn of 
fugitivc 
criminal by 
warrant. 
offence, the magistrate shall commit the fugitive criminal to prison S 
to await his return and shall forthwith send a certificate of the com-
mital and such report of the case as he may think fit, to the Central 
Government. 
19. The Central Government may, at any time after a fugitive 
criminal has been committed to prison under this Chapter, issue 10 
a warrant for the custody and removal to the commonwealth coun-
try concerned of the fugitive criminal and for his delivery at a 
place to be named in the warrant. 
CHAPI'ER IV 
SURRENDER OR RETURN OF ACCUSED OR CONVICTED PERSONS FROM FOREIGN IS 
STATES OR COMMONWEALTH COUNTRIES 
Mode of 20. (1) A requisition far the surrender of a person accused or 
~~,\-~~i':r convicted of an extradition offence committed in India and who is 
warrant or is suspected to be, in any foreign State or a commonwealth coun-
;o:rr~~~t or try to which Chapter III does .not apply, may be· made by the 20 
mum to Central Government-India of 
accused or 
conVicted 
person who 
is in a 
foreign State 
or common-
wealth 
Country. 
(a) to a diplomatic representative of that State or country 
at Delhi; or 
(b) to the Government of that State or country through 
the diplomatic representative of India in that State or cdUntryi 2S 
and if neither of these modes is convenient, the requisition shall 
be made in such other mode as is settled by arrangement made by 
the Government of India with that State or country. 
(2) A walTant issued by a magistrate in India for the apprehen-
sion. of anY,person who is, or is suspected to be, in any common- 30 
wealth country to which Chapter III applies shall be in such form 
as may be prescribed. 
Conveyance Zl. Any person accused or convicted of an extradition offence 
: co~~:~ who is surreJldered or returned by a foreign State or commonwealth 
person country may, under the warrant of arrest for his surrender or 3S 
!~r::::~~t. retum issued in such State or cou~try, be brought into Jndia and 
delivered to the proper authority to be dealt with according to law. 

9 
22. Whenever any perSOll accused or convicted of an offence, Accused or 
which, if committed in India would be an extradition offence, is cunvicted 
d d · person surren ered or returne by a foreIgn State or commonwealth coun- SUITendered 
try, that person shall not, until he has been restored or has had an 0bT r:tu~ed . . y~m~ 
S opportunIty of returnIng to that State or country, be tried in India State ot 
10 
for an offence committed prior to the surrender or return, other ~~on­
than the extradition offence proved by the facts on which the sur· country not 
MIlder or return is based to be tri~d . for prevIous 
offence. 
CHAPTER V 
MISCELLANEOUS 
D. Every fugitive criminal of a foreign State or commonwealth Liability of 
country shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, be liable to be :r:::a. 
arrested and surrendered Or returned, whether the oftence in :res- to be am.t-
pact of which the surrender or return is sought was committed be- ~d-:!l::-
I' fore or after the commencement of this Act, and whether or not a returned. 
court in India has jurisdiction to try that offence. 
24. Where the offence in respect of which the surrender or ra-. Jurisdiction 
tum of a fugitive criminal is sought was committed. on board any a:.. to oucnces 
v~l on the high seas which comes into any port of India, the committ:d 
20 Central Government and any magistrate having jurisdiction in such It s~l. 
port may exercise the powers conferred. by this Act. 
25. If a fugitive criminal who, in pursuance of this Act, has been n i schaqe 
committed to prison to await his return to any foreign State or ofPrecrhllOndi_ .. . arp m~ 
commonwealth country is not conveyed. out of India within three i not w:c-
. 25 months after such committal, the High Court, upon application ~~~~ with-
made to it by or on behalf of. the fugitive criminal and upon proof month •• 
that reasonable notice~f the intention to make such application has 
been given to the Centu1 Government, may order such prisoner to 
'be discharged unless sufficient cause is shown to the contrary. 
SO •. In the case of a person who is a fugitive criminal arrested or Releale or 
detained under this Act, the provisions of the Code of Criminal P~! .,. Il'1'elIt .... em S fIf 1191. Procedure, 1898, rt!latmg to ball shall apply m the same manner as bail. 
they would apply if such persons were accused of committing in 
India the offence of which he is accused. or has been convicte8. 
35 27. A fugitive criminal who is accused or convicted of abetting Abetmen~ 
any extradition offence shall be deemed for the purposes of this Act ~i~~tradl. 
to be accused or convicted of having committed such offen~e and oft"eacel, 
thall ~ liable to be arrested and surrendered accordinlly. 

Lawfulncs, 
or,and 
retaking 
on escape 
from, CUII-
tody under 
warranl~. 
Property 
(GUIld on 
fulitlve 
criminal. 
10 
28. It shall be lawful for any person to whom a warrant is direct-
ed for the apprehension of a fugitive criminal to hold in custody and 
ccnvey the person mentioned in the warrant to . .the place named in 
the warrant, and if such person escapes' out of any custody to' which 
he may be delivered in pursuance of such waITant, he may be re- S 
taken as a person accused of an offence against the law of India 
may be retaken upon an escape. . 
29. Everything found in the possession of a fugitive criminal at 
the time of hIs arrest which may be material as evidence in prov-
ing the extradition offence may be delivered up with the fugitive 10 
criminal on his sU1"render or return, subject to the riibts, if any, 
of third parties with respect thereto. 
~o"er rfGo 30. If it appears to the Central Government that by reason of the 
v::!:ent ~ trivial nature of thf' case or by reason of the application for the 
di~'d surrender or return of a fugitive criminal not being made in good IS 
~rmiDal:ne faith or in the interests of justice or for political reasons ar other-
custocly. wise, it is unj usi or inexpedient to surrender or return the fugitive 
criminal, it may, by order, at any time stay any proceedings under 
this Act and direct any warrant issued or endorsed under this Act 
to be cancelled and the person for whose arrest the warrant has been 20 
issued or endorsed to be discharged. 
Simulta- 31. If requisitions for the surrender of a fugitive criminal are 
~:';!s~i- received from more than one foreign State or a commonwealth coun-
try or from any foreign State and any commonwealth country, the 
Central Government may, having regard to the circumstances of the 2S 
case, surrender the fugitive criminal to such State or country as that 
Government thinks fit. 
Act not to 
affect the 
Foreipers 
Act. 1946. 
Notifi~d 
orders to 
be laid 
before 
Parliament. 
32. Nothing in this Act shall affect the provisions of the Foreigners 
Act, 1946, or any order made thereunder. 
33. Every notified order made under this Act shall, as soon as may 30 
be after it is made, be laid before each House of Parliament. 
Power to ·34. (1) The Central Government may, by notifi<:,ation in the 
make rulcs. Official Gazette; make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. ' 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or 'any of the follow- 3S 
ing matters, namely:- , 
(a) the form in which a requisition for the surrender of a 
fugitive c:-iminal may be madej 
• 

11 
(b) the form in which a warrant for the apprehension of 
any person in a commonwealth country to which Chapter III 
applies may be made; . 
(c) the manner in which any warrant may be endorsed or 
S authenticated under this Act; 
(d) the removal of fugitive criminals accused Of' in custody 
under this Act and their control and maintenance until such 
time as they are handed over to the persons named in the war-
rant as entitled to receive them; 
iO (e) the seizure and disposition of any property which is the 
subject of, or required for proof of, any alleged offence to which 
this Act applies; 
(f) the form and manner in which or the channel through 
which a magistrate may be required to make his report to the 
IS Central Government under this Act; 
(g) any other matter which has to be or may be prescribed. 
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as 
may be after it is made before each House of Parliament while it is 
in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised 
20 in one session or in two successive sessions, and before the expiry of 
the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately follow-
ing, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule, or 
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modifi~d form or be of no effect, 
25 as the case may be, so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that rule. 
IS of 1903. 35. (1) The Indian Extradition Act, 1903, and any law correspond-
ing thereto in force at the commencement of this Act in the territoriel Repeals anJ 
30 which, immediately before the 1st day of November, 1956, were com- 5a"iIll5. 
prised in Part B States and the North East Frontier Agency and 
3 of 1961. Tuensang District (Extradition) Regulation, 1961, are hereby re-
pealed. 
33 and 34 (2) The Extradition Acts, 1870 to 1932 and the Fugitive Offenders 
j6ictin~ N; 35 Act, 1881; in so far as they apply to and operate as part of the law of 
'Wet. c. 60 ; India, are hereby repealed. 
6 Bdw. 7," 
IS; 22 and 
23 Geo .. 5, 
c·39. 
4~ and 45 
Viet. c. 69. 

THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
[See section 2 (a)] 
The following are commonwealth countries: .:: 
1. Commonwealth of Australia. 
2. Canada. 
3. Ceylon. 
4. Cyprus. 
5. Federation of Malaya. 
6. Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland. 
7. Ghana. 
8. New Zealand. 
9. Nigeria. 
10. Pakistan. 
11. Sierra Leone. 
12. Singapore. 
13. United Kingdom. 
12 

THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
, ~. . , 
[See section 2 (c) (ii)] 
Eztrodition olenee. in relation to foreign Sta.tes other than treAty 
StAtes or commonwealth countries to whiSh Chapter III doer not 
5 AWly_ 
The following list of extradition offences is to be construed accord. 
iD, to the law in force in India on the date of the alleged offence. 
Wherever the Dames of the relevant Acts are not given, the SectiODS 
relerred to are the sections of the Indian Code, (45 of 1860) :-
&0 1. Culpable homicide (sections 299 to 304). 
2. Attempt to murder (section 307). 
3. Causing miscaniage and abandonment of child (sections 312 
to 317). 
~. Kidnapping, abduction, slavery and forced labour (sections 
IS 360 to 374). 
5. Rape and unnatural offences (sections 375 to 377). 
6. Theft, extortion, robbery and dacoity (sections 378 to 402). 
7. Criminal misappropriation and criminal breach of trust 
(sections 403 to 414). 
to 8. Cheating (~ections 415 to 420). 
. ". 
9. Mischief (sections 425 to 440) . 
10. Forgery, using forged documents and other offences relat-
~ng to false documents (sec-tions 463 to 477A). 
11. Offences relating to coins and stamps (sections 230 to 
263A). 
12. Pirac:y by law of nations committed on board of or against 
a vessel of a foreign State. . 
13. Sinking or destroying a vessel at sea or attempting or 
conspiring to do so. 
30 14. Assault on board a vessel on the high seas with intent to 
destroy life or to do grievous bodily harm. 
13 • 

T4 
15. Revolt or conspiracy to revolt by two or more persons on 
board a vessel on the high seas against the authority of the 
master. I"~ ".. . 
16. Smuggling of gold, gold manufactures, diamonds and other" 
precious stones or of any narcotic substance (section 167, ~ 
entry 8 in column 2 of Schedule, Sea Customs Act, 1878 (8 
of 1818). . .. , ~ , , 
" ." 
17. Immoral traffic in women and girls (sections 4, 5, 6 and 8 of 
the Suppression of Immoral Trafftc in Women and Girls 
Act, 1956 (104 of 1956) . ! .>. I. 
18. Any offence against any other section of the Indian Penal" 
. Code or against. any otller law which Inay; from tf~&. (~ 
time, be specified by the Central Government by notiftca.;. 
tion in the Oflicial Gazette either generally for all States , 
or specially for one or more States. " . IS 

'tHE THIRD SCHEDULlt 
[See section 2 (c) (iH)] . 
EXTRADITION OFFENCES IN RELATION TO COMMONWEALTH COUNTRIES TO 
waICH CHAPTER III APPLIES. 
S The following, iist of extr~dition offences is to be construed accord-
ing to the law in force in India' on the date of ~he alleg~ oftence:-
Ie 
1. Piracy. 
2. Treason. 
3. Smuggling of gold, gold manufactures, diamonds and other 
precious stones or of any narcotic substance [Section 167, 
entry 8 in (''llumn 2 of Schedule, Sea Customs Act, 1878 (8 
of 1878) J. 
4. Immoral traffic in women and girls [sections 4, 5, 6 and 0 of 
the Supressioll of Immoral Traffic in Women and Girls Act, 
1956 (104 of 1956)]. 
5. Any offence which, if committed in In'di:1, would be punish-
able under any section of the Indian Penal Code with 
rigorous imprisonment for a term of twelve months or 
more or with death. 
6. Any offence against any other section of the Indian Penal 
Code or against any other law which may, from time to 
time, be specified by the Central Government by notifica-
tion in the Official Gazette either generally for all States or 
specially for one or more States. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASoNs . 
At present, the law of extradition applicable to India il to be found 
scattered in the United Kingdom Extradition Acts, 1870 to 1932. the 
Fugitive Offenders Act, 1881, and the Indian Extraditiort Act, 1903. 
The United Kingdom Extradition Act, 1870, in its application to India, 
authorised the extradition of fugitive offenders between India and 
'foreign State5', a term which meant States to which that Act was 
made applicable by Her Britannic Majesty's Order in Council. The 
Fugitive Offenders Act, 1881, on the other hand, provided a method 
whereby extradition of fugitive offenders could be effected between 
the British dominions and possessions by a simplified form of proce-
dure. The Indian Extradition Act, 1903, modified and supplemented 
the other laws by-
(a) prescribing the procedure for the surrender of fUlitive 
criminals in the case of 'foreign States'; 
I 
(b) providing a special machinery for the au.rrender of fuli-
tive criminals in case of States other than 'foreign States'i and 
(c) specifying the officers in India who may exercise the 
powers conferred by the Fugitive Offenders Act, 1881. 
2. The Indian Extradition Act, 1903, was not extended to Part B 
States in 1951 when the Part B States (Laws) Act, 1951, was enacted 
as it was felt even then that this should be done by a separate law, 
after a proper examination of the position. The result is that the legal 
position relating to the surrender of "fugitive criminals to 'foreign 
States' and commonwealth countries under the existing law from the 
erstwhile Part B States is somewhat doubtful. Further, the Supreme 
Court, in its judgment in the State of Madras vs. C.G. Menon report-
ed in (1955) Supreme Court Reporter 280, has held that after India 
became a RepUblic, the Fugitive Offenders Act, 1881 has ceased to 
apply to India. Moreover, the present law relating to extrad:l.tion 
contains certain lacunae on questions such as concurrent requests for 
the surrender of a fugitive criminal from more than one State. 
3. The purpose of this Bill is to remove all such anomalles and 
fill in the lacunae th.at exist at present in the law relating to extra-
dition and enact a consolidated and amended law for the extradition 
of fugitive criminals to all foreign States and commonwealth coun-
tries. 
4. The Notes on Clauses explain in detail the VariOUI prOvisions of 
the Bill. 
NKW DilLIn: JAWAHARLAL NEHRU, 
The 3rc! August, 1961. 
16 

Clause 2.-Sub-clause (a) .-Definition of commonwealth countrY 
is more or less on the same lines as in the Citizenship Act, 1955. A 
few more countries which have gained independence have been 
added in the Fint Schedule. 
Sub-clauBe (b) --Certain foreign laws like the French provide 
for the condemnation of an accused person par contumace but such 
condemnation is annulled if the accused person appears before the 
court, when his trial begins afresh. Such a person is correctly 
described as an accused person and not as a convicted person for 
the purposes of the extradition law. Sub-clause (a) of this clause 
is intended ~G ~larify this position and follows similar definitions in 
the United Kingdom and Canadian Acts. 
Sub-cZause (c) .-The expression "extradition offence" is so 
defined as to mean, in relation to a foreign State being a treaty 
State any offence specified in the treaty with that State, in relation 
to a foreign State other than a treaty State or in relation to a com· 
monwealth country to which Chapter III does not apply, an offence 
specified in the Second Schedule, and in relation to a commonwealth 
country to which Chapter III applies, an offence specified in the 
Third Schedule. 
Sub-clause (d) .-The definition of "extradition treaty" covers 
even pre-Independence treaties. 
Clause 3.~This clause covers all States outside India including 
commonwealth countries to which Chapter III does not apply. The 
Act can become operative in relation tc such States only on the issue 
of a notified order. Provision has been made in the clause where-
by it may be possible to make this Act effective only in relation to 
certain parts of India. In regard to a treaty State, power has also 
been taken to render the application of the Act subject to such modi-
fications, exceptions, conditions and qualifications as may be deemed 
ex,pedient for implementing the treaty with that State. 
Clause 4.-This clause contains the usual restrictions on sur-
render. The period of fifteen days specified in sub-clause (c) of 
this clause would enable a fugitive criminal to move the appropriate 
court for his release by filing a writ petition of habeas corpus . . 
Clause S.-This clause prescribes the channel through which a 
requisition for the surrender of a fugitive criminal of a foreign 
• 

1S 
State or a commonwealth country may be made to the Central 
Government. 
Clause 6.-This clause empower. the Central Government to issue 
an order to a magistrate having jurisdiction to enquire into the 
offence in respect of which requisition has been received under 
clause 5. This clause follows sub-section (1) of section 3 of the 
Extradition Act, 1903. 
Clauses 7 and 8.-These clauses prescribe the procedure to be 
followed by a magistrate when order is received by him under clause 
6. These clauses more or less are based on sub-secticma. (2)., (3), 
(4) and (6) of section 3 of tlhe Indian Extradition Act, 190& 
Clause 9.-This clause is based on sub-section (8) of section 3 
of the Indian Extradition Act, 1903. 
Clause 10.-This clause more or less reproduces section 4 of the 
Indian Extradition Act. 1903. 
Clause H.-This clause reproduces section 17 of the Indian Ex-
tradition Act, 1903. 
Clause 12.-This clause makes it clear that Chapter II will not 
apply in respect of fugitive criminals o! a commonwealth country to 
which Chapter III applies. 
Clause 13.-This clause makes it clear that Chapter III will 
apply only to such of the commonwealth countries as have en-
tered into extradition arrangements with the Central Government. 
Sub-clause (2) of this clause further provides that every such appU-
cation shall be by notified order. The Central Government 11 
further empowered to apply the provisions of Chapter III and other 
Chapters in relation to any such commonwealth country subject to 
such modifications, exceptions, conditions and qualifications as It 
may think fit to specify for the purposes of implementing the 
arrangement. 
Clause 14.-This clause makes it clear that a fugitive criminal 
of a commonwealth country to which Chapter III is made applicable 
shall be liable to be apprehended and returned in the manner pro-
vided in the said Chapter. 
Clauae 16.-This clause follows section 13 of the Fugitive Offen-
ders Act, 1881. '" ': 
ClaUle 17.-Sub-clause (1) of this clause follpws section 18 of 
the Fugitive Offenders Act, 1881. Sub-clause (2) requires a magis-
trate issuing a provisional warrant under sub-clause (1) to report 
the issue of such warrant to the Central Government. 

• 
18 
Clauses 18 and 19.-Clause 18 reproduces to a certain el\.tent the 
provisions of section 14 of the Fugitive Offenders Act, 1881 but clause 
19 makes it clear that the power of returning the fugitive crimi-
nal to the commonwealth country concerned will lie with the Cen-
tral Government. 
Cl4U1e 20.-ThiEI clause prescri'bes the channel for requisition for 
the surrender of a person accused or convicted of an extradition 
offence committed in India and who is or is suspected to be in any 
foreign State or a commonwealth country to which Chapter III 
does not apply. 
Clause 22.-This clause is based on section 19 of the United 
Kingdom Extradition Act. 1870. 
Clause 23.-This clau.e states the liability of a fugitive criminal 
In express terms even with regard to offences committed before the 
commencement of the Act. The clause corresponds to a certain 
extent section 16 of the Indian Extradition Act, 1903. 
Clause 24.-This clause follows section 20 of the Indian Extradi-
tion Act, 1903. " 
Clause 25.-This clause is self-explanatory. 
Clause 26.-This clause follows sub-section (4) of section 10 of 
the Indian Extradition Act, 1903. 
C'l4use 27.-This clause follows section 13 of the Indian Extra-
dition Act, 1903. 
Clause 28.-This clause follows section 3 (9) and section 14 of the 
Indian Extradition Act, 1903. 
ClaUBe aO.-This clause follows section 10 of the Fugitive Often-
ders Act, 1881 with this difference that power under that section is 
exercisable by a court whereas the power under this clause is exer-
cisable by the Central Government. 
Clause 31.-This clause makes a provision to meet a contingency 
when the surrender of a fugitive criminal has been requested by 
more than one State simultaneously. The clause is based mainly on 
the fact that there are quite a number of offences which consist 
of a series of penal transactions each one of which may be com-
pleted or originated in one or more States separately. Under this 
clause the Central Government would decide to which State or 
country a fugitive criminal may be surrendered after taking into 
consideration all the circumstances of the case, namely, the res-
pective dates on which the requisitions were received, the relative 
gravity of the offences alleged and the like. 
Clauses 32' aM 33.-The clauses are self-explanatory . • 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Proceedings for extradition of fugitive criminals to foreign States 
and commonwealth countries under the Bill would involve arrest of 
the .fugitive criminal, an enquiry by a Magistrate and in some cases 
the removal of the fugitive criminal and his delivery to the foreign 
State or commonwealth country. Such proceedings will also involve 
the detention of the fugitive criminal in police/jail custody, and the 
State shall have to involve expenditure during such detention/cus-
tody. In so far as the Union territories are concerned, such expendi-
ture will be met from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is not 
possible to estimate the amount of expenditure from the Consolidat-
ed Fund of India as that amount will depend on the number of re-
quests for' extradition that may be received in any given period. 
'j 
l' 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 34 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules by notification in the Official Gazette to carry out the purposes 
of the Act. The matters in respect of which such rules, may be 
made are specified therein. 
2. Most of those matters are of a routine character. They inteT 
alia relate to the form in which a requisition for the surrender of 
a fugitive criminal may be made, the form in 'which a warrant for 
the apprehension of any person in a commonwealth country to which 
Chapter III applies may be made, the manner in which any warrant 
may be endorsed or authenticated, the seizure and disposition of any 
property which is the subject of any extradition offence, and the 
form and manner in which or the channel through which a magis-
trate may be required to make his report to the Central Government. 
3. Under clause 3 (1), power is conferred on the Central Govern-
ment to apply by notified order the provisions of the Act (otl:ler 
than Chapter III), to such foreign State or to such commonwealth 
country to which the provisions of Chapter III do not apply, as may 
be specified in that order. Under clause 3 (2), however, power is 
reserved to the Central Government to restrict such application to 
fugitive criminals found in such part of India as may be specified 
in the order. As reg,ards a treaty State, the Central Government 
has been empowered to make the application of the Act §Ubject 
to such modifications and exceptions as may be deemed expedient 
for implementing the trp.aty with that State. The question to which 
countries or States the Act should be made applicable is a little 
diftlcult and complicated one. Recioprocity and other considera-
tions such as terms of a treaty may have to be weighed. It is not 
possible to specify all such considerations in the Act. The Central 
Government has therefore been vested with the necessary power in 
this regard. . 
4. Under clause 13, power has been reserved to the CentT~'" 
Government to apply by notified order the provisions of Chaptt'T TTl 
to such commonwealth countries as may enter into extradition 
arrangement with the Government of India. Power is also reserved 
to the Central Government to make the application of ChaptE"T TTl 
and of Chapters I. IV Rnd V suhject to such modifications, pxceptions, 
conditions and q'ualifications as may be specified in the order fOT t.hp 
purpose of implementing the arrangement. It is not pofI5iblr.o tl) 
21 

Z2 
vil,ualise at this stage what sort of extradition arrangement will 
be entered into by different commonwealth countries and conse-
quently it is difficult to specify in the· Act the modifications, ex-
ceptions, conditions and qualifications subject to which the Act may 
be made applieaible. 
5. Having regard to the circumstances under which powers unat!r 
clauses 3 and 13 will be exercised by the Central Government, the 
powers delegated to it are of a nonnal character, 

" ' 
LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
10 consolidate and amend the law relati ng to the extradition 
of fugitive criminals. 
(Shri Jawaharlal Nehru, Minister of External Affairs.) 