As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
.~, .. :r>! ~~ 'as "IJj . 
THE MERCHANT SHIPPI~'G (AMEND~ENT) 'lnL~,l979 
BILL 
further to amend the MeTchant Shipping Act, 1958. 
BE it 'enacted by Parliament in the Thirtieth Year of the Republic of 
xndia as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Short 
Act, 1979. title. 
44 of 1958. S 2. In section 21 of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 (hereinafter re- Amend-
ment of 
section 21. 
10 
2 of 1912. IS 
ferred to as the principal Act),-
(i) in the opening portion, for the word "either", the word "any" 
shall be substituted; 
(ii) in clause (b). the word "or" shall be added at the end; 
(iii) after clause (0), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:--
"(c) a co-operative society which satisfies the following 
requirements, namely:-
(i) the co-operative society is registered or deemed to be 
registered under the Co.operative Societies Act, 1912, or any 
other law relating to co-operative societies for the time being 
in force in any State; 
(ii) every individual who is a member of the c~perative 
society and where any other co.operative SOciety is a member 

Amend-
mento! 
eec:tion 211. 
Amend-
mento! 
section 26. 
Amend-
ment of 
Mdion 29. 
Amend-
mentof 
.ection45. 
Amend. 
mentor 
..etlon 
441. 
2 
thereof, every individual who is a member of such other co-
operative society, is a citizen of India .... 
3. In clause (e) of section 25 of the principal Act, after the words "a 
company". the words "or a co-operative society" shall be inserted. 
4. In section 26 of the principal Act, after the words"a company" 5 
at both the places where they occur, the words "or a co-operative society" 
shall be inserted. 
5. In section 29 of the principal Act,-
(i) in the opening ·portion, after the words "a company", the 
words "or a co.operative society" shall be inserted; 10 
(ii) in clause (a), for the words, brackets, letter and figures "or 
in the case of a company, whether the company satisfies the require-
ments specified in clause (b) of section 21", the words, brackets, letters 
and figures "or in the case of a company Or a co.operative society, 
whether the company or the co-operative society satisfies the require. IS 
ments specified in clause (b) or, as the case may be, clause (c) of 
section 21" shall be substituted; 
(iii) in clause (d), after the words "the company", the words "or 
the co.operative society" shall be inserted. 
~ In sub-section (2) of section 45 of the principal Act, for the words, 20 
brackets, letter and figures "or any company Which satisfies the require· 
ments specified in clause (b) of section 21", the words, brackets, letters 
and figures "or any company or any co-operative society which satisfies 
the requirements specified in clause (b) or, as the case may be, clause 
(c) of section 21" shall be substituted. 25 
7. In section 441 of the principal Act, in clause (a) of the E.rpZana.tion, 
for the words' "company" includes a firm', the words, brackets, letter and 
figures • "company" includes a co-operative SOCiety, a firm' shall be 
substituted. 

WK SABHA 
CO RRI GEl-mUM 
to 
THE l1ERCH.A}J"'r SHIPPING (~4MENDiviK.'!T) BILL, 1979 
(10 be/As introduced in Lok Sabha) 
1. Page 2, line'3 27 a'1d 28,-
omit ", bracket.s, letter and figures" 
NEW DELHI; 
Narch~-.1~9'-179:...&· :.........."._..--_ ..... 
Phalguna 28: 1900 ( Saka) 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The provisions of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958, do not permit the 
acquisition of an Indian ship by a co-operative society. In the interests 
of co_operative movement, particularly in the backward areas, Govern-
ment feel that any legal impediment in the way of co-operative efforts 
should be removed. This would also help co-operative societies, parti-
eularly in remote areas far away from mainland, to establish a supply, 
marketing and distributing system without depending on any commercial 
shipping line. 
The Bill seeks to achieve the above object. 
Nv:w DELHI; 
The 19th February. 1979. CHAND RAM. 

Indian 
ships. 
Reeister 
book. 
Applica-
tion tor 
reii.try. 
Declara-
tion of 
owner-
ahipon 
registry. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THB MERCHANT SKlPPING ACT, 19S8 
(44 OF 1958) 
• • • • 
11. For the purposes of this Act. a ship shall not be deemed to be ~n 
Indian ship unless oWned Wholly by persons to each of whom either ot 
the following descriptions applies:-
(a) a citizen of India; or 
(b) a company which satisfies the following requirements, 
namely:-
• • • • • 
(v) the managing agents, if any, of the company are citizens 
of India or in any case where a company is the managing agent, 
the company satisfies the rl'quirements specified in sub-clauses 
(i), (ii) , (iii) and (iv). 
• • • • 
25. Every registrar shall keep a book to be called the register book 
and entries in that book shall be made in accordance with the following 
provisions: -
• • • • 
(e) a company may be registered as owner by its name. 
26. An appUcation for the registry of an Indian ship shall be made-
(4) in the case of an individual, by the person requiring to be 
registered as owner or by his agent; 
(b) in the case of more than one individual requirmg to be 80 
registered, by some one or more of the persons SO requiring or by 
his or their agent; and 
(c) in the case of a company requiring to be so registered, by 
its agent; 
and the authority of the agent sha:l be testified by writing, if appoionted 
by an individual, under the hand of the person appointing him and, if 
appointed by a company, under its common seal. 
• • • • • 
29. A person shall not be registered as the owner of an Indian ship or 
of a share therein until he or, in the case of a company, the person autho-
rised by this Act to make declarations on its behalf has made and signed 
a declaration of ownership in the prescribed form referring to the ship as 
described in the certificate Of the surveyor and containing the following 
particulars: -
(a) a statement whether he is or is not. a citizen of India; or in 
4 

5 
the case of a company, whethel' the company satisfies the requIre-
ments specifled in clause (b) of section 21; 
• • ... ... • 
(d) the number of shares in the ship in respect of which he 
or the company, as the case may be, claims to be registered as 
owner; and 
• ... ... ... ... 
45. (1) ... ... ... ... 
(2) On receipt of such report, the Central Government may make an 
application to the H~gh Court for a direction fo:- the sale to any citizen 
of India or any company which satisfies the requirements specified in 
clause (b) of section 21 of the property so transmitted. 
• ... • ... 
441. (1) If the person committing an offence under this Act is a com-
pany, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in 
charge of. and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the 
business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be 
guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall render any such person 
liable to any punishment. provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence 
was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due dili. 
gence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an 
oftence under this Act has been committed by a company, and it is proved 
that the oftence was committed with the consent or connivance of, or is 
attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secre-
tary or other officer Of the company, such director, manager, secretary or 
other officer shall also be deemed to be gull ty of that oftence and shall be 
liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
Explanation~-For the purposes of this section,--
(a) "company" includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) "director" in relation tq a firm means a partner in the finn . 
... ... • • • 
Otderfor 
sale where 
ship has 
ceased to 
be an 
Indian 
ship . 
Offences 
by com_ 
panies. 

LOK SABHA 
It. 
BILL 
further to amend the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958. 
(Shri Clumd Ram, 
Minister of State in chArge 
of the MtniBtry of Shipping 
and TrAnsport.) 