8m No. 39 'of 19S. 
THE INDIAN INCOME·TAX (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, I954 
(As INTRODUCED IN THE LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Indian Income·tax Act, 1922; to provide for 
the assessment or reassessment of persons who have to a sub-
stantial extent evaded payment of taxes during a certain period 
and for matters connected therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifth Year of the Republic 
.of India as fo~ows:-
1. Short title and eommencement.-( 1) This Act may be called 
the Indian Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1954. 
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 17th day . S 
of July, 1954. 
2. Amendment of section 34, Act XI of 1922.-In section 34 of 
the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922 (hereinafter referred to as the 
principal Act), after sub-section (1), the following sub-sections shall 
be inserted, namely: _ 10 
"(lA) If, in the case of any assessee, the Income-tax Officer 
has reason to believe-
(i) that income, profits or gains chargeable to income-
tax have escaped assessment for any year in respect of 
which the relevant previous year falls wholly or partly I' 
within the period beginning on the 1st day of September, 
1939, and ending on the 31st day of March, 1946; and 
(ii) that the income, profits or gains which have so 
escaped assessment for any such year or years amount, or 
are likely to amount, to one lakh of rupees or more; 20 

,/ 
10 
15 
20 
30 
35 
40 
2 
he may, notwithstanding that the period of eight years or, as 
~e ca~e may be, four years specified in sub-section (1) has ex-
pIred m respect thereof, serve on the assessee, or, if the asses-
see is a company, on the principal officer thereof, a notice con-
taining all or any of the requirements which may be included 
in a notice under sub-section (2) of section 22, and may pro-
ceed to assess or reassess the income, profits or gains of the 
assessee for all or any of the years referred to in clause (i), and 
thereupon the provisions of this Act [excepting those contain-
ed in clauses (i) and (iii) of the proviso to sub-section (1) and in 
sub-sections (2) and (3) of this section] shall, so far as may be, 
apply accordingly: 
Provided that the Income-tax Officer shall not issue a notice 
under this sub-section unless he has recorded his reasons for 
doing so, and the Central Board of Revenue is satisfied on such 
reasons recorded that it is a fit case for the issue of such notice: 
Provided further that no such notice shall be issued after 
the 31st day of March, 1956. 
(1B) Where any assessee to whom a notice has been issued 
under sub-section (1A) applies to the Central Board of Revenue 
at any time within six months from the receipt of such notice 
or before the assessment or reassessment is made, whichever is 
earlier, to have the matters relating to his assessment settled, 
the Central Board of Revenue may, after considering the terms 
of settlement proposed and subject to the previous approval of 
the Central Government, accept the terms of such settlement, 
and, if it does so, shall make an order in accordance with the 
terms of such settlement specifying among other things the 
sum of money payable by the assessee. 
(le) Any sum specified in a settlement arriwd at in pursu-
ance of sub-section (IB) may be recovered and any penalty for 
default in making payment of any such sum may be imposed 
and recovered in the manner provided in Chapter VI. 
(1D) Any settlement arrived at under this section shall be' 
conclusive as to the matters stated therein; and no person, whose 
afJsessments have been 89 settled, shall be entitled to reopen in 
any proceeding for the recovery of any sum under this Act or 
in any subsequent assessment or reassessment proceeding relat-
ing to any tax chargeable under this Act or in any other pro-
ceeding whatsoever before any court or other authority any 
matter which forms part of such settlement." 
3. Amendm .. ~ of .. dOD 35, Act XI of 18Z2.-In section 35 of the 
principal Act, after sub-section (7), the following sub-section shall 
be inserted, namely: - : 
"(8) Where as a result of proceedings initiated under sub-
4S section (IA) of section 34-
(a) a firm or an association of persons is assessed or re-
assessed, 01' 

3 
(b) a company is assessed or reassessed and in respect 
thereof an order under section 23A is subsequently made; 
and the Income-tax Officer concerned is of opinion that it is 
necessary to compute or recompute the total· income of a part. 
ner in the firm or a member of the association of persons or a 5 
shareholder in the company, as the case may be, but such com-
putation or recomputation cannot be made by reason of the 
time-limit specified in sUb-section (1) of section 34 having ex-
pired, the Income-tax Officer may, notwithstanding the expiry 
of the time-limit aforesaid, on his own motion and after giving 10 
notice to the assessee of his intention so to do, and after giving 
him a reasonable opportunity of being heard, proceed to compute 
or recompute the total income as if the computation or recom-
putation is a rectification of a mistake apparent from the record 
within the meaning of this section; and the provisions of sub- 15 
section (1) shall apply accordingly, the period of four years spe-
cified in sub-section (1) being computed from the date of the 
final order passed in the case of the firm, association or com-
pany, as the case may be." 
... Repeal of Ordinance 8 of 1954.-The Indian Income-tax (Am- 20 
endment) Ordinance, 1954 (8 of 1954), is hereby repealed. 

4 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The object of the Bill is to enable investigations to be ma,de into 
certain cases of tax evasion during war-time. A number of such 
cases has been referred to the Income-tax Investig,tion Commission 
under section 5(1) of the Commission Act. A number of other cases 
was subsequently referred to the Commission under section 5(4) of 
that Act. As the Supreme Court has held the latter provision to be 
invalid, an Ordinance had to be promulgated to amend the Indian 
Income-tax Act so as to provide for the application of thE' normal 
machinery to such cases. In order that there may be no harassment 
to small assessees the Ordinance provides that the a~endment now 
made to the Income-tax Act shall have effect only in those cases 
where the evasion exceeds one lakh of rupees and the previous ap-
proval of the Central Board of Revenue has 1)een obtained for the 
initiation of proceedings in such cases. The present Bill seeks to 
replace the Ordinance. . 
2. The Bill also provides a machinery for the settlement of such 
cases as does the Commission Act. It also makes a consequential 
amendment in section 35 of the principa1 Act. 
C. D. DESHMUKH. 
NEW DELm; 
The 30th August, 1954. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
Bn.L 
funher to amend (he Indian Income-tax Act, 1922 to provide 
for the assessment or reassessment of persons who have to 
a substantial extent evaded payment of taxes during a cer~ 
tain period and for matters connected therewith • 
. The President has, in ~ursuance of clauses (I) and (3) of 
article I I 7 and clause (I) of article 274 of the Constitution of 
India, recommended to the Lok Sabb& the introduction and 
consideration of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
SICr,tary 
(Shri C. D. Deshmukh, 
MinUter of Finatll») 