BIU· No. 39 or 12$7 
THE COTTON FABRICS (ADDITIONAL 
EXCISE DUTY) BILL, 1957 
(As INTRODUCED. IN LOK SABHA) 

Z ofzH4-
BUI No. 39 of 1957 
THE COTTON F~BRICS (ADDITIONAL EXCISE DUTY), 
BILL,1957 
(As INTRODUCED IN Lox SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the levy and collection in certain circumstances of an 
additi01l4l duty of excise on cotton fabrics issued out Of mills. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Cotton 
Excise Duty) Act, 1957. 
5 (2) It extends to the" whole of India. 
Fabrics (Additional Short title~ 
enent 10\\ 
c:ommence-
ment. 
10 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In this Aet,-
(a) "cotton fabrics" has the meaning assigned to it in the 
First Schedule to the Central Excises "and Salt Act, 1944; 
(b) Uexport" means taking out of India by sea, land or air; 
(c) Uexport quota" means the export quota referred to in 
section 3; I I 
(d) UmUl" means any building or place In which cotton 
yarn is spun and cotton fabrics are manufaetured by machinery 
I, moved otherwise than by manual labour, and includes" every 
part of such buUding or place; 
Deb itloal. 

(i) with reference to any' mill or group of mills the 
possession of which has been transferred by lease, mortgage 
or othet'Wise, means the transferee so long as his right to 
possession subsists; and S 
(ii) with reference to any mill OJ' group of mills for 
which an agent is employed, means the agent if, and in so far 
as, he has been duly authorised by the owner in that behalf; 
(f) "year" means the year beginning on the 1st day of April. 
3. (1) The export quota in respect of all cotton fabrics manu- 10 
faetured by any mill, or by any group of mills under a common 
owner, for any year shall be such quantity as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, fix, and in fixing 
any such export quota the Central Government shall have regard 
to- IS 
(a) the quantity of cotton fabrics exported by such mill or 
group of mills during the relevant period; 
(b) the additional quantity of cotton fabrics that such mill 
or group of mills may normally be expected to produce on the 
new looms installed therein· after the 1st day of April, 1957,20 
in pursuance of any licence or permission granted under the 
Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951; and 65 or 1951 
(c) where the quota is to be fixed for any year subsequent 
to the quota first fixed for any mill or group of mills, the actqal 
quantity of cotton fabrics produced in that mill or group of 2S 
mills during any previous year for which an export quota has 
been fixed. 
(2) The owner of any mill or group of mills shall, within such 
time as the Central Government may fix in this behalf, intimate to 
the Central Government the relevant period chosen by him for the 30 
purpose of his mill or group of mills, and such relevant period shall 
be any such year, out of the three years commencing on the 1st day 
of April, 1953, and ending with the 31st day of March, 1956, as he 
may choose for the purpose: 
Provided that if within the time' fixed in this behalf no such 35 
intimation is received from any such owner, the relevant period 
shall be .such as the Central Government may fix in this behalf 
having regard to the cotton fabrics exported by that mill or group 
of mills during the said period of three years. 

3 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2) ,-
(i) where in the case of any mill or group of mills the 
relevant period cannot be chosen or fixed by reason of the fact 
that it came into existence or commenced working only during 
S or after the expiry of the three years referred to in sub. 
section (2), or 
(ii) where'the mill or group of mills, during the said period 
of three years, has not issued cotton fabrics for export, or 
(iii) where any mill out of a group of mills has been 
10 transferred during any year and by reason .of 'such transfer it is . 
necessary to fix the export quota for the mill so transferred, 
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
fix the export quota in respect of the mill or group of mills, as the 
case may be, to be such quantity as in its opinion is reasonable, 
IS having regard to the capacity of the mill or group of mills, the export 
quota fixed for mills of a similar description and to the other 
circumstances of the case. 
(4) The export quota fixed for any mill or group of mUls 'for any 
year may be revised at any time during that year if the Central 
20 Government is of opinion that due. to increased production, or to 
unforeseen causes adversely affecting production or for any other 
reason it is necessary to increase or diminish the export quota for 
that year. I .-~"", ........ 
4. (1) Where the quantity of cotton fabrics exported by any Levy of 
25 mill or group of mills in any year (whether the cotton fabrics were ~~l!~"~ty 
manufactured during that year or at any time previous thereto) ~nbc?tt,)n .a flCS. 
fa\1s short of the export quota for that year by any quantity (herein-
after :referred to as the said quantity), there shall be levied and 
collected on so much of the cotton fabrics issued by the said mill or 
30 group of mills during that year for consumption in India as is equal 
to the said quantity a duty of excise at the rates applicable thereto 
as specified in the Schedule. . 
(2) The duty of excise referred to in sub-section (1) shall be 
in addition to the duty of excise chargeable on cotton fabrics under 
3S any other law for the time being in force and shall be paid by the 
owner of the mill or group of mills concerned to such authority 
as may be specified in the notice demanding payment of the duty 
and within such period, not exceeding ninety days, as may be 
specified in such notice. 
40 (3) If any such owner does not pay the whole or any part of the 
duty payable by him within the period referred to in sub-section (2) J 

Delegation 
ofpowen. 
Power to 
make rules. 
4 
he shall be liable to pay in respect of every period of thirty days or 
part thereof during which the default continues a penalty which 
may extend to ten per cent. of the duty outstanding from time to 
time, the penalty being adjudged in the same manner as the 
penalty to which a person is liable under the rules made under the 5 
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944, is adjudged. 1 of 1944-
(4) The provisions of the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944, and I of 1944-
the rules made thereunder, including those relating to refunds and 
exemptions from duty, shaH, so far as may be, apply in relation to 
the levy and collection of the duty of excise or any other sum 10 
referred to in this section as they apply in relation to the levy and 
collection of the duty on cotton fabrics or other sums of money 
payable to the Central Government under that Act or the rules 
made thereunder. 
5. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official IS 
Gazette, direct that any power conferred on it by this Ac~ shall, 
subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the directiop, 
be exercisable also -by such officer or authority subordinate to the 
Central Government as may be specified in the direction. 
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Ofticlal 20 
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act, 
including, in particular, the submission by mills to such authority 
as may be specified in this behalf of returns or other information 
relating to the. manufacture or issue of cotton fabrics. 
(2) All rules made under this section shall be laid for not less 25 
than thirty days before each House of parliament as soon as ~y be 
after they are made, and shall be subject to such modifications as 
Par.liament may make during the session in which they are so laid 
or thp. se5sion immediately following. : 

'fm!. ScHEb~ 
[See IeCtion 4 (1) ] 
The duty leviable under section 4 shall be-
Rate 01 duty 
S (a) where the said quantity does not 
exceed S per cent. of the export quota . Six naye paise per' square 
yard. 
(6) where the 'said quantity exceeds 
S per cent. of the export quota but does 
10 not exceed 10 per cent. thereof : 
IS 
(,) on the quantity which does 
not exceed S per cent. of the export 
quota • • Six naye paiH per square 
yard. 
(i,) on the balance • . Nine na..Y4 pai$e per square 
yard. 
(c) where the said quantity exceeds 10 
per cent. of the export quota : 
(,) on the quantity which does 
20 not exceed S per cent. of the export 
quota • Six naye paise per square 
(i,) on the quantity which ex-
~ds S per cent. of the export quota 
as but does not exceed 10 per cent. 
yard. 
thereof • • Nine naye pais, per square 
(ii,) on the balance 
yard. 
• Twelve naye paise per square 
yard. 

§TATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
There has been a decline in the export of cloth from India over 
the last two years due largely to the increase in the internal demand 
and the high prices which are being realised for cloth in the home 
,market. Increase in production has not kept pace with the increase 
in demand. It has been decided, therefore, to allow the mill sector 
to increase their production by another 350 million yards but at the 
same time, it is necessary to ensure that the maximum possible 
quantity of this increased production would go out for export. It 
is proposed, therefore, to fix export quotas in respect of those mills 
which would be permitted to install additional looms, and to levy 
an extra excise duty by way of penalty on cloth which is diverted 
into the internal market from this export quota. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 12th June, 1957. N. KANUNGO. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 6 of the Cotton Fabrics (Additional Excise Duty) Bill. 
1957, empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of the Bill, when enacted, including, in particular, 
for the submission by mills to such authority as may be specified in 
this behalf, of returns or other information relating to the manufac-
ture or issue of cotton fabrics. The collection of duty, however, will 
be governed by the provisions of the' Central Excises and Salt Act, 
1944, and the rules thereunder [see clause 4 (4)]. 
2. The delegation of power made to the Central Government 
is of the normal type, being relataBle to matters of procedure only. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the levy and collection in certain circum-
stance~ of an additional duty of excise on cotton fab-
rics issued out of mills. 
The President has, in pursuance of clauses (I) ar..d (3) 
of article 117 of. the Constitution of India, recom-
mended to Lok Sabha, the introduction and considera-
tion of the Bill. 
GlpD-LS-1-476 L8-J5-7-51-75$. 
M.N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri Nityanand Kanungo, 
Minister oj Commerce.) 