~ .. 
Bill No. 39 ol18 
THE COMMISSIONS OF INQUIRY BILL, 1952 
(As INTRODUCED IN THE HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE) 
HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE 
-
COHR IGENDUl>1 
to 
TH~ COMMISSIONS OF INQUffiY' BJ;LL, 1952 
In page..3, line 13,.. bet'or~. "section. 3" ,insert 
sub-sec t10n (1) --or" • 
NEW DELHI, M, N. KAl1L, 
THE 31ST MAY, J.952. SEC RET, R Y. 

Bill Ro. 88 of 18a 
THE COMMISSIONS OF INQUIRY BILL, 1952 
(As INTRODUCED IN THE HOUSE OF THE PEoPLE) 
A 
BILL 
provide for the appointment of Commissions of Inquiry and fOT 
vesting such Commissions with certain powers. 
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows:-
1. Short title, extent and commencemeat.-(l)' This Act may be 
., ..... ''''''' the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952. 
2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu 
Kashmir. 0. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
t may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. Definltlons.-In this Act, unless the context otherwise 
(a) "appropriate Government" means- 10 
(i) the Central Government, in relation to a Commission 
appointed by it to make an inquiry into any matter relat-
able to any of the entries enumerated in List I or List n or 
List III in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution; and 
(ii) the State Government, in relation to a Commission 16-
appointed by it to make an inquiry into any matter relat-
able to any of the entries enumerated in List II or List In 
in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution; 
(b) "Commission" .means a Commission of Inquiry appointed 
under section 3; . JO. 
(c)' "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act. . 
3. Appointment of Conunlssion.-(l) The appropriate Govern-
ment may, if itO is of opinion that it is necessary so to do, and shall, 
if a resolution in this behalf is passed by the House of the People 26-
~
r, as the case may be, the Legislative Assembly of the State, by 
. notification in the Official Gazette, appoint a Commission of Inquiry 
for the purpose of making an inquiry into any definite matter of 
. ublic importance and performing such functions as may be specified 
'n the notification, and the Commission so appointed shall make the 30 
nquiry and perform the functions accordingly: 
Provided that no State Government shall, without the previous 
approval of the Central Government, appoint a Commission to inquire 
into any matter in respect of which a Commission has been appointed 
by the Central Government during the period in which that Commis- 35 
sion is functioning and until the expiry of two years from the date 
on which that Commission ceases to exist by a notification Wl.der 
section 6. 

2 
(2) The Commission may consist of one or more members 
appointed by the appropriate Government, and where the Commis-
sion consists of more than one member, one of them may be appoint-
ed as the. Chairman thereof. 
5 4. Powers of CommJssloD.-(l) The Commission shall have the 
powers of a civil court, while trying a suit under the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (Act V of 1908), in respect of the follQwing matters, 
namely:-
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance ·of any person 
10 and examining him on oath; 
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 
(d) requisitioning any public record from any court or 
office; 
15 (e) issuing commissions for the examInation of witnesses or 
documents; 
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed. 
(2) The Commission shall have power to require any person to 
furnish information on such points or matters as,· in the opinion of 
.20 the Commission, may be useful for, or relevant to, the subject matter 
of the inquiry. 
(3) The Commission or any officer specially authorised by the 
Commission may enter any building or place where the Commission 
has reason to believe that any books of account or other documents 
25 relating to the subject matter of the inquiry may be found, and may 
seize any such books of account or documents or take extracts or 
copies therefrom. 
(4) The Commission shall be deemed to be a civil court for the 
purposes of sections 480 and 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
:30 1898 (Act V of 1898) and any proceeding before the Commission 
shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of 
sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (Act XLV of 1860). 
(5) The COlllmission shall, subject to any rules that may be 
made in this behalf, have power to regulate its own procedure 
:35 (including the fixing of places and times of its sittings and deciding 
whether to sit in public or in prIvate) and may act notwithstanding 
the temporary absence of any member or the existence of a vacancy 
among its members. 
(~) Every member of the Commission and every officer appointed 
40 or authorised by the Commission to exercise functions' under this 
Act shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of 
section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (Act XLV of 1860). 
S. Statements made by persons to the CommissioD.-No state-
ment made by a person in the course of giving evidence before the 
-46 Commission shall subject him to, or be used against him in, any civil 
or criminal proceeding except a prosecution for giving false evidence 
by such statement: 
Provided that the ~tatement-
(a) is made in reply to a question which he is required by 
Jj() the Commission. to .answer, or 
(b) is relevant to the subject matter of the inquiry. 

3 
6. Commission to cease to e:dst when so Detlfted.-The appropri-
;ate Government may, if'it is of opinion that the continued exic:tence 
-of a Commission is unnecessary, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, declare that the Commission shall cease to exist from such 
date as may be specified in this behalf in such notification, and there- 6 
upon, the Commission shall cease to exist. 
.,. Act to apply to other inquiring authorities In certain cases.-
Where any authority (by whatever name called) is set up under any 
resolution or order of the appropriate Government for the purpose 
. of making an inquiry into any definite matter of public importance 10 
and that Government is of apinion that the provisions of this Act 
should be made applicable to that authority, that Government may, 
subject to the prohibition contained in the proviso to section 3, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, direct that the provisions df this 
Act shall apply to that authority, and on the issue of such a notifi-· 16 
cation, that authority shall be deemed to be a Commission of Inquiry 
appointed under section 3 for all the purposes of this Act. 
8. Power to make rules.-(l) The appropriate Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the 
purposes of this Act: 20 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the follow-
:ing matters, namely:-
(a) the term of office and the conditions of service of the 2 
members of the Commission; l5 
(b) the manner in which inquiries may be held under this 
Act and the procedure to be followed by the Commission in 
respect of the proceedings before it; 
(c) the powers of civil court which may be vested in the 
Commission; 30 
(d) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed. 

4 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Commissions and Committees of inquiry are at present appointed:-
by Government under executive order; there is no central law tc) 
regulate the powers of such bodies. Some of them have felt handi--
capped because of the absence of any statutory power to enforce 
the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents. In 
order to remove this difficulty, ad hoc legislation has been passed 
from time to time, such as for example, the Sugar Crisis Enquiring, 
Authority Act, 1950. It is felt that there should be a general law 
authorising Government to appoint an inquiring authority on any 
matter of public importance, whenever considered necessary, or-
when a demand to that effect is made by the Le~islature and that 
such law should enable the inquiring authority to exercise certain 
~pecific powers including the powers to summon witnesses, to take 
evidence on oath, and to compel persons to furnish infol'q1ation. The-_ 
Bill is designed to achieve this object. 
KAlLAS NATH KATJU. 
NEW DELm; 
The 20th May, 1952. 

HoUSE OF THE PEOPLE 
BILL 
to provide for the appointment Df Commi88ioDS of Inquiry aDd 
. for vesting such Commissions with Certain powera. 
(8"," KaUaB Nail Katj_, 
lIinwr lor Bmna ~air •. ) 