Bill No. 39-F of  2010
ORIGINAL
THE NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF TECHNOLOGY
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT—
LOK SABHA ON 19TH AUGUST, 2011
RAJY A SABHA ON 30TH APRIL , 2012
AMENDMENTS MADE BY RAJYA SABHA AGREED TO
BY LOK SABHA ON 11 MAY, 2012)
ASSENTED  TO
ON 7 JUNE, 2012
ACT NO. 28 OF 2012

1
Short title and
commencement.
THE NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF TECHNOLOGY (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2012
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT)
A
BILL
to amend the National Institutes of Technology Act, 2007.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as
 follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Institutes of Technology (Amendment)
 Act, 2012.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In the National Institutes of Technology Act, 2007 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), in the long title, for the words “certain institutions of technology”, the words
“certain institutions of technology, science education and research” shall be substituted.
3. In section 1 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words “National Institutes
of Technology”, the words “National Institutes of Technology, Science Education and
Research” shall be substituted.
4. In section 2 of the principal Act, for the words “the Schedule”, the words “the First
Schedule and the Second Schedule” shall be substituted.
Bill No. 39-F of  2010
Amendment of
long title.
Amendment of
section 1.
Amendment of
section 2.
29 of  2007.

2
5. In section 3 of the principal Act,—
(i) in clause ( c), for the words “the Schedule” at both the places where they
occur, the words “the First Schedule and the Second Schedule” shall be substituted;
(ii) in clause (d), after the word and figures “section 30”, the words, brackets,
figures and letter “or sub-section ( 1) of section 30A, as the case may be,” shall be
inserted;
(iii) in clause (g), for the words “the Schedule”, the words “the First Schedule
and the Second Schedule” shall be substituted;
(iv) in clause (k), for the words “the Schedule”, the words “the First Schedule
and the Second Schedule” shall be substituted;
(v) in clause (m), for the words “the Schedule”, the words “the First Schedule
and the Second Schedule” shall be substituted.
6.  In section 4 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words, “the Schedule”
the words “the First Schedule and the Second Schedule” shall be substituted.
7.  In section 6 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in clause (h), the words “and the
Deputy Director” shall be omitted.
8.  In section 11 of the principal Act,—
(i) for the word “Institute” wherever it occurs, the words “Institute mentioned in
the First Schedule” shall be substituted;
(ii) in clause (e), the word “and” occurring at the end shall be omitted;
(iii) after clause (f), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(g) the Director of the Indian Institute of Technology in whose zone the
Institute is located, or his nominee, not below the rank of a Professor.”.
9.  After section 11 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
“11A. The Board of every Institute mentioned in the Second Schedule shall
consist of the following members, namely:—
(a) the Chairperson to be nominated by the Visitor;
(b) Secretary, Department of Higher Education, Government of India,  or
his nominee not below the rank of the Joint Secretary to the Government of
India, ex officio;
(c) Director of the Institute, ex officio;
(d) Director of Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, ex officio;
(e) Director of one of the Indian Institutes of Technology, to be nominated
by the Central Government;
(f) two Secretaries to the Government of India, to be nominated by the
Central Government representing its Scientific or Industrial Ministries;
(g) Chief  Secretary of the State in which the Institute is located, or his
nominee not below the rank of the Joint Secretary to the Government of India,
ex officio;
(h) two professors of the Institute to be nominated by the Senate;
(i) two eminent scientists, to be nominated by the Council, having special
knowledge or practical experience in respect of education, engineering or science,
one of whom shall be a woman; and
(j) Financial Advisor, Ministry of Human Resource Development,
ex officio.”.
Amendment of
section 3.
Amendment of
section 4.
Amendment of
section 6.
Amendment of
section 11.
Insertion of
new section
11A.
Board of
Institutes of
Second
Schedule.

3
10. In section 12 of the principal Act,—
(i) in clause (c), after the figures "11", the words, brackets, letters and figures
"and clause (h) of section 11A" shall be inserted;
(ii) in clause (d), after the word and figures "section 11", the words, figures and
letter "or section 11A, as the case may be," shall be inserted;
(iii) in clause (f), after the figures "11", the words, brackets, letters and figures
"and clauses (c) and (h) of section 11A" shall be inserted.
11. In section 17 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1), the words "and Deputy Director" shall be omitted;
(b) for sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
"(5) The Deputy Director of every Institute shall be appointed in such
manner and on such terms and conditions as may be laid down by the Statutes
and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be assigned to
him by this Act or the Statutes or by the Director.".
12. In section 24 of the principal Act, the words "and Deputy Director" shall omitted.
13. In section 30 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the word "Schedule", the
words "First Schedule" shall be substituted.
14. After section 30 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"30A. ( 1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by
notification, specify in this behalf, there shall be established for all the Institutes
specified in column 3 of the Second Schedule, a central body to be called the Council.
(2) The Council under sub-section (1) shall consist of the following members,
namely:—
(a) the Minister in charge of the Ministry or Department of the Central
Government having administrative control of the technical education, ex officio,
Chairman;
(b) the Secretary to the Government of India in charge of the Ministry or
Department of the Central Government having administrative control of the
technical education, ex officio, Vice-Chairman;
(c) the Chairperson of every Board of the Institutes mentioned in the
Second Schedule, ex officio;
(d) the Director of every Institute mentioned in the Second Schedule,
ex officio;
(e) the Chairman, University Grants Commission, ex officio;
(f) the Director-General, Council of Scientific and Industrial Research,
ex officio;
(g) four Secretaries to the Government of India to represent the Ministries
or Departments of the Central Government dealing with bio-technology, atomic
energy, information technology and space, ex officio;
(h) the Chairman, Defence Research and Development Organisation,
ex officio;
(i) not less than three, but not more than five persons to be nominated by
the Visitor, at least one of whom shall be a woman, having special knowledge or
practical experience in respect of education, industry, science or technology;
Amendment of
section 12.
Amendment of
section 17.
Amendment of
section 24.
Amendment of
section 30.
Insertion of
new section
30A.
Establishment
of Council for
the Institutes
of Second
Schedule.

4
(j) three members of Parliament, of whom two shall be chosen by the
House of the People and one by the Council of States:
Provided that the office of member of the Council shall not disqualify its
holder for being chosen as or for being, a member of either House of  Parliament;
(k) two Secretaries to the State Government, from amongst the
Ministries or Departments of that Government dealing with technical
education where the Institute is located, ex officio ;
(l) Financial Adviser, dealing with the Human Resource Development
Ministry or Departments of that Government dealing with technical education
where the Institute is located, ex officio ; and
(m) one officer not below the rank of the Joint Secretary to the
Government of India in the Ministry or Department of the Central Government
having administrative control of the scientific or technical education,
ex officio , Member-Secretary.”.
15. In section 31 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 2), after the word and
figures “section 30”, the words, brackets, letters and figures “and clause ( j) of sub-
section ( 2) of section 30A” shall be inserted.
16. In section 37 of the principal Act,—
(i) in clause ( a), after the words “every Institute”, the words “mentioned in
the First Schedule” shall be inserted;
(ii) after clause (b), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
“(c) recruitment process and disciplinary proceedings, which had
commenced before the commencement of the National Institutes of
Technology (Amendment) Act, 2012,  shall be completed, mutatis mutandis ,
in accordance with the relevant provisions in force immediately before such
commencement.
Explanation .– Recruitment process for a post may be taken to have
commenced from the date of publication of the advertisement inviting
application for the post, and disciplinary proceedings against an employee
of the Institute may be taken to have commenced on the date of issue of
charge sheet for major penalty or show cause notice for minor penalty to
such employee;
(d) all matters, which are meant to be provided through Statutes and
Ordinances under sections 25 and 27, respectively, shall, till such Statutes
and Ordinances are made, be governed, mutatis mutandis , by the
corresponding provisions in force immediately before the commencement
of this Act.”.
17. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act—
(a) the Board of  every Institute specified in the Second Schedule functioning
as such immediately before the commencement of this Act shall continue to so
function until a new Board is constituted for that Institute under this Act, but on
the constitution of a new Board under this Act, members of the Board holding
office before such constitution shall cease to hold office;
(b) every Senate constituted in relation to every Institute before the
commencement of this Act shall be deemed to be the Senate constituted under
this Act unless a Senate is constituted under this Act for that Institute but on the
constitution of new Senate under this Act, members of the Senate holding office
before such constitution shall cease to hold office.
18. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of the National
Institutes of Technology (Amendment) Act, 2012, the Central Government may, by
Amendment
of section 37.
Transitional
provisions in
respect of
Institutes of
Second
Schedule.
Amendment
of section 31.
Power to
remove
difficulties.

5
order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the
difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from
the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid
before each House of Parliament.
19. (1) The  Schedule to the principal Act shall be numbered as the First Schedule and
in the First Schedule as so numbered, after Sl. No. 20 and the entries relating thereto, the
following shall be inserted, namely:—
"21. National Institute of Technology, National Institute of Technology,
Goa, Society Goa.
22. National Institute of Technology, National Institute of Technology,
Puducherry Society Puducherry.
23. National Institute of Technology, National Institute of Technology,
Delhi Society Delhi
24. National Institute of Technology, National Institute of Technology,
Sumari (Srinagar), Uttarakhand Society Uttarakhand.
25. National Institute of Technology, National Institute of Technology,
Sohra (Meghalaya) Society Meghalaya
26. National Institute of Technology, National Institute of Technology,
Mizoram Society Mizoram
27. National Institute of Technology, National Institute of Technology,
Manipur Society Manipur.
28. National Institute of Technology, National Institute of Technology,
Nagaland Society Nagaland
29. National Institute of Technology, National Institute of Technology,
Arunachal Pradesh Society Arunachal Pradesh
30. National Institute of Technology, National Institute of Technology,
Sikkim Sikkim.".
(2) After the First Schedule as so numbered, the following  Schedule shall be inserted,
namely:—
"THE  SECOND  SCHEDULE
[See sections 3(g), (m), 4(1) and 11A]
L
IST OF INDIAN INSTITUTES OF SCIENCE  EDUCATION RESEARCH
Sl. Society Corresponding Institute
No.
12 3
1. Indian Institute of Science Education Indian Institute of Science Education
and Research, Kolkata Society and Research, Kolkata.
2. Indian Institute of Science Education Indian Institute of Science Education
and Research, Pune Society and Research, Pune
3. Indian Institute of Science Education Indian Institute of Science Education
and Research, Mohali Society and Research, Mohali.
4. Indian Institute of Science Education Indian Institute of Science Education
and Research, Bhopal Society and Research, Bhopal
5. Indian Institute of Science Education Indian Institute of Science Education
and Research, Thiruvananthapuram and Research, Thiruvananthapuram.".
Society
Amendment
of Schedule.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the National Institutes of Technology Act, 2007.
————
(As passed by the Houses of  Parliament)
GMGIPMRND—1538LS—14-06-2012.