Bill No. 39 of  2020
THE  WHISTLE BLOWERS IN PRIV ATE SECTOR (PROTECTION) BILL, 2020
By
SHRIMATI SUPRIYA SULE, M.P.
——————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
——————
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
R
EGULATION OF DISCLOSURES
3. Disclosures qualifying for protection.
4. Disclosure of any act contrary to any provision of certain Acts.
5. Protection from retaliatory practices.
CHAPTER III
D
ISCLOSURE AND WHISTLE BLOWERS PROTECTION MECHANISMS
6. Constitution of the Internal Ombudsman Committee.
7. Functions of the Internal Ombudsman Committee.
8. Whistle Blower to approach Committee for redressal.
9. District Officer.
10. Constitution of the Whistle Blower Complaints and Grievance Redressal Council.
11. Functions of the Council.
CHAPTER IV
D
ISCLOSURES, COMPLAINTS AND INQUIRIES
12. Whistle blower disclosures and complaints.
13. Action during pendency of inquiry.
14. Inquiry Report.
15. Punishment for false or malicious complaint.
16. Prohibition of publication or making known contents of complaint or disclosure.
17. Penalty for publication or making known contents of complaint and inquiry
proceedings.
A
S INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

15
CLAUSES
CHAPTER V
DUTIES OF THE EMPLOYER
18. Duties of the employer.
CHAPTER VI
MISCELLANEOUS
19. Annual Report.
20. Employer to include information in annual report.
21. Appropriate Government to monitor the implementation of the Act.
22. Penalty for non-compliance with provisions of the Act.
23. Act not in derogation of any other law.
24. Central Government to provide fund.
25. Power to remove difficulties.
26. Power to make rules.
(ii)

1
THE  WHISTLE BLOWERS IN PRIV ATE SECTOR (PROTECTION) BILL, 2020
By
SHRIMATI SUPRIYA SULE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the protection of whistleblowers within the private sector through the
setting up of internal and external complaint review and redressal mechanisms
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Whistleblowers in Private Sector (Protection)
Act, 2020.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 39 of  2020
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate authority" means a person or organization designated as such
by the Central Government;
(b) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(c) "Committee" means the Internal Ombudsman Committee constituted under
section 6;
(d) "company" means a company as defined in clause ( 20) of section 2 of the
Companies Act, 2013;
(e) "complaint" means a complaint regarding retaliatory practices having been
taken against an eligible whistleblower or their relatives;
(f) "Council" means the Whistleblowers Complaints and Grievance Redressal
Council constituted under section 10;
(g) "disclosure" means a disclosure regarding misconduct having taken place,
or currently taking place at a regulated organization;
(h) "eligible whistleblower" means an individual who, in relation to a regulated
organization, is or has been,—
(i) an employee of the regulated organization; or
(ii) an individual who supplies goods or services to the regulated
organization; or
(iii) an individual who is an associate of the regulated organization; or
(iv) an individual who is a relative of the regulated organization;
(i) "employee" means a person employed at a regulated organization for any
work on regular, temporary, ad hoc or daily wage basis, either directly or through an
agent, including a contractor, with or, without the knowledge of the principal employer,
whether, for remuneration or not, or working on a voluntary basis or otherwise, whether
the terms of employment are express or implied and includes a co-worker, a contract
worker, probationer, trainee, apprentice or called by any other such name;
(j) "employer" means any person responsible for the management, supervision
and control of the regulated organization;
(k) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(l) "regulated organization" includes,—
(i) any private sector organization, private venture, body corporate,
undertaking, enterprise, institution, establishment, company, society, trust,
partnership, non-governmental organization, unit or service provider carrying
on commercial, professional, vocational, educational, entertaining, industrial,
health services or financial activities including production, supply, sale,
distribution or service;
(ii) hospitals or nursing homes;
(iii) any sports institute, stadium, sports complex or competition or games
venue, whether residential or not used used for training, sports or other activities
relating thereto; and
Definitions.
5
10
18 of 2013.
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(iv) such other regulated organizations as the appropriate authority may,
by an order specify in this regard; and
(m) "retaliatory practices" includes,—
(i) dismissal of an employee; or
(ii) injury of an employee in his or her employment; or
(iii ) alteration of an employee's position or duties to his or her
disadvantage; or
(iv) discrimination between an employee and other employees of the same
employer; or
(v) harassment or intimidation of an employee or person related to an
employee; or
(vi) harm or injury to an employee or person related to an employee,
including psychological harm; or
(vii) damage to an employee's property; or
(viii) damage to an employee's reputation; or
(ix) damage to an employee's business or financial position.
CHAPTER II
REGULATION OF DISCLOSURES
3. Any disclosure of information by an individual shall be qualified for protection
under this Act, if,—
(a) such individual is an eligible whistleblower with respect to the regulated
organization;
(b) has reasonable grounds to suspect that the information indicates the improper
functioning of the regulated entity; and
(c) such disclosure has been made to the Committee of the regulated organization
constituted under section 6 or the Council constituted under section 9, as the case
may be.
4. Any eligible whistleblower may disclose information to the Committee or to the
Council, as the case may be, if such whistleblower has reasonable grounds to suspect that
the information indicates that the regulated organization or an officer, employee or related
party to the regulated organization has engaged in conduct that constitutes an offence
against or is in contravention of a provision of any of the following Acts,—
(a) the Indian Penal Code, 1860;
(b) the Income Tax Act, 1961;
(c) the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988;
(d) the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 2010;
(e) the Companies Act,  2013;
(f) the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002;
(g) the Black Money (Undisclosed Foreign Income and Assets) and Imposition
of  Tax Act, 2015;
Disclosures
qualifying for
protection.
Disclosure of
any act
contrary to
any provision
of certain
Acts.
45 of 1860.
43 of 1961.
49 of 1988.
42 of 2010.
18 of 2013.
15 of 2003.
22 of 2015.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
(h) the Fugitive Economic Offenders Act, 2018;
(i) any applicable rules, regulations, orders and directives of the Reserve Bank
of India;
(j) any applicable rules, regulations, orders and directives of the Securities and
Exchange Board of India; and
(k) such other laws as the Central Government may, by order in the Official
Gazette, specify.
5. (1) No eligible whistleblower shall be subject to any retaliatory practices as a result
of any disclosures made in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
(2) If any person inflicts any kind of retaliatory practice against the eligible whistle
blower, such whistleblower may make a complaint about the same to the Committee or the
Council, as the case may be in such manner as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER III
D
ISCLOSURE AND WHISTLEBLOWERS PROTECTION MECHANISMS
6. (1) Every employer of a regulated organization shall, by an order in writing, constitute
a Committee to be known as the Internal Ombudsman Committee for carrying out the purposes
of this Act:
Provided that where the offices or administrative units of the workplace are located at
different places or divisional or sub-divisional level, the Committee shall be constituted at all
administrative units or offices.
(2) The Committee shall consist of —
(a) a Presiding Officer who shall be a person employed at a senior level at the
regulated organization:
Provided that in case a senior level employee is not available, the Presiding
Officer shall be nominated from other offices or administrative units of the workplace
referred to in sub-section (1);
(b) not less than two members from amongst employees preferably serving in
the human resources management sector, or having legal knowledge; and
(c) one member from amongst non-Governmental Organisations or associations
committed to the cause of transparency and prevention of corrupt activities,
to be nominated by employer.
(3) The Presiding Officer and every member of the Internal Ombudsman Committee
shall hold office for a period not exceeding three years, from the date of appointment as may
be specified by the employer.
(4) Where the Presiding Officer or any member of the Committee—
(a) contravenes the provisions of section 16 of this Act; or
(b) has been convicted for an offence or an inquiry into an offence under any law
for the time being in force is pending against him; or
(c) has been found guilty in any disciplinary proceedings or a disciplinary
proceeding is pending against him; or
( d) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial
to the public interest,
such Presiding Officer or member, as the case may be, shall be removed from the
Committee and the vacancy so created or any casual vacancy shall be filled by fresh
nomination in accordance with the provisions of this section.
Protection
from
retaliatory
practices.
Constitution
of the Internal
Ombudsman
Committee.
17 of 2018.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
(5) The Presiding Officer and members of the Committee shall be paid such allowances
for attending the sitting for of the Committee by the employer, as may be prescribed.
7. The Committee shall—
(a) set up a whistle blower hotline for receiving complaints and tips about
inconsistent practices in the regulated organization;
(b) Institute or conduct an inquiry into the complaints or inconsistent practices
in a regulated organization upon receipt of complaints;
(c) refer matters and report to the employer in relation to the disclosures made by
the whistleblower;
(d) maintain confidentiality of the contents of the disclosures made and identity
of the eligible whistleblower;
(e) reveal the identity of the whistle blower after taking the consent of the
eligible whistleblower in writing;
(f) coordinate with the Council to draw attention to, and take action against any
illegal activities taking place within the regulated organizations;
(g) forward the complaint and disclosure to the Council or the local police within
a period of seven days for registering the case under the relevant laws, if, laws on the
disclosures and inquiry conducted, there exists a prima facie case;
(h) provide each party involved a reasonable opportunity of being heard;
(i) act as a mediator between the eligible whistleblower and the employer, in the
event there have been retaliatory practices; and
(j) act in good faith at all times and not jeopardise the identity, employment and
life of the eligible whistleblower.
8. Every eligible whistleblower shall, in the first instance, approach the Committee for
redressal of his grievance:
Provided that the eligible whistleblower may choose to directly approach the Council
if,—
(a) the Committee has not taken any action despite a disclosure having been, or
a complaint having been lodged; or
(b) the eligible whistleblower reasonably believes that a member of the Committee
is acting illegally; or
(c) the disclosure pertains directly to employer at the regulated organization.
9. The appropriate Government may notify a District Magistrate, or the Collector, or
Deputy Collector as a District Officer for every District to exercise powers or discharge
functions under this Act.
10. (1) Every District Officer notified under section 8, shall constitute a Council to be
known as the Whistleblower Complaints and Grievance Redressal Council in the district
to receive disclosures and whistle blower complaints from,—
(a) the Committee; and
(b) an eligible whistle blower.
(2) The Council shall consist of a Chairperson, Vice Chairperson and five members
with at least one expert from the field of law, one person with expertise in human resource
management and one person with experience in law enforcement to be nominated by the
District Officer in such manner as may be prescribed.
Functions of
the Internal
Ombudsman
Committee.
Whistle
Blower to
approach
Committee for
redressal.
District
Officer.
Constitution
of the Whistle
blower
Complaints
and Grievance
Redressal
Council.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

6
(3) The chairperson and every member of the Council shall hold office for a period not
exceeding three years from the date of appointment as may be specified by the District
Officer.
(4) Where the Chairperson or any member of the Council—
(a) contravenes the provisions of section 15; or
(b) has been convicted for an offence or an inquiry into an offence under any law
for the time being in force is pending against him; or
(c) has been found guilty in any disciplinary proceedings or a disciplinary
proceeding is pending against him; or
( d) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial
to the public interest,
such Chairperson or member, as the case may be, shall be removed from the Council
and the vacancy so created or any casual vacancy shall be filled by fresh nomination in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
(5) The Chairperson and members of the Council shall be entitled to such fees or
allowances for holding the proceedings of the Council as may be prescribed.
11. (1) The Council shall—
(a) institute or conduct an inquiry into the matter upon receipt of complaints;
(b) maintain confidentiality of the contents of the disclosures made, as well as
the identity of the eligible whistle blower;
(c) reveal the identity of the whistle blower after taking the consent of the
eligible whistle blower in writing;
(d) coordinate with State and Central law enforcement bodies to draw attention
to, and take action against any illegal activities taking place within the regulated
organizations;
(e) forward the complaint and disclosure to the local police within a period of
seven days for registering the case under the relevant legislation, if, based on the
disclosures and inquiry conducted, there prima facie exists a case;
(f) provide each party involved with the opportunity of being heard;
(g) act as a mediator between the eligible whistle blower and the employer, in the
event there have been retaliatory practices.
(2) For the purpose of making an inquiry under sub-section (i) the Council, shall have
the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 when
trying a suit in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him
on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;
(c) any other matter as may be prescribed.
(3) Every inquiry into any complaint received under clause (a) of sub-section (1) shall
be completed within a period of ninety days from the date of receipt of complaint by the
Council.
CHAPTER IV
D
ISCLOSURES, COMPLAINTS AND INQUIRIES
12. Any eligible whistle blower may make a disclosure or a complaint in writing or
through hotline if so instituted by the Committee or the Council, as the case may be, within
Functions of
the Council.
Whistle
blower
disclosures and
complaints.
5 of 1908
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
a period of three months from the date of incident and in case of a series of incidents, within
a period of three months from the date of last incident:
Provided further that the Committee or the Council, as the case may be, may, for the
reasons to be recorded in writing, extend the time limit not exceeding three months, if it is
satisfied that the circumstances existed which prevented the eligible whistle blower from
filing a complaint within the said period.
13. (1) The Committee or the Council, as the case may be, during the pendency of an
inquiry on a written request made by the eligible whistle blower may recommend to the
employer to,—
(a) transfer the eligible whistle blower or the respondent to any other workplace;
or
(b) grant leave to the eligible whistle blower up to a period of three months; or
(c) grant such other relief to the eligible whistle blower as may be prescribed.
(2) The leave granted to the eligible whistle blower under clause (b) of sub-section (1)
shall be in addition to the leave he is otherwise entitled to.
(3) On the recommendation of the Committee or the Council, as the case may be, the
employer shall implement the recommendations made under sub-section ( 1) and send the
report of such implementation to the Committee or the Council, as the case may be.
14. (1) On the completion of an inquiry under this Act, the Committee or the Council,
as the case may be, shall provide a report of its findings to the employer or as the case may
be, to the District Officer within a period of ten days from the date of completion of the
inquiry and such report be made available to the concerned parties.
(2) Where the Committee or the Council, as the case may be, arrives at the conclusion
that the allegation against the respondent has not been proved, it shall recommend to the
employer and the District Officer that no action is required to be taken in the matter.
(3) Where the Committee or the Council, as the case may be, arrives at the conclusion
that the allegation against the respondent has been proved, it shall recommend to the employer
or the District Officer, as the case may be,—
(a) to take action for such misconduct in accordance with the provisions of the
service rules applicable to the respondent or where no such service rules have been
made in such manner as may be prescribed;
(b) to deduct, notwithstanding anything in the service rules applicable to the
respondent, such sum from the salary or wages of the respondent, as it may consider
appropriate to be paid to the eligible whistle blower as compensation for retaliatory
practices initiated against such eligible whistle blower;
(c) take necessary legal action against the respondent, including forwarding the
disclosure and complaint to law enforcement authorities; or
(d) recommend corrective measures.
(4) The employer or the District Officer shall act upon the recommendation within a
period sixty days of its receipt.
15. Where the Committee or the Council, as the case may be arrives at a conclusion
that the allegation against the respondent is malicious or that the eligible whistle blower
making the complaint or disclosure has made the complaint or disclosure knowing it to be
false or the eligible whistle blower has produced any forged or misleading document, it may
recommend to the employer or the District Officer, as the case may be, to take action against
Action during
pendency of
inquiry.
Inquiry report.
Punishment
for false or
malicious
complaint.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

8
the eligible whistle blower who has made the complaint under section 11, as the case may be,
in accordance with the provisions of the service rules or where no such service rules exist, in
such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that a mere inability to substantiate a complaint or provide adequate proof
need not attract action against the eligible whistle blower under this section.
16. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the contents of the complaint or
disclosure made under section 11, the identity and addresses of the eligible whistle blower,
respondent and witnesses, any information relating to conciliation and inquiry proceedings,
recommendations of the Committee or the Council, as the case may be, and the action taken
by the employer or the District Officer under the provisions of this Act shall not be published,
communicated or made known to the public, press and media in any manner:
Provided that information may be disseminated, once a complaint or disclosure has
been forwarded to the appropriate law enforcement agency or if such information is otherwise
made publicly available, regarding the action taken by the employer, the Committee and the
Council under this Act without disclosing the name, address, identity or any other particulars
calculated to lead to the identification of the eligible whistle blower and the witnesses.
17. Where any person entrusted with the duty to handle or deal with the complaint,
inquiry or any recommendations or action to be taken under the provisions of this Act
contravenes the provisions of section 15, he shall be liable for penalty in accordance with the
provisions or the service rules applicable to the said person or where no such service rules
exist in such manner as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER V
D
UTIES OF THE EMPLOYER
18. Every employer shall—
(a) provide a safe and inclusive working environment at the workplace which
shall include safety from the persons coming into contact at the workplace;
(b) display at any conspicuous place in the regulated organization, the available
options for highlighting misconduct and illegal activities taking place at the regulated
organization, and the order constituting the Committee under sub-section ( 1) of
section 6;
(c) organise workshops and awareness programmes at regular intervals for
sensitising the employees with the provisions of the Act and orientation programmes
for the members of the Committee in the manner as may be prescribed;
(d) provide necessary facilities to the Committee or the Council, as the case may
be, for dealing with the complaint and conducting an inquiry;
(e) assist in securing the attendance of respondent and witnesses before the
Committee or the Council, as the case may be;
(f) make available such information to the Committee or the Council, as the case
may be, as it may require having regard to the complaint or disclosure made under
section 11;
(g) cause to initiate action, under any law for the time being in force, against the
party responsible for the misconduct as detailed in the disclosure or complaint made
by the eligible whistle blower.
CHAPTER VI
M
ISCELLANEOUS
19. (1) The Committee or the Council, as the case may be, shall in each calendar year
prepare, in such form and at such time as may be prescribed, an annual report and submit the
same to the employer and the District Officer.
(2) The District Officer shall forward a brief report on the annual reports received under
sub-section (1) to the State Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
Prohibition of
publication or
making known
contents of
complaint or
disclosure.
Penalty for
publication or
making known
contents of
complaint and
inquiry
proceedings.
Duties of the
employer.
Annual
Report.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

9
20. The employer shall include in its report the number of complaints and disclosure
filed, if any, and their disposal under this Act in the annual report of his organisation or where
no such report is required to be prepared, intimate such number of cases, if any, to the
District Officer.
21. The appropriate Government shall monitor the implementation of this Act and
maintain data on the number of cases filed and disposed of, in respect of all whistle blower
disclosure and complaints in such manner as may be prescribed.
22. Where the employer fails to—
(a) constitute a Committee under sub-section (1) of section 6; and
(b) contravenes or attempts to contravene or abets contravention of other
provisions of this Act or any rules made thereunder,
he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees.
23. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the
provisions or any other law for the time being in force.
24. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act from
time to time.
25. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the removal of any difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after expiry of three years from the date of
commencement of this Act.
26. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days, which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, Parliament agrees in making any modification in the rule or
Parliament agrees that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modifications or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.
Employer to
include
information in
annual report.
Appropriate
Government
to monitor the
implementation
of the Act.
Penalty for
non-
compliance
with
provisions of
the Act.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law.
Central
Government
to provide
fund.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

S-3\F\BILL 2020\LS\5187LS(E)5187LS ENG
10
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
With India's growing corporate and private sectors, and its improved performance on
the Ease of Doing Business index, it is necessary to also magnify the legislative focus with
respect to the internal workings within the private sector.
Massive data leaks that have taken place at the global level, such as WikiLeaks and the
Panama Papers, have exposed many cases of corruption, tax evasion, and corporate fraud.
These global events indicate how essential it is to encourage the act of whistleblowing
within all kinds of work environments, be it public or private. It has also widely been
acknowledged that regulatory and legislative interventions, of and by themselves, can have
the effect of curbing incidents of fraud, misconduct and non-compliance. While several
companies that operate across multiple countries have a whistle blower mechanism in place,
the same is not true for most Indian companies.
The Whistle Blowers' Protection Act, 2014, which provides for India's first whistle
blower protection framework, is yet to be operationalized, and the rules in relation to the
legislation are yet to be framed. Moreover, the Whistle blowers' Protection Act, 2014 is
limited in scope to public authorities, public servants and Government companies, and the
private sector is entirely excluded from the ambit of the 2014 legislation.
Given that the nature of the private sector and the public sector, and the implications
of whistle blowing in each of the sectors would be strikingly different, this Bill endeavors to
create a separate and distinct framework to provide for the protection and regulation of
whistle blowing activities within the private sector.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide for:—
(a) setting up of an internal complaints mechanism at the workplace for registering
and reviewing complaints by whistle blowers;
(b) creating an external quasi-judicial body for reviewing cases of harassment of
complainants by their employer or employee organizations.
(c) spreading awareness regarding protections and resourses available to whistle
blowers within each organization, as well as on applicable laws relating to corruption
and fraudulent activities.
(d) detailing the inquiry procedure and follow-up proceedings to be undertaken
after receipt of a complaint.
The need of the hour is increased transparency and accountability starting within
each workplace, in order to ensure the stability and resiliency of India's corporate and private
sector, while simultaneously protecting the interests of employees in the private sector.
Hence, this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SUPRIYA  SULE
January 20, 2020.

S-3\F\BILL 2020\LS\5187LS(E)5187LS ENG
11
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 10 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Whistle blower Complaints
and Grievance Redressal Council by the District Officer for redressal of complaints and
grievances. Clause 23 provides for payment of adequate funds for carrying out the purposes
of the Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore
per annum would involve from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees Fifty Crore is likely to be involved.

S-3\F\BILL 2020\LS\5187LS(E)5187LS ENG
12
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 26 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation
of legislative power, therefore, is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the protection of whistle blowers within the private sector through the
setting up of internal and external complaint review and redressal mechanisms
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shrimati Supriya Sule, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—5187LS(S3)—26.02.2020.