THE DESTITUTE CHILDREN (REHABILIT ATION AND
WELFARE) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI SUKHBIR SINGH JAUNAPURIA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the rehabilitation and welfare measures of destitute children and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Destitute Children (Rehabilitation and Welfare) Act,
2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 39 of  2016
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "child" means a boy or a girl who is below the age of eighteen years;
(c) "children home" means an institution or home established or certified as
such by the appropriate Government for the purposes of this Act;
(d) "destitute child" means a child who is an orphan or neglected or has been
abandoned or is a vagabond and who lives on pavement or in a hutment or slum or
railway platform or bus stop or such other place; and
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, formulate a National Policy for the
rehabilitation and welfare of destitute children so as to secure them all rights of childhood
and make them responsible citizens.
4. Every destitute child shall have the right to—
(i) adequate livelihood and protection against exploitation;
(ii) free and compulsory education and vocational training; and
(iii) free healthcare.
5. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the Official
Gazette, constitute a Fund to be known as the Destitute Children Welfare Fund for carrying
out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute to the Fund
in such ratio as may be prescribed.
(3) Such other sums as may be received by way of donation, contribution or assistance
from individuals, organizations or any other establishment shall also be credited to the
Fund.
(4) The Fund shall be used for the welfare of the destitute children in such manner as
may be prescribed.
6. (1) The appropriate Government shall establish or cause to be established such
number of children homes as it may deem necessary for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The children homes established under sub-section (1) shall provide free boarding
and lodging and such other facilities to the destitute children as may be prescribed.
7. The appropriate Government shall—
(a) conduct survey of destitute children in their area and maintain a district-
wise register of all destitute children;
(b) open sufficient number of schools and colleges for imparting education to
the destitute children and provide books, writing materials, clothes, uniforms and
other stationery articles free of cost;
(c) provide healthcare facilities free of cost to all destitute children;
(d) provide vocational training and gainful employment to destitute children;
(e) free meals including nutritious food and lodging facilities; and
(f) take such other measures as may be necessary for the rehabilitation and
welfare of destitute children.
Definitions.
National
policy for
destitute
children.
Rights of
destitute
children.
Establishment
of Destitute
Children
Welfare Fund.
Establishment
of Children
homes.
Welfare
measures for
the destitute
children.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
9. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
10. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
Central
Government
to provide
requisite
funds.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Act not in
derogation of
any other
law.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
3

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
India is a Welfare State and thus it is the duty of the State to ensure that every citizen
is able to live a life of dignity and respect. Children are the future of the country. It is,
therefore, duty of the State to see that orphan, destitute, homeless and street children are
protected against negligence, cruelty and exploitation. Unfortunately, in our country there
are millions of orphan-mostly homeless, abandoned, run away, vagabond and destitute
street children. They should be provided with quality education, nutrition, healthcare and
conducive atmosphere to enable them to grow up as responsible citizens. The Bill seeks to
provide for rehabilitation and welfare measures on the part of the State for these neglected
children  which will not only uplift their conditions but it will also help in creating a better
society and strong Nation.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SUKHBIR SINGH JAUNAPURIA
February 11, 2016.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for certain rights to be provided for destitute children.
Clause 5 provides for the establishment of a Destitute Children Welfare Fund by the Central
Government. Clasue 6 provides for establishment of children homes for the destitute children.
Clause 7 provides for welfare measures for the destitute children to be undertaken by the
appropriate Government. Clause 8 provides that Central Government shall provides requisite
funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes of this Act. Although, the
expenditure relating to States shall be borne out of the Consolidated Funds of the respective
States, the Central Government shall bear the expenditure in providing assistance to the
State Governments for carrying out the purposes of the Bill and for implementing the provisions
of the Bill in the Union territories. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees one thousand crore
would be involved as recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees ten thousand crore is also likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the rehabilitation and welfare measures of destitute children and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Sukhbir Singh Jaunapuria, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4269LS(S3)—29.02.2016.