1
THE COMPULSORY PHYSICAL FITNESS OF CHILDREN THROUGH SPORTS IN
SCHOOLS AND DEVELOPMENT OF SPORTS INFRASTRUCTURE BILL, 2019
By
SHRI SHRIRANG APPA BARNE, M.P.
A
BILL
to promote sports education and physical fitness for an all-round development of children
in the country and to develop international standard sports infrastructure in the
country, by making sports a compulsory regular subject in schools and
providing equal opportunity and incentives to sportspersons
across the country and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
WHEREAS the Memorandum of Understanding between India and Netherlands signed
in New Delhi on the Thirtieth day of January, 2014 recognises that India aims to create a
lasting legacy with the development of sports infrastructure for promoting sports, education
and allied areas along with India’s ambition to host global sports events in the future:
A
ND WHEREAS the United Nations, in its resolution 58/6 adopted by the General
Assembly and sponsored by India, on the third day of November, 2003, recognises sport as
Bill No. 39 of  2019
AS  INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
means to build a peaceful and better world and increased implementation of projects for
development through sport:
AND W HEREAS the United Nations in its resolution 58/5 adopted by the General
Assembly on the third day of November, 2003 recognises sport as a means to promote
education, health, development and peace:
A
ND WHEREAS it is considered necessary to give effect to the said resolution.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This  Act may be called the Compulsory Physical Fitness of Children through
sports in Schools and Development of Sports Infrastructure Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for coming into force
of different provisions of this Act, and any reference in any such provision to the
commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming into force of that
provision.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
the State, and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “coach” includes any trained person involved with development of skills of
an athlete for the sport;
(c)  “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the
expression “notify” shall be construed accordingly;
(d) “physical fitness” means optimal state of physical, mental health and
wellbeing to be able to cope with daily needs and the ability to perform one's daily
tasks efficiently; and
(e) “sports” means the sports specified in the Schedule.
3. (1) From such date, as the Central Government may, in consultation with the State
Governments, by notification specify, training in Sports and Physical Fitness shall be
imparted as a compulsory subject in all schools.
(2) The appropriate Government shall take such measures as may be necessary to
develop infrastructure of international standard for over-all development of student.
(3) The appropriate Government shall provide equal opportunities in sports to all
sportspersons, create awareness, reduce stress and develop skill in sports as a whole in the
country to achieve excellence in sports at the international arena.
4. The appropriate Government shall ensure capacity and awareness building
programmes in sports through physical education that may include orientation on national
cadets, scouts and guides, sports training and competitive sports along with demonstrations
or workshops to guide students and help in building awareness about sports.
5. The appropriate Government  shall issue guidelines to be followed by each school
to, —
(a) treat sports as a regular subject as a part of the curriculum in school, with
separate theory and practical training for the students’ mental well-being and physical
fintness;
(b) make evaluation of the subject through continuous grading and examinations
so that the subject has equal weightage as other academic subjects;
(c) include the result of the subject as part of the regular mark-sheet obtained
by the students in school;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
Sports and
Physical
Fitness as a
regular
Subject in
Schools.
Mandatory
Capacity and
Awareness
building
programmes.
Guidelines to
be followed
by Schools.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(d) allocate a minimum number of hours in a months, for the training to be
imparted compulsorily to students from sixth to twelfth standard; and
(e) allow students to choose from various sports with accredited coaches and
coaching facilities:
Provided that schools may choose to offer separate sports facilities to students,
depending on their infrastructure and accessibility to sports infrastructure.
6. The appropriate Government shall ensure that every school makes special
provisions for physically challenged student to,—
(i) engage them into games and sporting activities which are not much
physically intense activities such as Chess and Carrom.
(ii) arrange for special assistance programmes in each schools for those
physically challenged students who fail in the module or course:
Provided that the special assistance programmes for physically challenged students
shall be scheduled before or after regular school hours, to support the students to gain
insights and strive to perform better by each student.
7. (1) The appropriate Government shall take measures to ensure that the necessary
sports infrastructure is provided in every school.
(2) In case any school lacks sufficient sports infrastructure to facilitate sports
training, the appropriate Government shall extend facilities to the students of such school
by—
(i)  providing free access to Sports infrastructure available in the divisional
and district sports complex;
(ii) making necessary transport arrangements for students to visit and avail
the sports facilities in the divisional or district sports complex.
(3)  Every school shall maintain a record of students availing sports infrastructure
and forward the details to the board for granting of aid, assistance or funds to the respective
school.
(4) Every divisional or district sports complex where the students are availing the
sports facilities shall maintain a record of all activities and forward the same to the
appropriate Government for consideration of granting adequate funds for the upgradation
of the divisional or districts sports infrastructure facilities.
8. The appropriate Government shall sportspersons regulate the selection of
sportspersons for international and national events by selecting who qualify the standard
selection criteria, as per norms and standard prescribed by Sports Authority of India.
9. The appropriate Government shall take necessary measures to spread awareness
about sports education including the sports, regulations on anti-doping and other
malpractices to promote sports as per international standard.
10. (1) The appropriate Government, by notification, shall mandate that any new
infrastructure to be built in the country to be in accordance with international norms and
guidelines as set by the International Olympic Committee for the development of Sports
infrastructure by,—
(a) building both soft and hard infrastructure by taking international standards
as benchmarks for the purpose of easing the accessibility to infrastructure for sports
and games by sportspersons;
Special
Provisions
for Physically
Challenged
Students.
Adequate
access to
sports,
infrastructure.
Selection
procedure for
international
and national
sporting
events.
Promoting
sports as a
profession
and creating
awarencess
about
anti-doping
regulation.
Development
of sports
infrastructure
according to
international
parameters.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
(b) commissioning sports infrastructure in Divisional, State and National Level,
in rural and urban parts of the country; and
(c) commissioning the construction of separate infrastructural facilities for both
men and women in each sporting facility, like toilets and changing rooms etc.
(2) The appropriate Government shall ensure to provide at least minimum basic sports
infrastructural facilities in every village and town to encourage sportsmanship at grass root
level.
(3) The appropriate Government shall invest in the scaling up of the quality of
infrastructure at major towns and regional centres.
11. The appropriate Government shall frame guidelines to promote talent and give
incentives to students and sportspersons who represent the country at the national and
international level, by—
(a) rescheduling of examinations, compensation of attendance and granting
credits or by providing equitable credit system where in extra credits and grades are
required to ensure that the students and sportspersons do not lose out or refrain from
taking up sports at an extra-meritorious level; and
(b) providing job opportunities, preference for Government loans, concession
on travel fares and minimum financial benefits for students and sportsperson.
12. (1) The appropriate Government, shall ensure that Government owned or Public
Sector Undertaking Companies take responsibility for supporting talent and promising
sportspersons by providing a quota for employment and funding expenses for meeting
sports expenditure in the requirement of equipments and medical aid for sportspersons;
(2) Every Government Company and Public Sector Undertaking shall providing sports
facilities to its and open its sports facilities to general public and students.
13. The appropriate Government shall curtail grants and aids to a school if that school
fails to comply with any of the provisions of this Act.
14. The Central Government, shall from time to time provide, after due appropriation
made by the Parliament by law in this behalf, requisite funds for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
15. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government, in consultation with State Governments, may make such order or give such
direction, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary
or expedient for the removal of any difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of two years from the date
of commencement of this Act.
16. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as may
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period
of thirty days, which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid. Parliament agrees in making any modification in the rule or Parliament
agrees that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modifications
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
that rule.
Incentives
to and
promotion of
sportspersons.
Public sector
undertakings
to promote
and support
Sportspersons.
Penalty.
Central
Government
to provide
Funds.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
THE SCHEDULE
[See Section 2C]
Sl. No. Name of Sport
1. Aero Sports
2. Archery
3. Athletics
4. Atya Patya
5. Aquatics
6. Badminton
7. Ball Badminton
8. Baseball
9. Basketball
10. Billiards and Snooker
11. Bridge
12. Body Building
13. Boxing
14. Carrom
15. Chess
16. Cricket
17. Cycling
18. Cycle Polo
19. Equestrian
20. Fencing
21. Football
22. Golf
23. Gymnastics
24. Handball
25. Hockey
26. Ice Hockey
27. Judo
28. Kabaddi
29. Kayaking and Canoeing
30. Karate Do
31. Kho-Kho
32. Korfball
33. Mallakhamb
34. Mind Sports
35. Motor Sports
36. Netball
37. Paralympic Sports
38. Polo

6
39. Power-lifting
40. Rowing
41. Roller Skating
42. Rugby
43. Sepak Takraw
44. Shooting
45. Shooting Ball
46. Soft Ball
47. Soft Tennis Ball
48. Special Olympic Sports
49. Sports for deaf person
50. Squash Rackets
51. Table Tennis
52. Taekwondo
53. Tennis
54. Tenni-koit
55. Tennis Ball Cricket
56. Ten Pin Bowling
57. Triathlon
58. Throw Ball
59. Tug of War
60. V olleyball
61. Weightlifting
62. Winter Games (Skiing and Snowboarding)
63. Wrestling (Free Style and Greco Roman)
64. Wrestling (Indian Style)
65. Wushu
66. Yachting
Sl. No. Name of Sport

7
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is home to a billion plus population. However, our dismal performance at
International sports like the Olympics, Asian Games and the Common Wealth Games,
make it evident that there is an absence of thrust in sports in the country. Clearly, our
culture and attitude towards sports is a major deterrent towards improving sporting
standards in our country. Promoting sportspersons while providing equal opportunity,
incentives and access to sporting facilities is essential, however, changing the attitude
of people and bringing seriousness about sports education and training in physical
fitness is of utmost importance. Moreover, sporting activities are means of a holistic
development for all, a potential tool for the physical and mental well-being of people
by inculcating values of leadership, teamwork, endurance, and focus along with
bringing exposure, helping in skill development and increasing immunity towards
various illnesses that in turn would increase the productivity of people and hence
boost economic development throughout the country.
The United Nations recognises sport as a low-cost and high-impact tool in
humanitarian development and peace-building efforts, the standard of which is
increasingly being recognised. In India the prevalent scenario does not provide for
students and sportspersons to excel in the arena of sports, leave alone emphasizing
the importance of sports in physical fitness. Many schools across the country barely
recognise the necessity of including sports in their schedule. The education system
need to be revamped to give sports an equal importance in the holistic upbringing of
future flag-bearers of the country.
The lack of infrastructural facilities and training of international standards are
major impediments in the process of development of sports in India. Moreover,
considering sports as a serious carrier option comes at the cost of education and job
opportunities, falling attendance, grades and the struggle to earn a livelihood. Added
to that is the cost and struggle to avail sporting facilities in various parts of the
country.
This shouldn’t be used in excuse and deter the Government to wash their
hands off the responsibility of providing for sporting facility, from the grassroots
level, in villages and small towns to upgrade the quality of infrastructure at major
towns and regional centres.
This Bill intends to give sports education and physical fitness a status at par
with other academic subjects taught at schools and hence makes sports education a
compulsory module in all schools across the country, the evaluation of which would
be through continuous grading and examinations as is the case with other subjects.
Moreover, the Bill lays guidelines for schools to arrange for special assistance
programs for those who fair poorly in the evaluation of the sports module to monitor
their progress and physical fitness. The Bill seeks to make guidelines for the building
of such infrastructure to meet the benchmark of international parameters. This is a
step towards promoting a culture of sports and making the facility easily accessible
to all sportspersons.
Also, the Bill seek to give incentives to those who excel in any field of sport by
providing concessions and financial benefits, along with mandating all Public Sector
Undertakings and Enterprises to provide compulsory quota for employment of
sportspersons and make available their sporting infrastructure to all willing
sportspersons in the country, as part of their social responsibility. Creating awreness

8
about sports and physical fitness is imperative to empower sportspersons and
students alike for their overall development, in order to harness the talent and potential
of the youth and bring international acclaim to India.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SHRIRANG APPA BARNE
June  4, 2018.

9
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides sports and physical fitness education as a compulsory
and regular subject in schools. Clause 4 mandates capacity and awareness building
programmes. Clause 6 allows for special provisions for physically challenged students
to participate in sports. Clause 7 provides that appropriate Government shall ensure
availability of necessary sports infrastructure in every schools. Clause 10 lays down
guidelines to be adhered to while commissioning sports infrastructure in the country to
meet international standard. Clause 14 makes it obligatory for the Central Government
to provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this Bill. The Bill does
involve expenditure towards building of infrastructure of international standards
whenever it commissions the building of any such infrastructure after the enactment of
the Act for Union Territory. The Bill will also involve expenditure towards infrastructural
facilities and awareness programmes. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve
expenditure from Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure
of about rupees one thousand crore per annum would involve from the Consolidated
Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to
be involved.

10
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 16 of the Bill empowers the Central Government, in consultation with the
State Governments, to make necessary rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill.
As the rules will relate to matter of detail only, the delegation of legislative power is,
therefore, of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to promote sports education and physical fitness for an all-round development of children
in the country and to develop international standard sports infrastructure in the country,
by making sports a compulsory regular subject in schools and
providing equal opportunity and incentives to sportspersons
across the country and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Shrirang Appa Barne, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—425LS(S3)—13-06-2019.