1
THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
By
SHRI SHIV AJI ADHALRAO  PATIL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Acts, 1960.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Amendment)
Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 22 of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960, the following
proviso shall be inserted at the end, namely:—
"Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to conduct of
bailgada sharyat or bullock cart race in the State of Maharashtra.".
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No.  39 of  2018
5
Amendment of
section 22.
59 of 1960.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The bullock cart race or bailgada sharyat, as locally called, is being celebrated
extensively in the district of Pune and other parts of the State of Maharashtra. This traditional
festival has a history of being celebrated for the last many centuries. However the bullock
cart race has been banned by the Union Ministry of  Environment, Forests and Climate
Change citing provisions of section 22 of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animal Act, 1960. The
Hon'ble Supreme Court had also given a similar judgment banning the bullock cart race on
7th May, 2014.
Keeping in view the sentiments of the people in mind, the State Government of
Maharashtra passed an amendment Bill legalising bullock cart races in the State. The Bill was
then sent for the kind approval of the President of India. The President has assented to the
same. However, this could not be implemented with the intervention of the High Court of
Bombay on an appeal by People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals. Thus, the people of
Maharashtra are still deprived of the celebrations of their festival and cultural heritage.
These bullock cart races or bailgada sharyat functions consist of taming of bulls as a
part of ancient culture and tradition of the Maharashtrians. At present, there is no legislation
to regulate the conduct of bullock cart race or bailgada sharyat or any such activity involving
the taming of bulls. Unless the necessary amendments are made to the Central Act, the
bullock cart races could not be conducted lawfully.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Prevention of Cruelty Act, 1960 with a view to
permit exhibition and training of bulls for bullock cart races or bailgada sharyat in the State
of Maharashtra.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SHIV AJI  ADHAL RAO PA TIL
January 17, 2018.
2
S 3 \F\BILL 2018\LS\3996LS(E)

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960
(59 OF 1960)
* * * *
22  No person shall exhibit or train—
(i) any performing animal unless he is registered in accordance with the provisions
of this Chapter;
(ii) as a performing animal, any animal which the Central Government may, by
notification in the official gazette, specify as an animal which shall not be exhibited or
trained as a performing animal.
* * * *
Restriction on
exhibition and
training of
performing
animals.
3
S 3 \F\BILL 2018\LS\3996LS(E)

MGIPMRND—3996LS(S3)—08-02-2018.
LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960.
—————
( Shri Shivaji Adhalrao Patil, M.P .)