As INTRODUCED IN Lox SABHA

Bill No. 39 of 2000

‘THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
By
‘SuriG. S. Basvaras, MP.
A
BILL
further to amend the constitution of India.

| it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
lows:—

1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2000.

2. In Part V of the Constitution, after article 151, the following Chapter and articles
\der shalll be inserted, namely: —

“CHAPTER VI
CENTRAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION

151A. (1) There shall be established a Central Bureau of Investigation consisting
a Chief Commissioner and three other Commissioners,

(2) The Chief Commissioner and other Commissioners shall be appointed by the
ident by warrant under his hand and seal.

Short title.

Insertion of
new Chapter
vi.

Central Bureau
of Investiga-
tion,


2

(3) The Chief Commissioner and other Commissioners shall be appointed on the
recommendations of a Committee consisting of. —

(i) the Prime Minister;

(ii) the Chief Justice of India;

(iii) the Leader of the Opposition in Lok Sabha;
(iv) the Union Horne Minister.

(4) The Chief Commissioner and other Commissioners of the Bureau shall hold
office for five years or until they attain the age of sixty years, whichever is earlier,

Duties of the 1518. (1) The duties of the Bureau shall be the following, namely:-—
Bureau.

(2) to inquire or cause an inquiry or investigate or cause an investigation on a
reference made by the Central Government or Police establishment of a Union territory
onan allegation of an offence committed under any law for the time being in force;

(8) suo-moto inquire or cause an inquiry or investigate or cause an investigation
to be made in any allegation of an offence committed under any law for the time
being in force in a Union territory, whether any reference has been made or not;

(०0 advise the Central Government on investigation made in any case or use of
methods for investigations;

(@) take necessary preventive steps in case the Bureau apprehends that an
offence is likely to be committed;

(०) make arrest, search any Premises, call for such information or Tecords
from any authority, office, establishment or individual for efficient
functioning;

(0 take such steps, which in the opinion of the Bureau, are necessary
in the interest of the investigation or inquiry or prevention in relation to a.
offence.

(2) The recommendations of the Bureau in each case shall be final and
implemented by the Central Government.

Secretariat of 1SIC- (1) There shall be set up a Secretariat to be known as "Central
Bureau. Bureau of Investigation Secretariat" and it shall be headed by an Assistant
Commissioner.

(2) The Central Government shall make available such officers and staff
as may be requisitioned by the Bureau from time-to-time.

(3) All the expenses of the Bureau including salaries and allowances of
Commissioners of Bureau shall be charged upon the Consolidated Fund of
India

Inquiry or 1SID. (1) Ifa complaint is received from or made by a State Government or

जे 0 any individual or any organisation, the Chief Commissioner shall inquire or cause

ae ee an inquiry or investigate or cause an investigation to be made in any allegation
"of an offence committed under any law for the time being in force in that State,

(2) The State Government shall make available all necessary information,
records, evidence, material and documents to the Bureau to facilitate the Bureag
in its functioning.

(3) Where any inquiry or investigation is under progress, the case shall not
be dealt with by the Police establishinent of that State.

(4 The inquiry report and its recommendations by the Bureau shall be
implemented by the State Government.",

15

20

25)


STATEMENT OF OBJECTSAND. REASONS

At present, Central Bureau of Investigation is under the control of the Cen-
tral Government. As such, the Bureau is unable to function independently and
Properly. There has been a persistent demand from all quarters that the Bureau
should be made an autonomous organisation.

With a view to giving full autonomy to Central Bureau of Investigation to
discharge its functions independently and efficiently and without any fear or
favour or any sort of influence, it is Proposed to give the Bureau constitutional
status. Central Bureau of Investigation should be vested with the powers to inves-
tigate or inquire cases suo-moto and also to investigate cases referred to it by the
State Governments. The action recommended by the investigation authority shall
be final and implemented by all concerned.

Hence this Bill.

New Det; G. S. BASVARAJ
February 9, 2000,


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill provides for establishment of a Central Bureau of
Investigation consisting of a Chief Commissioner and three other Commission-
ers. It also provides for establishment of a Central Bureau of Investigation Secre-
tariat consisting of such officers and staff as may be required. The Bill, if enacted
will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India in respect of ad-
ministration of the Bureau and Secretariat. The Bureau is already functioning.
However, it is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees
ten lakh is likely to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees ten lakh is also likely to be
involved.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri 6.5. Basvaraj, M.P)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—3581LS—28-2-2000,