As INTRODUCED IN Lox SABHA

v2 1

Bill No. 39 of 2006

THE DELIMITATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006
By
Suri PUNNULAL Mouate, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Delimitation Act, 2002.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Delimitation (Amendment) Act, 2006. Short. title
d
(2) Itshall be deemed to have come into force with effect from the I st January, 2002. पदक यथा
2002. 5 2. In section 2 of the Delimitation Act, 2002, in clause (f), for the words "the State of Amendment
Jammu and Kashmir", the words "the States of Jammu and Kashmir and Chhattisgarh” shall _ of section: 2.
be substituted.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS a

The creation of Chhattisgarh State on November 1, 2000 fulfilled the long standing
demand of the people of Chhattisgarh region. The passing of the Madhya Pradesh
Reorganisation Act, 2000 by both Houses of Parliament and assented to by the President of
India on 25 August, 2000 paved the way for the creation of new Chhattisgarh State in the
Union of India. The State of Chhattisgarh is one of the backward States of India. It is evident
from the fact that large number of seats in the legislative assembly of the State have been
reserved for the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.

At present, the strength of Chhattisgarh Legislative Assembly is 90, out of which ten
seats are reserved for Scheduled Castes and thirty-four seats are reserved for Scheduled
Tribes. Similarly, there is provision for reservation of two seats for Scheduled Castes and
four seats for Scheduled Tribes in Lok Sabha from the State.

The census conducted in the year 2001 shows that the population growth rate of
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the State has declined whereas the growth rate of
general category population has increased. Whereas in the census conducted in the years
1971 and 1991, population growth rate of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes popula-
tion in the same region showed upward progress.

Now on the basis of figures of census 2001, the Delimitation Commission is carrying
out the delimitation exercise by reducing the number of seats reserved for Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes in Chhattisgarh Legislative Assembly. Similarly, the delimitation exer-
cise is being carried out by reducing the number of seats reserved for Scheduled Castes in
Lok Sabha from the State. In case, Delimitation Commission recommends the reduction of
seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes on the basis of census figures, it will be a
great injustice to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. Besides, in the census data of
2001 around 500 to 600 villages in the State of Chhattisgarh have been shown as deserted but
in fact, these villages are, at present, well inhabited.

In order to overcome the above anomalies, it is essential that the State of Chhattisgarh
should not be covered under any exercise of the Delimitation Commission and should also
be exempted from the Delimitation Act, 2002. Thus the reserved seats will remain intact which
will prove to be helpful in fulfilling the demands and aspirations of the people.

The matter pertaining to irregularities committed during the census 2001 in respect of
Chhattisgarh State has already been brought to the notice of his Excellency, the President of
India, the Hon'ble Prime Minister, the Minister of Home Affairs, the Minister of Law, Election
Commission and Chief Minister of Chhattisgarh. The matter is still pending consideration.
Therefore, it is essential to suspend the delimitation exercise in the State of Chhattisgarh.

Hence the Bill.

New DELHI;

March 6, 2006. PUNNULAL MOHALE

n


(a)
(6)
(०
@
(ष)

(0 "State" includes a Union Territory

*

*

ANNEXURE

EXTRACT FROM THE DELIMITATION ACT, 2002

* * *
* * *
* . *
* * *
* * *
an * *
* * *

include the State of Jammu and Kashmir.

*

* *

*

ry having a Legislative Assembly but does not

Definitions.


LOK SABHA ~

A
BILL
further to amend the Delimitation Act, 2002.