 Bill No. 39 of 2023
THE CRIMINAL LAWS (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2023
By
DR. NISHIKANT D UBEY, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860 and the
Code of  Criminal Procedure, 1973 .
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of
India as follows:–
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Criminal Laws (Amendment)
Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
5
 AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title
and
commencement.

2
CHAPTER II
AMENDMENTS TO THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
2. In Chapter II of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter in this Chapter
referred to as the Penal Code), after section 52A, the following section shall
be inserted, namely:—
“52 B. The words “Social boycott” refer to any action or gesture,
oral or written, by a member of a community or a caste panchayat, such
as those mentioned, but not restricted to, in the descriptions hereinafter
following, namely:
First.—The prevention or obstruction, or attempt to prevent or
obstruct any person from partaking or observing any social, religious or
traditional custom or usage or ceremony or from taking part in any social,
religious or community functions, procession, assembly or meeting;
Second.—The refusal or denial or attempt to refuse or deny any person
the right to perform marriage, funeral or any other religious or customary
rites and ceremonies as the persons of his community ordinarily perform;
Third.—The act or attempt to commit or cause social ostracism on
any grounds;
Fourth.—The refusal or purposeful exclusion of any person from
engaging in the society by hampering social or commercial ties of such person
with his community, thereby affecting his right to life and personal liberty;
Fifth.—The prevention or obstruction, or attempt to prevent or
obstruct any person from accessing any place ordinarily used or intended
to be used for any religious, charitable or public purpose that is either
established or maintained wholly or partly by the person’s own community,
for and on behalf of the community using the funds contributed by such
community and is normally available for use to or by any other person of
his community;
Sixth.—The prevention or obstruction, or attempt to prevent or
obstruct any person from accessing any school, educational institution,
medical institution, cemetery, burial ground or any other place used by,
or intended to be used by, or for the benefit of his community;
Seventh.—The prevention or obstruction, or attempt to prevent or
obstruct any person from enjoying any benefit under a charitable trust or
waqf created for the benefit of his community;
Eighth.—The act of inciting or provoking or encouraging any person,
directly or indirectly to sever social, religious, professional or business
relations with other persons of his community;
Ninth.—The prevention or obstruction, or attempt to prevent or
obstruct any person of belonging to his community from enjoying human
rights;
Tenth.—The discrimination or act of discriminating against a person
by his community on the basis of morality, political inclination, sexuality,
gender expression or any other basis;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Insertion of
new section
52B.
Social boycott.
45 of 1860

3
Eleventh.—The expulsion, directly or indirectly, of any person from
his community;
Twelfth.—Any other similar acts.”
3. After section 298 of the Penal Code, the following Chapter, shall be
inserted, namely:—
CHAPTER XV A
OFFENCES RELA TING TO SOCIAL BOYCOTT
298A. Whoever imposes, or causes to impose any kind of social boycott
on a person, shall, on conviction, be punished with imprisonment for not less
than three years, but which may extend to seven years, or with fine which
may extend to five lakhs rupees, or with both.
298B. Whoever gatheres, congregates, assembles, or participates in a
meeting of a caste panchayat, at any time and at any place, with the view or
intent to deliberate on the issue of imposing social boycott on any person,
shall, on conviction be punished with imprisonment for not less than three
years, but which may extend to seven years or with fine which may extend to
five lakhs rupees, or with both.
CHAPTER III
AMENDMENT TO THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973
4. In the First Schedule to the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, under
the heading “1. OFFENCES UNDER THE INDIAN PENAL CODE”, after
entries related to section 298, the following entries shall be inserted, namely:—
 1 2 3 4 5 6
“298A Imposing Imprisonment Cognizable Bailable Magistrate
social for not less of the first
boycott on than three years, class
a person or but which may
group of extend to seven
persons. years, or with
fine which may
extend to five
lakhs rupees,
or with both.
298B Deliberating Imprisonment Ditto Ditto Ditto
on the issue for not less
of imposing than three years,
social but which may
boycott. extend to seven
years, or with
fine which may
extend to five
lakhs rupees,
or with both.
5
10
15
20
Insertion of
new sections
298A and B.
Imposing social
boycott on a
person or group
of persons.
Deliberating on
the issue of
imposing social
boycott.
Amendment of
First Schedule.
2 of 1974
CHAPTER XVA.– OFFENCES RELATING TO SOCIAL BOYCOTT
25
30
35
40

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Article 21 of the Constitution guarantees the life and personal liberty
to all persons. It also guarantees the right to such persons to live a dignified
life. The bare text of the article reads as, “No person shall be deprived of
his life or personal liberty except according to a procedure established by
law”. Despite a constitutional obligation on the state to protect the
fundamental rights of its citizens, India witnesses a parallel system; one
that imposes harsh socio-economic extra judicial punishments on persons
and communities that in their orthodox and conservative views, transgress
certain social mores or diktats.
Social boycotts imposed by “caste panchayats” result in deprivation of
basic human rights and ostracisation of those who are boycotted. This is done
through planned and systematic social exclusion from not just religious
ceremonies and gatherings, but also by placing restrictions on physical and
social mobility, imposition of physical and social segregation and isolation,
denial of employment, and even goes to the extent of halting sale of necessities
of life, such as food and water. In a free and fair society, there must be no
space or opportunity given for such extrajudicial actions that hamper an
individual, or a community’s right to life and personal liberty. The existence
of social boycotts to this very day, has led to psychological, physiological
and economic impact and trauma on marginalised communities. It is necessary
to criminalize such actions that go against the spirit of our Constitution.
Hence this Bill.
   NEW DELHI;                                        NISHIKANT DUBEY
January 16, 2023.
4

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860 and the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
————
(Dr. Nishikant Dubey, M.P .)