5
As introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 39 of 2024
THE RESERV ATION FOR THE SCHEDULED CASTES, THE 
SCHEDULED TRIBES AND THE OTHER BACKWARD 
CLASSES IN PRIV ATE SECTOR BILL, 2024
By
Adv . Chandra Shekhar Azad, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for reservation for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes  
and the Other Backward Classes in private sector and  
for matters connected therewith.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy- fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Reservation for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled 
Tribes and the Other Backward Classes in Private Sector Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Short title and 
commencement.

2. In this, act, unless the context otherwise requires,–
(a) “private sector” means any organization, establishment, educational institutes or 
institution which is owned fully by private individual or corporation or limited company 
or an organization in which the Government of India or a State has no financial interest 
and wherein  not less than twenty persons are employed; and
(b) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall give due encouragement to private sector to make 
provisions for reservation in favour of persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the 
Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward Classes in their establishment/organisation.
(2) The encouragement as provided in sub-section (1) may include–
(i) special concessions under various existing Central schemes; and
(ii) loans from nationalized banks at lower rate of interest.
4. The Central Government shall cause an annual report to be laid before both the 
Houses of Parliament on the action taken under this Act.
5. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both the Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that 
the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form 
or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5
10
15
20
Definitions.
Government 
provide 
incentives to 
Private Sector to 
make provisions 
for reservation.
2
Annual report.
Power to make 
rules.

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
At present, reservation is available for persons belonging to the Other backward Classes, 
the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in service and posts under the Central 
Government. The number of posts and appointments in Government sector come down 
considerably, especially after the economic liberalization. Today, private sector has become 
more important and job oriented. In such scenario, the private sector is more involved in 
the nation building activities alongwith infrastructure and economical projects. People 
belonging to Other Backward Classes, Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes find it very 
difficult to get into Government service due to availability of less number of posts.
Under the provisions of article 16(4) and 16(4A) of the Constitution, Public Sector 
Undertakings (PSU) including Public Sector Banks under the Central Government and 
Financial Institutions are following the instructions issued by the Government of India 
mutatis mutandis . Implementation of the Provisions or reservation is a pre-requisite for 
such voluntary organizations, autonomous bodies/institutions etc. where the body receiving 
grant-in-aid, employs  more than twenty people on regular basis and minimum fifty per cent. 
of its recurring expenditure is met by grant-in-aid of the Central Government and such body 
should be a registered society of any cooperative society and should be in receipt of rupees 
two lakh or more from the Consolidated Fund of India as annual grant-in-aid for general 
purpose. 
There are several schemes and special provision in the country for the welfare of the 
people belonging to the Other Backward Classes, Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. 
However, in spite of all these measures, there has not been any big change visible in their 
socio-economic status. In this situation, their presence is very vital in the private sector in 
order to ensure their all-round development.
At present, there is no provision for reservation of persons belonging to Other Backward 
Classes, Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in private sector. However, the Government 
also cannot pressurise them to provide reservation. In such a scenario, the private sector 
can be incentivised to provide reservation to persons belonging to Other backward Classes, 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes by way of making provisions for concessions and 
special schemes. 
Hence this Bill.
New Delhi;                                   C H A N D R A  S H E K H A R  A Z A D  
June 26, 2024.

LOK SABHA
a
BILL
to provide for reservation for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes  
and the Other Backward Classes in private sector and  
for matters connected therewith.
(Adv. Chandra Shekhar Azad, M.P .) 