Bill NO.3 of 1959 
THE INDIAN INCOME-TAX (AMENDMENT) 
BILl. , 195'9 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 

Bill No. 3 of 1159 
THE INDIAN INCOME-TAX (AMENDMEN1J BILL, 1959 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to alnend the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Tenth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Indian Income-tax (Amendment) Short title. 
Act, 1959. 
19U" S Z. In section 34 0 [ the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922 (hereinafter Amendment 
referred to as the principal Act), after sub-section (3), the followine of ae«ion u· 
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
1.9-1 
10 
"(4) A notice Wlder clause (a) of sub-section (1) may be 
issued at any time notwithstanding that at the time of the is.ue 
of the notice the period of eight years specified in that sub-section 
before its amendment by clause (a) of lection 18 of the 
Finan~e Act, 1956, had expired in respect of the year to which 
the notice relates.". 
3 After section 49E of iht' principal Act, the following section nscnion of 
IS .h all be insermd, name ly: __ ne:naectlOll 
49 ... · 
"49EE. (1) Where in pursuance of any settlement relatina Power to let 
to the assessment, re-assessment or case of any person made or ~~~~l~~~:;: 
purported to have been made before the 17th day of January, ir ~he pot-
H~59, whether under this Act or otherwise, any sum of money Z!~:'JIl"~ 

19ainat ta~ 
found due 
under assess-
ments etc., 
thereafter to 
be made. 
1 
ot any security for the payment of any sum of money has beefi 
paid or furnished by him, or on his behalf by any other person, 
no claim for the refund of any sum so paid or for the return of 
any security so furnished shall be entertained or allowed on the 
ground that the settlement is invalid- S 
(a) in any case where a notice under section 34 in 
respect of the income, profits or gains relating to the settle-
ment aforesaid has been issued before the 17th day of 
January, 1959. and 
(b) in any other case, for a period of two years from 10 
that date and, if during the period of the said two years any 
notice under section 34 is issued, pending the completion of 
the assessment, re-assessment or settlement in pursuance of 
such notice; 
and, accordingly, no application, suit or other legal proceeding IS 
shall lie for the refund of any such sum of money or the retuI'B 
of any such security-
(i) pending the completion of the assessment, re-assess-
ment or settlement in pursuance of the notice referred to in 
clause (a); or 20 
(ii) during the period 
clause (b) or pending the 
re-assessment or settlement 
referred to in· that clause. 
of two years referred to in 
completion of the assessment, 
in pursuance of the notice 
(2) The Income-tax Officer, Appellate Assistant Commis- 25 
sioner or the Commissioner. as the case may be, may set off the 
amount referred to in sub-section (1) or the amount of the 
security referred to in that sub-section which may be realised 
for the purpose against the tax, interest, penalty or any other sum 
which may become payable by reason of any assessment, 30 
re-assessment or settlement made in pursuance of the notice 
referred to in clause (a) of that sub-section or in pursuance of 
any such notice issued within the period of two years referred 
to in clause (b) of that sub-section. 
(3) In computing the period of limitation prescribed for any 3S 
legal proceeding in relation 'to any such sum or security aforesaid, 
the time during which any such proceeding cannot be instituted 
by reason of the provisions contained in sub-section (1) shall 
be exc1uded. ... 

3 
4. No notice issued under clause (4) of sub-section (1) tlf section Savil'g tlfnn-
34 of the principal Act at any time before the commencement of this tices, 8S&CS~­menb, etc. In 
Act and no assessment, re-assessment or settlement made or other cenain cases. 
proceeding taken in consequence of such notice shall be called in 
5 question in any court, tribunal or other authority merely on the 
ground that at the time the notice was issued or at the time the 
assessment or re-assessment was made, the time within which such 
notice should have been issued or the assessment or re-assessment 
should ha\'e been made under that -section as in force before its 
10 amendment by clause (a) of section 18 of the Finance Act, 1956, had 
expired. 
5. (1) The Indian Income-tax (Amendment) Ordinance, 1959, is Repeal and 
hereby repealed. savin,. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action 
IS taken (including any notice issued) in the exercise of any powers 
conferred by or under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have 
been done or taken in the exercise of the powt:!rs conferred by or 
under this Ac: as if this Act were in force on the day on which such 
thing was done or action was taken. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
TAe objecti of the Bill are two-fold:--
(i) to make it clear that section 34, as amended by section 
1. of the Finance Act, 1956, applies to all escaped incomes relat-
in, to any year commencing from the year ending on 311t 
March, U~41; 
(ii) to enable the GovernIIient to set ot! the amounti 
already paid by assessees in pursuance of settlements against 
taxes found due in pursuance of proceedinis to be completed 
hereafter. 
2. Section 34(1) (a) of the Income-tax Act as it stood prior to itl 
amendment by section 18 of the Finance Act, 1956 (18 of 1956) per-
mitted assessment or re-assessment as contemplated in clause (a) 
of sub-section (1) of section 34 within a per'od of eight years from 
the assessment year to which sucll assessment or re-assessment 
related. This time limit was removed by an amendment in 1956 
which empowered the Income-tax Department to re-open assess-
ments in cases of escapement amounting to rupees one lakh or 
more for any back year without limitation of time. subject only to 
the condition that the assessment reo~ned did not relate to any 
year prior to the year ending on 31st March, 1941. However, it has 
recently been held by the Calcutta High Court that in the absence 
of an express provision to that effect, the amended section cannot 
be applied to assessments which had become more than eight years 
old by 1st April, 1956, The present Bill seeks to place this matter 
beyond doubt by an amendment to section 34 of the Act. 
3. The Supreme Court has, by a judgment delivered recently, 
held that the proceedings completed under the Taxation on Income 
(Investigation Commission) Act, 1947 on or after the 26th January, 
1950 resulting in settlements under section 8A of the said Act offend 
article 14 of the Constitution. It is now proposed to re-open these 
cases under the ordinary law. Pending completion of the fresh 
proceedings, the Bill provides th~t po claim for refunds shall be 
entertained or allowed and that the 3mounts already paid shall be 
available for being set off against any sums which may be found 
due as a result of the fresh proceedings. Any right which the 
uaessee may have in regard to the sums so paid is, however. 
sought to be protected by sub-eection <,,> of clause 3 of the Bill. 
4 

S 
4. An Ordinance (No. 1 of 1959) wail promulgated b1 the Pre.-
dent on the 17th January, UJS9, amending the Income-tax Act on 
the above linea. This Bill replaces that Ordinance. 
MORARJI DESAI. 
Haw DIILHI; 
The 30th Janua'1l. lD50. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
As explained in the Statement of Objects and Reasons, if this 
Bill is passed into law, the Income Tax Department will have to 
take action under section 34 of the Income tax Act to re-assess the 
incomes in all the cases of settlement affected by the recent 
Supreme Court's judgment. There is already a special organisation 
called the Directorate of Special Investigation to which the disposal 
of Commission cases invalidated by the previous judgments of the 
Supreme Court has been entrusted. For taking over the fresh 
cases to be re-assessed now, it will be necessary to add to the exist-
ing staff of the Directorate. The additional expenditure on the 
'extra staff is estimated at Rs. 4' 81 lakhs. 
I.-VOLUME OF WORK 
Number of cases to be assessed. is 516 involving 7,224 assess-
ments for both Income-tax and Excess Profits Tax. 
II.-REQUIREMENT OF PERSONNEL AND FINANCE 
A.-OFFICERS 
I. Inspec ing A8Sis~aot Com-
missi0ners 
2. Ineome-tax Officers (Class I, 
GrdI) 
B.-STAFF 
3 Inspectors 
4. Supervisors (Grade I) 
5. Head Clerks 
6. Stctlographera 
7. S'me-1YPis's 
8. Upper Division Clerks 
9. Lower Division Clerks 
No. 
3 3 x I2.00 X I2. 
10 10 X 800 >.< 12 
6 6 x 250 x I2. 
3 3 x 350 X 12 
5 5 x 250 X 12 
3 3 x 150 X 12 
10 10 x 140 x I2 
48 48 x 150 x I2. 
19 19 x 120 x 12 
lIay .... Ra. 
C-INClDiNTAL EXPBNDITURB Rs. 
TOTAL ...... Rs 
Coet 
Ra. 
43,200 
96,000 
18,000 
12,600 
15,000 
5>400 
16,800 
86,400 
27,3 60 
3,21,000 
1,60,000 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE INDIAN INCOME-TAX ACT, 1922 
(11 01' 1922) 
• • • • 
34. (1) 1£-
(a) the Income-tax Officer has reason to believe that by rea-
son of the omission or failure on the part of an assessee to 
make a return of his income under section. 22 for any year or to 
disclose fully and truly all material facts necessary for his assess-
ment for that year, income, profits or gains charieable to income-
tax have escaped assessment for that year, or have been under-
assessed, or assessed at too Iowa rate, or have been made the 
subject of excessive relief under the Act, or excessive loss or 
depr.:!ciation allowance has been computed, or 
(b) notwithstanding that there has been no omission or 
failure as mentioned in clause (a) on the part of the asse~e, 
the Income-tax Officer has in consequence of information in 
his possess'on reason to believe that income. profits or gains 
chargeabloe to income-tax have escaped assessment for any 
year, or have been under-assessed, or assessed at too low a 
rate, or have been made the subject of excessive relief under 
this Act, or that excessive loss or depreciation allowance has 
been computed, 
he may in cases falling under clause (a) at any time and in cases 
falling under clause (b) at any time within four years of the end 
of that year, serve on the assessee, or, if the assessee is a company, 
on the principal offiC'er thereof, a notice containing all or any of 
the requirements which may be included in a notice under sub-
section (2) of section 22 and may proceed to assess or re-assess such 
income, profits or gains or recompute the loss or depreciation allow-
ance; and the provisions of this Act shall, so far as may be, apply 
accordingly as if the notice were a notice issued under that sub-
section: 
Provided that the Income-tax Officer shall not issue a notice 
under clause (a) of sub-section (1)-
(i) for any year prior to the year ending on the 31st day 
of ~arch, 1941; 
7 

~ 
(U) for any year, if eight years have elapsed afoor the 
expiry of that year, unless the income, profits or gains charge-
able to income-tax which have escaped assessment or have 
been under-assessed or assessed at too low a rate or have been 
made the subject of excessive relief under this Act, or the 10s8 
or depreciation allowance which has been computed in exceSI, 
amount to, or are likely to amount to, one lakh of rupees or 
more in the agil'eiate, either for that year, or for that year 
and any other year or years after which or after each of which 
eight years have elapsed, not beini a year or yearll endine 
before the 31st day of March 1941; 
(iii) for any year, unless he has recorded his reasons for 
doing so, and, in any case falling under clause (ii), unless the 
Central Board of Revenue, and, in any other case, the Com-
missioner, is satisfied on such reasons recorded that it is a fit 
case for the issue of such notice: 
Provided further that the Income-tax Officer shall not issue a 
notice under this sub-section for any year, after the expiry of two 
years from that year, if the person on whom the assessment or re-
assessment is to be made in pursuance of the notice is a person 
d'eemed to be the 8ient of a non-resident person under section 43: 
Provided further that the tax shall be chargeable at the rate at 
which it would have been charged had the income, profits or gain; 
not escaped assessment or full assessment, as the case may be. 
Explanation.-Production before the Income-tax Officer of account 
books or other evidence from which material facts could with due 
diliience have been discovered by the Income-tax Officer will not 
necei5arily amount to disclosure within the meanini of this .ection 

LOK SABRA 
A • 
BILL 
further to amend the Indian Income-tax Act, 192Z. 
The President has, in pursuance of clauses (I) and (3) of article 
117 and clause (I) of article 274 of the Constitution of 
India, recommended to Lok Sabha the introduction and 
consideration of the Bill. 
GIPND- LS 1- 18ar, LS-6-2-S~16SO 
M. N. KAUL, 
S~CTelary. 
(Shri MoraTji Desai, 
Minister of Finan~) 