As ~'t7CED IN LoK SABRA O%( 
, 8 --AR \961 
Bill No. 3 of 1967 
THE LAND ACQUISITION (AMENDMENT AND 
- VALIDATION) BILL, 1967 
A 
Sn..L 
further to amend the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, and to tnllidate 
certain acquisitions of land under the said Act. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighteenth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the· Land Acquisition (Amendment and Short 
Validation) Act, 1967. title. 
S 2. In section 5A of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (hereinafter Amend-
referred to as the principal A:c~), in sub-section (2), for the words ::!n of 
"submit the case for the decIsIon of the appropriate Government, SA. 
together with the record of the proCeedings held by him and a report 
contatni'ng his recommendations on the objection.", the words, 
10 figures and brackets "either make a report in respect of the land 
which has been notifted under aeciion 4, sub-section (1), or make 
cWfe:rent reports U1 respect of ciitferent parCels of such bm~ to the 

Amend-
mentof 
sect1on6. 
Valida-
tioDof 
certain 
acquisi-
tions. 
2 
appropriate Government, containing his recommendations on the 
objections, together with the record of the proceedings held by him, 
for the decision of that Government." shall be substituted. 
3. In section 6 of the principal Act,-
(4) in sub-section (1) ,-
(i) after the words "certify its orders", the following 
shall be inserted, namely:-
'., anet different declarations may be made from time 
to time in respect of different parcels of any land covered 
s 
by the same notification under section 4, sub-section (1), 10 
irrespective of whether one report or difterent reports 
has or have been made under section 5A, sub-sec-
tion (2)"; 
(ii) for the words "Provided that", the following shall 
be substituted, namely:- IS 
"Provided that, no declaration in respect of any 
particular land covered by a notification under sec-
tion 4, sub-section (1) , published after the com-
mencement of the Land Acquisition (Amendment and 7 
Validation) Ordinance, 1967, shall be made aftrr the 20 1 of 196 . 
expiry of three years frem the date of such publication: 
Provided further that"; 
(·b) in suh-section (2), for the words "The declaration", the 
words "Every declaration" shall be substituted. 
4. (1) Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any 25 
court to the contrary,-
(4) no acquisition of land made or purporting to have been 
made under the principal Act before the commencement of the 
Land Acquisition (Amendment and Validation) Ordinance, 1967, 1 of 1967. 
and no action taken or thing done (including any order made, 30 
agreement entered into, or notification published) in connection 
with such acquisition shall 'be deemed to be invalid or ever to 
have become invalid merely on the ground-
(i) that one or more Collectors have performed the 
functions of Collector under the prinCipal Act in respect of 35 
the land covered by the same notification under sub-sec-
tion (1) of section 4 of the principal Act; or 
(ii) that one or more reports have beeB made under sub-
sectiOll (2) of. secti~ 5A of the principal.Act. whether. in 

I 
LOX S,UH1 
-
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE LAND ACQUISITION (AMENDMENT A.i.iD VALIDATION) BILL, 1967 
(To be/As introduced in Lok SabQe) 
1. Page 2, line 16,-
after "that" Wi "," 
2 • Page:3 , line 8,-
after "re'ports" insert "made" 
3. Page 4, line 7,-
aft~r "in respect of" wert. "the" 
4. ~e 4, lin~ 12,-
after." case" ~ ., • 
Page 5, line 5,-
.2.m!1 " rna k elf 
6. Page 5, line 26,-
after "ex::>iry of" omit "the" 
7. PaSe 5, line 27,-
.t2l: "thi3" ~" t.he" 
Phalg una.,888 (Saka) 

Repeal 
and 
. saving. 
S 
10 
IS 
f('Spect ()f the entire land, Or different parcels thereof, cov-
m'ed by the same notification under sub-section (1) of sec-
tion 4 of- the principal Act; or 
(iii) that one or more declarations have been made under 
section 6 of the principal Act in respect of difIf.'l'ent parcels 
of the laud covered by the same notification under sub-sec-
tion (1) of section 4 of the principal Act in pursuance of 
one or more reports under section SA thereof; 
(b) any acquisition in pursuance- of any notification pub-
lished under sub-section (1) of section 4 of the principal Act 
before the commencement of the Land Acquisition (Amend-
ment and Validation) Ordinance, 1967, may be made after such lof 196'1. 
commencement and no such acquisition and no action taken or 
thing done (including any order made, agreement entered into, 
or notification published), whether before or after such com-
mencement, in ccnnfction with such acquisition shall be deemed 
to be invalid merely on the grounds referred to in clause (a) 
or any of them. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything cont::.' ned in clause (b) of sub-
2.0 section (1), no declaration under secticn 6 of the principal Act in 
respect of any land which has been not ned before the commence-
ment of the Land Acqu~ition (Amendment and Validation) 
Ordinance, 1967, under sub-section (1) of section 4 of the principal J o·{ 1967. 
Act, shall be made after the expiry of two years from the commence-
25 ment of the said Ordinance. 
S. (1) The Land Acquisition (Amendment and Validation) 
Ordinance, 1967, i,s hereby repealed. J of 1967. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action 
taken under the prinCipal Act as amended by the said Ordinance 
30 shall 'be, deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act 
as amended by this Act as if this Act had come into force on the 
20th day of January, 1967. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In acquisition of land for big projects, the practice generally 
followed under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, is that a single noti-
fication is issued under section 4(1) of the Act which indicates that 
a particular area of land is needed or is likely to be needed for a 
public purpose. This is the'n followed by one or more declarations 
under section 6 of the Act in respect of land specified in the afore-
said notification to the effect that such land is needed fOit a publlc 
purpose or for a company, as and when the plans are completed 
ror the various stages of the project, e.g., plant, township and an-
cillary reqUIrements. 
2. In their Judgment dated 9th F'ebruary, 1966 in the case; the State 
of Madhya Pradesh VeT8U8 Vishnu Prasad Sharma and others, the 
Supreme Court held that once a declaration under section 6 of the 
Act is issued whether it be in respect of a part of the land com-
prised in the ~otification under section 4 (1) or in respect of the 
whole of it, the effect of initial notification is exhausted and no 
further declarations Wlder section 6 of the Act are sustainable. In 
other words, Government cannot acquire land by means of succes-
sive declarations following the not.iflCation under section 4(1) in 
respect of a particular area. The Supreme Court has construed the 
acts done under sections 4, 5A and 6 of the Act as part and parcel 
of a single process. 
3. The above decision of the Supreme Court however has the 
e1fect of upsetting a large number of proceedings for land acquisi-
tion for various public purposes throughout the country as in most 
cases of bigger projects, acquisition has been dO'ne in stages con-
sistent with the requirements of the situation and a single notifica-
tion under section 4(1) has been followed with more than one de-
claration under section 6 of the Act. It was not possible to reopen 
all such cases and to start proceedings afresh as it would have 
seriously dislocated projects for which land had been acquired and 
compensation paid. 
4.. Consequently, to overcome the adverse effect of the Supreme 
Court Judgment and in view of the urgency of the situation affect-
ing many important pmjects the Laud AcquisitloD Act, 1894, was 
... 

! 
amended with retrospective effect by the promulgation of the Land 
Acquisition (Amendment and Validation) Ordinance, 1967 en the 
20th January, 1967 to provide for submission of either one report 
in respect of the land which has been notified under section 4 (1) or 
make different reports in respect of different parcels of such land 
to the appropriate Government containing the recommendations of 
the Collector(s) on the objections submitted by the inteTeited per-
sons under section SA (1) of the Act to the acquisition of the land 
covered by the notification under section 4 (1) or of any land in the 
locality, as the case may be. The Ordinance specifically provides 
that, if necessary, more than one declaration may be issued from 
time to time in respect of different parcels of any land covered by 
the same notification under section 4, sub-section (1) of the Alt 
irrespective of the fact whether one report or di1ferent reports has 
or have been made under section 5A, sUb-section (2) of the Act. 
5· At the same time, care has been taken to ensure that land ae-
,~uisition proceedings do not linger on for unduly long time. The 
aforesaid Ordinance, therefore, provi~ that no declaration under 
section 6 of the Act should be issued i'n respect of any par~icu1ar land 
I!overed by a notification under section 4(1) published after the 
commencement of the Ordinance, after the expiry of three years 
from the date of such publication. In case of pending proceedings 
it has been provided that 'no declaration under section 6 of the Act 
in respect of any land which has been notified before the commence-
ment of the above Ordinance, under sub-section (1) of section 4 of 
the Act may be hloiued after the expiry of the tHo years from the 
t!ommenceme'nt of this Ordinance. 
6. It i!; necessary that the aforesaid: Ordinance be converted into 
un Act of Parliament. 'The proposed Bill seeks to achieve th5s 
Object. 
NEW DELHI; 
Th~ 13th March, 1967. ANNASAHIB P. SHINDE. 

Bearing 
of abjec-
tions. 
D~lara­
lion that 
Iltldis 
required 
for a 
public 
purpoee, 
• 
ANNEXURF! 
ExTRACTS FROM THE LAND ACQUISITION ACT, 1894 
(1 OF 1894) 
• • • 
PART U 
ACQ~ITION 
• • • • • 
Objections 
SA. (1) • • • • 
• 
(2) Every objection under sub-section (1), shall be made to the 
Collector in writing, and the Collectc'r shall give the objector an 
opportunity of being heard either in person or by pleader and shall, 
after hearing all such objections and after making such further 
inquiry, if any, as he thinks necessary, submit the case for the deci-
sion of the appropriate Government, ~gether with the record of the 
proceedings held by him and a report containing his recommenda-
tions on the objections. The decis;on of the appropriate Government 
on the objections shall be final. 
• • • • • 
DeclaratiO'Tl of intended acquisition 
6. (1) Subject to the provisions of Part VII of this Act, when 
the appropriate Government is satisfied, after considering the report, 
if any. made under section SA, sub-section (2), that any particular 
land is needed for a public purpose, or for a Company, a declaration 
:mall be made to that effect under the signature of a Secretary to 
such Government or of some officer duly authorised to certify its 
orders: 
Provided that no such declaration shall be made unless the com-
pensation to be awarded for such property is to be paid by a Com-
pany, or wholly or partly out of public revenues or some fund 
controlled or managed by a local authority. 
(2) The declaration shall be published in the Official Gazette, 
and shall state the district or other territorial division in which the 
1and is situate, the purpose for which it is needed, its approximate 
area, and where a plan shall have been made of the land, the place 
where such plan' may be inspected. 
• • • • • 
6 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Land Acqwsition Act, 1894, and to 
validate certain acquisitions of land under the said Act. 
(Shri Annasahib Shinde, 
Minister of State in the 
Mmistry of Food mad 
Agriculture. ) 