• 
./ .. 
a ot 1181 
11 of 1922. 
>. 
Bm N. J .1 ~I's 
THE INCOJdE-T~ (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1965 
A 
BU,T. 
/urthet" to czmend the Incom..!-t:u Act, 1961 and to tHlhddte cenai" 
aearcMs under that Act. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixteenth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called "the Income-tax (Amendment) Act, Short 
1985. title. 
%. For.eetion 132" of the Income-tax Act, 1161 (hs'.einafter referred Subm- f 
, to u the principal Act), the following sections Ihall be lU1Mtituted, :~ 0 
namely: - MCtioDI 
for tee-
_ " "" tion ISS. 
'132. (1) Where the DireetOr of Inspec:tion or the Commis- Search, 
IIioner, In consequence of information In his possession, has reason and 
10 to believe that- .eizure . 
20 
..., (4) any person to whom a summons under sub-sec-
tion (1) of section 37 of the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922 or 
under sub-section (1) of section 131 of this Act, or a riotice 
under sub-section (4) of section 22 of the Indian Income-tax 
Act, 1922 or under sub-eection (1) of section 142 of thlll ,Act 
was Issued to produce, or cause to be produced, any books 
of Iccount, or other documents has omitted or failed to pro-
duce, or cause to be produced, such books of account, or other 
documents as required by such summons or notice, Or 
(b) any person to wham a aummons or notice u afore-
aaid has been or might be t.ued will not, or would not, 

! • 
.. ' 
I 
produce, or cause to be prodUced my boob at account, or 
other dOClpDenta which will be useful for, or relevant to, any 
proceeding under the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922 or under 
thfI Act, or 
(e) any person Is in possession of any money, bullion, , 
jewellery or other valuable article or thing and such money, 
bullion, jewellery or other valuable article or thing represents 
11 ot 1122. 
either wholly or partly Income or property which has not 11 of 1m. 
been c:Usclosed for the purposes of the Indian Income-tax Act, 
1922 or this Act (hereinafter in this section referred to as 10 
the undisclosed income or property), 
he may authorise ant Deputy Director of Inspection, Inspecting 
Aul8tant Commissioner, Assistant Director of Inspection or 
Income-tax Of!lcer (hereinafter referred to as the authorised 
of!lcer) to- 15 
(I) enter and search any building or place where be has 
reelOn to suspect that such books of account, documents, 
money, bullion, jewellery t or other valuable article or thing 
are kept; 
(Ii) break open the lock of any door, box, locker, safe, Xl 
almirah or other receptacle for exercis;n~ the powers con-
ferred by clause (i) where the keys thereof are not avanable; 
(iii) seIZe any such book, of account. other doeumeuts, 
money, 1mlUon, jewellery, or other valuable article or thJDg 
foaDd as a result of such search. 25 
(it7) place marks of identification on any books. of 
.eeount or other documents or make or cause to be made 
.. extracta or copies therefrom; 
(t7) make a note or an inventory of any such money, 
bullion, jewellery or other valuable article or thing. 30 
(2) The authorised omcer may requisition the ~ervtces of 
any Police oftlcer or of any omcer of the Central Government, 
. Or of both, to assist him for all or any of the purposes specifled 
. tD sUb-section (1) and it shall be the duty of every such omcer 
to comply with such' reqUisition. 3' 
(3) The authorised officer may, where it is not practicable 
to sef7.e any book of account, document, money, bullien, jewellery, 
or other valuable article or thing, serve an order on the owner 
or the person who is in immediate possession or control thereof 
that he shan· not remove, part with or otherwise deal with it 40 
except with the previous permissIon of such ofticer and such 

Ii at 1822. 
10 
IS 
II 01 1m. 
·1 / 
. . 
oalCer may take such steps as may be nece.uy ~ ...ma, 
compliance with this sub-section. 
(4) The authorised officer may, during the com. of the 
aearch or seizure, examine on oath any person who u founcl to 
be in possession or control of any bocb of account, clocUmenta, 
money, bullion, jewellery, or other valuable article or thing ancl 
any statement made by such person during IUch examin'Uon 
may thereafter be used in evidence in any proceed1q under the 
Indian Income-tax Act, 1922 or under this Act. 
(5) Where any money, bullion, jewellery, or other valuabie 
article or thing (hereinafter in this aeotion and section 132A 
referred to' as the assets) is seized under sub-section (1), the 
Income-tax Officer, after aifording a reaso~ble op~ty to 
the person concerned for being heard and making sucli enquir)' 
as may be prescribed, .shall, within ninety days of the ~ 
mak~ an order, with the previous approval of the the Commi .. 
ai.oner,-
(i) estimating the undisClosed income (lDcludfn. the 
income from the undisclosed. property) .In a .summ.ry maD-
ner to the best of his judgment on. the basts of IUch matariall 
as are available with him; 
(ii) calculationg the amount of tax 011 the tDcome., 
estimated in acoordanec with the proviIIoQI of the ;mdien 
Income-tax Act, 1922 or this Act; 
(iii) specifying the amount that will be required to 
satisfy any existing liability under this Act and anyone or 
more of the Acts specified in clause (4) of sub-lect1on (l) 
of sectien 230A in respect of w:hich such pEC'3OA Ie III dafl»llt 
or Is deemed to be in default, 
and retain in his custody such assets or-part thereot u are fn'·hfI 
opinion suftlcient to satisfy the aggregate of the amounts referred 
to in clauses (ii) and (iii) and forthwith releue the rem·t;r'tnl 
portion, if any, of the a~ to the parson from wm. ~ 
they were seized: 
Pro\1ded that if, after taking into account the matarlala 
available with him, the Income-tax Ofticer is of the view that It 
1a not poui~e to aacertain 110 which particulal' ~ y.u .. 

, 
"W'B such ~ or any part thereof relates, be may calculate 
the tax on such income or part thereof, as the case may be, as 
If such income or part thereof were the total income chargeable 
to tax at the rates in force in the financial year in which the assets 
. were seJzed: 5 
Provided further that where a penon has paid or made 
Atiafactory arrangements for payment ol all the accounts refer-
nd to in dauaes (ii) and (iii) or any pert thereof, the IncoIIle-tax 
Officer may, with the previous approval of the Commiuioner, 
release the assets or such part thereof as he may deem fit in the 10 
circumstances of the case. 
(6) The assets retained under sub-section (5) may be dealt 
. wtth in accordance with the provisions of section 132A. 
(1) If the Income-tax Officer is satisfied that the seized assets 
or any part tbereafwere held by such person for or on behalf of 15 
any other person, the Income-tax Officer may proceed under suP-
section (5) against such other person and all the provisiona of 
this section slutll apply accordingly. 
(8) The books of account or other documents selHd under . 
sub-section (1) shall not be retained by the authorised ofticer for 30 
a period exceeding one hundred. and eighty days from the date of 
the ~ unless the reasons for retaining the same are record-
ect by him in Writing and the approval of the Commissioner for 
such retention is obtained: 
Provided that the Commissioner shall not authorise the reten- 2, 
tion of the books of account and other documents for a period 
exceeding thirty days after all the proceedings under the Indian 
m.come-tax Act, 1922 or this Act in respect of the years for which 
the books of account orotber documents are relevant are com-
pleted. 30 
(9) The person from whose custody any boob of account or 
other documents are seized under su~tion (1) may make 
copi~ thereof, or take extracts therefrom, in the presence of the -
authorised ofticer or any other person empowered by him 
in this behalf, at such place and time as the authorised 3' 
oftlcer may appoint in this behaU. 
(10) If a person legally entitled to the books of. aceount or 
other docwnents seized under sub-section (1) objects for any 
N90n to tlte approval eiven by tb CoJT\IDhwJonar under.u.b-
11 of 1922. 

11 of 18D. 
.i 
section (8) he may make an application to the Board. statiD& 
therein the reasons for such objection and requesting for the 
return of the books of account or other documents. 
(11) If any person objects for any reason to an order made 
, • under sub-section (5), he may, within thirty days of the date of 
such order, make an applicat~on to such authority, as may be 
notifted in this behalf by the Centra'l Government in the OfBcia1 
Gazette (hereinafter in this section referred to 81 the notifled 
authority), stating therein the reasons for such objection and r&-
IO questing for appropriate relief in the matter. 
(12) On receipt of the application under sub-section (10) 
the Board, or on receipt of the application under sub-sectlon (11) 
the notified authority, may, after giving the applicant an oppor-
tunity of being heard, pass such orders as it t.hinks fit. 
" (13) The provisions of the Cede of Criminal Procedure, 1888 
relating to searches and seizure shall apply, so far a8 may be, to 
searches and seizure under sub-section (1). 
(14) The Boan:l may make rules in relaticm to an,. search or 
seizure under this section; in parUcular, aJ).d without prejudice 
20 to the aenerality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide 
for the procedure to be followed by the authoriseed deer. <HI 
3' 
(i) for obtaining ingress into such building 01' place to 
be searched where free ingress thereto is not avallable; 
(ii) for ensuring safe custody of any books of account or 
other documents or assets seized. 
Explanation I.-In computing the period of ninety days for 
the purposes of sub-section (5), any period durinl which any 
proceeding under this section is stayed by an order or injunction 
of any court shall be excluded. ... < • :., 
Explanation 2.-In this section, the word. ."proceeding" means 
any proceeding in respec~ of any year, whether under the Indian 
Income-tax Act, 1922 or this Act, which may be pending on the 
date on which a search is authorised under this section or which 
may have been completed on or before such date and includes 
also all proceedings under this Act which may be commenced 
after luch date in respect of any year. 

I 
App!lca':' 
tlon of re-
tained 
Uleta. 
.'. 
132A. (1) The assets retained under sub-section (5) of sec> 
tion 132 may be dealt with in the following manner, name1y:-
(i) The amount of the existing liability referred to in 
clause (iii) of the said sub--section and the amount ocl the 
liability determined on completion of the J:egular assessment , 
or reassessment for all the assessment years relevant to the 
previoUs years to which the income referred to in clause (i) 
, of that sub-section relates, and in respect of which he is in 
default or is deemed. to be in default may be recovered out 
of such assets. ' . Ie 
(ii) U the assets consist solely of money, or partly of 
money and partly of other assets, the Income-tax OfBcer may 
apply such money in the discharge of the liabilities referred 
to in clause (i) and the assessee shall be discharged of such 
liability to the extent of the money so applied. IS 
(iii) The assets other than money may also be applied 
for the discharg~ of any such liability referred to in clause (i) 
as remains undischarged and for this purpose such assets 
ahall be deemed to be under distraint as if such distraint wu 
e1!ected by the Income-tax Officer under authorisation from 20 
the Commissioner under sub-section (5) of section 226 and 
the Income:tax Officer may recover the amount of such liabi-
lities by the sale of such assets and such sale shall be eftected 
in the manner laid down in the Third Schedule. 
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall preclude the:aS 
recovery of the amount of liabilities aforesaid by any other mode 
laid down in this Act. 
(3) Any assets or proceeds thereof which remain after the 
liabilities referred to in clause (i) of sub-section (1) are discharg-
ed shall be forthwith made over or paid to the persons from 30 
whose custody the assets were seized. 
(4) '(a) The Central Government shall pay simple intereat 
at the rate of five per ceut. per annum on the amount by whleh 
the agpepte of money retained under section 132 and of the pro-
ceeds, if any, of the assets sold towards the disc:Juaqe of the eldst- 3S 
lq liability referred to in clause (iii) of sub-section (5) of that 
, ,88dion exceeds the aarelate of the amounts required to meet 
the liabilities referred to in clause (i) of sub-section (1) of this 
section. ' 
(b) Such interest .hall run from the elate ~ediately 40 
followjq the aplrJ of th. period of lis mOlltha bolD the date 

to 
I$ 
, 
of the order under lub-leCtion (5) of section 131 to tile date of 
the replar .Ulessmen.t or reassessment referred to In c:Ia ... (i) 
of sub-section (1) or, a. the c:ue may be, to the date of last 01 
luch assessments or reassessments.'. 
3. In section 271 of the principal Act, after sub-eection (4), the Ama-
following lub-sections shall be inserted, namely: _ ment OIl 
IeCtion 
"(4A) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (iii) 211. 
of lub-section (1), the Commissioner may, in his discretion, 
reduce or waive the amount of minimum penalty lmposable on a 
person under the said clause if he is satisfied that such person-
(4) has, prior to the detection by the Income-tax OfIlcer, 
of the concealment of particulars of income In respect of 
which the penalty is imposable, or of the inaccuracy of par-
ticulars furnished in respect of such income, voluntarily and 
in good faith, made full and true disclosure· of such particu-
lars; 
(b) has co-operated in any enquiry relating to the IIIel1 
ment of luch income; and 
(c) haa either paid or made satisfactory arrangements 
for payment of any tax or interest payable In comequence 
of an order passed under this Act in respect of the relevant 
assessment year: 
Provi~ed that if in a case the minimum penalty tmposable 
under clause (iii) of sub-section (1) in respect of the relevant 
assessment year, or where such disclosure relates to more than 
one assessment year, the aggregate of the minimum penalty 
irnposable in respect of those years, exceeds a sum of rupees fifty 
thousand, no order reducing or waiving the penalty shall be 
made by the Commissioner unless the previous approval of the 
Board has been obtained. 
(4B) ·An order under sub-seetion (4A) shall be final and 
shall not be called in question before any ~ourt of law or any 
other authority.". 
c_~ 
4. In Chapter XXII of the principal Act, before Bection 278, 
~ 
" following section shall be inserted, namely:-
the IDIertlOil 
of ne .. 
MCtiOll 
2'f5A. 
"275A. Whoever contravenes any order referred to in sub- Contra-
section (3) of section 132 shall be punishable with rigorous im- ventlon 
prisonment which may extend to two years and shall also be of order 
~~~ = 
aub-HC-
tion (3) 
of He-
Uoa 111. 

rv 
AaleDd-
IIWlt 
~. of MCtion 
2.". 
Valida-
, tion of 
eerta!n 
lIUl'Chetl 
mad .. 
• 
I. In leetfon 2'19 of the princlpal Aet,-
(1) in lub-lection (1), after the words "o1!enee under', the 
words, figures and letter "section 27~A or" shall be inlerted; 
(it) after lub-seetion (1), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(lA) A person shall not be proceeded against for an 
offence under section 277 in relation to the assessment for an 
assessment year in respect of which the penalty imposable 
upon him under clause (iii) of sub-seetion (1) of section 271 
hal been reduced or waived by an order under sub-lec- 10 
tlon (4A) of that section."; 
(iii) after 8ub-seetion (2), the following sub-section shall be 
iDIerted, namely:-
"(3) Where any proceeding has been taken against any 
person under lub-seetion (1), any statement made or account 15 
or other document produced by such person before any of the 
Income-tax authorities specifted in clauses (a), (b), (c), (d) 
and (e) of section 116 shall not be inadmisalb1e as evidence 
for the purpose of such proceedings merely on the ground 
that such statement was made or such account or other docu- 20 
ment was produced in the belief that the penalty imposable 
woald 'be reduced or waived under sub-section (4A ) of 
section 271 or that the offence in resoect of which IUch pro-
ceecUng was taken would be compounded.". 
I. ADy search of .• buildin~ or place by an Inspecting Assistant 35 
Commissioner or Income-tax Oftlcer purported to have been made in 
pursuance of sub-section (1) of s'ction. 132 of the priilclpal Act be- . 
fore the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to have bean 
made in accordance with the provisions of that sub-section as amend-
ed by this Act as if those provisions were in force on the day the 30 
. -'J;$earch was made and shall not be called in question before any court 
of law or any other authority merely on the ground-
(i) that the Inspecting Assistant Commissioner or the 
Income-tax OfBcer made such search with the assistanee of any 
other penon; or 3' 
(it) that no proceeding under the Indian Income-tax Act, 11 of 1822. 
1922, or the principal Act was pending against the person con-
cerned when the search was authorised under the said Sl.lbesec-
tlon. 
• 

i of 1988. 7. (1) The Income-tax (Amendment) Ordinance; 1965 is he~by Repeai 
repealed. and 
-vm,. 
(2) Notwithitanding such repeal, anything done or any action 
taken under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have beer1lone 
S or taken UDder thia Act as if this Act had commenced on the 6th day 
of January, 1965. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND lU!ASONS 
The main object of the Bill is to replace the Income-tax (Amend-
ment) Ordinance, 1965 (1 of 1965). The Ordinance was promulgated 
on the 6th January, 11965 and contains provisions which were found to 
be immediately necessary, relating to searches and seizures, volun-
tary disclosures and validation ot certain searches made under sec-
tion 1~ of the Income-tax Act, 1961. OppOrtunity has also been 
. taken to include in the Bill certain other amendments which are 
incidental or supplemental to the above matters. 
The more important provisions of the Bill are as follows:-
The powers of search and seizure are being enlarged, enabling 
seizure of any money, bullion, jewellery or other valuable article or 
thing which represents either wholly or partly undisclosed income 
or property. The Income-tax Officer is being empowered to retain 
such of the assets seized as he may consider necessary to satisfy the 
liability estimated by him in respect of the undisclosed income and 
also any existing liability under the Direct Taxes Acts in respect of 
which the person concerned is in default or is deemed to be in de-
fault. The balance, if any, will be returned forthwith. The retained 
assets will be applied for the discharge of such existing liabilities and 
of the liability determined on regular assessment relating to the un-
disclosed income, in respect of which the assessee is in default or is 
deemed to be in default. It is also clarified that proceedings in the 
course of which search warrants can be issued. include future pro-
ceedings also; 
FUrther, the Commissioner is being empowered to reduce or waive 
the amount of minimum penalty imposable in the case of voluntary 
disclosure. A person in whose case the penalty is so waived or re-
dtreed will not be prosecuted in relation to the relevant assessments. 
The notes on clauses e~lain the vario'us provisions of the Bill. ' .~ 
1'. T. KlUSHNAMACHAlU. 
11 .... .,.." 

N otel on clauae, 
~lt.&u3e 2 of the Bill substitutes a new section for the existing 
section 132 and also adds a new section 132A. 
The new section 132 includes certain provisions in addition to 
the existing ones. 
The new sub-section (1) provides another circumstance, in ad-
diti~n to ~e existing ones, in which search or seizure may be au-
thonsed, tnZ., where any money, bullion, jewellery or other valuable 
article or thing which represents either wholly or partly undisclosed 
income or property is believed to exist. The power conferred on 
the Commissioner under sub-section (1) is also being conferred on 
the Director of Inspection and further the authorisation by the 
Director of Inspection or the Commissioner can also be to a Deputy 
Director of Inspection or an Assistant Director of Inspection. For 
the purpose of search and seizure the authorised officer may break 
open the lock of any door or locker, safe,· almirah or any other re-
ceptacle where the keys thereof are not available. 
The new sub-section (2) empowers, for the purposes of search and 
seizure, the authorised officer to requisition the services of any 
police officer or of any officer of the Central Government, or of both, 
to assist him. 
Where it is not practicable to seize any asset found during the 
search, the new sub-section (3) empowers the authorised officer to 
serve an order on the person concerned not to remove or part with 
or otherwise deal with it except with his previous pennission. 
According to the new sub-section (4), during thet~urse of search 
and seizure, the authorised officer may examine on oath any person 
who is found. to be in possession of books of account or documents 
and assets like money, bullion and jewellery. This provision is In-
tended to enable the Income-tax Officer to ascertain the true facts 
before an assessee can make up an explanation as a result of after-
thought. The statement made during such examination .may there-
after be used in evidence in any proceedings under the Indian Income-
tax Act, 1922 or the Income-tax Act, 1961. 
11 ...... "..... ' .... ', 

12 
The. n~w sub-section (5) provides that where any asset is seized, 
then within 90 days of such seizure and with the previous approval of 
the . Co~issioner, the Income-tax Officer shall pass an order esti .. 
mating In a summary manner the undisclosed income (including the 
income from the undisclosed property), calculating the amount 
of tax on the same in accordance with the provisions of 
the la~ ~ ~~g the amount that will be required to satisfy 
any eXIstmg lIabIlIty under the direct taxes enactments in respect of 
which the person is in default or is deemed to be in default. In com-
puting the period of 90 days, any period during which any proceeding 
in this regard is stayed by an order or injunction of any court, shall 
be excluded (vide Explanation.1 to the new section 132). Before 
making such an order the Income-tax Officer has to afford a reason-
able opportunity to the person concerned for being heard and make 
such enquiry as may be prescribed. The Income-tax Officer shall re-
tain such assets or part thereof which are, in his opinion, sufficient 
to satisfy the aggregate of the amount of liability determined in 
respect of the undisclosed income and the existing liabilities in res-
pect of which the assessee is in default or is deemed to be in de-
fault. The remaining portion of the assets, if any, shall be forth-
with released to the person from whose custody they were seized. 
The aforesaid sub-section (5) further provides that if, after con-
sidering the materials available with him, the Income-tax Officer is 
of the opinion that it is not possible to ascertain which particular 
previous year or years such undisclosed income or any part of such 
income relates to, he may calculate the tax 1,On the same as if it were 
the total income chargeable to tax at the rates in force in the financial 
year in which ,the assets ~re seized. 
, Where, however, a person has paid or made satisfactory arrange-
ments for payment of the amount of liability relating to the undisclos-
ed income estimated by the Income-tax Officer and the existing 
liabilities aforesaid, Income-tax Officer may release such assets as 
he may deem fit. For this purpose, the ~n~ome-tax Officer has to 
obtain the previo11S approval of the CommISSIoner. i"'~~ 
b-section (6) provides that the assets retained under 
The ~e:-" SUol sub-section (5) shall be applied in accordance with the proV181ons 
tlie provisions of the new section 132A. 
The new sub-section (7) is sell-explanatory. 
.' ub-sections (2), (3) and (4) have been re-numbered 
8 Th~:x~~:~;O) respectively with certain ~erbal changes conse-
~je~tial to the provisions of the new sub-sectIon (1). 

". ' r· 

14 
U any auet. or proceeds thereof remain affer the aforesaid lia-
bilities have been discharged, they will be forthwith paid or made 
over to the person from whose custody they were aeized .. 
The mode of recovery prescribed by section 132A shall not pre-
clude the recovery of the amount of the liability by any other 
mode laid down in the Acl. 
Sub-section (4) of tne new sub-aection 132A provides for in-
terest to be paid by the ·Central Government as compensation for 
retention of money seized and proceeds of assets sold in excess of 
the total tax liabilities against which they are applied. Where 
the aggregate of the amount retained under section 132 and the 
proceeds, if any, of the assets sold for the purpose of recovery of 
'"lte existing liabilities referred to in that section exceed the aggre-
gate of the existing liabilities in default and the liability detp.r-· 
mined on regular assessment, the Central Government shall pay 
simple interest at the rate of ~ per cent. per annum on the amount 
of such excess. The interest shall run from the date immediately 
following the end of six months from the date of the order under 
section 132 (5) to the date of regular assessment or reassessment 
relating to the undisclosed income, or, as the case may be, to the 
date of the last of such assessments or reassessments. No interest 
wiD be payable in relation to assets, other than money, wbich are 
not sold by the Income-tax Officer. 
With a view to encourage voluntary disclosures of undisclosed 
income, c14use 3 inserts a new su'b-section (4A) in section 271 
which empowers the Commissioner, in his discretion, to reduce or 
waive the amount of minimum penalty imposable under section 
271 (1) (iii) in the case of a person who has voluntarily and in good 
faith made full and true disclosiH'e of his concealed income, before 
detection of the same by the Income-tax Ofticer and, in addition, 
has co-operated in any enquiry relating to the assessment of the con-
cealed income a1:!!L has either paid or made satisfactory arrange-
ments for payment' of any tax or interest which may bE'Come p~y­
able in lespect of the income concealed. Where the amount of 
minimum penalty imposable under section 271 (1) (iii) in respect of 
all asseaament years involved exceeds Rs. 50,000, the previous 
approval of the Board has to be obtained by the Commissioner. 
In order to ensure that an order under sub-section (3) of section 
132 may not be contravened, clause 4 inserts a new section 275A 
which provides for punishment for contravention of such order. 
C'l4U1e 5 amends sub-section (/) and inserts two new sub-
sections, namely, (IA) and (3) in section 279. 

15 
The amendment to sub-section (1) is consequential to the inser-
tion of new section 275A. 
Su~section (lA) provides that a personln whose case the penalty 
imposable under section 271 (1) (iii) has been reduced ar waived by 
the Commissioner under sub-section (4A) of that section, shall not 
be liable to be prosecuted under section 277 in relation to assessment 
for the uaessm.ent year in respect of which the penalty imposable has 
been reduced or waived. 
Sub-section (3) provides that where any prosecution has been 
started against any person, any statement made or account or other 
document produced by him before any of the Income-tax authori-
tties of. the rank of Income-tax Ofticer and above shall not be in-
admlt-ble as evidence for the purpose of the prosecution merely 
on the ground that such statement was made or such account or 
other document was produced in the belief that the penalty im-
posable would be reduced or waived under sub-section 271 (4A) 
or that the particular offence would be compounded. 
C1aue 6 validates certain searches purported to have been made 
tn" pursuance of section 132 (1). 
The clause is self-explanatory. 

· 
tJ 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
I 
SUb-teCtion (4) of the new section 132A inserted by clauae 2 of the 
Bill provides for interest to be paid by the Central Gcwermnent in 
certain cirewnstaaces. The exact amount of interest so payabJJe 
cannot be foreseen at the present, but it is expected that it would be 
of-the order of Ra. 25,000. 
The provisions of section 132 relating to seizure are also expected 
to· iAwlve some aGGitionat expenditure such as expeDAiliture on 
arranpments for safe custody of assets seized. The amount of such 
expenditure cannot be b-eeeen at present with any degree of preci-
sion. It i& expected, however, that such expenditure will be of the 
order of Rs. 1,00,800. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA.TED LEGISLATION 
Clause 2 of the Bill would enable the Board to fi-ame rules re-
garding the enquiry to be made for purposes of section 132(5). 
The clause also clarifies that the rules to be made by the Bdard in 
relation to any search or seizure made under section 132 (1) include 
rules to provide the procedure to be followed in a search or seizure. 
for obtaining ingreSS into a building or place where ingress thereto 
is not aVailable, and for ensuring safe custody of any books of 
account, other documents or assets seized. 
The matters in respect of which rules will be made are matters 
of procedure or detail. -
The delegation of legislative pewers is, tqer~ore, f)~ ~ n~ 
~ctef'~ -.. ' . 
17 

Pow ... 
of IHI"Ch 
and 
Mizure. 
• 
~ 
ErraAcr noM '1'BB btCGIO-~ AcT, ,li61 
(G OJ' 1161) 
• • • • 
13Z. (1) WRere the CemmiAlionel\ in CGDSequenae Gf .informa-
tion.in bia polleaBion, has reason to believe tbal-
~G) uy perBOll to whom a 'summons tmcier suh-!ledlon (l' 
of section 37 of the Indie lneome tax Act, 1*22 or under sub- 11 of 1922. 
aection (1) of sectton 131 of this Act, or a notice under sub-
section (4) of section 22 of the Indian Income-taX Act 1922 or 
" 
under sub-section (1) of section 142 of this Act was issued to 
produce, or cauae to be produced, any boeD of ' accouat or 
other documents bas omitted or failed to produce, or C8uae to 
be produced, such books of account or other documents as Ie-
quired by such summons or notice, or 
(b) any person to whom a summons or notice, as afore-
said has been or might be issued will not, or would not, pro-
duce or cause. 10 be produced any books of account or other 
doc:umeJlts which will be useful for, or relevant to, any pro-
ceeding under the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922 or under this 11 of 1922. 
Act, or 
(c) any person is in possession of any articles or things 
including money wholly disproportionate to his known sources 
of income, particulars of which will be useful for, or relevant 
to, any proceeding under the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922 or 11 of 1922-
this Act, 
he may authorise any Inspecting Assistant Commissioner or any 
Income-tax Oftlcer to enter and search any building or place where 
he has reason to suspect that such books of account, other docu-
ments artft!h!s or things inchiding money are kept and if as a ' 
result' of the search such books of account, other documents, articles 
or tbings including money are found, the Inspecting Assistant Com-
missioner or the Income-tax omcer, as the: case may be, may-
(i) seize any such books of account or other docump.ots; 
(ii) place marks of identification on any such books of 
account or other documents or make or cause to be made ex-
tracts or copies therefrom; 
18 

-41/t 
19 
(iii) make a note or an inventory of any arttcies or things 
including money found which, in his opinion, will be usaful 
for, or relevant to, any proceeding under the Indian Income.. 
tax Act, 1922, or this Act. 
(2) The books of account or other documents seized under 8Ub-
section (1) shall not be retained by the Inspecting Assistant 'Com-
missioner or the Income-tax Ofticer for a period exceeding one 
hundred and eighty days from the date of the seizure unless the 
reuoDl for retaJ.ning the same are recorded by him in writing and 
the approval of the Commissioner for such retention is obtained: 
Provided that the Commissioner shall not authorise the reten-
tion of the books of account and other documents for a pp.riod ex-
ceeding thirty days after all the proceedings under the Indian In-
come-tax Act, 1922, or this Act in respect of the years for which 
the books of account or other documents are relevant are comple-
ted. 
(3) The person from whose custody any books of account or 
other documents are seized under sub-section (1) may make copies 
thereof, or take extracts therefrom, in the presence of, the Income-
tax Oftlcer or any other person' 1I11thorised by him, at such place 
and time as the lDcome-tax om~ ~ appoiD~' in ~behaJ.f.'· ' 
(4) U a pE'.rso~ tePily .mtJtlecl to the' books of .account or other 
documents seized under sub-section (1) objects for any reason to 
the approval given by the Commissioner under sub-section (2) , 
he may make an application to the Board stating therein the reasons 
for such objection and requesting for the return of the books of 
account or other documents. 
(5) On receipt of the application under sub-section (4) the 
Board may, after giving the appltesut'an opportunity of being heard, 
pass such orders as it thinks fl t. 
(6) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 re-
lating to searches shall apply, so far as may be, to searches 
under sub-secti~l) of this section. 
(7) The Board may make rules in relation to searches under 
this section. 
* * * • * 
271. (1) A person shall not be proceeded against for an offence Prosecution 
und ection 276 or section 277 or section 278 except at the instance 10 be at er S instance of 
of the Commissioner. Commls-
(2) The Commissioner may either before or after the institution siaT.er. 
of proceedings compound any such offence. * • • • * 

LOK Si\.BHA 
A. 
BnL 
~c;r tq ~end the Income-tax Act, 1961 and ~ v~~ 
.. I c;rtiaQ searches under that Act. 
• . . I I \ • • • • ., .• • 
-
(Shri T. T. Krishnamachari, 
Minister of Finance.) 