.BiD .0. 8011868. 
THE.KHADI AND OTHER HANDLOOM INDUSTRIES 
DEVELOPMENT (ADDITIONAL EXCISE UUTY ON 
CLOTH) BILL, 1953 
(As INTRODUCED IN TB'E HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE.) 
.. 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the 1,evy and collection of an additional duty oj 8:tciB6 
on cloth for rai8ing funda f01 the purp08e of developing khadi and 
other handloom induBtrieB and for promoting the Bale of khadi and 
other hand-loom cloth. 
HE it enaoted by Parliament as follows :-
_ 1. Short t.ltle &Del eztent.-(l) This Act may be caUed the Khadi 
.. and other Handloom Industries Development (Additional Excise Duty 
.on Cloth) Act, 1958 . 
• ,. (9) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and S 
Kashmir.· 
2. DtIDlttoDl.-In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) 'appointed day' means the 15th day of February, 19158; 
(b) 'cloth' has th.e meaning assigned to it in the First Sohedule 
to the Central ~xcises and Salt Act, 1944 (I of 1944); 10 
(0) 'hadloom cloth' menus any cloth Woven from &ny material 
including silk, lIrtifidal silk, staple fibre and wool, on looms worked 
by manual labour; 
(d) 'handloom industries' means industries which manufacture 
khadi .or other handloom oloth;" 15 
(8) 'khadi' means tiDy handloom cloth wo"en from y&m ha.nd-
sPl.!n in India. 
8. Levy of additional duty or e:rc.tae on cloth.-(l) '!bue mall b8 ~.'.i; 
levied and collected on &ll cloth mlUlUfactured on or after the appointed 
day In tbe terrftorltl to wblcb thlI Act extends and OIl au cloth 17tD. 2 

2 
in .tock on the appointed day in any faetory where cloth ill mmufactme4 1 
or In any prem.illea appurteD8Dt thereto, a duty of ezc1le at the rate ot 
&hree plea per yard: 
Provided that no such duty shaU be levied OD cloth which 1I uported 
5 out of India. 
(2) The duty Of ezcille speciJled in aub-lection (1) ahaIl be ID. addltion 
to the duty of ezclle chargeable on clOth under the OeDtral Kzcllle 
and Salt Act, 1M' (lot lNt), md Iha11 be levied and collected in the 
lime maDDer as the dut,. of ezelle OIl cloth 1I levied and collected 
10 UDder .\bat Act. 
fl. AppUcatlOD of proceedl,~e CentraL o-overnment may utiliee 
the net proceeds of the duty of excise levied under thii Act tor Dl.eetiQ 
the costs of such measures as it considers necessary or eXpedient 'to 
take for developing khadi and other handloom industries, and, in partie 
15 cntar, mef.sures for-
20 
25 
30 
35 
(a) undert-aking, assisting or encouraging khadi and other 
handloom industril3s; 
(b) encouraging the ndoption of improved methods of munufao· 
turing khadi and other hnlldloom cloth; 
(c) encouraging and developing research in the technique of 
production of khadiand other h&:ndloom cloth and in the art of 
designs relating thereto ~ 
(d) maintaining or nssisting in the maintenlll1Ce of institutes 
. for the development of khadi and other handloom industries; 
(e) promoting the sale and marketing of khadi and other 
handloom cloth; 
U) fixing the grades and st&.ndards of khadi und other handloom .. 
cloth and enforcing quality control; 
(g) promoting and encouraging co-operative etlort among 
manufacturers of khadi and othel' handloom cloth, 
6. Power to make rulea.-(l) The Central Government mas, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out tM 
purposes of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for-
(a) the mnnner ip which the proceeds of the duty of excise levied 
under this Act may be applied for all or any of the purposes specified 
'In section 4; 
(b) the making of grants or loans from such proceeds to Stnte 
Governments for oIl or any of the said purposes; 
(c) the allocation of the net proceeds of tJhe duty of GxciBe 
between khadi and other ho.ndloom industries; 
(d) the manner in which acoounts relating to the proceeds of 
the duty of excise shall be maintained; 

~ 
(e) the· exemption from the whole or SIlY part of the duty or 
excise levied under this Act of any' variety of cloth which . is for 
the time being exempt from the duty of excise imposed under the 
Centrsl Excises and E'alt Act, 1944 (I of 1(44). . 
Declaration under tI&e Pro"i.ional CoUection 0/ Taa:tl8 Act, 1981. 
It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the public interest that 
the provisions of clause 8 of this Bill shall have immediate effect 
under the Pro\l'jsioDal Collection of Taxes' Act, 19~1 (XVI of 1931). 

, 
STATEMEN:T OF OEJECTS AND REASONS 
Both the khadi and tbe ha.ndloom cloth industry have " definite 
riace in our national economy. Khadi makes its contribuUou towards 
the relief of rural unemployment and provides a supplementary aoU1'Oe 
of livelihood to our agricultural population. The handloom industry 
has 0. substantial part. to play in supplying the demand for cloth in the 
country. Both these industries, however, have been suffering from 
many han<Ucaps of late, main,ly in finding an adequate market for 
their products. They have to cater to certain special markets and to 
individual and local tastes. For this purpose they need asaiata.nce in 
order to obtain adequate supplies of cotton and yarn at reasonable 
rates, to effect improvement in their methods and technique of produc .. 
tion and for organi~ing the sale and matk.eting of their goods. In 
order to finance the development of these industries on these linos, It 
is proposed that a cess of three pies per yard should be imposed 011 
mill-made cloth other than cloth ex,Ported out of India. ,('he 06SI1 
would take the form of a duty of excise and is expected to yield more 
than rupees five crores per year. The proceeds of the cess will be 
allocated by Government for the development. of the khadi and the 
handloom industry, the proportions being determined each year 
according to circumstances. Legislation is required for imposing tJrls 
cess as a duty of excise. 
T. T. KRISHNAMACHARI. 
NEW DELHI; 
• The 11th Februa.ry, 1958. 

5 
FINANCIAL ,MEMOBNNDUM 
The Ministry of Commerce and Industry propose. to introduce a 
Bill to provide for the levy and collection of a (leSS for raising funds 
for ~he purp(l8e of developing handloom industry and for promoting 
thf "BIt) of khadi and other handloom cloth. The cess would be in the 
l.Iature 04 a duty of excise. 
2. The Bill provides for Itt levy of ce88 of 8 pies per yard of mill. 
made cloth produced in the country. As in the case of the exoise duty 
it is intendt'd toel-empt under clause 8(1), cloth which is exported out 
of the country. On the basis that the 08S8 would be levied then on 
ahouf. 3,500 million yard8 it is expected that the ceaa will ybld <flore 
than E!. 5 orores per annum. 
3. The uOOve cess will be collected in the Bame manner sa the dut.y 
Of excite 011 cloth, by the Central Excise Department, and the net 
proceeds Vo·i1l be available !or distribution for developing the Bandloom 
and Khadi luduatrifl. 

I : '.',' 
II. 
,HOU8B I OF. ,THE 'PE()PL~ 
I" I, 
, i • : ,~ 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the levy and oollection of an additional duty of 
excise on oloth for raising funds for the purpose 0; develop-
ing khadi and other handloom industries and for promot 
ing the sale of khadi and other handloom cloth. 
The President has, in pursuanoe of clauses (1) and (3) of 
article 117 of the Constitution of India, recommended to the 
House ef the People the introduotion and oonsideration of the 
Bill. ' 
M, N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(8Mi T. T. K rish,namaMari, . 
Jlim.ur Jor Com1nlru and Indutr". 
GlPD-LAD-l111 1'1-1"-2-18-1,1110. 