~3 ot 1981. 
, 
r 
As ~ IN' Lox: SABHA OM' 
BJU No .• of IN' 
THE CINE-WORKERS WELFARE FUND (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1987 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Cine-worker, Welfa.re Fund Act, 1981. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-eJ.ghth Year of the Republic of 
india as follow.:-
L (1) This Act may be called the Cine-workers Welfare Fund Short 
(Amendment) Act, 1987. tiUe aad com-
S (2) It shan come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Oftlcial Gazette,. appoint. 
2. In section 2 of the Cine-workers Welfare Fund Act, 1981 (herei.n-
after referred to as the principal Act), in clause (b), in sub-clause (ii), 
for the words "one thousand. rupees" and "five thousand rupees", the 
10 words "one thousand and six hundred rupees" and "eight thousand 
rupees" shall, respectively, be substituted. 
3. In section 4 of the principal Act, in sub-8ection (1), in clause (c), 
after the words "the cine-workers", the words ", including family wel-
fare, family planning, education and services" shall be inserted. 
IS '- In section 6 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the words 
"eleven members appointed", the words "such number of members as 
may be appointed" shan be substituted. 
mence· 
Mento 
Amend. 
ment of 
lection 2. 
Amend. . 
mentof 
section 4. 
Amend. 
ment of 
section •. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Cine-workers Welfare Fund Act, 1981 is applicable to cine--
workers as defined under the Act whose remuneration with respect to 
the type of employment referred to in the Act does not exceed,· where 
such remuneration is by way of monthly wages, a sum of (\ne thousand 
rupees per month, and where sUch remuneration is by way of lump sum, 
a sum of five thousand rupees. However, the ceiling on monthly wages 
under the Cine-workers and Cinema Theatre Workers (Regulation of Em-. 
ployment) Act, 1981 as well as under the welfare schemes framed under 
other Welfare Fund Acts is one thousand and six hundred rupees per \ 
month. It is, therefore, proposed to amend the Cine.workers Welfare 
Fund Act 'Sui~ably to bring about llniformity to the extent possible in 
this respect. 
2. The purposes for which the Welfare Fund formed undetthe Act 
can be applied by the Central Government have been specified in sec-
tion 4 of the Act. In view of the importance and urgency accorded by 
Government to family welfare and family planning programmes, it is 
proposed to specifically provide that the Fund can als-o be applied for 
family welfare schemes including family planning, education and ser-
vices. 
3. According to the existing provisioll'S in the Act, the Central Advi-
sory Committee constituted under the Act consists of eleven members. 
In all the other Central Advisory Committees established under various 
Acts.. the principle of tripartism has been recognised and equal number 
of representatives of Government, employers and employees have been 
included in such Advisory Committees. With a view to bringing the 
prOvIsions of the Cine--workers Welfare Fund Act. 1981 in conformity 
with the said principle. the ceiling of eleven members provided in sub-
section (2) of section 6 is sought to be suitably amended. 
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW DELHI; PURNO A. SANGMA. 
The 28th J o.nuary, 1987. 

ANNEXURE 
ExTRACTS nOM THE CINE-WORKERS WEUAIlE FuND ACT, 1981 
(33 01' 1981) 
• • • • • 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
• • • • • 
(b) "Cine-worker" means an individual-
• • • .. 
(ii) whose remuneration with respect to such employment 
in or in 'connection with the production of each of any five 
feature films, has not exceeded, where such remuneration has 
been by way of· monthly wages, a sum of one thousand rupees 
per month, and where such remuneration has been by way of a 
lump sum, a sum of five thousand rupees; 
• • • • • 
4. (1) The Fund shall be ,pplied by the Central Government to 'meet 
the expenditure incurred in connection with measures. and facilities 
which, in the opinion of that Government, are necessary or expedient 
to promote the welfare of cine-workers; and, in particular ,-
• • • • • 
(c) to sanction any money in aid of any scheme for the welfare 
. of the cine-workers which is approved by the Central Government; 
• • • • • 
6. (1) • • • • • 
(2) The Central Advisory Committee shall consist of eleven members 
appointed by the Central Governme~t and ~ members shall be chosen 
in such manner as may be prescribed: 
Provided that the Central Advisory Committee shall include at least 
three members representing the Government, the cine.workers and the 
producers. 
• • • • '. '. 
3 
~ni­
tions . 
Appli_ 
cation 
Of Fund, 
Central 
Advisory 
Com_ 
mittee. 

LOK SABRA. 
BILL 
to amend the Cine-workers Welfare Fund Act, 1981. 
(Shri P. A. Scmgma, Minister of Sta.te of the Ministry of lAbour.) 