8W No. J of 1"1 
THE KHAnI AND VILLAGE INDUSTRIES 
COMMISSION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1961 
• 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA 
ON 28m FEBRUARY, 1961) 

s 
Bill No. 3 of 1961. 
THE KHADI AND VILLAGE INDUSTRIES COMMIS-
SION (AMENDMENT) BILL, I¢I 
(As INTRODl1CED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Khadi and Village Industries Commission Act, 
1956. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twelfth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:....&. 
1. This Act may be called the Khadi and Village Industries Com- Short title. 
mission (Amendment) Act. 1961. 
Z. In section 2 of the Khadi and Village Industries Commission AmeDdmcDt 
61 of 19,6. Act, 1956 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) ,_ of IeCtioD 2. 
(i) in clause (e), for the words "and includes the chairman", 
the words "and includes the chairman and the vice-chairman" 
shall be substituted; 
10. (ii) after clause (g). the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
'(gg) "vice-chairman" means the vice-chairman of the 
Commission;' . 
3. In section 3 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the fo1- ADWldment 
IS lowing sub-section shall be substituted, namely:- of section 3· 
"(1) The Central Government may, of its own motion or on 
the recommendation of the Commission, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, add to, or omit from, the Schedule any village 
industry or alter the description of any village industry and 
20 • thereupon the Schedule shall be deemed to be amended accord-
ingly.". 
18S4 (B)LS-I 

2 
:r:-:. 4. In section 4 of the principal Act, after sub-section· (2), the 
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(3) The Central Government may appoint from among the 
members of the Commission a vice-chairman who shall exercise 
such of the powers and perform such of the duties of the chair- S 
man as may be prescribed or as may be delegated to him by the 
chairman.". 
Amendment 5. In section 5 of the principal Act. for the words "a member 
of teCtiao S· other than the chairman", the words "a member other than the 
chairman or the vice-chairman" shall be sl:lbstituted. 10 
Amendment 8. In section 12 of the principal Act, for sub-section (2), the fol-
ofleCdoD 12. lowing sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-
"(2) The chairman or, in his absence, the vice-chairman or, 
in the absence <1f both the chairman and the vice-chairman, any 
member chosen by the members present from among themselves, IS 
shall preside at a meeting of the Commission.". 
A_dmeDt~ 7. In section 13 of the principal Act, for the words "and the terms 
ofleetion 13· and conditions of service of the chairman", the· words "arid the terms 
and conditions of service of the· chairman, the vice-chairman" shall 
be substitut~. 20 
Ameaclment 8. In section 15 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), in clause 
ohection IS· (c), after the words ·'village. industries", the words "or handicrafts" 
shall be inserted and shall be deemed always to have been inserted. 
IDlerUon of 9. After section 17 of the principal Act, the following section 
DeWA section shall be inserted, namely: - 25 17 • 
Commi.,ion "17A. The Commission may, for the purpose of development 
to rec:dYe of khadi or the development of village industries, receive gifts, lifts. lrants, etc. grants, donations or benefactions from the Government or any 
AmeodmeDt 
of 1eCti0D II. 
other person.". 
10. In section 18 of the principal Act.-
(i) in sub-section (1), after the words "and all receipts of 
the Commission", t.he brackets, words, figures and letter" (in-
cluding all gifts, grants, donations or benefactions received under 
section 17A) ,. shall be inserted; 
30 
(ii) after sub-section (1), the following sub-seetions shall 35 
be inserted, namely:-
., (lA) All receipts of the Commission in respect M 
products of handicrafts shall be credited to the village indus-

iC 
trIes fund and all payments by the Ccmmission for or :in 
respect of such products shall be made from that fund. 
(lB) If at any time. the amount available in either of 
the two funds referred to in sub-section (1) is in excess of 
the requirements of that fund and the amount available in 
the other fund is insufficient to meet the requirements of 
that fund, the Co'mmission may, with the previous approval 
of the Central Government, transfer from the first mention-
ed fund the excess amount or such part thereof as may be 
necessary to the other fund. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of .computing the amount 
available in either of the two funds, the amounts received 
under section 17A shall not be taken into account.". 
11. After section 19 of the principal Act. the tollowing sections lDlertion of 
15 shnll be inserted, namely: - new ICCtioDS 
19A 8JJd 198. 
20 
30 
35 
• 
"19A. (1) There shall be constituted from among the mem- Stading 
bers of the Commission in the prescribed" manner. a Standing Finance 
Finance Committee in respect of each of the two funds referred Committees. 
to in section 18. 
(2) The Standing Finance Committee shall exercise such of : 
the powers of the Commission under section 19 as are delegated to 1 i 
it by the Commission. , ~ 
........ .,;r..~. 
19B. (1) Any sum payable to the Commission under any Recovery of 
agreement, express or implied. or otherwise howsoever, may be monies due 
recovered in the same manner as an arrear of land-revenue. :~ ~ 
arrears of 
• (2) If any question arises whether a sum is payable to the land-revenue. 
Commissjon within the meaning of sub-section (1), it shall be 
referred to a Tribunal constituted by the Central Government for 
the purpose which shall, after making such inquiry as it may 
deem fit and after giving to the person by whom the sum is alleg-
ed to be payable an opportunity of being heard, decide the ques-
tion; and the decision of the Tribunal shall be final and shall not 
be called in question by any court or other authority. 
(3) The Tribunal shall consist of one person who is not con-
nected with the Commission or with the person by whom the sum 
is alleged to be payable . 
. (4) The expenses of the.Tribunal shall be borne by the Com-
mission." . 

4 
AmeD~eDt 12. In section 20 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), for the 
of seCtiOn 20. words "but in no case", the words, brackets, figures and letter "but, 
subject to the provisions of sub-section (lB) of section 18, in no case" 
shall be substituted. 
Amen4meDt 
of lIc:tion 26. 
AmtDdment 
oflcction 27. 
13. In section 26 of the principal Act,-
(i) in sub-section (2) ,-
(a) in clause (a), for the words "and the terms and 
conditions of service of the Chairman", the words "and the 
terms and conditions of service of the chairman, the vice-
5 
chairman" shall be substituted; 10 
(b) after clause (c), the following clause shall be insert-
ed, namely:-
" (cc) the powers and duties to be exercised and per-
formed by the chairman and the vice-chairman;"; 
.(c) after clause (d), the following clauses shall be inser- IS 
ted, namely:-
"(dd) the constitution of the Standing Finance Com-
mittees under sub-section (1) of section 19A; • 
(ddd) the procedure to be followed by the Tribu-
nal in deciding questions referred to it under sub-section 20 
(2) of section 19B;"; 
(ii) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of 2 5 
Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty . 
days which may be comprised in one session' or in two 
successive sessions, and, if, before the expiry of the session 
in which it is so laid or the session immediately follow-
ing, both . Houses agree in making .any modification ~n the 30 
rule or both Houses agree that the rule should nct be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such 
.modified form or be of .no effect, as the case may be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment 'shall be' 
without prejudice to the validity ,cf. anything previously 35 
done ,~nder that rule.". 
14. In section 27 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2) ,-
(i) after clause (b) ,the following c~ause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(bb) the summoning and holding of meetings, anq the 40 
conduct of business of a S'anding Finance Committee;"; 
(ii) in clause (h), the words "and the fees chargeable in 
respect thereof" shall be added at the end. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Experience of the administration of the Khadi and Village 
Industries Commission Act, 1956, has disclosed certain difficulties 
in its working. The object of the present Bill is to remove such 
difficulties. Opportunity has been taken to make certain other 
minor and fonnal amendments in the Act. 
The notes on clauses explain in detail the important provisions of 
the Bill. 
NEW DELHI; MANUBHAI SHAH 
The 19th January, 1961 

Notes On clauses 
Clause 3.-This clause amends section 3 of the Act and empowers 
the Central Government to add to, or omit from, the Schedule any 
village industry or alter the description of any village industry. 
Clause 4.-This clause provides for the appointment of a vice-
chairman to give some relief to the chairman. The vice-chairman 
will exercise such of the powers and perform such of the duties of 
the chairman as may be prescribed by the rules or as may be dele-
gated to him by the chairman. 
Clause 8.-The amendment mede by this clause will enable the 
Commission to undertake marketing or sale of products of handicrafts 
in its Emporia. 
Clause 9.-This clause enables the Commission to receive gifts, 
grants, donations and benefactions from the Government or any other 
person for the purpose of development of khadi or the development 
of village industries. 
Clause lO.-Under sectiQ1l 18 (1) of the Act, all payments by the 
Commission for or in respect of khadi or village industries shall be 
made from the khadi FUlld or the village industries Fund, as the 
case may be. Sometimes, it so happens that while the Commission 
has excess money in one Fund, the other Fund is insufficient to meet 
the requirements. At present in spite O'f there being a surplus amount 
in one Fund, the Government has to make grant to the other Fund to 
meet its requirements. This clause, therefore, empowers the Commis-
sion to transfer, with the previous approval of the Central Govern-
ment, the necessary amount from the excess Fund t'O' the insufficient 
Fund which will obviate the necessity of Government making a fresh 
grant to the latter Fund. It is made clear that for the purposes of 
computing the amount available in either of the two Funds, the 
amounts received by way of gifts, grants, donations 'O'r benefactions 
from the Government or any other person which are in the n~ure of 
a trust shall not be taken into account. 
Cl4use ll.-The Commission has at its disposal very lar. funds 
from which grants are made to' various institutions. ~,.parf of ~e 
funds is also spent on some of the activities which .. carried{;~ 
.~~~~:' .. , 
6 

7 
directly by the Commission. At present only the full Commission is 
empowered to authorise such grants or expenditure. In order to en-
sure the speed and efficiency of this kind of work, this clause prcvides 
for the constitution of a Standing Finance. Committee in respect 
of each of the khadi Fund and village industries Fund, from among 
the members of the Commission. The Standing Finance Committee 
will exercise such of the powers of the Commission under section 19 
as are delegated to it by the Commission. 
The clause also makes provision for the recovery of any sum 
payable to the Commission as arrears of land revenue. If any ques-
tion arises whether a sum is payable to the Oammilsion, it shall be 
referred to a Tribunal consisting of one person who is not connected 
with the Commission or with the person by whom the sum is alleged. 
to be payable. Such a procedure will save the Commission from being 
involved in prolonged and expensive litigation in courts of law. 
Clause 13.-The clause, besides making certain consequential 
amendments to section 26 of the Act, empowers the Central Govern-
ment to make rules regarding the powers and duties to be exercised 
and performed by the chairman and the vice-chairman; the constitu-
tion of Standing Finance Committees and the procedure to be follow-
ed by the Tribunal in deciding questions referred to it. Sub-section 
(3) of that section is also being amended to conform to the pattern 
now adopted.. 
Clause H.-The clause seeks to' enable the Commission to make 
regulations regarding the summoning and holding of meetings and 
the conduct of business of the Standing Finance Committee and also 
for levying fees chargeable for certificates of genuineness of Khadi 
and products of village industries granted by the Commission . 
• 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING LEGISLATION 
Clause 13 of the Bill which seeks to amend section 26 of the 
Khadi and Village Industries Commission Act, 1956, eonfers on the 
Central Government the power to make rules regarding the terms 
and conditions of service of the vice-chairman, the powers and 
duties to be exercised and perfcrmed by the chairman and the vice-
chairman, the constitution of the Standing Finance Committees and 
the procedure to be followed by the Tribunal in deciding questions 
referred to it. These are matters of detail and the delegation of 
legislative power with respect to them is of a normal character. 

Definition .. 
Power to add 
to the 
Schedule. 
ANNEXURE 
EX'nlACTS FaOM THE KHADI AND VILLAGE INDUSTRIES CoMMISSION Ac:r • 
.1956 (61 or' 1956) 
• '" • • • 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
• '" '" • • 
(e) "member" means a member of the CornmJJsion and 
ineludes thf> chairman: 
• • • • • 
3. (1) The Central Government may, of its own motion or on 
the recommendation of the Commission, declare, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, any other industry to be a village industry to 
which this Act applies, and thereupon the industry so declared shall 
be deemed to be an industry !;pecified in the Schedule for the 
purposes of this Act. 
• '" '" • • 
i:.CQ,~~ 5. The Central Government shall appoint, after consultation with 
lion. the Commission, a member other than the chainnan, to be the 
secretary of the Commission. 
• '" • • '" 
12. 
• • • • • 
(2) The chairman or, in his absence any member chosen by the 
members present from among thpmselves. shall preside at a meeting 
of the Commission. 
• • ... • • 
T!~ Old 13. The tenh of oftlce and the terms and conditions of service of O ..... CaD 
conditiODI of t$~, the secretary and the other members and. of the 
=:.:~ FiI1ancla1 Adviser to the Commission shall be such u may be 
lecretary IDd p~ribed. 
other rAcm- !' 
bera. .:. • • • • • 
9 
JI54 (B)LS-z 

10 
15. 
• • • • • 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, the Commission may take such steps u it may 
thiJikA~ 
• • • • • 
( e) to provide for the sale and marketlu& of khadi or of 
products of village industries; 
• • • • • 
JlIarM.'IioDa ..... 
daeCommia-
aiea. 
18. (1) The Commission shall have two separate funds to be ~ ~ die 
called the khadi fund and the village industries fund, and all grants DUll 011. 
and advances made to the funds, from time to time, by the Central 
Government for the purposes of the development of khadi or the 
development of village industries, and all receipts of the Commis-
sien in respect of khadi or village industries shall . be credited to 
the kliadi 'fund or village industries fund, as the cue may 'be, and' 
all payments oy the Commission for or in respect of khadi or. village 
industries shall be made from the appropriate fund. . 
• • • • • 
ZOo ", ... - .... 
• * * • 
(3) The Commission may, within the respective limits of the 
khadi budget and the village industries 'budget, sanction ' any 
reappropriation from one head of expenditure to another or from a 
provision made for one scheme to that in respect of another, bui 
in no·cUe shall a reappropriation of fund be made from the thadi 
budget to 'the village industries budget or from the village industries 
budget to the khadi budget: 
Provided that no reappropriation from the beed 'Loan' to any 
other head'of ,expenditure and vice uer.a in either bddget shall be 
sanetionect by' the Commiuton, except with the previous" approval 
8u48Il. 
of : the Central Government, ' '," , 
• • • • • .""'" 

Power to 
IIIIJre rar.. 
11 
•• • • '" • • 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the 
following matters, name1y:-
(a) the term of oftlce of, and the manner of fl1ling casual 
vacancies among, the members of the Commission, and tile 
terms and conditions of service of the Chairman, the secretary 
and the other members and of the Financial Adviser to the 
Commission iBcluding the salaries and allowances to be paid to 
them and the travelling and daily allowances to be drawn by 
them when they are on tour; 
• • • • • 
(3) All rules made under this section shall be laid for not less 
than thirty days before both Houses of Parliament as soon as 
possible after they are made and shall be subject to such modifica-
tions as Parliament may make during the session in which thty 
are 10 laid or the session immediately following . 
• • • • • 
• 

LnK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Khadi and Village Industries Commis-
sion Act, 1956. 
• 
(Shri Mtmubhlli Shah, 
Minister of lrr4wtry.) 