As INTRODUCED IN Lok Sapiia

27 1 9101

166 of 2000.

THE COTTON GROWERS (BENEFIT) BILL, 2000

By
Sunt Ramoas ATHAWALE, M.P.

nN
BILL
to provide for the protection and welfare of cotton growers. ]
P P 8

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as

follows:—
1, (/) This Act may be called the Cotton Growers (Benefit) Act, 2000. Short title, ex-
teni and com-
(2) It extends to the whole of India. mmencement,
,
5 (3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Definitions.

(a) “cotton grower” means any person who cultivates cotton;

(b) “small and marginal cotton growers” shall mean cotton growers who are
jo declared as such under this Act; and

(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.


Central
Government to
procure cotton
and fix
remunerative
price thereof.

Export of

Insurance.

| Establishment
of Cotton

Grows

Power to make
rules.

2

3. The Central Government shall procure through the Cotton Corporation of
India all the cotton produced in the country and shall also fix remunerative price of
cotton every year after taking into consideration the increase in prices of cotton seeds,
pesticides and fertilizers, total investment capacity of cotton growers and such other
factors, as may be prescribed.

4. The Central Government shall endeavour to export all the excess cotton pro-
duced in the country during’a year.

5. The entire cotton grown by the small and marginal cotton growers shall be
compulsorily insured free of cost by the Central Government against natural calami-
ties, decline in yields of cotton produced, fall in prices of cotton and such other even-
tualities, as may be prescribed.

6, (1) The Central Government shall establish a Fund to be known as the Cotton
Growers Benefit Fund.

(2) The Central Government and State Governments shall contribute to the
Fund in such ratio, as may be prescribed.

(3) The Fund shall be utilized for the following purposes:—

(a) to extend financial help 10 the small and marginal farmers in such cases, as
may be prescribed;

(0) giving financial assistance to cotton growers for purchasing cotton seeds,
pesticides and fertilizers and in cases of low yields or fall in prices of cotton or
destruction of their crops due to rains, cyclones and floods.

7, The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

10

20


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

‘The market fluctuations, nature's fury and Government's neglect have driven the
cotton growers into a crisis. Declining yields and falling prices are making the lives of the
Poor farmers miserable. The agony that gripped the cotton growers in Prakasham district
of Andhra Pradesh had even caused suicides in 1987. Andhra Pradesh is one of the three
major cotton producing Siates alongwith Gujarat and Maharashira. Cotton is mainly
produced in Guntur, Prakasham, Kurnool, Mahabub Nagar, Warangal and Adilabad districts
of Andhra Pradesh. The costs of cotton inputs have shot up increasing the total capital
investment of the farmers. The peasant organisations are demanding remunerative prices
of cotton for cotton growers. But instead of getting remunerative prices, the cotton growers
have to face shocking experiences as prices in different markets in the State have generally
declined by 20 per cent. as compared to the previous year.

The main reason behind the cotton growers getting non-remunerative prices is
availability of excess stock of cotton in the market. There is, therefore, an urgent need to
bring a law assuring the cotton growers of Government's help in the event of excess
production or fall in prices and also to ensure that their minimum needs are looked after
by the Government. The creation of a fund and a provision of insurance cover for cotton
growers will help them immensely.

Hence this Bill.

New Detit; RAMDAS ATHAWALE
November 11, 2000.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM.

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the purchase of cotton from cotton growers by the
Central Government through the Cotton Corporation of India, Clause 5 provides that the
entire cotion grown by small and marginal cotton growers shall be compulsorily insured
free of cost by the Central Government against natural calamities, etc, Clause 6 provides
for the establishment of a Cotton Growers Benefit Fund to which the Central Government
and State Governments shall contribute in such ratio, as may be prescribed. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India, It is
likely to involve a recurring expenditure of rupees two hundred crore per annum,

A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of Tupees three hundred crore is also likely
to be involved,


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only. The delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the protection and welfare of cotton growers.

(Shri Ramdas Athawale, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—4624l S—17.11.2000,