THE PREVENTION OF INSULTS TO NATIONAL
HONOUR (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010
By
SHRI L. RAJAGOPAL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Prevention of Insults to National Honour Act, 1971.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Prevention of Insults to National Honour (Amendment)
Act, 2010.
2. After section 2 of the Prevention of Insults to National Honour Act, 1971, the
following section shall be inserted, namely:—
"2A. Whoever in any public place or in any other place within public view burns,
mutilates, defaces, defiles, disfigures, destroys, tramples upon or otherwise shows
Short title.
Bill No. 3 of 2010
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Insertion of
new section
2A.
Insult to the
Father of the
Nation.
69 of 1971. 5

2
disrespect to or brings into contempt whether by words, either spoken or written or by
acts or  through audio or video content, the photograph, image, or statue of Mahatma
Gandhi, the Father of the Nation, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
Explanation.—In this section, the word "disrespect" includes using the photograph,
image or statue or audio or video content, as the case may be, of the Father of the Nation—
(a) on costume, uniform, wardrobe or accessories of any description which is
worn below the waist by any person; or
(b) by embroidering or printing it on cushions, handkerchiefs, napkins,
undergarments or any dress material; or
(c) to promote any product, commercial or otherwise; or
(d) as a covering for a statue or a monument or a speaker's desk or a speaker's
platform; or
(e) as a drapery over the hood, top and sides or back or on a vehicle, train, boat
or an aircraft or any other similar object; or
(f) by allowing it to touch the ground or the floor or trail in water intentionally; or
(g) by wrongly depicting the picture, painting or drawing; or
(h) in such other form of false depiction as may be notified by the Government of
India, from time to time.".
5
10
15

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi popularly known as Mahatma Gandhi, stood as the
supreme symbol of relentless and uncompromising struggle to achieve independence for
India during its freedom struggle. He was the pioneer of principles like Satyagraha and
Ahimsa or non-violence to achieve his noble objectives. The principle of non-violence used
by Gandhiji has inspired movements for civil rights and freedom all over the world. Recognising
his philosophy and strategy of non-violence, the United Nations Organization vide its General
Assembly resolution A/RES/61/271 dated 15 June, 2007, has marked 2nd October, the birthday
of Mahatma Gandhi, as International Day of Non-violence.
In recent past, the cases involving showing of disrespect to Mahatma Gandhi have
come to the notice. There have also been attempts, time and again, to malign the image of
Gandhiji, a national symbol of communal and caste harmony. It has also been observed, quite
often, that the honour of the man, to whom we owe our freedom and who spent a lifetime for
protecting and uplifting the down-trodden is at stake. These incidents, be it in political
circles or otherwise, against Gandhiji have to be stopped.
It is the duty of the State and every citizen of the country, who have faith in his
principles, to prevent any kind of insult or disrespect to photograph, image or statue of the
Father of the Nation.
In view of the above, it is proposed to amend the Prevention of Insults to National
Honour Act, 1971 to prevent any act of disrespect to the picture, photograph, image or statue
of Mahatma Gandhi.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI;
December  9,  2009. L. RAJAGOPAL

LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Prevention of Insults to National Honour Act, 1971
—————
(Shri L. Rajagopal,  M.P.)
GMGIPMRND— 302LS(S5)—24-02-2010.