AS INTRODUCED IN Lox SaBHa

PN)
w
al

Bill No. ३ of 2000
—_

THE SCHEDULED CASTES AND SCHEDULED TRIBES
(RESERVATION OF VACANCIES IN POSTS AND SERVICES)
BILL, 2000
By
Suri Rampas ATHAWALE, M.P.

A

BILL

to provide for reservation of vacancies for the members of scheduled castes and scheduled
tribes in posts and services under the control of the Government of India or of a
‘State and in all statutory authorities and autonomous bodies receiving monies from
the Government of India or of a State and for providing punishment for violation of
reservation policy and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows: —
1. (7) This Act may be called the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes

Shon title,
(Reservation of Vacancies in Posts and Services) Act, 2000. commence-
ment and
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by application.
5 notification in the official Gazette, appoint.

(3) It shall apply to every establishment as defined in clause (b) of section 2.


Reservation of
vacancies for
Scheduled
Castes and
Scheduled
‘Tribes.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) “appointing authority” in relation to a service or post in an establishment
means the authority empowered to make appointment to such service or post;

(8) “establishment” means—
(ऐ any office of the Government of India or of a State;

(ii) any public sector undertaking or statutery authority constituted under
any Central Act or a State Act for the time being in force;

(iii) a corporation in which not less then fifty-one per cent, of the paid up
share capital is held by the Cenirai Government or a State Government;

(iv) a university and its affiliated colleges, including medical and
engineering colle: affiliated to such university established by a Central Act or
by a State Act;

(v) primary and secondary schools and other educational institutions which
are owned or aided by the Central Government or by a State Government;

(vi) any industry, trade, business or occupation owned, controlled or
managed by the Central Government or a State Government;

(vil) any Government company as defined in section 617 of the Companies
Act, 1956 or a Corporation established by or under 8 Central Act or a State Act;
and

(viii) all autonomous bodies and other institutions receiving monies out of
the Consolidated Fund of India or Consolidated Fund of a State or grants-in-aid
from the Central Government or a State Government,

(०) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;

(d) “recruitment year” means the financial year during which a recri#tment is
actually made;

(०) “reservation” means reservation of vacancies in posts and services for
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes;

(8 “Scheduled Castes” shall have the same meaning as is assigned to them in
clause (24) of article 366 of the Constitution of India; and

(g) “Scheduled Tribes” shall have the same meaning as is assigned to them in
clause (25) of article 366 of the Constitution of India.

3. (1) There shall be reservation of yacancies in posts and services for the members of
the Scheduicd Castes and the Scheduled Tribes at all levels of recruitment including
appointments by promotion. -

(2) Except as otherwise provided in this Act, the vacancies reserved for the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes shall not be filled up by candidates not belonging to the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.

(3) The reservation vi vacancies under sub-section (1) shall he at such percentage of
the total number of vacanvic. »s the Central Government may, after taking into consideration
the percentage of population of the Scheduled Castes and the Schedi.less Tribes to the total
population of the country, as per the figures of the latest census; from 10 time determine:

Provided that in no case such reservation shall be less than fifteen per cent. of the total
number of vacancies for the members of the Scheduled Castes and seven and a half per cent.
of the total number of vacancies for the members of the Scheduled Tribes at any given point
of time.



3

(4 Vacancies reserved for the members of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes under sub-section (1) shall be filled in such manner as may be prescribed:

Provided that any post falling vacant in any establishment from general category
shall be offered to the Scheduled Caste or the Scheduled Tribe candidate, as the case may
be, to fill up the gap—of percentage of vacancies reserved under sub-section (3).

4. (2) The recruitinen: to a vacancy aot reserved for the members of the Scheduled
Castes or the Scheduled Tribes or for auy other category shall be open to all eligible
candidates including the candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes.

(2) Where an unzeserved vacancy +s filed up by 2 caudidate belonging to a Scheduled
Caste or a Scheduled Tribe on the Sasi ५ ether by direct recruitment or by
Promotion, such vacancy sha!] not be ecijusucl against the percentage of vacancies reserved
for the Scheduied Casies or tne Scheduied ‘iribes, as the case may be.

5. (7) Where the

embers of the Scheduled
Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, as the ent year cannot be filled up
Gue to non-availability of candidates from the respective categories, such vacancies shall
continue to reserved for that category for such number of reomtiticent years, as may be
prescribed.

ine

( If, after the expiry of the number of recruitment year prescribed under sub-
section (1), the candidates belonging to the Scheduled Custes or the Scheduled Tribes, as
the case may be, are not available to fill up the vacancies respectively reserved for them,
such vacancies shall be exchanged between the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes
with such relaxation and in such manner, as may be prescribed.

6. (1) It shall be the responsibility of the appointing authority to ensure that the
provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder are no! violated

(2) The Central Government may give such directions or prescribe such guidelines
to the appointing authority, as it may deem fit for the purposes of sub-section (1)

7. The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall be in addition to
and notin derogation of any other law, for the time being in force, in respect of recruitment!
promotion of the members of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes to the extent
that such law is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act or 01: rules made.

8. For appointment of candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes—

(@) the upper age limit fixed for appointment to a
relaxed by such number of years, as may be prescribed, but
in no case, be less than five years;

ervice or a post shall be
ch relaxation in age,

(0) the examination fees fixed for recraitment to a service or a post through
competitive examination or otherwise shall be reduced to such extent, as may be
prescribed.

(0) the requirement of percentage of marks, educational and other qualifications
including experience required for direct recruitment/promotion may be relaxed at
the discretion of the appointing authority if at any stage of selection the appointing

Vacancies not
reserved to be
open to all
‘candidates
inciuding
candidates
belonging to
Scheduled

hatween
Scheduled
Castes and
Scheduled
Tribes,

Appointing
authority to be
responsible for
implementa-
tion of the
provisions of
the Act.

Application of
other laws not
barred.

Relaxations
and conces-
sions.


Protections of
action taken in
good faith,

Liaison officer.

Submission of
Annual
Reports and
maintenance of
other records
and inspection
thereof,

Punishment,

Punishment for
making false
claims,

4

authority is of the opinion that sufficient number of Scheduled Caste and Scheduled

Tribe candidates with requisite qualifications are not available to fill up the vacancies
reserved for them; and

(@ the appointing authority shall pay them such travelling allowance, as may
be prescribed, for the purpose of attending competitive examination and/orinterview.

9. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against any establishment
or any other person for anything which has been done or intended to be done in parsuance
of giving effect to the provision of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder.

10, (1) Every establishment shall designate one or more officers of such rank, as
may be prescribed, to act as liaison officer in respect of matters provided in this Act and to
ensure that the provision of this Act or rules made thereunder are not violated,

(2) The Liaison Officer, shall, in particular, be responsible for —

(@) ensuring coordination and proper implementation of the provisions of this
Act and the rules made or any order, instruction or direction issued by the Central
Government, thereunder;

(6) ensuring timely submission of the annual report, referred to in section 11
to the Central Goverment;

(©) conducting annual inspection of records in such manner, as may be
prescribed; and

(०) doing such other incidental work, as may be necessary, for the proper
implementation of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder.

11. (1) Every appointing authority shall maintain such records, as may be
Prescribed, and shall furnish every year, in such manner and at such time, as may be
prescribed, to the Central Government an annual report on the appointments and
Promotions made by it during the previous recruitment year:

Provided that the appointing authority shall maintain separate records of all
appointments and promotions made during the previous recruitment year for each category
of posts and services arid each of such records shall specifically contain the number and
percentage of persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes who
were appointed or promoted to fill up the vacancies against those posts and services during
that recruitment year.

(2 The Central Government may authorise any officer to inspect any records or
documents which are maintained in relation to appointments and promotions made in any
establishment by the appointing authority.

(3) It shall be the duty of the appointing authority to make available such records or
documents to— ee

(a) the officer authorised under sub-section (2) and furnish to him such
1 information and render such assistance as may be necessary for him to carry out his
functions under this 808 and

(6) any employee working under him on receiving a written request,

12. Whoever contravenes the provisions of this Act shall be punished with
imprisonment which may extend to one year or with fine amounting 10 rupees ten thousand
or with both. é

13. Whoever knowingly makes a false claim that he is a member of the Scheduled
Caste or, as the case may be, the Scheduled Tribe, and whoever knowingly issues false
certificate to this effect, shall be punished with imprisonment for aterm which shall be not
less than three years or with fine which may extend to rupees ten thousand or with both,

20

25

30

35

45


5

14, The Central Government may, by order give such directions, as it may deem fit,
from time to time, to give effect to the provisions of this Act and every establishment shall
७ bound by all such directions issued by the Central Government,

15. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Government may, by order, to be published in the Official Gazette, make such
ions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be
for removing the difficulty.

(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is
०, before each House of Parliament.

16. The Central Government shall, every year, lay before cach House of
‘fiament, a report giving full account of the working of the pro as of this Act
ing the preceding recruitment year:

Provided that the report shail also include details of penal action taken against the
authorities for violating the provisions of this Act.

17, (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
s for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—

(2) the percentage of vacancies to be reserved for the members of the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes under sub-section (3) of section 3;

(6) the manner of filling vacancies reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes under sub-section (4) of section 3;

(© the number of recruitment years for carrying forward reserved vacancies
not filling in a particular recruitment year and the manner of interchange of vacancies
between the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes under section 5:

* @ relaxation in upper age limit:
(© reduction in quantum of fees to be charged for admission to competitive
examination/interview,
(A the rate at which the travelling allowance, referred to in clause (व) of
section 8, may be given to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes:

(g) rank of officer to be designated as liaison officer under se

॥ 10;

(4) the manner in which records may be maintained by the appointing authority
and the manner in which and the time at which an annual report on the appointments.
and promotions made by the appointing authority during the previous year may be
furnished under sub-section (1) of section 11;

(0 the manner of conducting inspection of records under s

ion 11;

@ procedure that may be followed by the appointing authority for verification
of the caste status of the appointee and the procedure that may be followed by the
higher authority in case an appeal is filed by the appointee against the action of
appointing authority; and

(80 any other matter which may be prescribed or in respect of which rules are
required to be made by the Central Government.

(8) Every rule made under this Act shall he laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions

Power of
Central
Goverment to
give directions,

Removal of
difticulties.

‘Annual Report,

Power to make
ules,


Act to have
over riding

aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree
that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
that rule.

18. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument
having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Articles 38, 39 and 46 of the Constitation require the State to promote educational
and economic interests of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes ini order to
render social justice to them and since employment including promotions in service is an
aspect of economic interest of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Ti ‘bes, it is the
duty of the State to give adequate protection to the economic interests of the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled 'Iribes. Moreover, it has been our natioal policy to make special
provisions for the advancement of the Scheduled Castes and ihe Scheduled Tribes in
matters relating to their employment or appointment, including promotions, to any office
under the State. This view was also upheld by the Supreme Court in Rangachari's case in
1962 and ever since many judgements have been delivered by '. Sapreme Court on the
above principle including the judgements in the Thomas' case am! > Railway Karamachari
Sangh's case.

However, in the recent Mandal case the Supreme Court took the view that reservation
in confined only to initial recruitment and does not include promotion and, as such,
reservation in promotion is not covered under article 16(4) of the Constitution. The decision
of the Supreme Court is enforceable throughout the territory of India under article 142 of
the Constitution unless a law is made by the Parliament annulling the effect of the decision
of the Supreme Court.

In such circumstances it has, therefore, become necessary to amend article 16 and
Ninth Schedule to the Constitution making reservation in promotion as a part of reservation
‘scheme and such reservation of appointment and posts, which includes reservation in
Promotion in services and posts under the State, may not be subject to any judicial
scrutiny.

However, it is all the more important that a separate Act should be made providing
for ensuring reservation in appointments and posts for the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes, including reservation for them in promotions in all the departments of
the Central Government and State Governments, nationalised banks, public sector
undertakings, statutory authorities, autonomous bodies, companies or corporations,
societies, local authorities, universities, educational institutions affiliated to the universities
or those recognised by the Central Government or receiving aid from the Central
Government, etc. Moreover, penal provisions have to be provided to ensure effective
implementation of the Act and to ensure that the reservation is nat less than’ fifteen per
cent. of the total number of vacancies for members of the Scheduled Castes and seven and
half per cent. of the total number of vacancies for members of the Scheduled Tribes at any
given point of time.

_ The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective

‘New Dew; RAMDAS ATHAWALE
November 30, 1999.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 8(d) of the Bill provides that the appointing authority shall pay to the Sched-
uled Caste and the Scheduled Tribe candidates such travelling allowance, as may be pre-
scribed, for the purpose of. attending competitive examination and/or interview, Clause 11
provides that every appointing authority shall maintain such records, as may be prescribed,
and shall furnish every year, in such manner and such time, as may be prescribed, to the
Central Government an annual report on the appointments and promotions made by it
during the previous recruitment year. Clause 16 provides for the preparation and laying of
an annual report on the working of the Act before each House of Parliament. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
likely to involve an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore from
the Consolidated Fund of india.

No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 17 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
the provisions of the Bill. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are
ers of procedure and detail and since it is not possible to incorporate the same in the
Bill, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

ar
BILL

to provide for reservation of vacancies for the members of scheduled castes and scheduled
tribes in posts and services under the control of the Government of India or of a
State and in all statutory authorities and autonomous bodies receiving monies from
the Government of India or of a State and for providing punishment for violation of
reservation policy and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

(Shri Ramdas Athawale, M.P.) की

MGIP(PLU)MRND—32271.S1. |—18-1-2000.