1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT (RECRUITMENT) BILL, 2011
By
SHRIMATI BIJOY A CHAKRA V ARTY, M.P .
A
BILL
to provide for regulation of recruitment in public employment and for matters
connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1)  This Act may be called the Public Employment (Recruitment) Act, 2011.
(2)  It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No.  3  of  2011
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
Definitions. 2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means—
(1) in relation to—
(a) any establishment of railways, major port, mine or oil-field, or
(b) any establishment owned, controlled or managed by—
(i) the Central Government or a department of the Central
Government,
(ii) a corporation (including a co-operative society),
established by or under a Central Act, which is owned, controlled
or managed by the Central Government,
the Central Government; and
(2) in relation to any other public sector establishment, the Government
of the State in which that other establishment is situated;
(b) "employee" means any person who is employed in any public sector
establishment to do any work for remuneration;
(c) "employer" means any person who employs one or more persons to do any
work in public sector establishment for remuneration and includes any person
entrusted with the supervision and control of employees in such establishment;
(d) "employment exchange" means any office or place established and
maintained by the appropriate Government for the collection and furnishing of
information, either by the keeping of registers or otherwise, respecting—
(i) persons who seek to engage employees,
(ii) persons who seek employment, and
(iii) vacancies to which persons seeking employment may be appointed;
(e) "establishment" means—
(a) any office, or
(b) any place where any industry, trade, business or occupation is carried
on;
(f) "establishment in public sector" means an establishment owned, controlled
or managed by—
(1) the appropriate Government or a department of the appropriate
Government;
(2) a Government company as defined in section 617 of the Companies
Act, 1956;
(3) a corporation (including a co-operative society), established by or
under a Central or State Act, which is owned, controlled or managed by the
Government; and
(4) a local authority;
(g) "Group C post" means a post involving clerical, typing or such other work
but does not include a post involving supervisory work;
(h
) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
1 of 1956.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
Forwarding of
names of
eligible
candidates by
employment
exchange to
the employer.
Notification
and
publication of
vacancies.
3. It shall be mandatory for the employer of an establishment in public sector to—
(a) notify to such employment exchanges, as may be prescribed, about the
vacancies proposed to be filled up before filling up any vacancy in that establishment;
(b) publish in the newspapers having wider circulation, display on their office
notice boards, announce on radio and television network through employment news
bulletins and publish in the vernacular language newspapers of the area where the
establishment is situated or the vacancy has arisen about the vacancies in that
department and their full details.
4. It shall be the duty of every employment exchange to which a vacancy has been
notified by any employer to forward the names of candidates in accordance with their
eligibility and reservation policy for the time being in force to the employer of that department.
5. The employer of every establishment in public sector who has notified vacancies
shall consider all applications received through employment exchanges and direct from
candidates before filling up vacancies in that establishment.
6. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, order, rule, notification,
bye-law, regulation, instruction, judgement of any court of law or tribunal or any quasi-
judicial authority or any authority having judicial powers to the contrary for filling up a
Group C post, the knowledge of regional language of the State or area where the establishment
is situated or where the vacancy has arisen shall be a compulsory and pre-requisite
qualification for deciding the eligibility of candidates for filling up any Group C post in that
establishment.
7. Unless the Central Government otherwise directs by notification in the Official
Gazette in this behalf, this Act shall not apply in relation to vacancies which are proposed
to be filled up through promotion or by absorption of surplus staff of any branch or
department of the same establishment.
8.  (1)  The Central Government  may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Consideration
of all
applications
received
through
employment
exchange.
Regional
language to be
made
compulsory
for Group C
posts.
Act not to
apply in case
of promotion
or absorption
of surplus
staff.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
It has been observed that there is no proper and uniform recruitment policy in
Government bodies. Only a strong and clear cut policy will pave the way for appointment of
efficient staff in Government undertakings. It has been seen that many Government
departments advertise their vacancies only in national dailies or in employment news. As a
result only a few people have access to information regarding the vacancy position in a
particular department. In fact, there is a mandatory provision that whenever a vacancy
arises, employment exchanges should be notified about it, who in turn will forward details of
eligible candidates to the department. This procedure is not followed properly and as a result
even unsuitable candidates get selected in the process.
The Supreme Court in a case has observed that all vacancies arising in a Government
department should be given wide publicity in newspapers including regional newspapers,
employment news, employment news bulletins in radio and television network so that maximum
number of candidates can apply. However, many of the departments taking advantage of the
instructions given by the Government of India regarding the administrative and budgetary
convenience, publish the vacancies in Employment News only. The vacancies are not
published in regional languages and as a result people living in backward and far-flung areas
are not aware of the advertisements and as such are not in a position to apply for the same.
Therefore, through this Bill it is proposed to make it compulsory that all vacancies
must be notified not only to employment exchanges, employment news, but also published
in regional newspapers in addition to national and other dailies. In this connection it may not
be out of place to mention that a note on recruitment policy in the public sector enterprises
was laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on 14 April 1961 in which it has been stipulated that
all vacancies should be communicated to employment exchanges and advertisements should
be published in local languages and local newspapers. It is clear that even the judgement of
the Supreme Court is not strictly followed.
For efficient functioning of an establishment and to serve the people better, it is
essential that employees serving in a particular department should know the local or regional
language of the area where the department is situated. Earlier, the knowledge of regional
language or local language was an essential qualification for appointments. However, of late,
the knowledge of regional or local language is not being insisted upon as a pre-requisite
qualification in determining the eligibility condition for considering the candidature for a
vacancy. Therefore, it is also proposed in the Bill that knowledge of regional language be
made an essential qualification instead of desirable for appointment to Group C posts. This
will serve two purposes. First, persons speaking the local language can be appointed who
can liaison or communicate with the local people effectively and also to provide employment
opportunities to the local people.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BIJOYA  CHAKRAV ARTY
December 8, 2010.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for publication of vacancies arising in public sector
establishments in the newspapers, announcement on radio and television network through
employment news bulletins and publication in the vernacular language newspapers of the
area where the establishment is situated or the vacancy has arisen. The Bill, therefore, if
enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to
involve a recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore  is also likely to be
involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for regulation of recruitment in public employment
and for matters connected therewith.
—————
(Shrimati Bijoya Chakravarty, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—6142LS(S3)—14-02-2011.