THE HERITAGE CITIES AND SITES (CONSERV ATION AND
DEVELOPMENT) BILL, 2020
By
SHRIMATI RANJEETA KOLI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the conservation and development of heritage cities and sites by way of
retaining their historical identification and promoting international and domestic
tourism and publishing their historical importance through booklets, pamphlets
and such other material and for declaring heritage cities as smart cities for
 overall development and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Heritage Cities and Sites (Conservation and
Development) Act, 2020.
(2) It extends to the whole of  India.
Short title and
extent.
Bill No. 3 of 2020
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State the Government of
that State and in all other cases the Central Government;
(b) "Fund" means the National Heritage Cities and Sites Development Fund
established under section 4;
(c) "heritage City or heritage site" means a city or site, as the case may be,
having historical importance which has been declared as such either by United Nations
Organisation or any other international organization or as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare to be heritage; and
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, after inviting suggestions from the Governments
of the States and Administrations of the Union territories, by notification in the Official
Gazette, declare new heritage cities and sites in the country.
(2) Every city declared as heritage city under sub-section (1) shall also be declared as
a smart city under the policy of the Central Government.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, within a period of six months from the date
of commencement of this Act, constitute a Fund to be known as the National Heritage
Cities and Sites Development Fund with initial corpus of rupees fifty thousand crore to
be provided by the Central Government.
(2) The Fund shall be utilised in such manner as may be prescribed for,—
(a) development of heritage cities and sites;
(b) creating infrastructure such as hospitality establishments and services,
public utilities, water facility, and such other facilities as the appropriate
Government may deem necessary for the promotion and development of tourism
including publicity through booklets, pamphlets, print and electronic media and
through the Indian Embassies and High Commissions abroad to attract foreign
and domestic tourists in large numbers to such heritage cities and sites; and
(c) providing necessary transport facilities including air services, rail
connectivity, metro rail projects, public transport system, and such other means
to reach and see the heritage cities and sites.
5. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law or policy of the Central
Government for the time being in force every heritage city covered under this Act shall be
developed as Smart City by the Central Government.
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament
by law in this behalf, provide requisite funds from time to time, for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
7. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force dealing with the subject matter of this Act.
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case  may be; however, that only such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Definitions.
Constitution of
National
Heritage Cities
and Sites
Development
Fund.
Heritage cities
to be
developed as
smart cities.
Central
Government to
provide
requisite funds.
Central
Government to
declare new
heritage cities
and sites.
Act to supplement
other laws.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Our Nation, one of the oldest civilizations, is an ancient country with rich cultural
traditions in which many cities and sites were tastefully created and developed by the then
rulers which today have great heritage value. One such heritage city is Aurangabad in the
State of Maharashtra which is the gateway to world heritage site of Ajanta and Ellora caves.
This ancient city named after Mogul emperor Aurangzeb has witnessed the proud history of
Moghul dynasty. Apart from Ajanta and Ellora caves this city is famous for duplicate
Taj Mahal known as Bibi ka Maqbara, Grihaneshwar temple, Daulatabad fort, Salim Ali Lake
and bird sanctuary and 52 gates where every gate has its own history and named after
someone important in history. Being a Moghul era city there are many Dargahs and Mosques
in this ancient city.
There are many other historical cities and sites of heritage value. Many of them have
been declared as historical sites and remains under an Act of Parliament. Some sites have
also been declared as world heritage sites by UNESCO. But, unfortunately, most of them are
in dilapidated condition, completely neglected and are in need of refurbishment.
In fact these heritage cities and sites having historical value can be converted into
hubs of tourism and in turn will create employment opportunities and generate revenue for
the exchequer apart from preserving our history.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RANJEETA KOLI
November 7, 2019.

4
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the constitution of National Heritage Cities and Sites
Development Fund with an initial corpus of rupees fifty thousand crore to be provided by
the Central Government. Clause 6 makes it obligatory for the Central Government to provide
requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The Bill, if enacted, will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. Apart from initial corpus of rupees fifty
thousand crore,  it is estimated that a sum of rupees sixty thousand crore may involve as
recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees ten thousand crore will also be
involved.

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 8 empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the purposes
of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative
power is of a normal character.

MGIPMRND—4395LS(S3)—13.01.2020.
LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the conservation and development of heritage cities and sites by way of
retaining their historical identification and promoting international and domestic
tourism and publishing their historical importance through booklets, pamphlets
and such other material and for declaring heritage cities as smart cities for
 overall development and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
————
(Shrimati Ranjeeta Koli,  M.P .)