1
THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2021
By
DR. MOHAMMAD JAWED, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Amendment) Act,
2021.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 11 of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960, in sub-section (1),
for the words “he shall be punishable, in the case of a first offence, with fine which shall not
be less than ten rupees but which may extend to fifty rupees, and in the case of a second or
subsequent offence committed within three years of the previous offence, with fine which
shall not be less than twenty-five rupees but which may extend to one hundred rupees or
Bill No. 3 of  2021
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment of
section 11.
5
10

2
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with both.”, the words
“he shall be punishable, in the case of a first offence, with fine which shall not be less than
ten thousand rupees but which may extend to twenty five thousand rupees or with
imprisonment for a term which may extend upto one year or with both, and in the case of a
second or subsequent offence, with fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees
but which may extend to one lakh rupees and with imprisonment for a term which shall not be
less than one year but which may extend to two years.” shall be substituted.
5

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The laws in our country, in particular the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960,
meant for the protection and safety of animals are ineffective, considering the meagre or less
penalties prescribed, which are neither proportional to the gravity of the offences committed
nor enough to prevent such offences by creating any deterrent effect on the persons
committing such offence against animals.
A fine of fifty rupees is not adequate fine when it comes to offences which may result
in severe injury to animals. The consequence of such miniscule amount of fine and sentence
for such grave and serious offences is the recurring incidents of animal abuse.
Therefore, an amendment to the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960, with
increased amount of fine and sentence so as to create a deterrence to prevent cruelty against
animals is urgently required.
Hence, this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MOHAMMAD JAWED
September 16, 2020

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960
(59 OF 1960)
* * * * * *
11. (1) If any person—
(a) beats, kicks, over-rides, over-drives, over-loads, tortures or otherwise treats
any animal so as to subject it to unnecessary pain or suffering or causes, or being the
owner permits, any animal to be so treated; or
* * * * * *
(o) promotes or takes part in any shooting match or competition wherein animals
are released from captivity for the purpose of such shooting:
he shall be punishable in the case of a first offence, with fine which shall not be
less than ten rupees but which may extend to fifty rupees, and in the case of a second
or subsequent offence committed within three years of the previous offence, with fine
which shall not be less than twenty-five rupees but which may extend to one hundred
rupees or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with both.
* * * * * *
Treating
animals
cruelty.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960
————
(Dr. Mohammad Jawed, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—1016LS(S3)—08-01-2021.