THE WIDOWS’ WELFARE BILL, 2007
By
SHRI ADHALRAO SHIV AJI PA TIL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the protection and welfare of widows and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Widows’ Welfare Act, 2007.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) ‘appropriate Government’ means in the case of a State Government, the
Government of that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(ii) ‘prescribed’ means prescribed by rules made under the Act; and
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No.  3  of 2007
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Definitions.
5

2
(iii) ‘widow’ means any woman whose husband has expired after her legal
 marriage and who has not remarried and has no source of income or livelihood;
3. (1) The Central Government  shall set up a Fund to be known as the Widows’
Welfare Fund.
(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute to the fund in
such proportion as may be prescribed.
(3) The Fund shall also consist of contributions made by Voluntary Organizations and
donations or contributions received from other organizations or individuals.
(4) The Fund shall be managed by a Board consisting of—
(i) the Union Minister of Social Justice and Empowerment who shall be its
ex-officio Chairman;
(ii) one representative of the Union Ministry of Finance;
(iii) one representative of every State Government;
(iv) one representative of the voluntary organizations working in the field of
widows’ welfare; and
(v) the Secretary of the Union Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, shall
be the ex-officio Secretary to the Board.
4. (1) The Central Government shall formulate a scheme for the protection and welfare
of widows.
(2) The scheme shall provide for—
(i) payment of monthly subsistence allowance to every widow;
(ii) free health care facilities to the widows and their dependents;
(iii) free educational facilities for the dependent/minor children of widows;
(iv) setting up of widows’ homes in every district;
(v) insurance facility for widows;
(vi) financial assistance for marriage of children of the widows;
(vii) loan facilities for self-employment of widows; and
(viii) any other matter deemed necessary or expedient by the appropriate
Government.
5. (1) The appropriate Government shall implement the scheme formulated under
section 4 of this Act.
(2) The expenditure for implementation of the scheme shall be met out of the Widows’
Welfare Fund constituted under section 3.
6. The Central Government shall make provision for suitable employment to every
widow as per her qualifications and experience in services under the Central Government.
7. The appropriate Government shall maintain a register of widows, in such form and
manner, as may be prescribed.
8. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of the Act.
Widows’
Welfare Fund.
Formulation
of a scheme
for the
protection
and welfare
of widows.
Implementation
of widows
welfare
scheme.
Provision for
suitable
employment
for widows.
Maintenance
of a register
for wodows.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The condition of widows in the country is very pathetic. There is no scheme for their
protection and welfare. They are left to fend for themselves and nobody takes care of them.
They die of hunger and diseases.
Majority of the widows do not have any source of income. Even their children do not
take care of them.
In these circumstances, it is the responsibility of the State to come forward to undertake
welfare schemes for widows. It is, therefore, proposed in the Bill to set up a Widows'
Welfare Fund for their protection and welfare.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.
N
EW DELHI; ADHALRAO SHIV AJI PATIL
December 8, 2006.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for setting up of the Widows' Welfare Fund. The Central
Government has to contribute to the Fund. Clause 5 provides that the appropriate Government
shall implement welfare scheme for the widows. Clause 6 provides that the Central Government
shall make provision for suitable employment for widows. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring
expenditure of rupees three thousand crore will be involved from the Consolidated Fund of
India.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one thousand crore is also likely to be involved.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Government to make rules for carrying out the
purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the protection and welfare of widows  and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—79LS(S-5)—06.02.2007.