AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

-. © 2MN oer

Bill No. 3 of 2003

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2003
| By : "3
SHRI CHANDRAKANT Kuaire, M.P.

BILL.
further to amend the Constitution of India.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:— 3 “ |

ad YY
जज

4. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2003. _ Short title.

2. For article 263 of the Constitution, the following article shall be Substituted, Substitution for
5  namely:— 7 । | article 263.

"263. (1) There shall be established an inter-State Council charged with the Inter-State |
duty of— ' | | ~ Council. |

(a) inquiring into and advising upon disputes which may have arisen |
between States |

a=
बनने:
CD
2)
a
=
5.
oO
py
—:.
=
cD
ra
=
क्र
ww
D
of).
Laue}
2)
maa
=
5
नर
bong
es
pat]
Oo हैं
=
फल +
=
og
as
y
i
=
Mm
bong
=
a.
o
Cc
ae |
—.
reg
ns
bec j
5
MS .
@
O ¢
—"
beet ©
(7
bby



(5) investigating and discussing subjects in which some or all of the
States, or the Union and one or more of the States, have a common interest; or

(c) making recommendations upon any such subject and, in particular
recommendauons for the detier co-ordination of policy and action with respect
_ to that subject ? ।

(2) The Council shall consist of the Prime Minister, the Union Minister of Home
Affairs and the Chief Ministers of the States.

(3) The Prime Minister shall be the Chairman of the Conncil.

(4) The Council may invite any other member of the Union Council of Ministers and
any administrator of the Union-territories to the Council, whenever considered necessary.

(5) The Council shall meet at least thrice in a year and at any time at the request of the
Chairman or of a Chief Minister of a State

(6) The Council shall have a Secretary who shall be appointed by the President
under his hand and seal on the advice of the Prime Minister in consultation with the
Chief Ministers of the States

(7) The term of office of the Secretary shall be five years.

(6) The other terms and conditions of the service of the Secretary shall be such as
may be laid down by the Council

(9) The Council shall create an annual budget to which the Central Government
and the Governments of the States shall contribute equitably

(10) The Councii shall have the power to define the nature of duties to be

performed by it and lay down its own procedure

10

1 5 ह.

20



दे STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REAS ONS

The Administrative Reforms Commission, although did not share the view of amend-
ing the provisions of the Constitution to ensure more harmonious relations between the
Centre and States, did recommend the use of enabling provisions as provided in

article 2623 of the Canctitutian ta cet un an inter-State Canunecil

न अत ae

In the changed political scenario, marked particularly by the advent of multi-party
policy, the need of a forum for mutual exchange of views on issues which concern the
States as well as the Centre, is highly imperative

Though a council has been set up, it does not have adequate powers and functions
Unless more, powers and functions are vested in the Council, it will not have any impact.

Therefore, it is proposed to amend the Constitution with a view to enabling
establishment of a comprehensive Council with more powers and functions especially in
the changed circumstances for better and harmonious co-ordination between the Union
and the States

Hence this Bill.
CHANDRAKANT KHAIRE
| New Devt:
December 9, 2002.


ee

FINANCTAT,. MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill provides for an inter-State Council. The Council will have a
Secretary, with his Secretariat. There will be no expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India in the case of the Members of the inter-State Council inasmuch as all of them will be
the functionaries of the Central and State Governments and of the Administrations of the _
Union territories, drawing their salaries and aliowances from the respective Governmenis

and the Union territories

There will, however, be expenditure involved from the Consolidated Fund ot India in
respect of the office of the Secretary and his Secretariat and for contributions to be made by

the Central Government towards the annual budget of the Council. The recurring expendi-

ture on this account may, approximately, be of the order of rupees fifty lakh.per annum
There will also. be involved a non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one crore at the:
initial stage



है
1
ह

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 2 of the Bill provides for laying down by the Council the terms and condi-
tions of the service of the Secretary to the inter-State Council. Provision has also been made
empowering the Council to lay down its own procedure. The matters with respect to which
the Council will make rules are matters of detail only. The delegation of legislative power,
therefore, is of a normal character.


ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

Co-ordination between States

203. if at any time ii appears to the President thai ine Pubiic interests wouid.be served
by the establishment of a Council charged with the duty of—

(a) inquiring into and advising upon disputes which may have arisen
between States;

(b) investigating and discussing subjects in which some or all of the
States, or the Union and one or more of the States, have a common interest; or

(c) making recommendations upon any such subject and, in particular,
. . . . . 4
recommendations for the better co-ordination of policy and action with respect
to that subject,
it shall be lawful for the President by order to establish such a Council, and to define
the nature of the duties to be performed by it and its organisation and procedure.

Provisions
with respect
to an inter-
State Council.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Chandrakant Khaire, M.P,)