1
THE  CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED TRIBES) ORDERS
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008
By
SHRI HARIBHAU RA THOD, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950 and the Constitution
(Scheduled Tribes) (Uttar Pradesh) Order, 1967.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Orders  (Amendment)
Act, 2008.
2.  In the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950, in the Schedule, in
Part XIII—Rajasthan, the entries 1 to 12 shall be renumbered as entries 2 to 13, respectively,
and before entry 2 as so renumbered, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:—
"1. Banjara.".
Short title.
Amendment
of the
Constitution
(Scheduled
Tribes) Order,
1950.
Bill No. 3 of 2008
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
C.O. 22 5

2
3. In the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) (Uttar Pradesh) Order, 1967, in the Schedule,
the entries 1 to 15 shall be renumbered as entries 2 to 16, respectively, and before entry 2
as so renumbered, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:—
"1. Banjara.".
Amendment
of the
Constitution
(Scheduled
Tribes) (Uttar
Pradesh)
Order, 1967.
C.O. 78

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Even after sixty years of Independence, the community known as Banjaras are still one
of the most backward communities in the country. The condition of Banjaras is worse than
even the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. Most of them are destitute. They have no
permanent settlement. Our country has progressed much in every field, but unfortunately
Banjaras are still deprived of the benefits of development. Although they are living in a free
nation, but, they are yet to enjoy full benefits of development. Even now their way of living
has not changed much from that of the eighteenth century.  After independence, the provision
of reservation has resulted in the advancement of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
and has enabled them to join the mainstream of the society, but Banjaras are still being
neglected by the Government. It is the need of the hour that Banjaras should also be included
in the list of Scheduled Tribes and given the benefit of reservation, because they are one of
the most primitive communities existing in India for centuries.  Already Government of several
States have sent or are in the process of sending recommendation to the Central Government
to include Banjara community in the list of Scheduled Tribes as they fulfil all criteria of being
recognized as Scheduled Tribes. In view of the facts mentioned above, immediate action is
required to enact a legislation to give status of Scheduled Tribe to the Banjaras in
Uttar Pradesh and Rajasthan, where they are mostly located, so that they can be brought in
the mainstream of the society.
Hence, this Bill.
N
EW DELHI;
December 4, 2007                                                                                       HARIBHAU RATHOD.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clauses 2 and 3 of the Bill seeks to include Banjara community in the list of Scheduled
Tribes in respect of the States of Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh by way of amending the
Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950 and the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes)
(Uttar Pradesh) Order, 1967. The Bill, if enacted, would involve recurring and non-recurring
expenditure on account of the benefits to be given under the schemes and programmes of
the Government meant for social, educational and economic development of the Scheduled
Tribes. At this stage, it is not possible to mention the exact amount which may be incurred
on this account. However, it is estimated that a sum of approximately rupees two hundred
crore is likely to be involved as a recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED TRIBES) ORDER, 1950.
(C.O. 22)
* * * * * *
PART XIII.—Rajasthan
* * * * * *
1. Bhil, Bhil Garasia, Dholi Bhil, Dungri Bhil, Dungri Garasia, Mewasi Bhil, Rawal
Bhil, Tadvi Bhil, Bhagalia, Bhilala, Pawra, Vasava, Vasave
2. Bhil Mina
3. Damor, Damaria
4. Dhanka, Tadvi, Tetaria, Valvi
5. Garasia (excluding Rajput Garasia)
6. Kathodi, Katkari, Dhor Kathodi, Dhor Katkari, Son Kathodi, Son Katkari
7. Kokna, Kokni, Kukna
8. Koli Dhor, Tokre koli, Kolcha, Kolgha
9. Mina
10. Naikda, Nayaka, Cholivala Nayaka, Kapadia Nayaka, Mota Nayaka, Nana Nayaka
11. Patelia
12. Seharia, Sehria, Sahariya.
* * * * * *
5

EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED TRIBES) (UTTAR PRADESH) ORDER, 1967
(C.O. 78)
* * * * * *
THE SCHEDULE
1. Bhotia
2. Buksa
3. Jannsari
4. Raji
5. Tharu
6. Gond, Dhuria, Nayak, Ojha, Pathari, Raj Gond (in the districts of Mehrajganj,
Sidharth Nagar, Basti, Gorakhpur, Deoria, Mau, Azamgarh, Jonpur, Balia, Gazipur,
Varanasi, Mirzapur and Sonbhadra)
7. Kharwar, Khairwar (in the districts of Deoria, Balia, Ghazipur, Varanasi and
Sonbhadra)
8. Saharya (in the district of Lalitpur)
9. Parahiya (in the district of Sonbhadra)
10. Baiga (in the district of Sonbhadra)
11. Pankha, Panika (in the districts of Sonbhadra and Mirzapur)
12. Agariya (in the district of Sonbhadra)
13. Patari (in the district of Sonbhadra)
14. Chero (in the districts of Sonbhadra and Varanasi)
15. Bhuiya, Bhuinya (in the district of Sonbhadra).
6

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950 and the Constitution
(Scheduled Tribes) (Uttar Pradesh) Order, 1967.
————
(Shri Haribhau Rathod, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—159LS(S-5)—6.2.2008.