                                                            Bill No. 3 of 2023
THE INSTITUTE OF TEACHING AND RESEARCH IN
AYURVEDA (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023
By
SHRI M.K. RAGHA V AN, M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the Institute of Teaching and Research in Ayurveda Act, 2020.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of
India as follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Institute of Teaching and Research
in Ayurveda (Amendment) Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
5
 AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In the Institute of Teaching and Research in Ayurveda Act, 2020
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in the long title, for the words,
“The Institute of Teaching and Research in Ayurveda” the words, “The
Institutes of Teaching and Research in Ayurveda’’ shall be substituted.
3. In section 1 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1) for the words, “The
Institute of Teaching and Research” the words, “The Institutes of Teaching
and Research in Ayurveda” shall be substituted.
4. In section 3 of the principal Act in clause (h), after the words and
number “under section 4”, the words and number “under section 4 including
the Institute of Ayurveda Kozhikode established under section 4A ’’ shall be
substituted.
5. After section 4 of the principal Act, the following section shall be
inserted, namely:–
“4A (1) There shall be established an Institute of Ayurveda at
Kozhikode in the State of Kerala which shall be  a body corporate, to
be known as the Institute of Ayurveda, Kozhikode.
(2) The provisions of this Act shall apply mutatis mutandis to the
Institute of Ayurveda, Kozhikode established under sub-section (1).’’.
5
Amendment of
the long title.
Amendment of
section 1.
Amendment of
section 3.
Insertion of
new section 4A.
Establishment
of Institute of
Ayurveda at
Kozhikode in
the State of
Kerala.
10
15
16 of 2020

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Kerala is bestowed with a great natural resources. Its divine location is
sandwiched between the Sahyadris on the one side and the majestic
Arabian sea on the other side. This unique geographical location has led it
to have some unique flora and fauna. Large number of medicinal plants and
herbs are found here. Kerala has been the cradle of Ayurvedic medicine
since ancient times. Ayurveda is not a science in Kerala, but has been
blended with the lives of common people in a great way. People from
across the globe comes to Kerala for its unique Ayurvedic experience.
There are large number of private sector interventions in Ayurveda in
Kerala. Hence there is a great need for a Central Government institution of
Ayurveda in Kerala. Kozhikode is the ideal location for such an institute.
Due to its geographic location, Kozhikode will be accessible easily to
neighbouring States as well.
Hence this Bill.
   NEW DELHI;                                           M.K. RAGHA VAN
November 21, 2022.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill vide proposed section 4A provides for establishment
of Institute of Ayurveda, Kozhikode in the State of Kerala. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees
one hundred crore per annum would be involved from the Consolidated
Fund of India.
 A non-recurring expenditure of rupees hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE INSTITUTE OF TEACHING AND RESEARCH
IN AYURVEDA ACT, 2022
[ACT NO. 16 OF 2020]
* * * * *
1. (1) This Act may be called the Institute of Teaching and Research in
Ayurveda Act, 2020.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may
be appointed for different provisions of this Act.
* * * * *
3.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* * * * *
(h) “Institute” means the Institute of Teaching and Research in
Ayurveda established by conglomerating Anteceding Institutions and
incorporated under section 4;
* * * * *
4. (1) The Anteceding Institutions, namely, the Institute of Post Graduate
Teaching and Research in Ayurveda, Jamnagar, Shree Gulabkunverba Ayurved
Mahavidyalaya, Jamnagar and the Indian Institute of Ayurvedic
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Jamnagar are hereby conglomerated and established
as a body corporate under this Act and on such incorporation be called the
Institute of Teaching and Research in Ayurveda.
* * * * *
Short title and
commencement.
Establishment
and
incorporation
of Anteceding
Institutions as
Institute of
Teaching and
Research in
Ayurveda.
5
Definitions.

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to amend the Institute of Teaching and Research
in Ayurveda Act, 2020.
————
(Shri M.K. Raghavan, M.P .)