As INTRODUCED IN 1.01: SABHA. ON 
_ No .... of 1.'14 
THE· PUNJAB STATE LEGISLATURE (DELEGATION OF 
POWERS) BILL, 1984 .. 
A 
BILL 
to center on ~he President the 'power of the. Legislature of the State 
af Punjab th make laws. 
B& it enacted by Par1iament in:the Thirty-fifth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:- , 
1. This Act may be called the Pwlj8ib State Legislature (Delegation of Short 
Powers) Act, 1984. title. 
5 2. In this Act, "Proclamation" means the Proclamation issued on .the 
6th day of October, 1983 under article '356 of the Constitution by the 
President, and published with; the" notification of the Gove~ent of 
India in the Ministry of Home Affairs, 'No. G.S.R. 7S3(E) of the said 
date. 
rO 3. (1) The power' of the Legislature of the State of Punjab to make 
laws, which has been d~lared by 1rhe Proclamation to be exercisable by 
or ~der the authority of ParUament, is hereby conferred on the 
President. 
(2) In the. exercise of the said power, the President may, from time 
r 5 to time, whether ParHam_t is or is Dot in session, enact, as a Presi-
dent's Act, a BUI coataiDing such provisions as he considers Decessary: 
Pro.... ... Wore eDIIdbIe aD)' IDda Act, the President sha09 ' 
whenever he considers it practicable to do so, consult a Committee 
~OIIStitated forth. purpose, ~istJDg of thirty members of the 
'Confer-
menton 
the 
presi-
dent Of 
the 
power of 
the 
State 
Legisla-
ture to 
make 
Jawl. ... 

House of the People nominated by the' Speaker and fttteeD members of 
the CouneQ of States nomiDated by the Chairman. 
(3) Every Act enac~ by t1ie President under sub-section (2) shall, 
as soon as may be after enactment, be laid before each House of Parli&-
Mento ' 5 
(4) Either House of Pa11liament may, by! resolution passed wfthin 
thirty days from the date on which the Act has been laid before 1t unde,r 
suh-6ection (3), which period may be comprised in one session or in two 
suecessive sessions, direct any modifications to be made in the Ad and 
if the modifications are agreed to by the other House of ParUament 10 
during 'the session in which tae Act baa been so laid before it Ql" the 
session succeeding, such modifications shah be given effect to by the 
President by enacting an amending Act under sub-section (2): 
Provided that nothing in thi$ sub-section shall affect the validity. of 
the Act or of any action taken. thereundert befo~ it is so az:nended. '5 

,'" 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under the Proclamation iss~d by the President on ,the 6th October, 
1983, the powers of the Legislature of the State of Punjab are now 
eJ(ercisable by or under the, authority of Parliament. Such legislative 
measures as may be nece8J81'Y for that State can he taken up by Parlia-
ment only! by postponing its business; 81ld even ; then, it is likely that 
Parliament may not have time to deal with. all ~e 1egialativ~ measW'8S 
for ,the State. It, is, there.h'e" pro~ that ParUame~t should.,' in 
accordance with the provisions of su1>-clause (a) of clause (1) of! flrlicI.e 
357 of the Constitution, confer by law on the President the powers of 
the Legislature of the State of Punjab to make laws for. the State. The 
present Bm is intended to give eft'ect to this proposal. 
P. C.'SETHI. 
NEW DILHI; I 
The 21st April, 19M. 
PRFSIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE' 
CONSTITtITION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. V/UOI5i/3/83-CSR, dated the 21st April, 1984 
from Shrl P. C· Sethi, Minister of Home Mairs to the Secre11ary-General, 
Lok Sabha.] 
. The President, having been informed of the subj~ct matter of the 
Punjab State Legislature (Delegation of Powers) Bill, 1984, reconunends 
under clau_ (3) of article 117 of the Constitution of India, the conside. 
ratif'n of the Bill in Lot Sabha. 
3 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The proviso to sub-clause (2) of clause 3 Of the Bill provides for the 
constitution of a Committee for consultation regarding President's Acts, 
consisting of 30 Members of the House of the People and 15 Members of 
the Council of States. Expenses to be incurred in connection with the 
meetings of the Consultative Committee would be met trom the COZl8OU-
dated Fund of India. This Committee will meet as and when necessary. 
The expenditure is no~ expected to be l.arge and is not likely to exceed 
Rs., 1.35 lakh during the period the Proclamation remains in force. The 
,Bill, if enacted, wUl not involve any non-recurring expenditure. 

I:· MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
The powel' of the legislature of the State of Punjab to make laws, 
which has been declared by the Proclam1.tion issued under article 356 
of the Constitution in respect of that State on 6th October, 1983 to be 
exercisable by or under the authority of Parliament, is sought to be 
c:onferred on the .President under article 357 (1) (a) of the Constitution. 
Before eXEU'Cising the aforesaid power, the President Is required, when-
ever he considers it practicable to do so, to consult a Committee oil 
Members of ParUament constituted for the purpose in accordance with 
the provisions of the proviso to sub-clause (2) of clause 3. Any Act 
enacted by the President in exercise of the aforesaid power is required 
to be laid befo~e each House of Parliament and Parliament may direct 
modifications to be made in that Act [vide sub-clauses (3) and (4) of 
clause 3]. The delegation of legislative power is in pursuance of the 
express provision in this behalf in article 357 (1) (a) of the Constitution 
and is necessary as it will not be easy for Parliament to find time to deal: 
with the various leglslative measures that may;be required in respect of 
the State of Punjab. Under the exceptional circumstances arising out of 
the issue of a P.foc1amation under article 35601 the Constitution, this 
delegation of legislative power is limited to the period when the afore--
said Proclamation 'dated 6th October, 1983, will continue to be in force. 
To the extent that it has been usual for Parliament to' confer on the 
President ~ch legislative powers, it can be regarded as ola normal 
character .. 
..- ... 

\ 
LOK SABHA ! 
-' 
A 
Bfi..L 
'.... 11,:1 ... 
to confer on the President the power of the Legislature of the State of 
Punjab to make laws. 
(Shri P. C. Sethi, 
Minister of Home Affairs.) 
, 