Bill No. 40 of 1955. 
THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES 
(APPELLATE TRIBUNAL) AMEND:MENT 
BILL, 1955-
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 

Rep:al of 
Ordinance 
3 of 195$. 
2 
(c) and dispose of the same himself sitting singly or 
authorise any member to dispose of the same sitting 
singly Or transfer the same to anyone of the other 
industrial tribunals so specified. 
(2) Where the Chairman or any member sits singly to dispose 5 
of any proceeding under this section. he shall have .all the 
powers of the Appellate Tribunal in the disposal of the 
proceedinw· 
(3) Where any proceeding is transfen:ed to an industrial 
tribunal under this section, the industrial tribunal may, Il 
subject to any special directions in the order of transfer, 
proceed either de novo or from the stage at which it was 
transferred, and shall dispose of the proceeding as if it were 
a proceeding under section 33 or, as the case may be, section 
::I3A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and the provisions IS XIV of 1947 
of that Act shall apply accordingly. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 7, no appeal 
shall lie to the Appellate Tribunal from any. order or award 
of an industrial tribunal made in any proceeding transferred 
'to it under this section." 20 
3. (1) The Industrial Disputes (Appellate Tribunal) Amendment 
Ordinance, 1955 is hereby repealed. 
~) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action 
taken in the exercise of any power conferred by or under the said .. 
Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken in the 25 
exercise of the powers conferred by or under this Act. as if this Act 
were in force on the day on which such thing was done or action 
was taken. 
3 of 19S5. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
A large number of applications under sections 22 and 23 of the 
Industrial Disputes (Appellate Tribunal) Act, 1950, are filed by 
employers and employees during the pendency of appeals. Members 
of the Appellate Tribunal have to spend a considerable amount of· 
time in disposing of these applications which usually relate to cases 
of individual workmen and do not involve any major questions of 
law or principle. Employers and workmen have frequently com-
plained that there have been delays in the disposal of these applica-
tions owing to the preoccupation of the Appellate Tribunal with its 
more important work of hearing appeals. With a view to giving 
relief to the Appellate Tribunal and ensuring expeditious disposal of 
the applications, it is proposed to amend the Act so as to empower 
the Chairman, Labour Appellate Tribunal, to transfer such applica-
tions to the industrial tribunals constituted . under the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947, to be designated by the Central Government. It 
is also propose4 to empower the Chairman or any other member. 
specially authorised in this behalf by the Chairman, to dispose of. 
sitting singly, applications nndel' Rection 22 or Rection 23. 
The Bill seeks to give effect to the changes mentioned above. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 28th July, 1955. 
KHANDU BHAI DESA r. 

LOK SARHA 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Industrial Disputes (Appellate Tribunal) 
Act, 1950• 
.. 
(Shri Khandubhai K. Desai, 
Minister of Labour.) 
GIPD-LAD-S71 LS-3-8-SS-17,a. 