8U1 No. to of I~ 
THE CONSTITUTION (THIRD AM.ENDMENT) 
BILL, 1954 
(As INTRODUCED IN THE LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
fu.rther to amend the Constitu.tion of India. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the fifth year of the Republic of 
India as follows:-
I. Short title.-This Act may be called the Constitution (Third 
Amendment) Act, 1954. 
2. Amendment of the Seventh Schedule.-In the Seventh Schedule S 
to the Constitution, for entry 33 of List III, the following entry shall 
be substituted, namely:-
"33. Trade and commerce in, a~ the production, supply and 
distribution of,-
(a) the products of any industry {he control of 
by the Union is declared by Parliament by law to 
pedient in the public interest, and imported goods 
same kind as such products; 
(b) foodstuffs, including edible oil seeds and oils; 
which 10 
be ex-
of the 
(c) cattle fodder, including oil cakes and other concen- IS 
trates; 
(d) raw cotton, whether ginned or unginned, and cotton 
seed; and 
(e) raw jute.". 

2 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
While trade and commerce within the State, and production. 
supply and distribution of goods in general are within the legislative 
and executive authority of the States, Parliament is competent, by 
virtue of entry 33 of List III, to legislate in respect of products oE 
industries declared to be under Union control. In addition, 
Parliament is empowered by article 369, for a period of five years 
from the commencement of the Con~titution, to legislate in respect 
of certain specified essential commodities. Some o£ these, like 
cotton and woollen textiles, paper, coal, iron and steel. being pro-
ducts of industries under Union control, could continue to b£' 
regulated by central legislation even after article 369 lapses on the 
25th January, 1955. Other essential commodities, like foodstuffs, 
cattle fodder, raw cotton and cotton seed, would after that date be 
outside the legislative authority of Parliament. 
The position in respect of foodstuffs and cattle fodder at present 
is fairly comfortable, but it will not be advisable for the Centre to 
be divested of all legal powers to control their production, supply 
and distribution. Cotton, the basic raw material for one of Jur 
largest industries, is in short supply in the sense that our own pi'Q-
duction is not sufficient for our needs. Since jute goods are the 
most important item in our export trade it is desirable that thE' 
Centre should have the power to control the production, supply and 
distribution of raw jute. 
The Bill accordingly proposes an amplification of entry 33 of List 
III in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution. Besides placing 
four classes of essential commodities in that entry, it is proposed 
to include also imported goods of the same kind as the products of 
centralised industries, in order that the Centre may· be in a position 
to exercise full control over the development of such industries. 
T. T. KRlSHNAMACHARI. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 31st Au.gust, 1954. 
, 

ANNEXURE 
Extract from the Constitution of India 
• • • • • • 
SEVENTH SCHEDULE 
• • • • • • 
List III-Concurrent List 
• • • • • • 
33. Trade and commerce in, and the production, supply and dis-
tribution of, the products of industries where the control of such 
industries by the Union is declared by Parliament by law to be ex-
-pe<iient in the public interest. 
3 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
(Shri T. T. Krishnamachari, 
Minister for Commerce and Industry.) 