As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA ON 
'5 APR 19611 
ttfV.(t) ... . " \. 
J. "'I+\h+.' e) 
!! Mo. to of 19Y 
THE INDIAN MEDICAL COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1964 
BILL 
further to amend the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifteenth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
".." 
,:~.,.:. \ . 
1. This Act may be called the Indian Medical Council (Amend- Short title 
ment) Act, 1964. 
5 2. In seetrion 1 of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 (hereinafter Amend-
referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section (2), the words ment of 
"except the State of Jammu and Kashmir" shall be omitted. section 1. 
3. In section 2 of the principal Act, clause (c) shall be omitted. Amend-
ment of 
.ection 2. 
4. In ~ub-section (2) of section 12 of the principal Act, the words Amend-
10 "State or", in both the places where they occur, shall be omitted. mentof section 12. 
5. In sub-section (3) of section 13 of the principal Act, the words Amend-
"or State", in both the places where they occur, .shall be omitted. me~t of section 13. 
6. Tn sub-section (l) of section 14 of the principal Act,-
(a) the words "State or" shall be omitted; 
Amend-
mentof 
IJeCtion 1 •. 

(b) for the proviso, the following proviso shall be substi-
! 
tuted, namE!lly:_ 
"Provided that medical practice by persons possessina 
such qualifications-
(a) shall be permitted only if such perso~ are en- 5 
rolled as medical practitioners in accordance with the 
law regulating the registration of medical practitioners 
for the time being in force in that country; 
(b) shall be limited to the institution to which they 
are attached for the time being for the purposes of 10 
teaching, research or charitable work; and 
(c) shall be limited to the period specified in this 
behalf by the Central Government by eeneral or special 
order.". 
Amend- 7. Section 15 of the prinCipal Act shall be re-numbered 8.1\ sub- IS 
ment of section (1) thereof and after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, 
section 15. the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:-
.• (2) Save as provided in section 25, no person other than a 
medical practitioner enrolled on a State Medical Register,-
(a) shall hold office as physician or sturgeon or any other 20 
office (by whatever designation called) in Government or in 
any institution maintained by a local or other authGrity; 
(b) shall practise medicine in any State; 
(c) shall be entitled to sign or authenticate a medical or 
fitness certificate or any other certificate required by any 2S 
law to be signed or authenticated by a duly qualified medicaJ 
pnetitioDe!'; 
(d) shall be entitled to give evidence at any inquest or 
in any court of law as. an expert under section 4S of the 
Indian Evidence Act, 1872 on any matter relating to medicine. 30 1 of 1871. 
(3) Any person who acts in contravention of any provision 
of sub..sectiou (2) shall be punished with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may ex-
tend to one thousand rupees, or with both.". 
Amend- 8. For sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 17 of the principal Act, 35 
ment of the following sub-sections shall be subs.tituted, namely:-
lection 17. "(1) The Committee shall appoint such number of medical 
inspectors as it may deem requisite to inspect any medical insti-
tution, college, hospital or other institution where medical educa-

LOK SABHA 
'-
CORRIGENDA. 
to 
THB INDIAN MEDICAL COUNCIL (AMENDMmiT) BILL, 1964 
(To be/As introduced in Lok Sabba) 
1. Page 3, line 39,-
after "by" insert "," 
2. Page 6, lines 25 and 26,-
after "substitut-ed" int?ert "," 
3. Page 6, line 27,-
m "otmtry" J:W. "Country" 
4. Page 8, line 35, in column 3,-
for "Liceniate" .£iWl "Licentiate" 
5. Page 9, line 1 from bottam,-
!lekore "the Lok Sabba lt insert "to" 
6. Page 10, lines 5 and 6,-
m "prac-tioners" nwl "practitioners" 
7. Page 11, line 6 from bottam,-
fur "clause" ~ "clauses" 
8. Page 16, line 2 from bottom,-
~ "no" ~ "not tl 
9. Correct line numbers on page 4. 
~w DBLHI;-
April 27, 1964·· 
Vaisakha 7, 1886(Saka) 

~ 
tion is given, or to attend any examination held by any Univer-
sity or medical institution for the purpose of recommending to 
the Central Government recognition of medical qualifications 
granted by that University or medical institution. 
S (2) The medical inspectors shall not intp.rfere with the con-
duct of any training or examination, but shall report to the Com-
mittee on the adequacy of the standards of medical education 
including staff, equipment, accommodation, training and other 
facilities prescribed for giving medical education or on the sum-
10 ciency of every examination which they attend.". 
zo 
9. In section 18 of the principal Act,-
(a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section 
substituted, namely:-
Amend-
ment of 
shall be section 18. 
II (1) The Council may appoint such number of visitors 
as it may deem requisite to inspect anv medical institution, 
college, hospital or other instituUon where medical education 
is given or to attend any examination held by any Univer-
sity or medical institution for the purpose of granting 
recognised medic;al qualifications."; 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the word "examination", in both 
the places where it occurs, the words "inspection or examina-
tion" shall be substftuted; 
(e) for sub-section (3), the fol1owlng sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(3) The visitors shall not interfere with the conduct of 
any traintnll or examination, but shall report to the Presi-
dent of the Council on the adeQuacy of the standards of 
medical education includinll staff, eqUipment, accommoda-
tion, training and other facilities prescribed for giving medi-
cal education or on the suft!clency of every examination 
which they attend.". 
10. In section 19 of the principal Act,-
(a) for sub-section (1), the following 
substituted, namely:-
Amend-
mentor 
sub-section shall be section 19 
.. (1) When upon report by the Committee or the viSitor, 
it appears to the Council-
(a) that the courses of study and examination to be 
undergone in, or the proficiency required from candi-
dates at any examination held by any University or 
medical institution, or 

Insertion 
of new 
section 
IDA. 
Minimum 
standards 
for medical 
education. 
lasertion 
of new 
section 
20A. 
Profes-
810nal 
eooduct. 
4 
(b) that the staff, equipment, accommodation, train-
ing and other facilities for instruction and training pro-
vide(f in such University or medical institution or in any 
college or other institution affiliated to that University, 
do not conform to the standards prescribed by the Council, 5 
the Council shall! make a representation to that effect to 
the Central Government."; 
(b) in sub-section (4), the following words shall be inserted 
at the and, namely:-
"or that the said medical qualification if granted to 10 
students of a specified college or institution affiliated to 'any 
University shall be recogni!::;ed medical qualification only 
when granted before a specified date or, as the case may be, 
that the said medical qualification shall be a recognised medi-
cal qualification in relation to a specified college or institu- J S 
tion aftlliated to any University only when granted after a 
specified date.". 
11. After section 19 of the principal Act, the foHowing section shall 
be inserted, namely:-
I/ltA. (1) The Council may prescribe the minimum standards 
of medical education required for ~ranting recognised medical 
Qualtflcations (other than post-graduate medical qualifications) 
by Universitieg/ or med;cal institutions in India. 
20 
(2) Copies of the draft regulations and of all subsequent 2 
amendments thereof shall be furnished by the Council to all 5 
State Governments and the Council ~hal1, before submitti'1[! the 
regulations or any ammdment thereof, as the case may -be, to 
the Central Government for sanction. take into <!onsideration the 
comments Of any State Government recl"ived within three 
m.onths from the furnishing of th~ copies 8'> aforesaid. 30 
(3) The Committee shall from time to time report to the 
Council on the efficacy of the regulations and may recommend 
to the Council such amendments thereof as it may think fit.". 
U. After section 20 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be inserted, namely:- 35 
"20A. (1) The Council may prescribe standards of profes-
sional conduct and etiquet.te and a code of ethics for medical 
practitioners. 
(2) Regulations made by the Council under sub-osection (1) 
may specify wh~h yiol~tt()n, thereof shall ~onstit\lte inf8fl'\oQ5 40 

S 
conduct in any professional respect, that is to say, professional 
rrusconduct, and such provision shall have effect notwithstand-
ing anything contain.OO in any law for the time being in foree.". 
13. In section 22 of the principal Act, for the word IIthree", the Amend-
5 wOird "six" shall be substituted. ment of 
section 22. 
14. In section 24 of the principal Act, in sulb-sectian (2), for the Amend-
words lion any ground other than that he is not possessed of the re- me~t of 
quisite medical qualifications", the words I'on the ground of profes.- section 24. 
siooal misconduct or any other ground except that he is not posses-
10 sed of the requisite medical qualifications" shan be substituted. 
15. For section 25 of the principal Act, the following section shall Substitu-
be suibstituted, namely: _ tion of new 
section for 
section 25. 
15 
20 
"25. (1) A citizen of India possessing a medical qualification 
granted by a medical institution outside India included in Part 
II of the Third Scthedule, who is required to undergo pr8ICtical 
training as prescribed under sub-section (3) of ~tion 13, shall, 
on production of proper evidence that he has been selected for 
such practical training in an apprOVed iIUlotitution, be entitled 
to be registered provisionally in a State Medical Register and 
shall Ibe entitled to practise medicine in the approVed institution 
for the purposes of such training and for no other purpose. 
(2) A person who has passed the qualifying examination of 
any Universi,ty or medical institution in India for the grant of 
a recognised medical qualification shall he entitled to be register-
'5 ed provisionally in a State Medical Register for the purpose of 
enabling him to be engaged in employment in a resident medi-
cal capacity in any approved institution, or in the Medical Ser-
vice of the Armed Forces of the Union, and for no other pur-
pose, on production of proper evidence that he has been selected 
30 for such employmen..t. 
3S 
(3) The names of all persons provisionally registered under 
sub-section (1) or sub-seetion (2) in a State Medical Regirler 
shall be entered therein separa,tely from the names of other 
persons registered therein. 
(4) A person registered provi..c;.ionally as aforesaid who hu 
completed practical training referred to in sub-section (1) or 
who has been engaged, for the prescribed period in employment 
Provisional 
Registra-
tion. 

Amend-
ment of 
section 33. 
Amend-
ment of 
Second 
Schedule. 
6 
in a resident medical capacity in any approved f.nstitution or in 
the Medical Service of the Armed Forces of the Union, as the 
case may be, shall be entiHed to registration in the State Medlcal 
Register under section 15.". 
16. In section 33 of the principal Act,- 5 
(i) in claUSe (i), the word "and" occurring at the end shall 
be omitted; 
(ii) clause (j) shall be r&-lettered as clause (n); and 
(iii) before clause (n), as so re-lettered, the following 
clauses shall be inserted, namely:- 10 
II (j) the courses aDd period of study and of practical 
training to be undertaken, the subjects Of examination and 
the standards of proficiency therein to be Obtained, in Uni-
versities or medical institutions for grant of recogtnJsed me-
dical qualifications; IS 
(k) the standards of staff, equipment, accommodation, 
training atld other: facilities for medical education; 
(1) the conduct of professional examinations. qualifica-
tions of examiners and the conditions of admission to such 
. t' 20 exarmna Ions; 
(m) the standards of professional conduct and etiquett~ 
and code of ethics to be observed. by medical practitioners; 
and". 
- 17. In the Second Schedule to the principal Act, for the existing 
entri~ relating to United Kingdom, the following shall he substltut- 25 
ed n!'lmely:-
-------
. "un try 
I 
"UNITED KINGDOM 
University of ~irmhghBm 
University ofBrisml 
---------- ------ -----
Title 
2 
Nature of qualificatior B~ 
statrd j" diplomas 
3 
M.B., Ch. B., Bachelor of Mediclne ard' 
Bachelor of Surgery 
M.D.," Doctor of Medicine 
Ch.M. MasterofSurg¢ry 
M.S., Ch. B .• 
M.D .• 
Ch.M. 
Do: 
Abbreviation 
4 
U. Bir",. 
U. Brlst. 35 

7 
Title 
I 
u~verslty of Clotnbridge 
s 
10 University of Durham 
U nivenity of Leeds 
1 S U ~versity of Liverpoolj 
University of London ~ _ 
20 
University of Mar cheSler 
25 
University of Oxford 
University of Sheflleld 
30 
Unlvenity of Wales 
University of Aberdeen 
35 . 
University of Edil. burgh 
University of Glasgo .. 
Unlvenity of Andrews 
45 
M.B., B. Chir., 
M.D., 
M.Chir. 
M.B., B.S., ~ 
M.D., 
M,S'l 
M.B.,Ch.B.-
M.D., 
Ch.M., 
M.B., Ch. B., 
M.D., 
Ch.M., 
M.Ch.Orth. 
M.B.,B.S.,~ 
M.D., 
M,S. 
M.B.,Ch.B., 
M.D., 
Ch.M., 
M.B., B.Ch., 
D.M., 
M.Ch' J 
M.B,Ch.B., 
M.D., 
Ch.M.-
M .. B.,B.Ch., 
M.D., 
M.Ch. 
M.B.,Ch.B •• 
M.D., 
Ch.M. 
M.B., Ch.B., 
M.D., 
Ch.M.·: 
M.B.,Ch.B., 
M.D., 
Ch.M. 
M.B.,Ch.B., 
M.D .• 
'Ch.M. 
Queen" University of Be1fast M.B.,8.Ch., M.D., 
M.Ch. 
M.A.O. 
Nature of Qualification 
as stated in diplomas 
3 
Abbrevia-
tion 
Bache'or of Mtdkine U. Cam b. 
and Bachelor of 
SUfiery 
Doctor of MediciDe 
Ma.ter of SUfJerJ 
Do.~ 
00.1 
Do.~ 
Do: 
Do. 
Master of Orthopaedic Surgery 
Bachelor of MediciJ e & Ba-
chelor of SUDgery 
Doctor of Medicir.e 
Master of Surgery 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do., 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Master of Obstetrics 
U.DurIl. 
U. Leeds. 
U.L'Pool. 
U.Lord. 
U.MaJ c~ 
U. Oxford. 
U. Shttr. 
U. W'a]cs. 
U. Aberd. 
U. Edir·. 
U.Glas,. 
U.St. And. 
Q.U. Belf. 
---------_. __ .-so --- .. - ~--- --~, .-~ .. -------_ .. _ .. -~ _ .. --' 

Country Title 
I 
Nature of qualification 
al stated in dip:omal 
3 
Abbrevia-
tion 
J liv!rlity of Dablin M.B., a.Cn.,- Bachelor of Medicine Ktld 8a- U. Dub!. 5 cnc!ur uf Suraery 
L.Med., Licentiate in Medicine 
L.Ctl." .. Licentiate in Surgery 
M.D., O"ctor in Medicine 
M. Cn., Master in Surgery 
M.A.O. Master in Obstetric Scier.ce 
N.&tional University lretaad M.B., B.Ch., 
M.D., 
M.Ch.. 
M.A.O. 
Bachelor of Medicir.e aDd Ba-
chelor of Su~ry 
Doctor of Medlcine 
Master of Surgery 
Master of Obstetrica 
R ./11 C )lLel~ of P .1ysicians L.R.C.P. Licentiate 
ofLlndon. J M.a..C.P. Member 
F.R.C.P. Fellow 
Rlyal C,)lleg~ of Surgeons M.R-C.P. Member 
of England. !l.R.C.S. Fellow. 
Society of Apothecaries of L.M.S.S.A. Licentiate in Medici! e 
London. and Surgery. 
L.S.A. Licentiate 
Royal College ofPhysicia~s L.R.C.P. Licer.tiate 
of Bdinburgh. M.R.C.P. Member 
F.R.C.P. Fellow. 
Royal College of Surgeon. M.R.C.S. Member 
of Bdinburgh. F.R.C.S. Fellow. 
R.oyal College ofPhyaicians L.R.C.P.S. Licentiate 
and Surlcons of OtaBlOw. M.R.C.P. Member 
F.R.C.P. Fellow 
F.R.-C.S. Fellow 
F.R.C.P.S. Fellow 
Royal College of Physicians L.R.C.P. Licentiate 
of Ireland L.M. Liceniatein Midwifery 
M.R.C.P. Member 
F.R.UP. Fellow. 
Royal College of Surgeons ". L.R-C.S. Licentiate 
h Ireland. L.M. Lieentiatein Midwifery 
F.R.C.S. Fellow 
Apothecarks' Hall of Dublin L.A.H. Licentiate 
10 
N.U.lrel.~ 
IS 
R.C.P.Lond. 
R..C.S. EI g. 20 
S.A.Lord.! 
R.C.P. Edin. ~S 
R.C.S. Edil'. 
R.C.P.S. 
Glasg. 30 
R.C.P. Ire!. 35 
R.C.S. Ire!. 
40 
A.H.Dubl," 
----------------- ._------_.,------_ .. -

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Indian Medical Council Act, 1956, extends to the whole of 
India except the State of Jammu and KUhmir. It is now proposed 
to extend the Act to that St81te also. Opportunilty has also been 
taken. .to remove certain lacunaem the Act in order to eDaible the 
Medical Council of India more effectively to discharge its functions. 
The notes on clauses explain in detail the provisions of the Bill. 
NEW DELHI; SUSHILA NAYAR. 
The 15th April, 1964. 
PRESIDENT'S . RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. F.32-4/63-MPT, dated the 15th April, 1964 
from Dr. Sushila Nayar, Minister of Health to the Secretary, Lok 
Sabha.] 
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the 
proposed Bill, recommends under article 117 (3) of the Constitution, 
the Lok Sabha the consideration of the Bill. 

N otts on Clause; 
- . 
Clauses 2 to 5 and 6 (a) provide for the extension of the Act td 
the State of Jammu and Kashmir and for amendments consequential 
thereto. 
ClaUse 6 (b) will permit registration of fOreign medical prac-
tionel's only if they are enrolled on the Medical Registers of their 
respective countries. 
Clause 7 makes registration on a State Medical Register compul-
sory before a person can engage in private practice or hold appoint-
mentunder Government ar in any institution or sign or authenti-
cate a medical or fitness certificate or appear as an expert to glve 
evidence at any inquest or in any court of law. Penalty for in-
fringement of this requirement has been provided. 
Clauses 8 and 9 empower inspectors and visitors of the Medical 
Council of India to inspect medical institutions as regards staff, 
equipment and other requirements necessary for maintaining the 
prescribed standards of medical education il:l addition to inspection 
of examinations. 
CLa:u.se 10 provides for holding up recognition or withdrawal of 
recognition of medical qualiftcatiDns granted to students of a speci-
fied college or institution on its failure to oonform to the standards 
prescriJbed by the Medi.cB.I Council of India. 
Clause 11 empowers the Medical COWlcil of India to prescri'be, 
with the previous sanction of the Central Government, the minimum 
standal ds of medical educatiDn required for granting recognized 
medical qualifications .by universities or medical instnutions in India, 
after consultatiDn with the Sto.te Governments. 
Clause 12 authDrises the Medical Council of India tD prescribe 
stundards 'Of professional conduct and etiquette and a code of ethics 
for medical practitioners and to specify which violations shall cons-
titute infamous conduct in any professional respect. 
Clauae 13 provides for 6 copies, instead of 3, of the State Medical 
Register to be supplied to the Medical Council of India. 
Clause 14 is a consequential amendment to the provisions made 
under clause 12. 
10 

, ., II 
Clause 15 provides for provisional registration for Indian citizens, 
possessing foreign medical qualifications included in Part II of the 
Third Schedule, who are required to undergo prescribed practical 
training. . 
The clause also provides for provisional registration of a person 
• qualifying in recognized Indian medical qualification for the purpose 
of enabling him to be engaged in a resident medical capacity in any 
approved institution or in the medicel service of the Armed: Forces 
of the U mon. 
Clause 16 empowers the Medical Council of India to make regula-
tions in respect of the subjects mentioned in clause 11, 12 and 15-
Clause 17 substitutes for the existing entries relating to the Unit-
ed Kingdom in the Second Schedule of the Act the names of the 
medical institutions granting recognized. medical qualifications in the 
same way as the qualifications of other countries included in the 
Schedule. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 1964, provides 
for the extension of the Indian -Medical Council Aet, 1956, to the 
State of Jammu IImd Kashmir. It is expected that three members 
from this State will be elected or nominated on the Medical Council 
of India. In ease the Government of Jammu and Kashmir do not 
agree to meet the expenditure on the travelling and daily ellowance6 
of these members, this expenditllre will have to be borne by the 
Medical Council of India which body is paid grants-in-aid by the 
Central Government to meet its expenses- The additional expendi-
ture on this account is estime.ted to be Rs. 2,250' 00 per annum on 
the assumption that the Medical Council of India will meet twice a 
year. The Central Government will be required to meet the expen-
diture on the election of members from this State to the Council. It 
is estimated that there will be an additional expenditure of IQbout 
Rs. 500' 00 every five years. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 16 of the Bill empowers the Medical Council of India to 
make, with the previous sanction of the Central Government, re-
gulations to carry out the purposes of the Aat in respect of the 
rmtters as specified therein. These matters relate to the courses and 
period of study and of practical training to be undertaken, the sub-
jects of examination and the standards of profiCiency therein to be 
obtained, in Universities or med,ical institutions for grant of recog-
nised medical qUt31ifications; ·the standards of staff, equipment, 
accommodation, training and other facilities for medical education; 
the conduct of professional examinations, qualifications of exami-
ners; '.md the standards of professional conduct and etiquette and 
code of ethics to be obgerved by medical praotitioners. These are 
all matters of detail and the delegation of legislative power is of a 
character normal to such Acts, 
13 

Short title, 
extent and 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS PROM THE INDIAN MEDICAL COUNCIL ACT, 1956 
(102 OF 1956) 
• • • • • 
1. (1) • • • • • • 
commence- (2) It extends to the whole CYf India except the State of Jammu 
Mento and Kashmir. 
Ddnitiona. 
1teeogni-
tion 
of medical 
qualifica-
tions 
• • • • • 
Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
• • • • • 
(e) "India" means the territories to which this Act extends; 
• • • • • 
12. (1) • • • • • 
(2) The Council may enter into negotiations with the Authority 
in any State or country outside India which by the law of such 
granted by State or country is entrusted with the maintenance of a register of 
~edica~ medical practitioners, for the settling of a scheme of reciprocity for 
~titubtri°~S the recognition of medical qualifications, and in pursuance of any 
In coun e! h h h C 1 G b·ft . . th with which sue Be eme, t e entra overnment may, y notI catIon In e 
there is a Official Gazette, amend the Second Schedule so as to include therein 
scheme of the medical qualification which the Council has decided should be 
reciprocity. recognised, and any such notification may also direct that an entry 
l\eeo,ni-
tion 
ofmedieal 
qualiftca-
tions 
,ranted 
by certain 
medical 
insti-
tuticm. 
shall be made in the last column of the Second Schedule against 
such medical qualification declaring that it shall be a recognised 
medical qualification only when granted after a specified date . 
• • • • • 
13. (1) • • • • • 
(3) The medical qualifications granted by medical institutions 
outside India which are included in Part II of the Third Schedule 
shall also be recognised medical qualifications for the purposes ot 
this Act, but no person possessing any such qualification shall be 
entitled to enrolment on any State Medical Register unless he ~ " 

citizen of India and has undergone such pr-actical training after ob- who.e 
taining that qualification as may be required by the rules or regu- qualiftca-
lations in force in the country or State granting the qualification, or tio~ are 
if he has not undergone any practical training in that country or :\~nt~~d­
State, he has undergone such practical training as may be prescribed, First or 
III III • III • Second 
Schedule, 
14. (1) The Central Government after consultation with the Special 
Council may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that medi- p_'ovision 
cal qualifications granted by medical institutions in any State or in certain 
country outside India in respect of which a -scheme of reciprocity for cues t~t~ 
th 't' f edi l'fi t'" . f 1..·'1 b reco,ru Ion e recogru IOn 0 m cal qua I ca lOllS IS not moree, SU.eLl e re- ot medical 
cognised medical qualifications for the purposes of this Act or shall qualiftc9-
be so only when granted after a specified date: tiona 
granted by 
Provided that medical practice by the doctors possessing such medical 
qualifications shall be limited to the institution to which they are institution 
attached for the time being for purposes of teachipg, research or in.count~iel 
charitable work and shall be limited to the period specified in this ~~~e~sh~~h 
behalf by the Central Government by general or special order. scheme of 
• • • • • reciprocity . 
15. Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, the me- Right of 
dical qualifications included in the Schedules shall be sufficient qua- persons 
lification for enrolment On any State Medical Register. possessing qualifiea-
• • III • • tions in the 
Schedules 
to be 
enrolled. 
17. (1) The Committee shall appoint such number of medical Inspection 
inspectors as it may deem requisite to attend at any or all of the of exami-
examinations held by Universities or medical institutions in India for nations. 
the purpose of recommending to the Central Government recognition 
of medical qualifications. 
(2) Inspectors appointed under this section shall not interfere 
with the conduct of any examination but they shall report to the 
Committee on the sufficiency of every examination which they attend 
and on any other matters in regard to which the Committee may re-
quire them to report. 
• • • • • 
18. (1) The Council may appoint such number of visitors as it Visitors 
may deem requisite to attend at any or all of the examinations held at exami· 
nation. 

With-
drllwal 
of recogni-
tion. 
Supply of 
copies of 
the State 
Medical 
Registerl. 
Removal 
of names 
from the 
Indian 
Medical 
Regilter. 
16 
b)" Universities or medical inatitutions jn India for the purpose 01. 
granting recognised medical qualiftoatioos. 
(2) AlJ.y person, whether he is a member of the Council or not, 
may be appointed as a visitor under this section but a person who is 
appointed. as an inspectOr under section 17 for any examination shall 
not be appointed as a visitor fo.r the same examination. 
(3) Visitors appointed under this section shall not interfere with 
the conduct of any examination but they shall report to the Presi-
dent of the Couneil on the sufficiency of every examination which 
they att-end and on any other matters in regard to which the Council 
may require them to report . 
• • .. .. 
19. (1) When upon report by the Conunittee or by a visitor 
appointed under section 18. it appears tQ the Council that the courses 
of study and examination to be undergone in any University or medi-
cal institution in India in order to obtain a recognised medical qua-
lification or that the standards of proficiency required from candi-
dates at any examination held for the purpose of granting such qua-
lification are not such as to secure to persons holding slkh qualifica-
tion the knowledge and skill requisite for the efficient practice of 
medicine, the Council shall make a representation to that effect to 
the Central Government. 
.. .. • .. .. 
(4) The Central Government, after making such further inquiry, 
if any, as it may think fit, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
direct that an entry shall be made in the appropriate Schedule against 
the said medical qualification declaring that it shall be a recognised 
medical qualification only when granted before a specified date . 
• • .. • • 
22. Each. State Medical Council shall supply to the Council three 
printed copies of the State Medical Register as soon as may be after 
the commencement of this Act and ·subsequently after the first day 
of April of each year, and each Registrar of a State Medical Council 
shall inform the Council without delay of all additions to and other 
amendments in the State Medical Register made from time to time . 
24. (1) 
.. 
• 
.. .. • • • 
• 
• 
(2) Where the name of any person bas been removed from a State 
Medical Register on any ground other than that he is no possessed 
of the requisite medical qualifications or where any application made 

11 
by the said person for restoration of his name to the State Medical 
Register' has been rejected, he may appeal in the prescribed manner 
and subject to such condition&. inclu~. conditions as to the pay-
ment of a fee as may be laid 'down in rilles made by the Central 
Government in this behalf, to the Central Government, whose deci-
lion, which shall be given after consulting the Council, shall be 
binding on the State Government and on the authorities concerned 
with the preparation of the State Medical Register. 
21. If the courses of study to be undergone for obtaining a re- Provisional 
cognised medical qualification include a period of training after a registration 
person has passed the qualifying examination and before such qua- for Ctl~Cal . . . prac Ice. liftcatlon IS conferred on him, any such person shall, on application 
made by him in this behalf, be granted provisional registration in a 
State Medical Register by the State Medical Council concerned in 
order to enable him to practise medicine in an approved institution 
for the period aforesaid. 
• • • • • 
33. The Council may, with the prev10us sanction of the Central Power to 
Government, make regulations generally to carry out the purposes make regu-
of this Act, apd,witheut.p1'ejudice to the ,8nerality ol:this .pGWtJ\·~tion •. 
such regtilations may provide for~ 
• • • • • 
(i) the appointment, powers, duties and procedure of medi-
cal inspectors and visitors; and 
(;) any matter for which under this Act provision may be 
made by regulations. 
• • • • 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(See section 12) 
• 
RacooNlSBD MBDICAL QUALlPICATIONS ORANTBD BY MBDICAL INSTITUTIONS 
OUTSIDB INDIA 
QuaiificatioDi 
-----------------------------------------
United KiDldoDl . 
• • 
Reliltrable qualification, admittiI1l I?rimarily to the 
Medical Register .ranted by licenslnJ bodies in the 
'fi.Jl~ KiDJdom, as shown in Table 'E' let out in 
'~e Medical Re.ilte r prirted and publi,hed from 
:ttJnl to time under the direction of the General 
Medkal Council of the United Kingdom in pursu-
ance of the Medical Actl. 18S8, 1886 and 1950 • 
. _-_._-_._--_ .. _--• • • • 

LOI( SABHA 
I 
BILl. 
turtber CD amend the Indian Medical Council Act, ·1956. 
(Dr. Sushi/a Nayat', 
Mintner of Hetilth.) 