Bill NO. to of 195!. 
TH~J CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE (SECO ND 
AMENDMENT) BILL, 1952 
(As INTRODUCED IN TH'S HOUSB OF THB PBOPLIt) 
A-
BU.L 
further to amend the Code of Criminal ProcedurlJ, 1898. 
~
: BE it flnacted by Parliament 8S follows:-
. 1. Short title.--'rhh; Act rna)' bu elllI~d the Code of C'l'iminnl Pt'oet\-
ure (Second Amendment) Aet, 1952. 
2. Amendment of sectiOn 128, Act V of 1898.-1n section 12H of the 
r'Code of Criminal ProeedUl'e, 1898 (hereimtftel' referrlld to as the prim'i- 5 
,pul Act), for the word8 /llld figures "the Indian Army, Navy or Air F()r\~e 
or u person slIhjt-1'I tv th", 'ferritorial Army Act, 1948" the words" the 
armed forces" shall be substituted. 
3. Amendment of section 129, Act V of 1898.-ln section l,2H of t.he 
pl'ilJ(,jpal Aet, fol' the words "military force" the words "the Brmed 10 
forces" !>hall be substituted. 
4:. Amendmont Of section 130, Act V of 1898.-1n sub-section (1) 
of flection 130 of the principal Act. for the words and figurl:ls "by militury 
forcl:', he may require allY commissioned or lJon-eommissioned otlicer in 
commnnd of any soldiers in the Indian Army or of any persons subject to ];, 
the Territorial Army Act., 1948, to disperse such assembly by military 
; force", the words "by the armed forces, he may require any offic,er thereof 
in command of Ilny group of persons belonging to the armed forees to 
-disperse such assembly with the help of the armed forces under his com-
:nland" shall be substituted. 20 
5. Amendment of section 181, Act V of 1898.-1n sMtion un of the 
prim'i[-RI Act, for the words "any commisRiolled Offi(l.W of the Indian 
Army muy disperse such BSRf'mbly by militBJ'y force" the wor<u; "any 
commissioned officer of the armed fon'es mBY disperse Ku('h 1l8sembly 
with t,lw hell' of the armed forcl'S under his commRnd" shaH be substituted. 25 
8. Amendment 01 section 182, Act V of 1898.-1n setltion 1142 of t,he 
J,rillcipal Act.--
(a) j;. Cllallse ((1), for the words and figures "soldier, or person 
Ilubject to the Indian Territorial Army Act, 1948", the wordK 
"soldier., sailor or airman in the armed forces" shall be substituted; :10 
(Ill in the proviso, for the words and figures, "soidier in the 
Indian Army or any person subject to _ the Territorial Army Act, 
194A" the words "soldier, Bailor or airman in the armed forc'es" shall 
be substituted. 

2 
7. InsertioD of Dew sectlOD 182A in Act V of 1898.-In (;h1lptar IX 
after section 132 of the principal Act, the following section ,hall be insert-
ed, Jlallle]~':-
10 
'ISBA. Definition •. -In this Chapter,-
(Ir) tl~e e~preRsion "armed forces" me811S the military, nav&! nlld 
air forces,flJlrl includes any other armed forces of the Union; 
(b) "offi(',£'I','o in relation to the anned forces, means a T"::rsOD 
commissioned, gazetted or in pay as an officer ot the anned forces 8lld 
in{']udes a junior eommissioned officer, a warrant officer, f1 Ptltty offi<.'er 
and n non-commissioned officer.' 

3 
STATEME~ OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under the provisions of Chapter IX of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
'When a magistrate finds it necessary to have recourse to military force 
for tlw purpose of dispersal of any unlawful assembly, he may only 
reqllir'e a Commissioned or non-Commistlioned Officer of the Indian Army 
or of any person slIbject to the Territorial Army Act, 1048. to use sllch 
force. 'There may b" occRsionl when units of the other two branches of 
the Armed Forces I111l,V provide military assistance mOl'e expeditiously, 
especially in place" where major establishments of the Navy and Air 
Foree~ are located. It is proposed to Rmend the Code of Criminal Proce-
dure so as to enable the civil authorities to requisition the help of the 
Army or tho Ns'Y)' or the Air Force in case of necessity. Thi~ Bill gives 
effect ~ thit propoeal. 
N.w Dam; KAILAS NATH KATJU. 
The 16th Jlay, 1". 

4 
ANNPlXUBB 
EXTltAOT8 FROII TIlE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROOEDURE, 189S (V OF 1898) . 
• • • • • 
128. F8e of civil force to dispeTBe.-If, upon being so commallded, lIuy 
such assembly does not disperse, or if, without being 80 commanded, it 
conducts itself in iuch 0. manner as to show a determination lJot to 
disperse, auy ;Mllgistrate or offieer in charge of a polil~e·station, whether 
within or without the presidency· towns, may proceed to disperse such 
assembly by force, aud may require the Rssistance of any male person, 
not being an officer, soldier, sailor or airman in the Indian Army, Navy 
or Air Force or a person subjeet to the territorial Army Act, 1948, and 
ItoCting as snch, for the purpose of dispersing Buch Rssembly, and, if 
llCCCHijur.v, urreating and confining the persons who form part of it, ill 
order to disperse such assembly or that they may be punished according 
to law. 
129. Usc of military force.-!f any such aSRembly can!lot be other-
wise dispersed, and if it is necessary for the public seClUl'ity thut it should 
be dispersed, the ~ag!8tr8te of the highest rank who is prl'Rent Inny cause 
it to be dispersed by military force. 
130. Duty of officer8 commanding troopH required b!l Magifltrl1t/J to 
di'pllTilC ailll('111 /Jl?/.-( 1) Whell a Magistrate determmll;, tp dispel's(~ an~­
such assembly by military force, he may require any commissioned or 
non-commissioned officer in command of Rny soldier!:! in the IndIan Army 
or of Rny persollR subject to thfl T€lrritorial Army Ad, 1WB to disp('rse 
sueh assembly hy military force, and to arrest und confino sllC'h persolls 
formillg part of it as the :Magistrate may direct, or 8S it may bo nect-'s-
sary to arrest Dud ('onfine in order to disperse the assembly or to have 
them puniRhed according to law. _ • 
• • • • • 
131.. Powcr of commi88ioned military officers to disp13TIIC aH8embll1.-
When the puillie security iR munif(~stJy fmdangered by /lny such f, .;embly. 
and when no Magistrate ('Ull be ('ommunicated with, IIny commissioned 
offic'cr of the Indian Army may disperse such assembly by military force, 
and may "rrest and confine any persons forming part of it, in order to 
disperse such Assembl.v or that they may be punished Rccording to law; 
but if, while he is acting under this 8ection, it becomes practicable for 
11im to communieute with a Magistrate, he shall do so, and shall thence-
forward obey the ins~ructions of the MAgistrate as to whether he shall 
or shall not ,continue such action. 
132. Protection again8t prosecution for act done unrl'cr this ('hapter.-
No prose(\ution against any person for any act purporting to be done 
under this Chapter shall be instituted in any Criminal Court, except 
with the sanction of the State Goyernment; and-
• • • • • 
(d) no infurior officer, or soldier, or persons subject to the Indian 
Territorial Army Act, 1948 doing :m act in obedienoe to any order 
which h~ was bound to obey, 
shall be deemed to ?8Ve thereby eommitted an offence: 
Jlrovidfld that no such prosecution shall be instituted in nny Criminal 
Cou;rt against ~ny officer or soldier in the Indian Army or any person 
sub]e(·t to the Terri.rial Army Act, 1948 except with the unction of 
the Central Government. 

HOUSE OF 'IHE PEOPLE 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 189ft 
(SA,., Ka.ilGB Nat'" KatjtJ., 
M ;,nister lor Horne .AJJ a.,,.,) 