THE TRA VANCORE·COCHIN STATE 
LEGISLATURE (DELEGATION OF 
POW1RS) BILL~ 1956 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOit SABRA) 

BID No. 40 of 1,,6 
THE TRAVANCORE-COCHIN STATE LEGISLATURE 
(DELEGATION OF POWERS) BILL, 1956 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to confer on the President the power of the Legislature of the State 
of Travancore-ICochin to make laws. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called tqe Travancore-Cochin State Legisla- Short title. 
ture (Delegation of Powers)' Act, 1956. 
S 2. In this Act, "Proclamation" means the Proclamation issued on Definition. 
the 23rd day of March, 1956, by the President under clause (1) of 
Hticle 356 of the Constitution. . 
3. (1) The power of the Legislature of the State of Travancore- Conferment 
Cochin to m~ke laws, which ha. been declared by the Proclama- p~e~~ent 
10 tion to be exercisable by or under the authority of Parliament, is of the 
h b f ed th P 'd t power of the ere y con err on e reSl en . State Legis- • 
(2) In the exercise 'of the said power, the President may, from lature. 
time to time, whether Parliament is or is not in session, enact as a 
President's Act a Bill containing such provisions as he considers 
IS necessary: 
Provided that before enacting any such Act, the President shall, 
whenever he considers it practicable to do so, consult a committee 
constituted for the purpose consisting of ten members of the House 
of the People nominated by the Speaker and five members of the 
20 Council of States nominated by the Chairman. 

2 
(3) Every Act enacted by the President under sub-section (2) 
shall, as soon as may be after enactment, be laid before each House 
of Parliament. 
(4) Either House of Parliament may, by resolution passed within 
seven days -from the date on which the Act has been laid before it S 
under sub-section (3). direct any modifications to be mnde in the 
Act and if the modifications are agreed to by the other House of 
Parliament during the session in which the Act has been so laid 
before it, such modifications· shall be given effect to by the 
President by enacting an amending Act under sub-sectkn (2): 10 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall affect the validity 
of the Act or of any action taken .thereunder before it is so amended. 

3 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under the Proclamation of the President, dated the 23rd March, 
1956, the pOwer of t~e Legislature of the Travancore-Cochin State 
are now exercisable by or under the authority of Parliament. Such 
legislative measures, as may be neces8a.ry for the State, can be taken 
up by Parliament only by postponing its business and even then, it 
is likely that Parliament may not have the time to deal with all 
legislative measures for the State. It is therefore proposed that 
Parliament should, in accordance with the provisions of article 357 (1) ... 
of the Constitution, confer by law on the President the powe:r of the 
legislature of the State of Travancore-Cochin to make laws for the 
State. 
The present Bill is intended to give effect to this proposal. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 16th April, 1956 . 
• 
B. N. DATAR. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to confer on the President the power of the Legislature of the 
State of Travancore-Cochin to make laws. 
(Shri B. N. Datar, Minister in the 
Ministry of Home Affairs.) 