~ of 19,6. 
As INTRODUCE!> IN LoK SABRA ON 
• 
Blil No. '0 of 1693. 
THE SLUM AREAS (IMPROVEMENT AND CLEAR-
ANCE) AMENDMENT BILL, 1963 
BILL 
to amend the S~um Are(13 (ImprO'Uement an.d Clearance) Act, 19158. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fourteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Slum Areas (Improvement and ::::0:'. 
Clearance) Amendment Act, 1963. D1encem.Dt. 
, (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
10 
20 
ment may. by notification in the OfRcial Gazette, appoint. 
Z. In section 2 of the Slum ~as (Improvement and Clearance) ~meB~mell' 
Act, 1956 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act).- 0 IeCtIOII 2. 
(i) for clauses (e) and (f), the following cl§use shall be 
lIubstituted, namely:-
• (e) "occupier" includes-
(a) any person who for the time being is paying or 
is liable to pay to the ownd the rent or any portion ot 
the rent of the land or building in respect of which such 
rent is paid or is payable; 
(b) an owner in occ:upatlon of, or otherwise using 
his land or building; 
(c) a rent-free tenant of any land or building; 
(d) a licensee in occupation of any land or buildin,; 
and . 

• 
2 
(e) any person who is liable to pay to the owner 
damages for the ·use and occupation of any land or 
building;'; 
(ii) clauses (g), (h) and (i) shall respectively be re-num- 5 
bered as clauses (f), (g) and (h); 
(iii) after clause (h) as so re-numbered, the following clause 
shall be inserted, namely:-
'(i) "work of improvement" includes in relation to any 
building in a slum area the execution of anyone or more of 
the following works, namely: _ 10 
(i) necessary repairs; 
(ii) structural alterations; 
(iii) provision of light points, water taps and bath-
ing places; 
(iv) construction of drains, open or covered; ·15 
(v) provision of latrines; 
(vi) provision of additional or improved fixtures or 
fittings; 
(vii) opening up or paving of courtyards; 
(viii) removal of rubbish; and 20 
(ix) any other work including the demolition of any 
building or any part thereof which in the opinion of the 
competent authority is necessary for executing any of 
the works specified above.'. 
~':~ , 
3. In section 4: of the principal Act,-
(a) to sub-section (1), the following proviso shall be added, 
namely:-
"Provided that where the owner of the building is dift-
erent from the owner of the land on which the building 
stands and the works of improvement required to be execu- 30 
ted relate to provision of water taps, bathing places, cons-
truction of drains, open or covered, as the case may be, pro-
vision of water borne latrines or removal of rubbish and such 
works are to be executed outside the building, the notice 
shall be served upon the owner of the land."; 3S 
(b) in sub-section (2), after the word "building", the words 
"or the land on which the building stands" shall be inserted. 

10 
IS 
4. In section 5 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sUb-sections (1) and (2), after the words "owner of 
the building" wherever they occur, the words "or of the land on 
which the building stands, as the case may be," shall be inserted; 
(b) sub-section (3) shall be omitted. 
Amendment ot section ,. 
5. After section 6 of the principal Act, the following section shall Insertion. of 
be inserted, namely: _ ~~ Iccuon 
"6A. (1) The competent authority may, by notification in the Re.tr~io~ 
Official Gazette, direct that no person shall erect any building in :., ':11::: 
a slum area except with the previous permission in writing of are ... 
the competent authority. 
(2) Every notification issued under sub-section (1) shall 
cease to have effect on the expiration of two years from the date 
thereof except as respects things done or omitted to be done 
before such cesser. . 
(3) Every person desiring to obtain the permission referred 
to in SUb-section (1) shall make an application in writing to the 
competent authority in such form and containing such informa-
tion in respect of the erection of the building to which the 
application relates as may be prescribed. 
(4) On receipt of such application, the competent authority, 
after making such enqUiry as it considers necessary, shall, by 
order in writing,-
(a) either grant the permission subject to such terms 
and conditions, if any, as may be specified in the order; or 
(b) refuse to grant such permission: 
Provided that before making an order refUSing such 
permission, the applicant shall be given a reasonable 
opportunity to show cause why the permission should 
not be refused. 
(5) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall apply to---
(a) any works of improvement required to be executed 
by a notice under sub-section (1) of section 4 or in pursu-
ance of an undertaking given under SUb-section (2) of sec- • 
tion 7; or 
(b) the erection of any building in any area in respect 
of which a slum clearance order has been made under sec-
tion 10.". 

4 
AlIIelldmCDt 6. In section 10 of the principal Act, for sub-section (7), the fo1-
of lCCtioD lowing sUb-section shall be substituted, namely:-10. 
SubsftutiOD 
ot"new 
IICICtiOD for 
section n. 
Power of 
competent 
authority to 
.-develop 
clearance 
"I. 
. 
Amendment 
of aec:tioD 
13. 
u (7) Subject to the provisions of this Act, where a slum 
clearance order has become operative, the owner of the land to 
which the order applies may re-develop the land in accordance ~ 
with plans approved by the competent authority and subject to 
such restrictions and conditions (including a condition with re-
gard to the time within which the re-development shall be com-
pleted), if any, as that authority may think fit to impose. 
Provided that an ow~er who is aggrieved by a restriction or 10 
condition so impose~ on the user of his land or by a subsequent 
refusal of the competent authority to cancel or modify any such 
restriction or condition may within such time as may be pres-
cribed, appeal to the Administrator and the Administrator shall 
make such order in the matter as he thinks proper and his decision I, 
shall be final". 
'1 .For section 11 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be substituted, namely:-
"11. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section 
(7) of section 10, the competent authority may at any time 
after the land has been cleared of the buildipgs in accordance 200 
with a slum clearance order ;but before the work of re-de\relop-
ment of that land has been commenced by the owner, by order, 
determine to re-develop the land if that authority is satisfied 
'that it is necessary in the public interest to do so. 2 
(2) Where land has been cleared of the buildings in accord- ~ 
aee with a slum clearance order, the competent authority, if It 
is satisfied that the land has been, or is being, re-developed by the 
owner thereof in cOldravention of plans approved by the au-
thority or any restrictions or conditions ilnposed under sub-
section (7) of s~tion 10 or has not been re-developed within 30 
the time. if any. specified under such conditions, may, by order, 
determine to re-develop the land: 
Provided that ·before passing such order, tbe owner shall 
be given a reasonable opportunity to show cause why the order 
should not be passed.".: i 3' 
8. To section 13 of the principal Act, the following proviso shall 
be added. namely:-
"Provided that where on any representation from the com-
petent authority, the Central Government is satisfied that any 40 
.uch land or any portion thereof 15 unsuitable fDr the purposet 

mentioned in this section. the Central Government may use the 
land or allow it to be used for such other public purpose or 
purposes as it may deem fit.", 
9. In section 15 of the principal Act, in sub--section (6)- Amef n~mcI1l o sect lOll 
(i) in the first proviso, for the words uin such proportion I,. 
as he considers reasonable: ", the words "in the same proportion 
as the market price of the land bears to the market price of the 
building on the date of the acquisition," shall be substiuted; 
(ii) the second proviso shall be omitted. 
10. For section 19 of the principal Act, the following section shall ~~~tution 
10 be substituted, namely: - sect~on fo~ 
section lSI. 
"19. (1) Notwithstanding -anything co~tained in any other fo~~m: 
law for the time bemg in force, no person shall, except with the of telWltl 
previous permission in writing of the competent authority, =e~ :tll-
• • OUt pcrmia-(a) mstItute, after the commencement of the Slum sion of the 
I~ Areas (Improvement and Clearance) Amendment Act. 1963, ~:=~Dt 
any suit or proceeding for obtaining any decree or order for u my. 
the eviction of a tenant from any building or land in a slum 
3S 
area; or 
(b) where any decree or order is obtained in any suit or 
proceeding instituted before such commencement for the 
eviction of a tenant from any building or land in such area, 
execute such decree or order. 
(2) Every person desiring to obtain the permission referred 
to in sub-section (1) shall make an application in writing to 
the competent authority in such fonn and containing such par-
ticulars as may be prescribed. 
(3) On receipt of such application, the eompetent autho-
rity, after giving an opportunity to the parties of being heard 
and after making such summary inquiry into the circum-
stances of the case as it thinks fit, shall by order in writing, 
either grant or refuse to grant such permission. 
(4) In granting or refusing to grant the permission under 
sub-section (3). the competent authority shall take into account 
the following factors, namely:-
(a) whether alternative accommodation within the 
means of the tenant would be available to him 11' he were 
evicted; 

Subttitution 
of new 
lection for 
aection 20. 
Appeals. 
IDsertien of 
new SCc',ions 
20A and lOB. 
Restoration 
of poslcssi.,n 
ofpremile. 
Yacated by a 
tenant. , 
(b) whether the eviction is in the interest of improve..-
ment and clearance of the slum areas; 
(c) such other factors, if any, as may be prescribed . 
. (5) where the competent authority refuses to grant S 
the permission, it shall record a brief statement of the reasons for 
such refusal and furnish a copy thereof to the applicant.". 
11. For section 20 of the principal .Act, the following section shall 
be substituted, namelY:i i 
"20. Any person aggrieved by an order of the competent au- 10 
thority refusing to grant the permission referred. to in sub-
section (1) of section 6A or referred to in sub-section (1) of 
section 19 may, within such time as may be prescribed, prefer 
an appeal to the Administrator and the Administrator m~, 
after hearing the 'appellant, decide such appeal and his decision J, 
shall be fina!.". 
12. After section 20 of the principal Act, the following Sectiorul 
shall be inserted, namely:---l 
"20A (1) Where a tenant in occupation of any building 
in a slum area vacates any building or is evicted therefrom on 20 
the ground that it was required for the purpose of executini 
any work of improvement or for the purpose of re-erection of 
the building, the tenant may, within such time as may be pres-
cribed, file a declaration with the competent authority that he 
desires to be replaced in occupation of the building after the 
completion of the work of improvement .or re-erection of the 2S 
building, as the case may be. 
(2) On receipt of such declaration, the competent authority 
shall by order require the owner of the building to furnish to 
it, within such time as may be prescribed, the plans of the work 
of improvement or re-erection of the building and estimates of 30 
the cost thereof and such other particulars as may be necessary 
and shall, on the basis of such plans and estimates and particu-
lars, if any, furnished and having regard to the provisions of 
sub-section (3) of section 20B and after holding such inquiry 
as it may think fit, prOvisionally determine the rent that would 3S 
be payable. by the ·tenant if he were to be replaced in occupa-
tion of the blIilding in pursuance of the declaration made by 
him under su\H3ection (1) 
(3) The rent prOVisionally determined under sub-section 
(2) shall be communicated in the prescribed manner to the 4G 
tenant and the owner. I I 

10 
20 
Z5 
35 
7 
(4) If the tenant after the receipt of such communication 
intimates in writing ~o the cOIppetent authority within such time 
as may be prescribed that when he is replaced ill occupation 
0' the building in pursuance of the declaration made by him 
under sub-section (1), he would pay to the owner until the rent 
is finally determined under section 20B the rent provision~ Uy 
determined under sub-section (2), the competenll authority 
'shall direct the owner to place the tenant in occupation of the 
building after the completion of the work of ·improvement or 
re-erection of the building, as the case may be, and the owner 
shall be bOWld to comply with such direction. 
20B. (1) Where any building in a slum area is let to • :ent.ot 
tenant after th~ execution of any work of improvement or after ~~:;~p 
it has been re-erected, the rent of the building shall be deter- areas. 
mined in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(2) Where any such building is let to a tenant other than 
a tenant who is placed in possession of the bui1din~ in pur-
suance of a direction issued under sub-section (4) of section 
20A. the tenant shall be liable to pny to the owner-
(a) if there is a general law relating to the control of 
rents in force in the area in which the building is situated 
and applicable to that building, the rent determined in 
accordance witib the provisions of that law; 
(b) if there is no such law in force in such area, such 
rent as may be agreed upon between the owner and the 
tenant. 
(}) Where any such building is let to a tenant in pursuance 
of a direction issued under sub-section (4) of section 20A, the 
tenant shall, notwithstanding any law relatinsr to the control 
of rents in force in the area, be liable to pay to the owner-
(a) if any work of improvement has been executed in 
relation to the building, an annual rent of a sum equivalent 
to the aggregate of the following amounts, namely:-
(i) the annual rent the tenant was paying imme-
diately before he vacated the building for the purpose of 
execution of the work of improvement; 
(ii) seven and a half per cent. of the cost of the 
work of improvement; and I I 
(iii) seven and a half per cent. of a sum equivalent 
to the compensation payable in respect of any land 
which may have been Acquired for the purpose of eff~ct­
Ing such improvement as if such land were acquired 

8 
under section 12 on the date of the eommencement of 
the work of improvement: 
(b) if the building has been re-erected, an annual rent 
of a sum ~quivalent to seven and a half per cent. of the 
aggregate cost of reconstruction of the building and the S 
cost of the land on which the building is re-erected. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this clause, the cost 
of the land shall be deemed to be a sum equivalent to the 
compensation payable in respect of the land if it were ac-
quired under section 12 on the date of commencement of the 10 
reconstruction of the building. 
(4) The rent payable by a tenant in respeCt of any build-
hig under sub-section (3) shall, on an appliction made by 
the tenant or the owner, be det-ermined by the authority re-
ferred to in sub-section (5): 15 
Provided that an application for determination of such rent 
by the oWner or the tenant shall not, except for sufficient cause, 
be entertained by such authority after the expiry of ninet~· d:\Vs 
from the completion of the work of improvement or re-ereciion 
of the building, as the ease may be. 20 
(5) The authority to which the application referred to in 
sub-section (4) shall be made, shall be-
(a) where there is a general law relating to the control 
of rents in forre in the area in which the building is situate, 
the authority to whom applications may be made for fixing 2S 
of rents of buHdings situate in that area; and for the purpose 
of determining the rent under this section that authority may 
exercise all or any of the powers it has under the said gene-
rallaw; and the provisions of such law including provisions 
relating to appeals shall apply accordingly; 30 
(b) if there is no such law in force in that area, such 
authority as may be specified by rules made in this behalf by 
the Central Government and such rules may provide the pro-
cedure that will be followed by that authority in determining 
the rent end also for appeals against the decision of such 3S 
authority. 
(6) Where the rent is finally determined under this section, 
then the amount of rent paid by the tenant shall be adjusted 
against the rent s:> finally determined 8ll;d if the amount so paid 
falls short of, or i~ in excess of, the rent finally determined, the 40 
tenant shall pay the deficiency, or be entitled to a refund, as the 
eaSe may be.". 

, 
13. In section 21 of the principal Act,- A en 
ofaectioD 
(i) for the words "execution of any decree or order under any 21. 
law for the evj~tion", the words "eviction under any law" shall 
be substituted; 
(ii) for the words "the Delhi Improvement Trust", the words 
"the Delhi Development Authority" shall be substituted. 
14. In section 27 of the 'principal Act, for the words "No building Amen~ent 
or land", the words "Save as provided in this Act, no building or land" ~~~ectJon 
shall be substituted. 
10 15. In section 28 of the principal Act, after the words "specified in Amendment 
the order", the words "and for the purpose of such eviction may use ofsectioll . . 28 
or cause to be used such force as may be necessary" shall be . 
inserted. 
16. In section 32 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the Amend:ment 
IS words "does any act in contravention of", the words "fails to comply ~~.ICCtlOD 
with" shall be sUbstituted. 
1'1. Section 33 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered as sub- Amen4meDt 
section (1) thereof and after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the ~~.sectlOD 
following sub-section shWl be inserted, namely:-
20 "(2) For the purpose of causing any building to be demolish-
ed under sub-section (1), the competent authorlty may use or 
cause to be used such force as may be necessary.". 
18. Section 36 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered as sub- Amendment 
section (1) thereof and after sub-section (1) as so r~umbered, the ofseccion 
a, following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- 36. 
"(2) The Administrator may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, delegate, t;upject to such conditions, if any, QS may be 
specified in the notification, any power exercisable by him under 
sub-seetion '(7) of section 10, section 15, section 20 and section 30. 
to any officer not below the rank of a District Judge.". 
19. After section 37 of the prinCipal i\ct, the following section shall Insertion Of 
be inserted, namely:-- new ICction 
37A~ 
"37 A. Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, no Bar of ril-
civil court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any matter which diction. 
3' the competent authority or any other person is empowered by or 
under this Act; to determine and no injunction shall be granted 
by any court or other authority in .respect of any action taken ot 

AJDeIIdDleDt 
of IeCtiOD 
<$0. 
. 1~'··-
10 .. 
to be taken in ·pursuance of any power conferred by or under 
this AJ::t". . 
ZOo In section 40 of the princlp3.1 Act,-
(i) in s:ub-section (2) ,-
(s) after dause (b), the following clauses shall be insert~ S 
ed, namely:-
"('bb) the form in which an application under sub-
section (3) of section SA shall be made and the informa-
tion to be furnished and the fees to be levied in respect 
of such application; 10 
(bbb) the manner in which inquiries may be held 
under sections 15 and 19;"; 
(b) in clause (d), after the words "be followed", the 
words "and thE" factors to be taken into consideration" shall 
be ~nserted; 
te) in clause (e), far the word and figures "section 20", 
the 'Words, figures and brackets "sub..section (7) of section 10 
or section 20" shall be substituted; 
(d) after clause (e), the following clauses shall be insert-
ed, namely:- 30. 
II (ee) the time within which IS declaration may be 
filed under sub-tection (1) or an intimation may be sent 
,under sub-section (4) of section 20A and the fees, if any, 
to be levied in respect of such declaration; 
(eee) the time within which plans, estimates and 2S 
other particulars referred to in sub-sedion (2) of section 
20A may be furnished; 
(eeee) the procedure to be followed by the comp~ 
tent authority for Axing the provisional rent under sub-
section (2) of section 20A; , 
(eeeee) the manner in which the rent provisionally 
determined under section 20A shall be communicated to 
the tenant.'I I.Uld owners; 
(eeeeee) the matters in respect of which provision 
may be made under su~section (5) of section 20B;"; 
(ii) for sub-section (3), the following su~'Section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
35 
"(3) Every rule made under this section sbal1 be laid 8S 
lOon as may be after l·t i8 made before each House of Parlia .. 
ment while it is in session for a totar period of thirty days 40 
Wpich lD9r be comprised in one session Of in two suC;cessiv' 

'. II 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session in which it 
is so laid or the session immediately following, both Houses 
agree in making any modlftcatlon in the ru.le or both Houses 
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule aha1l then-
s after have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, 
U! the ("lr.e may be; so however that any such modiftcatlon or 
an.nulment sholl be without prejudice to the validity of aay· 
thing previou.,ly done under that rule.". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Slum Areas (Improvement and Clearance) Act, 1956, was 
enacted to provide for the improvement and clearance of slum' areas 
in certain Union territories and for the protection of tenants from 
eviction 'in such areas. Experience of the working of the Act has, 
however, revealed certain difficulties. It is, therefore, proposed to 
amend the Act to remove these difficulties, to facilitate and quicken 
slum improvement and clearance work, to require owners to restore 
the possession of the improved and re-developed premises to the 
previous tenants on payment of a reasonable rent, and to give pro-
tection against eviction to tenants such as Amledars of premises in 
slum areas. 
2. The main feature!! of the Bill are: 
(a) Unauthorised building activity in slum areas will be 
prohibited: 
(b) The competent uuthority will have the power to re-
develop a clearance area before this work is commenced by the 
.owner, if it is necessary in the public interest to do so. That 
authority will also be authorised to undertake re-d.evelopment 
work itself' if the owner re-develops the clearance area in contra-
vention of the plans or delays the re-dev~lopment work; 
(c) It will be obligatory on the owners of slums, who take 
up improvement or re-development work of their property, to 
restore possession of the ·premises to the previous ten1lnts in the 
improved or re-erected buildings at a concessional rent; 
(d) Proceedings for the eviction of tenants in the slum areas 
will not be taken without the prior permission of the competent 
authority. 
3. The notes on clauses explain the various changes proposed to be 
made. ' I ~: 1:;, ,., 
NEW DELHI; MEHR CHAND KHANNA. 
The 24th Augmt, 1963. 
• 
" I2 

PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 
OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. HIII-9/1/59-HI, dated the 6th September, 1963 
from Shri Mehr Chand Khanna, Minister of Works, Housing and 
Rehabilitation to the Secretary, Lok Sabha]. 
The President having been informed of the subject matter of the 
proposed Slum Areas (Improvement and Clearance) Amendment 
Bill, 1963, recommends to the House under article 117(3) of the 
Constitution of India the consideration of the Bill. 
. 13 . . 

Notes on C"La:uses 
Clause 2.-The d(;finition of 'occupier' hili been amplified to include 
persons who are paying or are liuble to pay rent of the land or the . 
. building and certain categories of persons in occupation of or other-
wise using the land or building so as to facilitate recovery under sec-
tion 6 of the Act of expenses incurred in connection with the main-
tenance of works of improvement, etc. It is on the same lines as in 
the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957. 
The detinition of 'work of improvement' besides being placed jJa 
its proper alphabetical order has been slightly modified to include 
provision of bathing places. 
Clauses 3 and 4.·--Sections 4 and 5 of the Act empower the compe-
tent authority to require by notice the 'Owner of the building to exe-
cute wOl'ks of improvement to the buildings in slum areas. These 
have been found to be inadequate in cases where the owner of the 
land is different from the owner of the building and certain essential 
improvements outside the building have to be carded out, which O)n 
be done only by the owner of the land. Clauses 3 and 4 seek to amend 
sections 4 and 5 of the Act suitably to remove this diffi.culty. 
Clause 5.-Proposed section 6A empowers the competent' authority 
to prohibit for a reasonable period the construction of any building 
or any addition nr alteration in an old building in the are~ declared 
as slwn areas except with its previous permission and on such terms 
and conditions as may be imposed in this regard. This will facilitate 
planned improvement of slum arelli. 
Clauses 6 and 7.-Clause 6 substitutes existing sub-section (7). of 
section 10 by a new sub-section. This new sub-section effects a 
change which is consequential to the substitution of section 11 by 
a new section. Moreover, it has been made clear in the new sub-
section that the competent authority may impose 8 condition as to 
the time limit within which re-development shall be completed. 
Proposed section 11 consists of two sub-sections. Proposed sub-
section (.1) confers power on the competent authority ·to undertake 
re-development work in urgent cases without giving the owner an 
opportunity to re-develop the land. Proposed. SUb-section (2) would 
"Pply in cases where the owner has undertaken the lrMevelopment 
of the land himself but the re-development is not being done in ac-
.. 14 

cordance with the plans or has not been completed within the time 
specified by the competent ·authority. In such cases the competent 
authority may by c,rder determine to re-develop the land. It is, how-
ever, being provided that no such order shall be passed without 
dording to the owne; a reasonable opportunity of showing cause 
against the order proposed. 
Clause 8.-The propoRedproviso to section 13 is intended to make 
it clear that.in cases where Jand acquired under the Act has become 
or is found to be unsuitable for the purposes of slum improvement, 
the Central Government may use the land or allow it to be used. for 
such other public purpose or purposes as it may deem fit. 
Clau.'1e 9.-Sectbn 15 (6) is being amended to make it clear that 
the apportionment of compensation between the owner of the lend 
and the owner of the building standing on such land would be in the 
proportion the market priee of the land -bears at the time of acquisi-
tion to the market price of the. building thereon. At present the 
matter is left to the discretion of the competent autho~ty. 
Clause lO.-Under section 19, the previous permission in writing 
of the competent authority is required for the execution of any decree 
or order for eviction of Ii tenant from any building in a slum urea. 
Clause 10 seeks to amend section 19 to provide that after the com-
mencement of the amendment Act, no suit for the eviction of a tenant 
from any building in a slum area shall be instituted except with the 
previous permission in ~riting of the competent authority. Permis-
sion at the commencement of legal proceedings would avoid inft'Uc-
tuous 1itJ~tion, Specific principles for guiding the competent autho-
rity in dealing with the 8pp1icationc; for the grant 'of sanction to sue 
are laid down. The existingprovisi(1T!!'; will continue to apply in re-
lation to the pending suit!:: or other pr('lC'eed'in~ for eviction or deerees 
or orders already passed. 
Clau.se 11.-This seeks to provide also for a right of appeal from 
orders of the competent authority refusing to grant permission under 
the proposed section 6A (vide notes on clause 5). 
Claw*! 12.-Proposed section 20A seekf! to impose, in the circum-
stances mentioned in that secti,on, an oblilt3tion upon the owner of a 
building to replace a tenant, who has vacated' the building to facilitate 
'the execution of any works of improvement or the re-erection of the 
building, after the completion of such works of iml)rovernent or re-
building. Proposed section 20B provides for determination of rent of 
buildings in a slum area let out after the execution of any work of 
improvement or re-erectfon of the building. In the case of an old 

16 
tenant replaced in possession of ,the building in pursuance of the 
provisions of proposed. section 20A, a concessional rent is pr~scribed 
afld in the case of other tenants the provisions of the general rent 
control law are sought to be made applicable. 
Clau.~Els 13 and 14.-The amendments are of a consequential and 
clariftcatory nature. 
Clauses 15 and 17.-Sections 28 and 33 of the Act are sought to be 
modified by clauses 15 and 17 respectively so as to give power to the 
competent authority to use minimum reasonable force necessary in 
"the enforcement of orders for vacation or demolition of a building. 
Clause l6.-The change is of a dmfting nature. 
C14use l8.-Proposed. sub-section (2) of section 36 empowers the 
administrator to delegate his power of hearing appeals to any officer 
not below the rank of a district judge. 
Clau.~e 19.--Proposed section MA provides for bar af jurisdiction 
of civil courfs in respect of matters which the competent authority or 
any other person is empowered to determine under the Act and fur-
ther provides that no court o.r nuthority shall have the power to grant 
any injunction in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pur-
suance of any power conferred by or under the Act. This is to faci-
litate speedy execution of slum improvement and clearance work. 
C'l4use 20.-The changes made are IDfinly of a consequential 
nature. . 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
·Clause 7 .of the Bill enables the competent authority to undertake 
re..c:levelopment of slum cleaqmce areas himself if he is satisfied that 
it is necessary in the public inlcl'cst Lo du w. He would thus have 
greater discretion in undertaking re-Of'velnpment work than under 
e"isting section 11, As beforE'. ordinarily, the re-development work 
would be left to be done by the ·owners themselves. However, in 
view of the proposed amcndment the competent authority may now 
Wldert'lke re-developrrfent work, in a larger number of cases and this 
may involve· additional expenditure. Inasmuch as the. circumstances. 
under which .the competent authority will exercise his powers are un-
certain, it is -11et possible to state exactly the likely expenditure,. 
though· according to present e~timates, it is expected to be about fif-
teen lakhs per annum. 
Z. Under clause (5) of proposed section 20B (vide clause 11 of the 
Bill), final determination of the rent in respect of buildings replaced 
in possession of the tenant~ in slum areas will be made by the autho-
rities under the general law relftting toO the control .of rents in force 
in the area in which thc buildings are situate; in regard to areas in 
which no such law is in force, provi.sion is made for prescribing a 
suiVable authority for the purpose by rules. The existing officers of 
the Govemm~nt will be prescrib~d as the appropriate authorities for 
determining rents in cases where rules are made for the purpese and 
therefore no ad"ltjonaJ expenditure 1. likely to be !1'1eurred 01\ W, 1CCO\lJ\*, -- ,-' I . -. , 
J7 

MEMORANDUMKEoARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause' 26 of the mn amends sub-section (2) of seclion 40 at 'the 
Act to empbwer the Central Government to make rules in·retattc:m:'td 
certain additi'onat matters. The additional matters relate, mter afta, 
to die fdrm in wh1ch an app1i~tion under sub-section (3) of~' 
seCti6n~A mall be made, the information to be :fUrnished _lfth 
fees to be' leVied in respect of such applications, the Il1&IUl'el' ira- ~ 
enquiries may be held under section 15 and proposed aeetton 'ft,' 
me ecMrtlonal' factors'to be taken into conslcteration in gran'Hnt-ar 
refuSfftg' an: app1ieation under sub-sectiOn (1) of propOiIed ·Be<itit)n ·tt, 
&he- tIme within which a declaration may be fthd under sab-seetlon 
(1) of I"!'b~ seetion 20A and the fees to be levied ili're8peet of' 
suehtJeetaratioh, 'the procedure to be followed for fudttg' provisltm'ld 
rent under sub-section (2) of proposed section !tA. These ms;t~ 
pm;tain to procedure. form or detail and as such the delep.tien of 
lq'isMive power is of a normal character. 
18 • 

ANNEXtlM 
tEXTRACTS FBOM THE SLUM AREAS (l:t.IPRoVEMDt 
AND CLEARANCE) AcT, 1956 
(96 OF 1956) 
• • • • • 
CHAPTER I 
PRELlMINARY 
• • • • • 
2 .. ,fa. -tbia· A~, ,~eSl the context otherwiBereq~ires,-
• • • • • 
le) "work of improv.ement" includes in relation to 8J1T 
building in a alum area the execution of anyone or more oftbe 
following works, namely:-
~i) necessary repairs; 
(ii) structural alterations; 
(iii) provision of light points aDd water tapa; 
(iv) cons~ruction of drains, open ,or covered; 
(v) provision of latl"ines; 
(vi) provision of additional or improved ibttures or 
'ftftinp; 
(ui.ij ~iDiUP or paving of cow:t yards; 
(viii) removal of rubbish; and 
,(~) 80J other woRt including the demoliti9l1 of any 
bui1di~ or any part tbereof which in the opiniGD of the 
~pe.teDt ~tAm'ity is necessary for execu~ aay 01. .. 
. \\(qI'kI ~ified -8Qov.e; 
-m '~capier" iTIcludes an owner in occupation of or other-
wise using his own land or building; 
. (g) "owner" iftcludes any person who Is recetvlDg at .. 
e~ to .r..eQaive the r-en.t of any buil~~g or land wbether ca. 
his own account or on behalf of himaelf and ·ethers or _ ..... 
or t~s~e, or who would so receive the rent or be entitled to 
'rec~ive it.if the b\lild,ing or land were let to a tenant; 
19 

Power of 
competfDt 
authortiy to 
require im-
provemeDt 
of buildings 
UDJit for 
humao 
habitation. 
20 
(h) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under 
this Act; and 
(i) "slum clearance" means the clearance of any slum area 
by the demolition and removal of buildings therefrom . 
• • • • • 
CHAPTER III 
SLUM IMPROVEMENT 
4. (1) Where the competent authority upon report from any 
of its officers or other information in its possession is satisfied that 
any building in a slum area is in any respect unfit for human 
habitation, it may, unless in its opinion the building is not capable 
at a reasonable expense of being rendered so fit, serve upon the 
owner of the building a notice requiring him within such time not 
being less than thirty days as may be specified in. the notice to 
execute the works of improvement specified therei. and stating 
that in the opinion of the authority those works will render' the 
building fit for human habitation. 
(2) In addition to serving a notice under this section on the 
owner, the competent authority may serve a copy of the notice on 
any other person having an interest in the building whether as 
lessee, mortgagee or otherwise. 
• • • • • 
Enforcement 5. (1) If a notice under section 4 requiring the owner of the 
of DC?(c:e building to execute works of improvement is not complied with, 
requlrlnl h f h " f h' 'fi d' th 'th execution of t en. a ter t e expIratIon 0 t e tIme SpecI e m e notIce e 
~ol'ks of competent authority may itself do the works required to be done by Improve_ , 
ment, the notIce, 
(2) All expenses incurred by the competent authority under 
this section, together with interest. at such rate as the Central 
Government may by order fix, from the date when a demand for 
the expenses is made until payment, may be recovered by' the com-
petent authority from the owner of the building as arrears of land 
revenue: 
Provided that if the owner proves that he-
(a) is receiving the rent merely as agent or trustee for 
some other person; and 
(b) has not in his hands on behalf of that other person 
sufficient money to satisfy the whole demand of the authority, 
his liability shall be limited to the total amount of the money 
which he has in his hands as aforesaid. 
• 

21 
(3) If the owner of the building is different from the person 
who owns the land on which the building stands and the expenses 
incurred by the competent authority under this section are recover-
able from both these persons, then, such expenses shall be recover-
ed from them in such proportion as may be determined by the com-
petent authority or by an officer empowered by it in this behal!. 
• • • • • 
CHAPTER IV 
SLUM CLEARANCE AND RE-DEVELOPMENT 
• • • • • 
10. (1) • • • • • • Slum clear-
ance order. 
(7) Where a slum clearance order has become operative, no land 
to which the order applies shall be re-developed except in accordance 
with plans approved by the competent authority and except subject 
to such restrictions and conditions, if any, as the competent autho-
rity may think fit to impose: 
Provided that an owner who is aggrieved by a restriction or con-
dition SO imposed on the user of his land or by a subsequent refusal 
of the competent authority to cancel or modify any such restriction 
or condition may at any time appeal to the Administrator and the 
Administrator shall make such order in the matter as he thinks 
proper and his decision shall be final. 
• • • • • 
11. Where land has been cleared of buildings in accordance with Pf)\\'er of 
a slum clearance order, the competent authority may, at any time :ili~~:;~o 
after the expiration of twelve months from the date on which the re-devclop 
d b . clearance or er ecame operatIve, by order, determine to re-develop any land arca or an y 
which on the date of the making of the order has not been, or is pan thereof. 
not in the process of being, re-developed by the owner thereof in 
accordance with plans approved by the authority and any restrictions 
and conditions imposed under sub-section (7) of section 10. 
· . . .' . 
• • 
CHAPTER V 
ACQUISITION OF LAND 
• • • It. Where any land in a slum area or clearance area has been Land Ie-
acqdftoed under this Act the Central Government shall make the ~rcctlb6ov_ 
land available to the competent authority for the purpose of execut- mm':t to 
ing any work of improvement or carrying out any order of demolition be'lm~e VI.! able to 
or for the purpose of re-development. the compe-
• • • • • tent autho-ritY. 

Basis for 
deterMina-
tion of com-
pensation. 
u. (I) • • • • • 
(6) Where there is any building on the land in respect of which 
the net average monthly income has been determined, no separate 
compensation shall be paid in respect of such building: 
Provided that where the owner of the land and the owner of 'a. 
building on such land are different, the competent authority shall 
apportion the amount of compensation between the owner of the land 
and the owner of the building in such proportion as he considers 
reasonable: 
Provided further that the compensation in respect of the building 
.shall not in any case exceed fifty per cent. of the tot.l amount of, com-
pensation which has been determined in accordance witA the pro-
visions of this section. 
• • • • • 
CHAPTER VI 
PRoTEoTION OF 'lBNANTS IN SLUM ABBAS FORM EVIC\'IOJ( 
Ten .. tl in ~9. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law 
alum areas for the time being in force, no person who has obtained anydec~ 
:'k::l!ith- or order for the eviction of a tenant from any building ill a ,a1wn 
out permi8- area shall be entitled to execute such decree or order except with 
!!,C;;:p::: the previous permission in writing of the competent authority. 
authority. 
,.,..... 
(2:) Every person desiring to obtain thepermiSiiOll. nferMi to 
m Bubo-settion (l) shall make anapplic8tion in writing to the cem-
.,etent authority in such form and containing S\lch,particw8I'I • 
..y 'De prescribed. i 
(3) On receipt of such application the competent authortty, 
after giving an opportunity to the tenal'lt of being heard and afte}' 
making such summary inquiry into the ekcumstances of the ease 
as it thinks fit, shall by order in writing either grant such pemiiltBton 
or refuse to grant such permission. 
(4) Where the competent authority refuses to grant the permis-
sion it shall record a brief statement of the reasons for IUch refusal 
ond furnish a copy thereof to the applicant. 
• 2lt. Any person aggrieved by an order of the competent 'a~o-
l1ty refusing to grant the permission referred. to in sub-section (f) 
-6f section 19 may, within such time as may be prescribed, prefer 'an 
appeal to the Administrator and the decision of the Administrator 
on such a'ppeal shall be final.: 'I" 

23 
•. Nothing in this Chapter shall apply to or in relation to the· Cbaptjr not 
e3tetutfon of aay decree or Qrder under any law for the eviriiM of' !~i~rfo1 0\0 
a"~.nt from any building in a slum area belonging to the Gov- tena~t. flUD . . h . certaIn et1UWent,the DelhI Improvement Trust or any local aut onty. buildinJl. 
CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLA1'II'EOUS 
• • • • • 
27. No building or land shall be entered without the consent of Own .... 
the occupier, or if there i'3 no occupier, of the owner thereof. and no ~;~;.n:oO=i­
such entry shall be made without giving tlie said occupier or owner, obtained. 
as the case may be. not le:>s th:m twenty-four hours' written notice 
of the intention to make such entry: 
Provided that no such notice shall be necessary if the place to be 
inspected is a shed: for cattle or a latrine, urinal or a work under 
CQl1'Struction. " 
28. Where the competent authority is satisfied either upon a repre- Power of 
(lentation trom the owner of a building or upon other information in eviction ~o d 
its possession that the occupants of the building have not vacated it ~,~;~b! 
'n pursuance of any notice, order or direction issued or given by the QOmpe!-Cnt 
.uthottty, the authority shall, by order, direct the eviction of the a"thorltf' 
CK'-fUpaMs' frem· fiDe buildmg in such manner and within such t~Q 
fiS may.be specified in the order: 
.i'r.oYicied th,at before making any order Wilder this sec.tion the 
e&mpetent. authority shaU live a reas0Bable opportunity to th& OCC\Jro 
»&uta. oj thebWldini to. show cause why they; should not. -be evicted. 
t.G.eWrom.i. I 
• •• • • • 
32. ~) Whoever ioes any act in contravention of any notice, , 
order or direction issued or given under this Act shall be punishable Penalties. 
with. imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, 
or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both . 
• • • • • 
~. Where the erection of any building has been commenced, or Order, ~f 
i be, . d t h be ltd' t t' f demolItion s mg carrie ou, or as en comp e e , In con raven Ion 0 any of buil$linga 
restriction or condition imposed under sub-section (7) of section 10 in cenain 
or a plan for the re-development of any clearance area or in contra- catel. 
vention of any notice, order or direction i9Sued or given under this 
Act the competent authority may, in addition to any other remedy 
that may be resorted to under this Act or under any other law, make 
In order directing that such erection shall be demolished by the 

Power to 
delelatc. 
24 
owner thereof within such time not exceeding two months as may 
be specified in the order, and on the failure of the owner to comply 
with the order, the competent authority may itself cause the ereetion 
to be demolished and the expenses of such domolition shall be re-
coverable from the owner as arrears of land revenue: 
Provided that no such order shall be made unless the owner has 
been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard . 
• • • • • 
36. The competent authority may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, direct, that any power exercisable by it under this Act may 
also be exercised, in such cases and subject to such conditions, if any, 
as may be specified in the notification, by such officer or the local 
authority as may be mentioned therein . 
• • • • • 
=rr~el. 40. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in . the 
a lcial Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
.)regoing power such rules may provide for all or any of the fol., 
.owing matters, namely:--2 
• • • • • 
(d) the procedure to be followed by the competent authority 
before granting or refusing to grant permission under section It: 
• • • • • 
(3) All rules made un<ler this section sha~l be, laid for Dot leu 
thaD, thirty days .before bOth HOUSel of Parliament,' as SOOll u ,.,i-
ble after they are made, and shall be subject to suell modifie,tlODI 
u Parliament may make during the sea lion in which theY are 'If) 
laid or the session immedtately follOWing. '" 
• • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
.. - .. ~ .... -'" 
A. 
BILL 
to amend the Slum Areas (Improvement and Clearance) 
Act, 1956. 
; 
(Shri Mehr Chand Khanna, 
Minister of Works, Housing and 
Rehabilitation. ) 