Short title and
commencement.
THE SECULARISM AND COMMUNAL HARMONY
(PRESERV ATION) BILL, 2020
By
PROF. SAUGATA ROY,  M.P.
A
BILL
to ensure preservation of secularism and communal harmony in the country for a
peaceful life to all communities irrespective of caste, religion or region.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  ( 1) This Act may be called the Secularism and Communal Harmony
(Preservation) Act, 2020.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  It shall be the duty of every citizen to  preserve secular character as envisaged
in the Constitution and maintain communal harmony in the country.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
   Bill No. 40 of  2020
Duty of every
citizen to
preserve secular
character and
maintain
communal
harmony.
5

2
3. Whoever, by words, either spoken or written, or by visible representation, or
by any action or otherwise including through social media disturbs the secular
character as envisaged in the Constitution or the communal harmony shall be punished
with rigorous imprisonment for a period which shall not be less than three years.
4. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other law for the time being in force.
Punishment.
Provisions not
in derogation of
any other law.
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
A number of incidents happened in various parts of the country to destabilize
the secular character and to disturb communal harmony in the country. Communal
polarization and division among the citizens of the country is being done to appease
a section of the society. It is our prime responsibility to safeguard the intentions of
Dr. B.R. Ambedkar and Mahatma Gandhiji to maintain the communal harmony and
preserve secular credentials of world's largest democracy.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW D ELHI; SAUGA TA ROY
January 21, 2020.
3

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to ensure preservation of secularism and communal harmony in the country for a
peaceful life to all communities irrespective of caste, religion or region.
————
(Prof. Saugata Roy, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—5350LS—(S3)—20.02.2020.