As InTRopucen IN Lok SasHa

28 31 2006

Bill No. 40 of 2006.

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006
By 4
80०५. TUKARAM RENGE PariL, M.P.
A
BILL
Surther to amend the Constitution of India.

BE it enacted-by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

- 1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2006. Short title.
2. In article 217 of the Constitution, in clause (1), for the words “sixty-two years”, Amendment
of article

5 the words “sixty-five years” shall be substituted. 217


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Like all institutions of governance, the judiciary too requires a periodic dose of
institutional reforms to keep pace with the societal demands. From time to time several steps
have been taken to improve and strengthen judicial process and to modemise the judiciary
in the country.

At present, the age of retirement for the judges of the High Court is sixty-two years
whereas it is sixty-five years for the judges of the Supreme Court. Ithas been observed that
many High Court judges have after retirement been appointed as members or Chairmen of
various tribunals and have continued to function till the age of sixty-five years. A fair number
of retired High Court judges can be seen as practicing advocates in the Supreme Court. With
the rise in the average life expectancy in the country it is desirable that the age of retirement
for the High Courts judges should be raised. A judge of the High Court, if appointed as a
judge of the Supreme Court, can continue in service till he completes the age of sixty-five
years. But vacancies in the Supreme Court are not of frequent occurrence. In comparison
with the number of judges who retire every year from the High Courts, probable vacancies in
the Supreme Court during the same period are negligible. The disparity in the age of retirement
of judges of the Supreme Court and the High Courts result in the retirement of some of
the brilliant judges of High Courts who could not be elevated to the Supreme Court due to
Jess number of vacancies in the highest court of the land.

It may be stated that there is no age limit for retirement of High Court judges in other
countries and where the age limit exist they are higher than sixty-five years. Even the law
Commission has recommended increase in retirement age for judges of High Courts.

To strengthen the morale of the judges in the High Courts it is necessary that age limit
for retirement of judges of High Courts should be raised to sixty-five years.

Hence this Bill.

New Deut; TUKARAM RENGE PATIL,
April 12,2006.



FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill provides for increasing the age of retirement of High Court judges
including Chief Justice from sixty-two to sixty-five years. It is expected that expenditure will
be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India by way of payment of increased pension to
retired judges. It is, likely to involve an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty
crore. No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.


ANNEXURE
Extract from the Constitution of India

* * * * * * *
Appointment 217. (i) Every Judge of a High Court shall be appointed by the President by warrant
and under his hand and seal after consultations with the Chief Justice of India, the Governor of

conditions ©f the State, and, in the case of appointment of a Judge other than the Chief Justice, the Chief
a Judge of Justice of the High Court, and shall hold Office, in the case ofan additional or acting Judge,

High Court. as provided in article 224, and in any other case, until he attains the age of sixty-two years:

Provided that—

@

(6)

©

* « * * * * *


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Ady. Tukaram Renge Patil, M.P)

MGIPMRND—192LS(S-3)—03.05.2006.