AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 40 of 2022
THE  RIGHTS OF PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
SHRIMATI CHINTA ANURADHA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
(Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
5
Short title
and
commencement.

2. After Chapter X of the Rights of the Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 the
following Chapter and sections thereunder shall be inserted, namely:—
“59A. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be by notification in
the Gazette, constitute a body to be known as the National Commission for
Persons with Disabilities, hereinafter referred to in this Chapter as the National
Commission, to exercise the power and to perform the functions conferred on it
under this Act.
(2) The Commission shall consist of the following members, namely:—
(a)  a Chairperson who shall be a person with disability, having special
knowledge in matters relating to the disability issues and knowledge
in law;
(b)   a member who may be a person with disability or not, having special
knowledge in matters relating to the disability issues and knowledge
in law;
(c) a woman who may be a person with disability or not, having special
knowledge in matters relating to the disability issues and knowledge
in law and has proved working excellence in such matters, to be
appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(3) An officer not below the rank of an Additional Secretary to the Government of
India shall be the Member–Secretary and the Chief Executive Officer of the
National Commission and shall exercise such powers and discharge the functions
as the National Commission may, by its order, authorize.
59B. (1) Each member may continue in office till the completion of three years
from the date on which he assumes office.
(2) The Chairperson or a member of the National Commission may, at any time, by
giving intimation to the Central Government in writing under his hand, demit his
office.
(3) The Central Government shall remove a person from the office of the
Chairperson or of a Member, if that person—
(a) becomes an undischarged insolvent; or
(b) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which,
in the opinion of the Central Government, involves moral turpitude; or
(c) becomes of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or
(d) refuses to work or becomes incapable to work; or
(e) without obtaining prior permission from the National Commission, does
not attend three consecutive meetings of the National Commission; or
(f) in the opinion of the Central Government, has so abused the official
position of Chairperson or Member as to render that person’s
continuance in office detrimental to the interest of disabled people or
public interest:
           Provided that no person shall be removed under this sub-section
unless that person is given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in
the matter.
59C. (1) The Central Government shall provide such officers and other employees
as may be required for the efficient performance of the National Commission.
(2) The salary and allowances payable to, and the terms and conditions of service
of the officers and other employees appointed for the purpose of the National
Commission shall be such as may be prescribed.
59D. The salary and allowances payable to the Chairperson and Members, and
the administrative expenses, including salary,  allowances and pension payable
to the officers and other employees referred to in sub-section (1) of
section 59(C), shall be paid by the Central Government.
Insertion of new
Chapter XA.
Terms of office
and conditions
of service of
Chairperson
and Members.
Officers and
other
employees of
the National
Commission.
Salary , allowances
and administrative
expenses to be
paid by the
Central
Government.
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
5
10
50
49 of 2016.
Constitution of
the National
Commission for
Persons with
Disabilities.
2

59E. The National Commission shall,—
(a) evaluate the progress of the development of persons with disabilities in
the country;
(b) enquire and monitor the manner of functioning of various safeguards
provided, in the Constitution or under any other law or under any order
of the Central Government for the welfare, protection and empowerment
of the persons with disability in the country;
(c) enquire into specific complaints about deprivation of social, economic,
educational and linguistic rights, safeguards and benefits of the persons
with disabilities to bring such matters into the notice of authorities
concerned and to suggest remedial measures;
(d) participate in and give creative suggestions on the planning programmes
for the educational, social and economic development of the persons
with disabilities;
(e) make recommendations as to the steps to be taken by the Central
Government for the effective implementation of the measures and
safeguards for the educational, social and economic development, welfare
and protection of the persons with disabilities and to make report to the
Central Government either annually or at such other time, as the National
Commission may deem fit and to monitor their timely implementation;
(f) cause studies to be undertaken into various problems arising out of
discrimination towards persons with disabilities and recommend
measures for their removal; and
(g) conduct studies, research and analysis and to organise seminars,
symposium and awareness classes on the issues relating to social,
economic and educational advancement of persons with disabilities.
59F. In case of any difficulty relating to issue of Certificate of Disability under
section 58 in the manner and form specified by the Central Government to the
persons with disability comes to the notice of the National Commission, the
National Commission may report the same to the Central Government and suggest
remedial measures therefore.
59G . The Central Government shall cause the reports referred to in section 59F, to
be laid before each House of the Parliament along with the action taken or
proposed to be taken thereon and also the reasons, if any, for non-acceptance of
the recommendations in such manner as may be prescribed.
59H. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Chapter,
the Central Government may, by order published in the Gazette, make provisions
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act which appear to it to be necessary
or expedient, for removing the difficulty:
           Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of
two years from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made,
be laid before the Parliament of India.’’.
Functions of
the National
Commission.
5
10
Supervision of
issuing
Certificate of
Disability.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
15
20
25
30
35
40
Laying of
Report.
3

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 was enacted to protect the
rights and ensure welfare of the persons with disabilities. Under the aforesaid Act a
Central Advisory Board on Disability has been constituted. However, the
comprehensive social and educational advancement, welfare, protection and
empowerment of persons with disability is yet to achieved.
The need is to constitute a National Commission for the Persons with Disability
on the lines for the development of National Commission for the Minorities, Women,
Other Backward Classes, the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. The
establishment of the National Commission is intended to provide equality and welfare
as well as the safeguard to the four per cent. of the persons with disability in the
national population.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Persons with Disability Act, 2016 with a
view to constitute a National Commission for Persons with Disabilities.
Hence this Bill.
NEW DELHI; CHINTA ANURADHA
16 December, 2021.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill vide proposed section 59A provides for the constitution
of  National Commission of Persons with Disabilities.  It also provides for appointment
of a Chairperson and other members of the National Commission. It also vide proposed
section 59C provides for appointment of officers and employees to the National
Commission. It further vide proposed section 59D provides for the salary and
allowances payable to the Chairperson and members of the National Commission to
be paid out of the grants available to the Central Government. The Bill if enacted will
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.  A recurring expenditure of
rupees one hundred crore would be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees three hundred crore would also be
involved.
5

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Right of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016.
.
—————
(Shrimati Chinta Anuradha, M.P.)