AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 40 of 2021
THE UNIFORM CIVIL CODE BILL, 2021
By
SHRI SUSHIL KUMAR SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
to  provide  for uniform civil code for all citizens of the country and for
matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic of
India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Uniform Civil Code Act, 2021.
    (2) It extends to the whole of India.
     (3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
5

(a) “degrees of prohibited relationship” shall have the same meaning and
connotation as provided in clause (b) of section 2 of the Special Marriage Act,
1954.
(b) “District Court’’ means, in an area for which there is a city civil court, that
court and in any other area the principal court of original jurisdiction, and includes
any other civil court which may be specified by the State Government, by
notification in the Official Gazette, as having jurisdiction in respect of the matters
dealt with in this Act;
(c) “Kindred” means the connection or relation of the parties descended
from the common ancestor; and
(d) “uniform civil code” means the common civil code or common law for
every citizen residing in India irrespective of religion and caste.
CHAPTER II
MARRIAGE AND DIVORCE
3.  Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force relating to the solemnization of marriages, a marriage between any two
persons may be solemnized under this Act, if at the time of the marriage the
following conditions are fulfilled namely:–
(a) Neither party has a spouse living:
(b) Neither party-
(i) is incapable of giving a valid consent to it in consequence of
unsoundness of mind, or
(ii) though capable of giving a valid consent, has been suffering from
mental disorder of such a kind or to such an extent as to be unfit for marriage and the
procreation of children; or
(iii) has been subject to recurrent attacks of mental disorder;
(c) the male has completed the age of twenty-one years and the female the
age of eighteen years;
(d) the parties are not within the degrees of prohibited relationship:
Provided that where a custom governing at least one of the parties permits of a
marriage between them, such marriage may be solemnized, notwithstanding that they
are within the degrees of prohibited relationship.
Explanation—In this section, “custom, in relation to a person belonging to any
tribe, community, group or family, means any rule which the State Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf as applicable to members
of that tribe, community, group or family:
Provided that no such notification shall be issued in relation to the members of
any tribes, community, group or family, unless the State Government is satisfied—
(i) that such rule has been continuously and uniformly observed for a
long time among those members;
(ii) that such rule is certain and not unreasonable or opposed to public
policy; and
(iii) that such rule is applicable only to a family, has not been
discontinued by the family.
4. (1) For the purpose of facilating the proof of marriage, the State Government
shall make rules providing that the parties to any such marriage may have the
particulars relating to their marriage entered, within a specified time, in such manner
Definitions.
Conditions
relating to
solemnization
of marriage.
Registration of
Marriage.
2
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
43 of 1954

and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed in the marriage register
maintained for the purpose.
(2) the Marriage register maintained under sub-section (1), shall at all
reasonable time be open for inspection, and shall be admissible as evidence of the
statements therein contained.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the validity of any
marriage shall in no way be affected by the omission to make the entry.
5. Any marriage solemnized after the commencement of this Act shall be null and
void and may, on a petition presented by either party thereto against the other party,
be so declared by the decree of nullity if it contravenes conditions specified in clause
(a), (c) and (d) of section 3.
6. Any marriage solemnized after the commencement of this Act shall be voidable
and may be annulled by a decree of nullity on any of the following grounds–
(a) That the marriage is in contravention of the conditions specified in Clause
(b) of section 3.
(b) That the consent of the petitioner was obtained by force or by fraud as to
nature of ceremony or as to any material fact.
(c) That the marriage has not consummated owing to the impotence of the
respondent.
7. (i) Any marriage solemnized, whether before or after the commencement of this
Act may be dissolved only by a decree of divorce granted by a court of the competent
jurisdiction.
   (ii) a petition for divorce may be presented to the District Court either by the
husband or the wife on the ground that the respondent–
(a) has, after the solemnization of the marriage, had voluntary sexual
intercourse with any person other than his or her spouse; or
(b) has deserted the petitioner for a continuous period of not less than two
years immediately preceding the presentation of the petition; or
(c) is undergoing a sentence of imprisonment for seven years or more for an
offence; or
(d) has since the solemnization of the marriage treated the petitioner with
cruelty; or
(e) has been incurably of unsound mind, or has been suffering continuously
or intermittently from mental disorder of such a kind, and to such an extent that the
petitioner cannot reasonably be expected to live with the respondent; or
(f)  has renounced the world by entering any religious order.
   (iii) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), the wife may also
present a petitioner for divorce to the District Court on the ground that her husband
has, since the solemnization of the marriage, been guilty of rape, sodomy or bestiality.
8. (i)  Subject to the provisions of this  Act, a petition for dissolution of marriage
by a decree of divorce may be presented to the District Court by both the parties to a
marriage together, whether such marriage was solemnized before or after the
commencement of this Act, on the ground that they have been living separately for a
period of one year or more; that they have not been able to live together and that they
have mutually agreed that the marriage should be dissolved.
    (ii) On the motion of both the parties made not earlier than six months after the
date of the presentation of the petition referred to be in sub-section (i) and not later
than eighteen months after the said date, if the petition is not withdrawn in the
meantime, the court shall on being satisfied, after hearing the parties and after making
such inquiry as it thinks fit that a marriage has been solemnized and that the averments
in the petition are true, pass a decree of divorce declaring the marriage to be dissolved
with effect from the date of decree.
Divorce.
V oid Marriage.
V oidable
Marriage.
Divorce by
mutual
consent.
3
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

9.  Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, custom or usage, where
in any proceeding under this Act, it appears to the court that either the wife or the
husband, as the case may be, has no independent income sufficient for her or his
support  and the necessary expenses of the proceedings, it may on the application of
the wife or the husband, order the respondent to pay to the petitioner the expenses of
the proceedings, and  monthly, during the proceeding such sum as, having regard to
the petitioner’s own income and the income of the respondent, it may seem to the
court to be reasonable.
10.   Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, custom or usage, any
court exercising jurisdiction under this Act may, at the time of passing any decree or
at anytime subsequent thereto, on an application made to it for the purpose by either
the wife or the husband, as the case may be, order that the respondent shall pay to the
applicant for her or his maintenance and support with such monthly or periodical sum
for a term not exceeding the life of the applicant, as, having  regard  to the respondent’s
own income and other property, if any.
11.  Notwithstanding that a marriage is null and void under this Act, any child
born of such marriage who would have been legitimate if the marriage has been valid,
shall be legitimate,  whether such child is born before or after the commencement of
this Act and whether or not a decree of nullity is granted in respect of that marriage
under this Act and whether or not the marriage is held to be void otherwise than a
petition under this Act.
CHAPTER III
INTESTATE SUCCESSION
12. The property of an intestate devolves upon the wife or husband, or upon
those who are of the kindred of the deceased, in the order and according to the
following rules.
(a) Where intestate has left widow and lineal descendants, or widow and
kindred only, or widow and no kindred.
(i) if he has also left any lineal descendants, one-third of his property
shall belong to his widow, and the remaining two-thirds shall go to his lineal
descendants;
(ii) if he has left no lineal descendant, but has left persons who are of
kindred to him, one-half of his property shall belong to his widow, and the other half
shall go to those who are kindred to him;
(iii) if he has left none who are of kindred to him, the whole of his
property shall belong to his widow.
(b) Where intestate has left no widow, and where he has left no kin, his
property shall go to his lineal descendants or to those who are of kindred to him, not
being lineal descendants,
(c) Where intestate has left none who are of kindred to him, it shall go to the
Government;
(d) Where intestate has left no child or children only but no more remote
lineal descendant through a deceased child, the property shall belong to his surviving
child if there is one, or shall be equally divided among all his surviving children.
(e) Where intestate has left no child, but grandchild or grandchildren and no
more remote descendant through a deceased grandchild, the property shall belong to
his surviving grandchild if there is one, or shall be equally divided among all his
surviving grandchildren.
13.  For the purpose of this Act, husband surviving his wife shall have the same
rights in respect of her property, if she dies intestate, as a widow has in respect of her
husband’s property, if he dies intestate.
Legitimacy of
Children.
Maintenance and
expenses of
proceedings.
Permanent
alimony and
Maintenance.
Devolution of
property.
Rights of
widower.
4
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

CHAPTER IV
MISCELLANEOUS
14.Every petition under this Act shall be presented to the District Court
within the local limits of whose ordinary original civil jurisdiction–
(i) the marriage was solemnized ; or
(ii) the respondent, at the time of the presentation of the petition, resides, or
(iii) the parties to the marriage last resided together; or
(iv) in the case the wife is petitioner, where she is residing on the date of
the petition.
15.(1)  Every proceeding under this Act, pertaining to matters related to
Chapter II of this Act, shall be conducted in camera and it shall not be lawful for any
person to print or publish any matter in relation to any such proceeding except a
judgment of the High Court or of Supreme Court printed or published with the previous
permission of the Court.
(2)   If any person prints or publishes any matter in contravention of the
provisions  contained in sub-section (1), he shall be punished with fine which shall
not be less than five thousand rupees but may extend up to fifty thousand rupees.
16.  (1)  The trial of a petition pertaining to matters related to Chapter II of this Act
shall as far as is practicable consistently with the interest of justice in respect of the
trial be continued from day to day until its conclusion unless the court finds the
adjournment of the trial beyond the following day to be necessary for reasons to be
recorded.
(2) Every such petition shall be made to conclude within six months from the
date of the service of notice of the petition on the respondent.
(3)  Every appeal under this Act shall be heard as expeditiously as possible
and endeavour shall be made to conclude the hearing within three months from the
date of service of notice of appeal on the respondent.
17.   All decrees and orders made by the court in any proceeding under this Act
shall be enforced in the like manner as the decrees and orders of the court made in the
exercise of its original civil jurisdiction for the time being are enforced.
18.(1)  Any marriage solemnized after the commencement of this Act is void if at
the date of such marriage either party had a husband or wife living and the provisions
of sections 494 and 495 of the Indian Penal Code shall apply accordingly;
(2) Every person who procures a marriage of himself or herself to be
solemnized under this Act in contravention of the conditions specified in section 3
shall be punishable with simple imprisonment which may extend to fifteen-days or
with fine of one hundred rupees or with both.
19.  The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the
time being in force.
20.(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or
the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in
the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without Prejudice
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Proceeding to
be in camera
and may not
be printed or
published.
Court to which
petition shall
be presented.
S p e c i a l
provision
relating to trial
and disposal of
petitions under
the Act.
Enforcement
of decrees and
orders.
Punishment
for
contravention
of certain
conditions of
marriage.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to
make rules.
5
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Article 44 states: “The State shall endeavour to secure for the citizens, a
uniform civil code throughout the territory of India.”
Uniform Civil Code as provided for in article 44 by the founders of the Indian
constitution is the need of the hour. The Code encompasses the best practices of all
religions and sects to provide for a uniform governance structure of personal laws of
the citizens of India.
The need of the hour is to secure fundamental rights provided under articles 14
and 15 of the Indian constitution to all the citizens, with a view to ensure gender
justice and gender equality while accommodating principles and religious norms of
the different communities of the country. It shall provide a secular status to marriage,
divorce, maintenance etc.
The Hon’ble Supreme Court has time and again mentioned the need for a Uniform
Civil Code for the citizens of the country. In several judgements like Mohd. Ahmed
Khan vs Shah Bano and Sarla Mudgal vs Union of India, the Supreme Court has urged
Parliament to consider bringing in a UCC. Former Chief Justice of India Y. V .
Chandrachud commented in one of his judgements  that “A common civil code will
help the cause of national integration by removing disparate loyalties to laws which
have conflicting ideologies.” However, the State has been unable to formulate a
uniform civil code yet.
The  uniform civil code is not violative of articles 25 & 26 of the Indian constitution.
The code doesn’t interfere with religious practices and rather aims to modify
maintenance, succession, inheritance laws to make them uniform across the board.
Justice Khare in John V allamattom vs Union of India (AIR 2003 SC 2902) said that
“It is no matter of doubt that marriage, succession, and the like matters of secular
character cannot be brought within the guarantee enshrined under articles 25 and 26
of the constitution’’.
Therefore, after seventy-one years of the enactment of our constitution it is time
for us to enact a uniform  civil code to unify customs and norms of different commu-
nities to give a secular character to the civil code for the citizens of the
country.
Hence this Bill.
  NEW DELHI;
January 22, 2020.               SUSHIL KUMAR SINGH
6

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLA TION
Clause 20 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules  for
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details
only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
7

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to  provide  for  uniform civil code for all citizens of the country and for
matters connected therewith.
—————
(Shri Sushil Kumar Singh, M.P .)