"As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

1w\
. 4) i iii

Bi No. 40 of 2001

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2001

By
‘Sunt HANNAN Mowatt, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2001.
2. In the First Schedule to the ‘Constitution, —
5 (i) the existing entries 3 to 13 shall be renumbered as entries 4 to 14 respectively,
and before entry 4 ‘as so renumbered, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:—
“3, Bangla The territories which immediately before the commencement of this
Constitution were either comprised in the Province ‘of West Bengal or were being
(आहत aif they formed part ofthat Province and the territory of Chandertagons
10 defined in clause (ले of section 2 of the Chandemagore (Merge) Act, 1954 and also the

territories specified in sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Bihar ‘and West Bengal (Transfer
of Territories) Act, 1956".

(i) the existing entry 14 retating to “West Bengal” shall be omitted.

Shorttitle,

Amendment ot
First Schedule:


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

‘The existing nomenclature “West Bengal” has its origin in the partition of the
erstwhile Indian Province of Bengal into West Bengal remaining with India and East
Bengal (forming part of Pakistan then known as East Pakistan and now Bangladesh) in
1947, Similarly Punjab was also divided into West Punjab merging with Pakistan and East
Punjab remaining with India. Since then while “East Punjab” had shaken off the adjective
“Bast” in mid-sixties and became “Punjab”, the adjective “West” continues to be prefaced
with Bengal despite the persistent public demand to the contrary. The West Bengal
Legislative Assembly had also passed a resolution in consonaz.2e with the public demand
to drop this adjective “West” and had forwarded it to the Central Government but of no
avail.

‘Whatever might have been the compulsion earlier for retaining the word “West”
with Bengal, there is no justification for continuing this partition legacy at this point of
time in the new millennium. Hence this Bill.

New Devin; HANNAN MOLLAH
January 10, 2001.



West Bengal

FIRST SCHEDULE
(Articles 1 and 4)
I. THE STATES
* * . * * . *
aS ee. तन सन नशनननननितन पा
a __ _-++7 ‘Territories
* * * * * * *

‘The territories which immediately before the commencement of this,
Constitution were either comprised in the Province of West Bengal or
were being administered as if they formed part of that Province and
the territory of Chandernagore as defined in clause (c) of section 2 of
the Chandernagore (Merger) Act, 1954 and also the territories specified
in sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Bihar and West Bengal (Transfer
of Territories) Act, 1956. *


गा कि]

मजाक oft इक
ts Saw past नि

srk embed
els 17: ro.liTes) at
> ४७७४ ctr sy

mal
५३८ the ew ६ Q Aud कर
Nairn. ७
+ ” 7
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
कक
(Shri Hannan Mollah, M.P.)