1
Short title,
extent  and
commence-
ment.
THE  RURAL  LABOUR  WELFARE  FUND  BILL, 2012
By
DR. MAHENDRASINH P. CHAUHAN, M.P .
A
BILL
to  provide for the establishment of a rural labour  welfare  fund  for  the  welfare
of the rural labour employed in the agriculture and other rural occupations
and for matters connected therewith.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Rural Labour Welfare Fund Act, 2012.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "employer" means the cultivator, orchard owner, poultry farm owner, agency,
society including cooperative society or any establishment in a rural area which
employs rural labour;
Bill  No.   40  of  2012
Definitions.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(b) "Fund" means the Rural Labour Welfare Fund established under section 3;
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(d) "rural labour" means any person engaged in agriculture, sericulture, poultry,
horticulture, handicrafts or any related occupation in rural areas as a wage earner,
whether in cash or kind, for his livelihood and includes a person engaged through a
contractor or engaged as a self employed person.
3.  (1) With effect from such date, as the Central Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, there shall be constituted for the purposes of
this Act, a Fund to be called the Rural Labour Welfare Fund.
 (2) The Central Government shall after due appropriation made by Parliament in
this behalf, credit to the Fund in each financial year such sums of money as it considers
necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
4. The Fund shall be utilized by the Central Government to meet the expenditure in
connection with measures which in the opinion of the Central Government, after consulting
the Governments of the States and Union territories Administrations, are necessary or
expedient to promote the welfare of the rural labour and in particular:—
(a) to defray the cost of measures to be carried out for the benefit of rural labour
towards—
(i) providing water supply for drinking and other purposes;
(ii) providing educational facilities;
(iii) the improvement of standard of living and nutrition;
(iv) amelioration of the social conditions;
(v) providing housing and recreational facilities;
(vi) rendering financial assistance in case of infirmity or disability due to
accident, old age, or any other reason; and
(vii) providing such other welfare measures as may be prescribed.
(b) to grant loan, assistance or subsidy to Government of any State, Union
territory Administration, local authority or any organisation for any scheme approved
by the Central Government for the purposes connected with the welfare of rural
labour;
(c) to pay annually grant-in-aid to Government of any State or Union territory
administration, local authority or an employer or any other organisation which provides
to the satisfaction of the Central Government such welfare measures and facilities of
the prescribed standard for the benefit of rural labour;
(d) to meet the cost of administering the Fund; and
(e) any other expenditure which the Central Government may direct to be
defrayed from the Fund.
5. (1) The Central Government may constitute as many Advisory Committees as it
deems fit to advise the Central Government on such matters arising out of the
implementation of the provisions of this Act:
Provided that atleast one Advisory Committee for each State and Union territory
shall be constituted by the Central Government in consultation with the respective
State Government and Union territory Administration.
State Advisory
Committees.
Establishment
of Fund.
Utilisation of
Fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
Central
Advisory
Committee.
(2) The Chairman and such number of other members as may be prescribed, of each
Advisory Committee shall be appointed by the Central Government.
(3) The term of office and other conditions of service of the Chairman and other
members shall be such as may be prescribed.
6. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Central Advisory Committee to
coordinate the work of the Advisory Committees constituted under section 5 and to advise
the Central Government on any matter arising out of the implementation of provisions of
this Act.
(2) The Chairman and such number of other members, as may be prescribed, of the
Central Advisory Committee shall be appointed by the Central Government.
(3) The term of office and other conditions of service of the Chairman and other
members shall be such as may be prescribed.
7. (1) The Central Government may appoint as many  Rural Labour Welfare Fund
Commissioners, Inspectors and such other officers and staff as it deems necessary for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every person appointed under this section shall be deemed to be a public servant
within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
(3) Any officer or inspector appointed under this Act, may,—
(a) with such assistance, if any, as he may deem fit, inspect at any reasonable
time any place which he considers necessary for carrying out the purposes of this
Act;
(b) do within such place anything necessary for the proper discharge of his
duties; and
(c) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed.
8. The Central Government may require a State Government or a Union territory
Administration or a local authority or an employer to furnish for the purposes of this Act,
such statistical and other information in such form and within such period as may be
prescribed.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for,—
(a) the manner in which the fund may be applied;
(b) the conditions governing the grant of loans or subsidy;
(c) the conditions governing grant-in-aid;
(d) the standard of welfare measures and facilities to be provided out of the
fund;
(e) the composition of the Advisory Committees and Central Advisory Committee
constituted under sections 5 and 6 respectively and the manner in which the members
thereof shall be appointed;
(f) the term of office of such members, the allowances, if any, payable to them
and the manner in which the Advisory Committee and the Central Advisory Committee
shall conduct their business;
(g) the recruitment, conditions of service and duties of all persons appointed
under section 7; and
Appointment
of
Commissioners,
Inspectors
and other
officers.
State
Government
to furnish
requisite
information.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
45 of 1860.

4
(h)  the powers that may be exercised by an officer or inspector appointed under
section 7.
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India resides in villages and eighty-five per cent. of its rural population earns its
livelihood from agriculture. There are cultivators, orchard owners, poultry owners, agricultural
workers and home based workers in the rural areas. Their number runs into crores. However,
their wages and income are meagre and many of them do not get employment throughout
the year. These rural labourers also become an easy prey to the debt trap of the landlords
and moneylenders who force them to become bonded labourers. Most of them remain very
poor throughout their lives and live in distress for generations. In a welfare State like ours,
there are no welfare schemes or funds for these helpless rural labourers whereas in the
industrial sector there are Labour Welfare Boards and cess is levied and collected through
legislative measures in order to provide them various amenities including housing, education
and medical care. But the rural labourers are unorganized, poverty stricken and neglected,
even by the State.
It is, therefore, necessary that the deteriorating plight of rural workers be felt at
national level and the Central Government should establish a Rural Labour Welfare Fund
for financing adequately and systematically the welfare measures to be carried out for the
rural and agricultural labour throughout the country so as to achieve the goals of a welfare
State in its true sense.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MAHENDRASINH  P.  CHAUHAN
March 19, 2012.
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Rural Labour Welfare Fund.
Clause 5 provides for the constitution of Advisory Committees. Clause 6 provides for
constitution of a Central Advisory Committee. Clause 7 provides for appointment of Rural
Labour Welfare Commissioners, Inspectors and officers and staff for carrying out the
purposes of this Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated  Fund of India but it is not possible at this stage to give the precise details of
the expenditure that would be involved. It is, however, estimated that it will involve a
recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred crore per annum.
It will also involve a non-recurring expenditure of about rupees sixty lakh.
6

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill provides that the Central Government may make rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill. The delegation of legislative power will relate to matters of
detail only and is of a normal character.
7

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a rural labour welfare fund for the welfare
of the rural labour employed in the agriculture and other rural occupations
and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Dr . Mahendrasinh P . Chauhan, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—45LS(S3)—17-04-2012.