se Co

19 JUL 20

Bill No. 40 of 2002

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2002
By
‘Suri S. Murucesan, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2002,

2. In article 275 of the Constitution, in clause (1), before the first proviso, the following
5 provisos shall be inserted, namely;—

“Provided that there shall be paid out of the Consolidated Fund of India as
grants-in-aid of the revenues of a State such capital and recurring sums as may be
necessary to enable that State to meet the costs of such schemes or development
works undertaken by the State if the State is unable to carry out such schemes or

10 works due to severe financial crisis:

Provided further that a sum of rupees three thousand and two hundred crore
shall be allocated as grants-in-aid of revenues of the State of Tamil Nadu as one
time grant and rupees five hundred crore every year as recurring expenditure

and such amount shall be charged on and paid out of the Consolidated Fund of
15 India”,

Short title.

Amendment
of article 275


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Several States are reeling under severe financial crisis. As a result, they are not able to
undertake developmental schemes. In Tamil Nadu when the present Government took over
the reins, the coffers were empty.

‘Therefore, the present Government is in a precarious position. Central Government
should come forward and assistTamil Nadu and other States where there is a severe financial
crisis.

The Bill accordingly seeks to amend the Constitution.

New Deut; S. MURUGESAN,
17 April, 2002.



FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill provides for grants-in-aid of the revenues of a State facing severe
financial crisis. The Bil, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees ten
thousand crore is likely to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty thousand crore is also likely to be
involved.


ANNEXURE

EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

* * * * * *

275. (1) Such sums as Parliament may by law provide shall be charged on the Consoli-
dated Fund of India in each year as grants-in-aid of the revenues of such States as Parliament
may determine to be in need of assistance, and different sums may be fixed for different
States:

Provided that there shall be paid out of the Consolidated Fund of India as grants-in-aid
of the revenues of a State such capital and recurring sums as may be necessary to‘enable that
State to meet the costs of such schemes of development as may be undertaken by the State
with the approval of the Government of India for the purpose of promoting the welfare of the
Scheduled Tribes in that State or raising the level of administration of the Scheduled Areas
therein to that of the administration of the rest of the areas of that State:

* * * * * *


further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri. Murugesan, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MAND—730L.S—03-05-2002,