1
THE  RIGHT OF CHILDREN TO FREE AND COMPULSORY
EDUCATION (AMENDMENT)  BILL,  2018
By
SHRI BHAIRON  PRASAD  MISHRA , M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009.
BE  it enacted by the Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education
(Amendment) Act, 2018.
(2)  It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 (hereinafter
referred to as the principal Act), in the long title for the word “fourteen” the word “eighteen”
shall be substituted.
3. In section 2 of the principal Act—
(i) in clause (c), for the word “fourteen” the word “eighteen” shall be substituted.
Short title
and
commence-
ment.
Bill No.  40  of  2018
Amendment
of long title.
Amendment
of section 2.
5
10
35 of 2009.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(ii) in clause ( n), after the words “elementary education”, the words “and
secondary education” shall be inserted.
(iii) after clause (o), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(p) secondary education means the education from ninth to twelfth class
wherein classes ninth and tenth constitute the secondary stage and classes
eleventh and twelfth constitute the higher secondary stage;”
4. In section 3 of the principal Act, in clause (1),
(i) for the word “fourteen” the word “eighteen” shall be substituted; and
(ii) for the word “elementary” the words “elementary and secondary” shall be
substituted.
5. In section 4 of the principal Act,—
(i) for the word “elementary” the words “elementary and secondary” shall be
substituted; and
(ii) for the second proviso the following be substituted, namely:—
“Provided further that a child so admitted to elementary or secondary
education shall be entitled to free education till completion of secondary
education even after eighteen years.”
6. In section 5 of the principal Act, in clauses (1) and (2) for the word “elementary” the
words “elementary and secondary” shall be substituted.
7. In section 8 of the principal Act, for the words “elementary” and “fourteen” wherever
they occur the words “elementary and secondary” and “eighteen” shall respectively be
substituted.
8. In section 9 of the principal Act, for the words “elementary’’ and “fourteen” wherever
they occur the words  “elementary and secondary” and “eighteen” shall respectively be
substituted.
9. In section 10 of the principal Act, for the words “an elementary education” the
words “a pre-school and if not at least to an elementary education” shall respectively be
substituted.
10. In section 11 of the principal Act, for the word “may” the word “shall” shall be
substituted.
11. In section 12 of the principal Act, for the word “elementary” wherever it occurs the
words  “elementary and secondary” shall be substituted.
12. In section 14 of the principal Act, in clause (1) for the word “elementary” the words
“elementary and secondary” shall be substituted.
13. In section 33 of the principal Act, in clause (1) for the word “elementary” the words
“elementary and secondary” shall be substituted.
14. In section 34 of the principal Act, in clause (1) for the word “elementary” the words
“elementary and secondary” shall be substituted.
15. In section 38 of the principal Act, in clause (2)—
(i) in sub-clause (c) for the word “fourteen” the word “eighteen” be substituted;
and
(ii) in sub-clause ( o), for the word “elementary” the words  “elementary and
secondary” shall be substituted.
Amendment
of section 3.
Amendment
of section 4.
Amendment
of section 5.
Amendment
of section 8.
Amendment
of section 9.
Amendment
of section 10.
Amendment
of section 11.
Amendment
of section 12.
Amendment
of section 14.
Amendment
of section 33.
Amendment
of section 34.
Amendment
of section 38.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
16. In the Schedule to the principal Act,—
(i) in Sl. No. 1, after item (b), the following shall be inserted, namely,—
“(c) For ninth class to twelfth class
(i) at lease one teacher for every thirty children;
(ii) subject-wise Trained Graduate Teacher and Post Graduate Teacher;
(iii) specialized teachers for Physical Education, Art or Craft and
Culture Education;
(iv) counselor for emotional and psychological support, as per
school counseling programme;
(v) career counselor.’’
(ii) in Sl. No. 2, in norms and standards, after (vii), the following shall be inserted,
namely,—
‘‘(viii) one integrated science laboratory — for Physics, Chemistry, Biology
and Mathematics for classes ninth to twelfth (one room for science laboratory in
a secondary school and at least three laboratories for science subjects) in higher
secondary schools;
(ix) computer room for classes ninth to twelfth;
(x) art or Craft Culture Laboratory;
(xi) provisions to make the building disabled friendly;
(xii) a rainwater harvesting system;
(xiii) classrooms with a classroom — pupil ratio of 1:40 for classes ninth to
twelfth.”
(iii) in Sl. No. 3, in norms and standards, after (iv), the following shall be inserted,
namely,—
“(v) a minimum of two hundred and twenty working days for classes ninth
to twelfth;
(vi) one thousand two hundred hours per academic year for the teaching
and planning, out of which not more than two hundred hours may be required to
be devoted for remedial teaching and attention to weak students for ninth class
and tenth class;
(vii) one thousand two hundred hours per academic year for teaching and
planning, out of which not more than two hundred hours may be required to be
devoted for remedial teaching and attention to weak students for eleventh class
and twelfth class.”
(iv) Sl. No. 5 shall be deleted.
(v) for Sl. No. 7, the following shall be substituted, namely,—
“7. Teaching learning equipment—
(i) shall be provided to each class as required;
(ii) necessary equipment for Physics, Chemistry, Biology and
Mathematics will be needed initially to facilitate academic activities in
laboratories for classes ninth to twelfth;
(iii) sports, music, dance, painting, culture, teaching aids.”
Amendment
of Schedule.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Secondary education is an important stage in the educational hierarchy. It is essential
to ensure greater access to secondary education by making it free and compulsory. The
vision of Rashtriya Madhyamik Shiksha Abhiyan (RMSA) was to make good quality
education available, accessible and affordable to all young persons in the age group of
fourteen to eighteen years. Among the other goals, it aims to achieve Universal retention by
2020, a Gross Enrollment Ratio of 100% by 2017 and access to education with special
references to economically weaker sections of the society. The guiding principle of this
policy includes Universal Access.
India adopted 17 Sustainable Development Goals by the United Nations in 2015. Goal
aims to ensure inclusive and quality education for all. It highlights that getting access to
quality education can help set a strong foundation to improve lives. It also points out that
while several countries have achieved gender equality in primary education, very few have
managed to achieve the target at all levels of education.
India has shown tremendous progress in primary education with the implementation
of the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education (RTE) Act, 2009. However, there
have not been adequate parallel initiatives to ensure access to secondary education. As per
the 2016 report by United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation
(UNESCO), Institute for Statistics and Global Education Monitoring, 47 million youth drop
out of school by the 10th standard in India. The literacy rates for the 15 and above age
groups remains average at 59.3% for females and 78.8% for males in 2011. Similarly, the
Gross Enrollment Ratio was at 78.5% for students in the Secondary level of school education
in 2014-15. This means that 25.5% of the students in this age group do not enroll themselves
in schools. In 2013-14, the annual dropout rate of students in the secondary level of school
education stands high at 17.86%. For students belonging to the Scheduled Tribes, it is
staggering at 27.2% and 18.66% for students belonging to the Scheduled Castes.
Therefore, it has been proposed that the coverage for RTE Act, 2009 be extended to
three to eighteen years. This will cover the secondary level of education and help India
achieve the Sustainable Development Goal of Quality Education as well as the objectives
set under RMSA. It will also encourage State Governments to strengthen their anganwadi
system or create more pre-schools. As a result, India will truly be able to ensure universal
access to education to all children in the age group of  three to eighteen years.
Hence this Bill.
S-3\F\BILL 2018\LS\3956LS
4
NEW DELHI; BHAIRON PRASAD MISHRA
January 15, 2018

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
The Government of India incurred an expenditure of Rs. 3562 crores in 2015-16 on
Rashtriya Madhyamik Shiksha Abhiyan. The Budget for the scheme in 2016-17 was
Rs. 3700 crores while in 2017-18, it was Rs. 3830 crores. It is increased by about 3.5% every
year. The Bill will involve an expenditure that will be about 15% more than the expenditure
on the scheme. The Bill, therefore if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India.  It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees four
thousand five hundred and fifty eight crore is likely to be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand crore is also likely to be
involved.

6
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE RIGHT OF CHILDREN TO FREE AND
COMPULSORY EDUCATION ACT, 2009
(35 OF  2009)
* * * * * *
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* * * * * *
(c) “child” means a male or female child of the age of six to fourteen years;
* * * * * *
(n) “school” means any recognised school imparting elementary education and
includes—
(i) a school established, owned or controlled by the appropriate
Government or a local authority;
(ii) an aided school receiving aid or grants to meet whole or part of its
expenses from the appropriate Government or the local authority;
(iii) a school belonging to specified category; and
(iv) an unaided school not receiving any kind of aid or grants to meet its
expenses from the appropriate Government or the local authority;
(o) “screening procedure” means the method of selection for admission of a
child, in preference over another, other than a random method;
* * * * * *
3. (1) Every child of the age of six to fourteen years, including a child referred to in
clause (d) or clause (e) of section 2, shall have the right to free and compulsory education in
a neighbourhood school till the completion of his or her elementary education.
* * * * * *
4. Where a child above six years of age has not been admitted in any school or though
admitted, could not complete his or her elementary education, then, he or she shall be
admitted in a class appropriate to his or her age:
Provided that where a child is directly admitted in a class appropriate to his or her age,
then, he or she shall, in order to be at par with others, have a right to receive special training,
in such manner, and within such time-limits, as may be prescribed:
Provided further that a child so admitted to elementary education shall be entitled to
free education till completion of elementary education even after fourteen years.
5. (1) Where in a school, there is no provision for completion of elementary education,
a child shall have a right to seek transfer to any other school, excluding the school specified
in sub-clauses (iii) and (iv) of clause (n) of section 2, for completing his or her elementary
education.
Definitions.
Right of child
to free and
compulsory
education.
Special
provisions for
children not
admitted to,
or who have
not
completed,
elementary
education.
Right of
transfer to
other school.

7
(2) Where a child is required to move from one school to another, either within a State
or outside, for any reason whatsoever, such child shall have a right to seek transfer to any
other school, excluding the school specified in sub-clauses (iii) and (iv) of clause (n) of
section 2, for completing his or her elementary education.
* * * * * *
8. The appropriate Government shall—
(a) provide free and compulsory elementary education to every child:
Provided that where a child is admitted by his or her parents or guardian, as the
case may be, in a school other than a school established, owned, controlled or
substantially financed by funds provided directly or indirectly by the appropriate
Government or a local authority, such child or his or her parents or guardian, as the
case may be, shall not be entitled to make a claim for reimbursement of expenditure
incurred on elementary education of the child in such other school.
Explanation .—The term “compulsory education” means obligation of the
appropriate Government to—
(i) provide free elementary education to every child of the age of six to
fourteen years; and
(ii) ensure compulsory admission, attendance and completion of elementary
education by every child of the age of six to fourteen years.
(b) ensure availability of a neighbourhood school as specified in section 6;
(c) ensure that the child belonging to weaker section and the child belonging to
disadvantaged group are not discriminated against and prevented from pursuing and
completing elementary education on any grounds;
(d) provide infrastructure including school building, teaching staff and learning
equipment;
(e) provide special training facility specified in section 4;
(f) ensure and monitor admission, attendance and completion of elementary
education by every child;
(g) ensure good quality elementary education conforming to the standards and
norms specified in the Schedule;
(h) ensure timely prescribing of curriculum and courses of study for elementary
education; and
(i) provide training facility for teachers.
9. Every local authority shall—
(a) provide free and compulsory elementary education to every child:
Provided that where a child is admitted by his or her parents or guardian, as the
case may be, in a school other than a school established, owned, controlled or
substantially financed by funds provided directly or indirectly by the appropriate
Government or a local authority, such child or his or her parents or guardian, as the
case may be, shall not be entitled to make a claim for reimbursement of expenditure
incurred on elementary education of the child in such other school;
(b) ensure availability of a neighbourhood school as specified in section 6;
(c) ensure that the child belonging to weaker section and the child belonging to
disadvantaged group are not discriminated against and prevented from pursuing and
completing elementary education on any grounds;
Duties of
appropriate
Government.
Duties of local
authority.

8
(d) maintain records of children up to the age of fourteen years residing within
its jurisdiction, in such manner as may be prescribed;
(e) ensure and monitor admission, attendance and completion of elementary
education by every child residing within its jurisdiction;
(f) provide infrastructure including school building, teaching staff and learning
material;
(g) provide special training facility specified in section 4;
(h) ensure good quality elementary education conforming to the standards and
norms specified in the Schedule;
(i) ensure timely prescribing of curriculum and courses of study for elementary
education;
(j) provide training facility for teachers;
(k) ensure admission of children of migrant families;
(l) monitor functioning of schools within its jurisdiction; and
(m) decide the academic calendar.
10. It shall be the duty of every parent or guardian to admit or cause to be admitted his
or her child or ward, as the case may be, to an elementary education in the neighbourhood
school.
11. With a view to prepare children above the age of three years for elementary
education and to provide early childhood care and education for all children until they
complete the age of six years, the appropriate Government may make necessary arrangement
for providing free pre-school education for such children.
12. (1) For the purposes of this Act, a school,—
(a) specified in sub-clause (i) of clause (n) of section 2 shall provide free and
compulsory elementary education to all children admitted therein;
(b) specified in sub-clause (ii) of clause (n) of section 2 shall provide free and
compulsory elementary education to such proportion of children admitted therein as
its annual recurring aid or grants so received bears to its annual recurring expenses,
subject to a minimum of twenty-five per cent.;
(c) specified in sub-clauses (iii) and (iv) of clause (n) of section 2 shall admit in
class I, to the extent of at least twenty-five per cent. of the strength of that class,
children belonging to weaker section and disadvantaged group in the neighbourhood
and provide free and compulsory elementary education till its completion:
Provided further that where a school specified in clause (n) of section 2 imparts
pre-school education, the provisions of clauses (a) to (c) shall apply for admission to
such pre-school education.
(2) The school specified in sub-clause (iv) of clause (n) of section 2 providing free and
compulsory elementary education as specified in clause (c) of sub-section (1) shall be
reimbursed expenditure so incurred by it to the extent of per-child-expenditure incurred by
the State, or the actual amount charged from the child, whichever is less, in such manner as
may be prescribed:
Provided that such reimbursement shall not exceed per-child expenditure incurred by
a school specified in sub-clause (i) of clause (n) of section 2:
Provided further that where such school is already under obligation to provide free
education to a specified number of children on account of it having received any land,
building, equipment or other facilities, either free of cost or at a concessional rate, such
school shall not be entitled for reimbursement to the extent of such obligation.
Duty of parents
and guardian.
Appropriate
Government
to provide for
pre-school
education.
Extents of
school’s
responsibility
for free and
compulsory
education.

9
S-3\F\BILL 2018\LS\3956LS
(3) Every school shall provide such information as may be required by the appropriate
Government or the local authority, as the case may be.
* * * * * *
14. (1) For the purposes of admission to elementary education, the age of a child shall
be determined on the basis of the birth certificate issued in accordance with the provisions
of the Births, Deaths and Marriages Registration Act, 1886 (6 of 1886) or on the basis of such
other document, as may be prescribed.
* * * * * *
33. (1) The Central Government shall constitute, by notification, a National Advisory
Council, consisting of such number of Members, not exceeding fifteen, as the Central
Government may deem necessary, to be appointed from amongst persons having knowledge
and practical experience in the field of elementary education and child development.
* * * * * *
34. (1) The State Government shall constitute, by notification, a State Advisory Council
consisting of such number of Members, not exceeding fifteen, as the State Government may
deem necessary, to be appointed from amongst persons having knowledge and practical
experience in the field of elementary education and child development.
* * * * * *
38. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification, make rules, for carrying out
the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
* * * * * *
(c) the manner of maintenance of records of children up to the age of fourteen years,
under clause (d) of section 9;
* * * * * *
(o) the form and manner of awarding certificate for completion of elementary education
under sub-section (2) of section 30;
* * * * * *
Proof of age
for admission.
Constitution
of National
Advisory
Council.
Constitution
of State
Advisory
Council.
Power of
appropriate
Government
to make rules.

10
S-3\F\BILL 2018\LS\3956LS
THE SCHEDULE
(See sections 19 and 25)
NORMS  AND  STANDARDS  FOR  A  SCHOOL
Sl. No. Item Norms and Standards
1. Number of teachers: Admitted children- Number of teachers
(a) for first class to fifth Up to sixty Two
class Between sixty-one to Three
ninety
Between ninety-one Four
to one hundred and
twenty
Between one hundred Five
and twenty one to two
hundred
Above one hundred Five plus one Head-
and fifty children teacher
Above two hundred Pupil-Teacher Ratio
children (excluding Head-
teacher shall not
exceed forty).
(b) For sixth class to (1) At least one teacher per class so that there
eighth class shall be at least one teacher each for—
(i) Science and Mathematics;
(ii) Social Studies;
(iii) Languages.
(2) At least one teacher for every thirty-five children.
(3) Where admission of children is above one
hundred—
(i) a full time head-teacher;
(ii) part time instructors for—
(A) Art Education;
(B) Health and Physical Education;
(C) Work Education.
2. Building All-weather building consisting of—
(i) at least one class-room for every teacher and
an office-cum-store-cum-Head teacher’s room;
(ii) barrier-free access;
(iii) separate toilets for boys and girls;
(iv) safe and adequate drinking water facility to
all children;
(v) a kitchen where mid-day meal is cooked in the
school;
(vi) Playground;

11
(vii) arrangements for securing the school
building by boundary wall or fencing.
3. Minimum number of (i) two hundred working days for first class to
working days/instructional fifth class;
hours in an academic year (ii) two hundred and twenty working days for
sixth class to eighth class;
(iii) eight hundred instructional hours per
academic year for first class to fifth class;
(iv) one thousand instructional hours per
academic year for sixth class to eighth class.
4. Minimum number of Forty-five teaching including preparation hours.
working hours per week
for the teacher
5. Teaching learning Shall be provided to each class as required.
equipment
6. Library There shall be a library in each school providing
newspaper, magazines and books on all subjects,
including story-books.
7. Play material, games and Shall be provided to each class as required.
sports equipment
Sl. No. Item Norms and Standards
11

MGIPMRND—3956LS(S3)—08-02-2018.
LOK   SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009.
————
(Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra, M.P .)