AS INTRODUCED IN Lox SABHA

Bill No. 40 of 2004

THE UNIFORM MARRIAGE AND DIVORCE BILL, 2004
By
Siri Bact SincH Rawat, M.P.
A
BILL

{0 provide for uniform marriage and divorce law for all citizens of the country.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1, (1) This Act may be called the Uniform Marriage and Divorce Act, 2004.
(2) Itextends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —

(a) the expressions "custom" "usage" signify any rule that is being continuously
and uniformly observed for a long time and has obtained the force of law, among any
community in any local area, tribe, community, group or family; and

(6) “District Court" means, in an area for which there is a city civil court, that
court and in any other area the principal court of original jurisdiction, and includes any
other civil court which may be specified by the State Government, by notification in
the Official Gazette, as having jurisdiction in respect of the matters dealt with in this
Act.

2 DEC AL

Short title,
extent and
commence:
ment

Definitions


2

3. (1) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act:

te

(a) any text, rule or interpretation of any law or any custom or usage in force
immediately before the commencement of this Act shall cease to have effect with
Tespect to any matter for which provision is made in this Act; and

(b) any other law in force immediately before the commencement of this Act
shall cease to apply in so far as it is inconsistent with any of the provisions contained
in this Act.

Conditions for 4. After the commencement of this Act, a marriage may only be solemnised between
alld marriage. the two persons if the following conditions are fulfilled —

(i) the marriage is valid under any other law applicable to the partic

(ii) neither party has a spouse living at the time of marriage;

(ili) the bridegroom has completed the age of twenty-one years and the bride
the age of eighteen years at the time of the marriage: and
(iv) at the time of the marriage neither party—

(a) is incapable of giving a valid consent to it in consequence of
unsoundness of mind; or

(b) though capable of giving valid consent, has been suffering from mental
disorder of such a kind or to such an extent as to be unfit for marriage: or

(¢) is unfit for procreation of children; or
(०) has been subject to recurrent attacks of insanity.

5. Notwithstanding that a marriage is null and void under this Act, any child born of
[teimacy of such marriage who would have been legitimate if the marriage had been valid, shall be
shildren legitimate, whether such child is born before or after the commencement of this Act and
whether or not a decree of nullity is granted in respect of that marriage under this Act and

whether or not the marriage is held to be void otherwise than a petition under this Act,

6. Any marriage solemnised after the commencement of this Act shall be null and void
old marnages. and may, on a petition presented by either Pary thereto against the other party, be so declared
by a decree of nullity if it contravenes condition specified in clause (ii) of section 4.

7. (1) Any marriage solemnised, whether before or after the commencement of this Act
Divorce may be dissolved only by a decree of divorce granted by acourt of the competent jurisdiction,

(2) No court will dissolve any marriage by a decree of divorce unless and until a party
Presenting the petition for divorce is entitled to divorce under the law applicable to the
Parties or the court has reasons to believe that the marriage has broken down and cannot be
reconciled,

Explanation —tt is hereby declared that the provisions of this section will not affect
any divorce before the commencement of this Act.

8. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, a Petition for dissolution of marriage by a
Divorce by decree of divorce may be presented to the district court by both the parties to a marriage
mutual together, whether such marriage was solemnized before or after the commencement of this
Spirent Act, on the ground that they have been living separately for a period of one year or more,
that they have not been able to live together and that they have mutually agreed that the

marriage should be dissolved.

(2) On the motion of both the parties made not earlier than six months after the date of
the presentation of the petition referred to in sub-section (/) and not later than eighteen
months after the said date, ifthe petition is not withdrawn in the meantime, the court shall, on
being satisfied, after hearing the parties and after making such inquiry as it thinks fit, that a

40

45


20

2

30

40

45

50

3

marriage has been solemnised and that the averments in the petition are true, pass a decree
of divorce declaring the marriage to be dissolved with effect from the date of the decree.

9. Every petition under this Act shall be presented to the district court within the local
limits of whose ordinary original civil jurisdiction—

(i) the marriage was solemnised, or
(i) the respondent, at the time of the presentation of the petition, resides, or
(iii) the parties to the marriage last resided together, or

(iv) in case the wife is the petitioner, where she is residing on the date of the
petiton, or

(v) the petitioner is residing at the time of the presentation of the petition, in case
where the respondent is, at that time, residing outside the territories to which this Act
extends, or has not been heard of as being alive for a period of seven years or more by
those persons who would naturally have heard of him if he were alive.

10, Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, custom or usage, where in
any proceeding under this Act it appears to the court that either the wife or the husband, as
the case may be, has no independent income sufficient for her or his support and the
necessary expenses of the proceedings, it may on the application of the wife or the husband,
order the respondent to pay to the petitioner the expenses of the proceeding, and monthly,
during the proceeding such sum as, having regard to the petitioner's own income and the
income of the respondent, it may seem to the court to be reasonable.

11, Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, custom or usage, any court
exercising jurisdiction under this Act may, at the time of passing any decree or at anytime
subsequent thereto, on an application made to it for the purpose by either the wife or the
husband, as the case may be, order that the respondent shall pay to the applicant for her or
his maintenance and support such gross sum or such monthly or periodical sum for a term
not exceeding the life of the applicant, as, having regard to the respondent's own income and
other property, if any, the income and other property of the applicant, the conduct of the
parties, Mehar if any, between the parties and other circumstances of the case, it may seem
to the court to be just and any such payment may be secured, if necessary, by a charge on the
immovable property of the respondent.

12. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, custom or usage, in any
proceeding under this Act, the court may from time to time, pass such interim orders and,
make such provisions in the decree as it may deem just and proper respect to the
custody, maintenance and education of minor children, their welfare, consistently with their
wishes, wherever possible, and may, after the decree, upon application by petitioner for the
Purpose, make from time to time, all such orders and provisions with respect to the custody,
maintenance and education of such children as might have been made by such decree or
interim orders in case the proceeding for obtaining such decree was still pending, and the
court may, also from time to time, revoke suspend or vary any such orders and provisions
previously made.

13, Notwithstanding anything contained in any law, custom or usage, the court may in
any proceeding under this Act make such provisions in the decree as it deems just and
proper with respect to any property possessed, at or about the time of marriage, which may
belong jointly to both the husband and the wife,

14, (/) All decrees made by the court in any proceeding under this Act shall be
appealable as decrees of the court made in the exercise of its original civil jurisdiction, and
every such appeal shall lie to the court to which appeals ordinarily lie from the decisions of
the court given in the exercise of its original civil jurisdiction.

(2) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a period of ninety days
from the date of decree or order.

‘Court to which
petition shall
be presented.

Maintenance
and expenses
of

proceedings

Permanent
alimony and
maintenance

Custody of
children

Disposal of
property.

Appeal from
decrees and
orders


Documentary
evidence

Proceedings to
be in camera
and may not
be printed or
published

Special
provision
relating to
trial and
disposal of
petitions
under the Act

Fnforcement
of decrees and
orders,

Punishment
tor
contravention
of certain
conditions of
marriage

4

15. Notwithstanding anything in any enactment to the contrary, no document shall be
inadmissible in any proceeding at the trial of a petition under this Act on the ground that it
is not duly stamped or registered,

16. (1) Every proceeding under this Act shall be conducted in camera and it shall not
be lawful for any person to print or publish any matter in relation to any such proceeding
except a judgement of the High Court or of Supreme Court printed or published with the
previous permission of the Court.

(2) If any person prints or publishes any matter in contravention of the provisions
contained in sub-section (1), he shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than
two thousand rupees and which may extend to five thousand rupees.

17. (1) The trial of a petition under this Act shall, as far as is practicable, consistently
with the interest of justice in respect of the trial, be continued from day to day until its
conclusion unless the court finds the adjournment of the trial beyond the following day to
be necessary for reasons to be recorded.

(2) Every petition under this Act shall be made to conclude the trial within six months
from the date of service of notice of the petition on the respondent.

(3) Every appeal under this Act shall be heard as expeditiously as possible, and
endeavour shall be made to conclude the hearing within three months from the date of
service of notice of appeal on the respondent.

18, All decrees and orders made by the court in any proceeding under this Act shall be
enforced in the like manner as the decrees and orders of the court made in the exercise of its
original civil jurisdiction for the time being are enforced.

19. (1) Any marriage solemnized after the commencement of this Act is void ifat the
date of such marriage either party had a husband or wife living and the provisions of sections
494 and 495 of the Indian Penal Code shall apply accordingly.

(2) Every person who procures a marriage of himself or herself to be solemnized under
this Act in contravention of the conditions specified in clause (iii) of section 4 shall be
punishable with simple imprisonment which may extend to fifteen-days or one thousand
rupees or with both,

20

25 4


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Article 44 of the Constitution states that the State shall endeavour to secure for the
citizens uniform civil code throughout the country. The present Bill is a step in that direction.
It seeks to prohibit polygamy and permits the courts to grant maintenance and decide about
the custody of children and disposal of the property for benefit of women and children, The
Bill does not take away rights of the parties to obtain divorce on the grounds available under
personal laws but makes it mandatory to obtain it through intervention of the court. It also
permits the divorce on mutual consent where the marriage has broken down and cannot be
reconciled.

The Bill secks to achieve the above objective.

‘New एच; BACHI SINGH RAWAT
June 30, 2004. :


. LOKSABHA

A
BILL
to provide for uniform marriage and divorce law for all citizens of the country.

(Shri Bachi Singh Rawat, MP)

MGIPMRND—1214LS—13.07.2004.