1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014
By
SHRI MULLAPPALLY RAMACHANDRAN, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India .
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2014.
2. In the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution,—
(i) in List-II-State List, in entry 33, the word "sports," shall be omitted; and
(ii) in List-III-Concurrent List, after entry 25, the following entry shall be
inserted, namely:—
"25A. Sports and games.".
Bill No.  40 of  2014
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title.
Amendment
of the Seventh
Schedule.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India has a vast pool of human resources but it has not manifested its potential in
sports at the international level. There have been numerous explanations for India's poor
performance in sports at the international level. At present, sport is a State Subject and hence
a primary responsibility of the State Government. Therefore, it could not get direct attention
of the Union Government in order to achieve excellence at national and international level.
International sporting events are an essential part of diplomatic relations among the nations.
Sports diplomacy has been used as an effective tool to reshape bilateral political relations,
address security related issues or bring to an end the practice of apartheid or human rights
violations at international level by different nations.
International sporting events require political and diplomatic clearance, grant of visas
for sportspersons, coaches, administrators and provision of security to teams, etc., which
fall within the domain of the Union Government. No State Government can undertake such
exercise.
It has, therefore, become necessary that Central Government should take necessary
steps to promote and encourage sports activities in the country; make available all
necessary facilities and infrastructure and provide funds to all associations and institutions
involved in the promotion of sports.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution with a
view to—
(i) omit the word "sports" in entry 33 of List II-State List; and
(ii) include a new entry "sports and games" in List III-Concurrent List,
so that Union Government can also take all necessary measures including legislative measures
to improve the standard of sports in the country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MULLAPPALLY  RAMACHANDRAN
June 25, 2014.
2

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION  OF INDIA
SEVENTH  SCHEDULE
(Article 246)
List II-State List
* * * * * *
33. Theatres and dramatic performances; cinemas subject to the provisions of entry 60
of List I; sports, entertainments and amusements.
* * * * * *
List III-Concurrent List
* * * * * *
25. Education, including technical education, medical education and universities,
subject to the provisions of entries 63, 64, 65 and 66 of List I; vocational and technical
training of labour.
* * * * * *

GMGIPMRND—756LS(S3)—01.07.2014.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Mullappally Ramachandran, M.P .)