1
THE COMPULSORY TEACHING OF NORTH-EAST CULTURE IN
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS BILL, 2017
By
SHRI NINONG ERING, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory teaching of North-East Culture in all educational institutions
and for all matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  ( 1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Teaching of North-East Culture in
Educational Institutions Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 40 of  2017
Short title and
commence-
ment.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Advisory Council" means the Advisory Council for Education in North-
East Culture constituted under section 6;
(b) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(c) ''educational institution" means a primary, middle, secondary or senior
secondary level school imparting education to children, by whatever name such
institution is called, but does not include a minority educational institution;
(d) ''North-East Culture" includes knowledge and understanding of history, ethos
and culture of North-East part of India; and
(e) ''prescribed'' means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. From such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette,
specify, the North-East Culture shall be taught as a compulsory subject in all educational
institutions from such class onwards as may be determined by the Central Government on
the recommendation of Advisory Council.
4. The appropriate Government shall, immediately after issuance of the notification
under section 3, issue direction for compulsory teaching of North-East Culture in all
educational institutions within its jurisdiction.
5. Subject to such matters, as may be prescribed, the appropriate Government shall
ensure appointment of such number of teachers with such qualifications, as may be specified,
for teaching North-East culture in educational institutions.
6. (1) The Central Government shall, within three months of the coming into force of
this Act, by notification in the official Gazette, constitute an Advisory Council for Education
in North-East Culture.
(2) The Advisory Council shall consist of such number of persons, having special
knowledge or practical experience of the history and culture of North- East part of India, as
the Central Government may deem fit.
7. The Advisory Council shall perform the following functions, namely:—
(a) recommend to the Central Government the syllabus of North-East Culture for
each class upto senior secondary level;
(b) recommend to the Central Government the class from which onwards the
North-East Culture shall be taught in educational institutions;
(c) recommend to the appropriate Government the qualifications of teachers to
be appointed in educational institutions for teaching North-East Culture;
(d) recommend to the appropriate Government the institutions which may be
given recognition for training teachers in North-East Culture for the purpose of their
appointment in educational institutions; and
(e) co-ordinate with the appropriate Government and educational institutions
with a view to ensuring effective implementation of the provisions of this Act.
Definitions.
Compulsory
teaching of
North-East
Culture in
Educational
Institutions.
Appropriate
Government
to issue
direction for
compulsory
teaching of
North-East
culture in
educational
institutions.
Appointment
of teachers for
North-East
Culture.
Advisory
Council for
imparting
North-East
Culture.
Functions of
Advisory
Council.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

3
8. The appropriate Government shall de-recognize an educational institution which
does not comply with the provisions of section 4, after giving such institution a reasonable
opportunity of being heard.
9. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Government for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
10. The provisions of this Act shall effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before the each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if before
the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive session aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so; however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
De-
recognisation
of educational
institutions
for non-
compliance of
the provisions
of the Act.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to
make rules.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
5
10
15
50

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Bezbaruah Committee Report, 2014 raised the concerns of discrimination faced by
the people from the eight North-Eastern States, i.e. Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur,
Tripura, Sikkim, Nagaland, Meghalaya and Mizoram who are living in other States of the
country. As per the Report, there is sense of insecurity and vulnerability due to difference
and wrong perception of the culture of the North-Eastern States of India. Further, when
people from North-East States go to different cities especially metropolitans such as Delhi,
Mumbai and Bengaluru for work or studies, they are not only stigmatized but face racial
abuse and violent attacks. Thus, one of the major recommendations by the Bezbaruah
Committee is to educate the people about the North-East culture.
It is important to teach and create awareness about the culture of North-East India in
educational institutions. The imparting of knowledge about North-East culture in educational
institutions is a resilient way to celebrate the cultural difference and will further creates a
safer environment for people from North-East who are residing in other States.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide for imparting education of North-East culture
compulsorily in all educational institutions.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; NINONG  ERING
February 8, 2017.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for appointment of teachers for imparting North-East
culture in educational institutions. Clause 6 provides for constitution of an Advisory Council
for Education in North-East culture. Clause 9 provides for payment of adequate funds to the
State Governments for carrying out the purposes of the Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted,
would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an
annual recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees five hundred crores will be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crores is also likely to be
involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

GMGIPMRND—4701LS(S3)—01.03.2017.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory teaching of North-East culture in all educational institutions
and for all matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Ninong Ering, M.P.)