As introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 40 of 2024
THE GREENFIELD INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT 
BOARDS BILL, 2024
By
Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of Greenfield Infrastructure Board in each zone of the 
country to assess the availability of land in the respective zone and decide on the  
fitness of sites for development of a greenfield infrastructure project  
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
 B e it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy- fifth Year of the Republic of India as  
follows:–
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY
1. ( 1) This Act may be called as the Greenfield Infrastructure Development Boards  
Act, 2024.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title, 
extent and 
commencement.
5

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Board” means the Greenfield Infrastructure Development Boards constituted 
under section 3;
(b) “economically backward regions” means the under-developed regions in the 
country that demonstrate characteristics such as low levels of income as well as poor 
infrastructure and connectivity including but not limited to States like Bihar, Jharkhand, 
Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and Meghalaya;
(c) “five year plan” means the plan to be created by the Greenfield Infrastructure 
Boards for their respective zones post the land survey including development landmarks, 
processes of commissioning projects, schemes and programmes of the Center and State 
Governments that may potentially be utilized for sanction of projects and systems and 
mechanisms of accountability; 
(d) “greenfield infrastructure” means the infrastructure developed on empty land 
or previously undeveloped land and a project whose commissioning, planning and 
construction process is carried out from the scratch and grass route level;
(e) “infrastructure” means National Highways, ring roads, bypass, railway tracks, 
railway stations, regional air strips, under bridges and over bridges;
(f) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(g) “zone” means the following six zones:–
(i) North Zone comprising the States of Himachal Pradesh, Punjab, Uttarakhand 
and Haryana;
(ii) East Zone comprising the States of Bihar, Orissa, Jharkhand and  
West Bengal;
(iii) West Zone comprising the States of Rajasthan, Gujarat, Goa and 
Maharashtra, the South Zone comprising the States of Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, 
Kerala and Tamil Nadu; 
(iv) South Zone  comprising the States of Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala 
and Tamil Nadu; 
(v) Central Zone comprising the States of Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh; and  
(vi) North East Zone comprising the States of Assam, Sikkim, Nagaland, 
Meghalaya, Manipur, Mizoram, Tripura and Arunachal Pradesh.  
CHAPTER II 
GREENFIELD INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT BOARDS
3. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification, 
appoint, there shall be constituted, for the purposes of this Act, Boards in each zone 
to be known as the Greenfield Infrastructure Development Boards in such manner as 
may be prescribed.
(2) Each Greenfield Infrastructure Development Boards constituted under sub-section 
(1) shall consist of:– 
 (a) at least ten and not exceeding fifteen Members of Parliament representing the 
States in the zone taken up to be nominated by the Central Government—members,  
ex officio;
 (b) at least five and not exceeding eight Members of the State Legislative Assembly 
to be nominated by the Central Government in consultation with State Government 
concerned—members, ex officio;
 (c) not exceeding ten representatives of the Central Government not below the 
rank of Joint Secretary or equivalent dealing with matters relating to infrastructure 
in the Ministries including but not limited to Road, Transport and Highways,  
Constitution of 
Boards.
2
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

Civil Aviation, Ports, Shipping and Waterways, Railways, Housing and Urban Affairs 
and Tourism to be nominated by the Central Government —members, ex officio;
(d) not exceeding seven representatives of the State Governments not below the 
rank of Joint Secretary to that Government or equivalent dealing with matters relating 
to infrastructure to be nominated by the Central Government in consultation with the 
State Government —members, ex officio; and
(e) not exceeding three specialists in the field of infrastructure and allied fields 
with a minimum experience of fifteen years in the respective zone to be nominated 
by the Central Government–members; 
(3) The Chairperson of the Boards shall be appointed from amongst the Members of 
Parliament in the Boards to be decided by consensus:  
Provided that the position of Chairperson shall not remain vacant for more than  
ten days.
(4) The Central Government shall, for the purpose of enabling the Boards to 
perform functions under this Act, provide such number of officers and other employees 
as it may consider necessary. 
(5) The salary and allowances payable to and other functions, powers, terms and 
conditions of service of the officers and other employees appointed under sub-section (3) 
shall be such as may be prescribed. 
4. (1) Each Board shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules of 
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings in such manner as may be 
prescribed:
Provided that the Board shall meet at least twice in a year:
Provided further that the Board shall be allowed to meet even in the absence of the 
Chairperson with the next senior-most Member of Parliament presiding over the meeting:
Provided also that the meetings shall be convened by an officer as designated by the 
Chairperson. 
(2) Each Board may invite the representatives responsible for development of 
infrastructure as it may consider appropriate for the discharge of its functions.
(3) The expenditure incurred on the Boards shall be in such manner as may be prescribed.
5. Each Board shall–
(a) commission a survey of all the land area in their respective zones, to ascertain 
the need and scope of Greenfield Infrastructure Projects in their zones to enhance 
connectivity in such manner as may be prescribed;
(b) fix the priority of the development work to be undertaken particularly in 
economically backward regions in each zone and draw out five year plans with fixed 
priorities and landmarks of development, financing model suitability, tendering 
processes, structure of accountability and any other matter as it deemed fit;  
(c) identify schemes and programmes of the Central or the State Governments under 
which the project may be carried out and submit the proposal thereof to the respective  
Government who in turn shall be required to revert with the feasibility of the project 
within thirty days; 
(d) submit the five year plans to the Central Government;
(e) facilitate coordinated action to commission the proposed projects while deciding 
the best financing model suitability as well as remove constraints of any kind in the 
implementation of the projects;
(f) resolve matters related to provision of land and space in consultation with the 
respective Government for faster roll out of priorities;
(g) identify issues for follow up in each Houses of Parliament, State Legislative 
Assemblies and Local Governments for timely achievement of five year plan objectives;
3
Meetings of the 
Committees.
Function of the 
Committees.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

(h) intensively monitor all time bound deliverables of the five year plans;
(i) closely review the flow of funds including the funds allocated and released by both 
Central Government and the State Government, utilization and unspent balances for each 
project; 
(j) have the authority to summon and inspect any record for the purposes of 
looking into complaints/alleged irregularities received in respect of the implementation 
of the projects including complaints of mis-appropriation and diversion of funds and 
recommend follow-up action; and 
(k) refer any matter for enquiry or suggest suitable action to be taken in accordance 
with the rules which should be acted upon by the concerned authority within thirty days.
CHAPTER III 
ACCOUNTABILITY OF THE BOARDS
6. (1) The knowledge and information collected or generated by each Board, including 
but not limited to the five year plan shall be disseminated to all the stakeholders in written 
format by a designated officer as nominated by the Chairperson. 
(2) The meetings shall be recorded and made publicly available through a Management 
Information System (MIS) Portal to be developed by the Central Government in such 
manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that the proceedings of the meetings shall be recorded and uploaded on the 
MIS portal not exceeding five days after the conclusion of any meeting of the Board by a 
designated officer as nominated by the Chairperson. 
(3) The Central Government shall monitor the five year plans developed by each Board 
and ensure that the targets are achieved.  
CHAPTER IV 
MISCELLANEOUS
7.  The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament 
by law in this behalf, provide requisite funds to the Authority for carrying out the 
purposes of this Act.
8. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of the 
provisions in any other law, for the time being in force. 
9. ( 1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry out the 
provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the foregoing power, such rules may provide 
for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the qualifications, experience, functions, powers, and terms and conditions of 
service of the officers and other employees of the Boards under sub-section (3) and (4) 
of section 3;
(b) the time and place of the meetings of the Committees and the procedure to 
be followed at such meetings under sub-section (1) of section 4 and the expenditure 
incurred on the meetings of the Boards under sub-section (3) of section 4;
(c) any other matter which is to be or may be, prescribed or in respect of which 
provision is to be made by the Central Government by rules.
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both the Houses agree in making any modification in the rule 
or regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule 
or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as 
the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.
Dissemination 
of information 
by the Boards
Central 
Government to 
provide funds.
Act not in 
derogation of 
other laws.
Power of Central 
Government to 
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
4
45
50

5
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 States, cities and villages face immense economic, demographic and environmental 
challenges that prompt the public and private sectors to rethink their conduct of business. 
These challenges share an underlying need for modern, efficient and reliable infrastructure 
as well as optimal land use. 
 With an enhanced expenditure on capital, there is a multiplier effect that leads to 
millions of jobs generated in building and maintenance of the infrastructure as well as scope 
for easier and faster migration. This also provides for more effective delivery of services 
through last mile connectivity. Moreover, by connecting supply chains, these infrastructures 
enhance trade, commerce, tourism and travel by reducing costs of logistics and facilitating 
connectivity. 
 For the entire country to grow, we need to enhance connectivity at all levels of 
administration and governance which requires a reassessment of potential infrastructural 
spaces of development. The need is to create a Greenfield Infrastructure Board in each of 
the six zones of the country. 
  Greenfield Infrastructure refers to the infrastructure developed on empty land or 
previously undeveloped land and a project whose commissioning, planning and construction 
process is carried out from the scratch and grass route level.
  The Board shall be entrusted with carrying out an initial survey and developing a plan 
with a five year perspective to identify areas where a greenfield project can be developed, 
fix priorities as per the need to enhance the connectivity in Economically Backward regions 
first as well as coordinate to remove constraints related to provision of land and space and 
monitor the flow of funds. The need is also to assess the Central, Centrally Sponsored or 
State schemes and programmes wherein the requisite infrastructure can be built and include 
the same in the plan. 
 It is also necessary that each Board shall have representation from the Central and State 
Governments including the Members of Parliament and Members, Legislative Assemblies. 
The Boards shall be required to meet at least twice a year to monitor the progress of the 
projects. They shall also be required to submit the plans developed by them to the Central 
Government and record all meetings to disseminate the information to all stakeholders. 
 The Bill, therefore, seeks to assess the land in the entire country to identify areas for 
development of greenfield infrastructure to facilitate development of backward regions as 
well as support the entire economy through enhanced trade and commerce.
 Hence this Bill.
New Delhi;                                   RAJIV PRATAP RUDY 
June 18, 2024.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
 Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the Greenfield Infrastructure 
Development Boards in each of the six zones in the country. It also provides for appointment 
of specialists, dedicated officers and other employees to each Board. Clause 7 of the Bill 
provides for the Central Government to provide adequate fund. The Bill, therefore, if 
enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.  It is estimated 
that a recurring expenditure of about rupees two crore and fourty thousand per annum would 
be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
 A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees sixty lakh is also likely to be incurred for 
survey.
6

7
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
 Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules regarding the 
qualifications, experience, functions, powers, and terms and conditions of service of the 
officers and other employees of the Boards, the time and place of the meetings of the Boards 
and the procedure to be followed at such meetings, etc. As the matters in respect of which 
rules may be made by the Central Government are matters of procedure and administrative 
details only, the delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
a
BILL
to provide for the constitution of Greenfield Infrastructure Board in each zone of the 
country to assess the availability of land in the respective zone and decide on the  
fitness of sites for development of a greenfield infrastructure project  
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
(Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy, M.P .) 