LOK SABRA 
CORRIGEN~ 
to 
THE CENrRAL INDUSTRIAL SECURITY FORCE (AMmJDlmfl') B.ILL, 1983 
(To be/As introduced in 10k 8abba) 
1 • pa ge 4-, lJ-n e 9,-
!slr. ":1.nstallat1or;.11 ~ "installations" 
2. page 1', line 11,-
!Ql: "accountrement s" ~ "accoutrements" 
3. page 17, line 1 from bottom,-
!.ol: "pri v11ages" read "pri vileges" 
NEW DEU~I; 
~rl1 11, 198~ 

As INTRODUCIQD IN LoIt SABRA. ON 
raUl No. 41 of 1983 
THE CENTRAL INDUSTRIAL SECURITY FORCE (AMENDMENT) 
BUL,1983 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Central Industrial Se,-urity Fcwce Act, 1968. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-fourth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Central Industrial Security Force 
(Amendment) Act, 1983. 
5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Ofticial Gazette, appoint. 
110 of 1968. 2. In the Central Industrial Security Force Act, 1968 {hereinafter 
referred to as the prinCipal Act), for the long title, the following long 
title shall be substituted, namely:-
10 "An Act to provide for the constitution and regulation of an 
armed force ~f the Union for the better protection and security of 
industrial undertakings owned by the Central Government and 
certain other industrial undertakings and for matters connected 
therewith.". 
15 
gO 
3. In section 2 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1),-
(i) for claUSe (4), the folloWing clauses shall be S".xb6tituted, 
namely:-
, (4) "Director-General" means the Director-General of 
the Force appointed \U\Qersection 4; 
Short 
title 
and com-
mence-
ment, 
Amend. 
ment ot 
long title. 
Amend_ 
ment of 
section·2. 

Amend.. 
ment 01 
8ectionS. 
Amend_ 
ment of 
section 4, 
,.". I .•.. -
2 
(aa) "enrolled member of the Force" means any sub-
ordinate officer, under officer or any other member of the 
Force of a rank lower than that of an under officer; 
(ab) "Force" means the Central Industrial Security 
Force constituted under section 3; 5 
(ae) "Force custody" means the arrest or confinement of 
a member of the Force in accordance with rules made 
under this Act;'; 
(ii) clause (d) shall be omitted; 
(iii) in clause (f), the words ", other than a supervisory 10 
officer" shall be omitted; 
(iv) after clause (h), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
I (ha) "subordinate officer" means a person appointed to 
the Force as an Inspector, a Sub-Inspector or an Assistant 15 
SUb-Inspector;'; I 
. (v) after clause (i), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:- . 
, (j) "under officer" means a person appointed to the 
Force as a Head Constable, Naik or Lance Naik.'; 
(b) for sub-section (2), the following SUb-section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(2) Any reference in this Act to a law which is not in force 
20 
in any area shaU, in relation to that area, be construed as a 
reference to the corresponding law, if any, in force in that area .... 25 
4. In section 3 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), fo.r the words "a Force", the words "an 
armed force of the Union" shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words "supervisory officers and 
members", the words "supervisory omeers, subordinate officers, under 30 
oftlcers and other enrolled members" shaU be substituted. 
5. In section 4 of the principal Act,-
(a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
. "(1) The Central Government may appoint a person to be 35 
the Director-General of the Force and may appoint other persOns 
to be Inspectors-General, Deputy Inspectors-General, Comman-
dants, Deputy Commandants or Assistant . Commandants of the 
Force."; 
'(b) in sub-eection (2), for the expression "Inspector-General", 40 
t.be expression "Director-Genera!" shall -be substituted. 

5 
•. In section 5 of the principal Act, for the 'Vords "appointment of 
members of the Force shall rest with the Inspector-General", the words 
"appointment of the enrolled members of the Force shall rest with the 
D1rector-Genel'al" shall be substituted. 
7. In section 6 of the principal Act,-
(a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substi-
tuted, namely:-
"(1) Every enrolled member ·of the Force shall receive on 
his appointment a certificate in the form specified in the 8che-
IO dule, under the seal of the Director-General or such other 
supervisory officer 8G the Director-General may specify in this 
behalf, by virtue of which the person holding such certiftcate 
shall be vested with the powers of an enrolled member of the 
Force."; ! 
J 5 (b) in sub-section (2), for the wor&!! "a member", the words 
"an enrolled member" shall be sUbstituted. 
8. In section 7 of the principal Act;~ 
(a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
QO "(1) The superintendence of the Force shall vest in the 
Central Government, and subject thereto and to the provisions of 
this Act and of any rules made thereunder, the command, 
supervision and administration of the Force shall vest in the 
Director-General." ; 
Q5 (b) in S'Ub-section (2) ,-
(i) for the words "a Deputy Inspector-General, Chief 
Security Officer or Security Officer", the words "an Inspector-
General, a Deputy Inspector-General, a Commandant, a Deputy 
Commandant or an Assistant Commandant" shall be substituted; 
30 (ii) for the words "Central Government", the words "Central 
Government or the Director-General" shall be substituted. 
35 
45 
9. tn section 11 of the principal Act,-
(a) for sUb-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substi-
tuted, namely:-
"(1) Any member of the Force may, without any order 
from a Magistrate and without a warrant, arrest--
(i) any person who voluntarily causes hurt to, or 
attempts voluntarily to cause hurt to, or wrongfully restrains 
or attempts wrongfully to restratn, or assaults, threatens to 
assault, or uses, or threatens or attempts to use, criminal 
force to him or any other member of the Force in the exe-
cution of his duty as such member, or with intent to pre-
vent or· to deter him from discharging his duty as such mem-
ber, or in consoquence of anything done or attempted to be 
done by him. in the lawful discharge of his duty as such mem-
ber; or 
Amend-
ment of 
section 5. 
Amend· 
ment of 
aeetion 8. 
Amend. 
ment of 
section 7. 
Amend. 
mentot 
section 11. 

Insertion 
of new 
section 
15A. 
Restric-
tions res-
pecting 
right to 
form as-
!lociation, 
etc. 
AmencL 
ment of 
section 
18. 
4 
(ii) any person who has been concerned in, or against 
whom a reasonable suspicion exists of his having been con-
cerned in or who is found taking preca'utions to conceal his 
presence ~nder circumstances which afford rdson to believe 
that he is taking such precautions with a view to committing, 5 
a cognizable offence which relates to property belonging to, 
or in the premises of, any industrial undertaking referred to 
in clauses (b) and (c) of section 10, or relates to the other 
installation, or to property in the premises of the other 
installations, referred to in those clauses; 10 
(iii) any person who commits or attempts to commit a 
cognizable offence which involves or which is likely to 
involve imminent danger to the life of any person engaged 
in carrying on any work relating to any undertaking or 
installations referred to in clauses (b) and (c) of section 15 
10."; I 
(b) In sub-section (2), the words "supervisory officer or" 
shall be omitted. 
10. After section 15 of the prfncipal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:- 20 
"l50A. (1) No member of the Force shall, without the previous 
sanction in writing of the Central Government or of the prescribed 
authority,-
(4) be a member of, or be associated in any way with, any 
trade union, labour union, political association or with any class 25 
of trade unions, labour unions or political associations; or 
(b) be a member of, or be associated in any way with, any 
other society, institution, association or organisation that is not 
recognised as part of the Force or is not of a purely social, 
recreational or religious nature; or 30 
(c) communicate with the press or publish or cause to be 
published any book, letter or other document except where such 
communication or pUblication is in the bona fide discharge of 
his d'Ilties or is of a purely literary, artistic or scientific character 
or is of a prescribed nature. 35 
Explanation.-If any question arises as to whether any society, 
institution, association or organisation is of a purely social, recrea-
tional or religious nature under clause (0) of this sub-section the 
decision of the Central Government thereon shall be final. ' 
(2) No member of the Force shall participate in, or address, 40 
any meeting or take part in any demonstration organised by any 
body of persons for any political purposes or for S'Uch other purposes 
as may be preSCribed.". 
11. In section 18 of the prinCipal Act, for sub-sections 1(1) and (2), the 
follOwing sub-sections shall be substituted, namely: - 45 
"(1) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in section 
8, every member of the Force who shall be lUilty of any violation 

101.1974. 
2 of 1974. 
I 
of duty or wilful breach or neglect of any rule or regulation or 
lawful order made by a supervisory officer, or who shall withdraw 
from the duties of his office without permission, or who, being 
abse1!)t on leave, fails, without reasonable cause, to report himself 
5 for duty on the expiration of the leave, or who engages himself 
without authority in any employment other than his duty as a 
member of the Force, or who shall be guilty of cowardice, may be 
taken into Force custody and shall, on conviction, be punished with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year. 
10 
20 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973, an offence punishable under this section shall be 
cognizable a!ld non-bailable. I 
(2A) Notwithstandi!}g anything contained in the Code of Cr1mi~ 
nal Procedure, 1973, the Central Government may invest the Com~ 
mandant with the powers of a Magistrate of any class for the 
purpose of inquiring into or trying any offence committed by an 
enrolled member of the Force and punishable under thi~ Act, or any 
offence committed by an enrolled member of the Force agairat the 
person or property of another member of the Force: 
Provided that-
(i) when the offender is on leave or absent from duty; or 
(ii) when the offence is not connected with the offender'S 
duties as an enrolled member of the Force; or 
(Uli) when it is a petty offence even if connected with the 
25 offender's duties as an enrolled member of ,the Force; or 
35 
45 
(iv) when, for reasons to be recorded in writing, it fs not 
practicable for the Commandant invested with the powers of a 
Magistrate to inquire into or try an offence, 
the offence may, if the prescribed authority within the limits of 
whose jurisdiction the offence has been committed so requires, be 
inquired into or tried by an ordinary criminal court having jurlsdlc-
tion in the matter.". ! 
12. In section 22 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (2) ,-
(i) in clauses (a), (b) and (c), the 
officers and" shall be omitted; 
words "S'IlpervilorJ. 
(ii) after clause (g), the following clauses shall be inse1'ted. 
namely:-
"(gg) regulating matters with respect to Force eustody 
under this Act including the procedure to be followed for 
taking persons into such custody; 
(ggg) regulating matters with respect to ~isposal of 
cases relating to ottences under this Act and SpecIfying the 
places in which persons convicted under this Act may be 
confined;"; 
(iii) in clause (h), the words "supervisory ofticers and" Ihall 
be omitted; 
Amend-
ment of 
,ect1on 
22. 

Conse-
quential 
amend. 
ments. 
ProvL 
sions al 
to exist. 
ingFex-ce. 
• 
(iv) in clause (i), after the word "prescribed", the words 
"or in respect of which rules are required to be made under 
this Act" shall be iJ1Gerted j 
(b) in SUb-section (3), for the words "or in two successive 
sessions, and if before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid 5 
or the session immediately following,", the words "or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the seQiion imme-
diately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid," 
shall be substituted. 
13. The amendments directed in the Schedule (being amendments of 10 
a consequential nature) shall be made in the principal Act. 
" 
If. (1) The force consti'i:uted under the principal Act as functioning 
immediately before the commencement of this Act (hereafter in thjs 
section referred to as the existing Force) shall, on such commencement, 
be. deemed to be the force constituted under the principal Act al 15 
'amended by this Act, and every member of the existing Force holding 
immediately before such commencement an office mentioned in column 
,(1) of the Table below shall, on such commencement, be deemed to have 
been appointed to the office mentioned in the corresponding entry in 
column (2) of the said Table. 20 
(1) 
1. Chief Security Officer 
2. Deputy Chief Security 
Officer 
3. Security Officer 
4. Head Security Guard 
5. Senior Security Guard 
6. Security Guard 
TABLE 
(2) 
Commandant 
Deputy Commandant 
Assistant Commandant 
Head Constable 
Naik 
Constable. 
--------------------
(2) NotWithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) , any So 
member of the existing Force may, within thirty days from'the com-
,JQellcement of this Act, exercise his option by notice in writing to the 
Director-General-
(a) if such member had been on deputation to the existing 
Force from any other service, to revert to such other service, and 35 
(b) in any other case, to retire from service, 
and an option so exercised shall be final, and a member exercising 6".lch 
option shall be permitted, within thirty days from the date on which 
he exerci6essuch option to revert to the service from which he had 
been on deputation or, as the case may be, to retire from service. 40 
Ea.-planation..-For the purposes of this section, the exprelliOD 
"member" includes an officer, and the expression "DtrectorooGeneral" 
Bhal:! have the same meaning as in the principal Act as amended by thil 
Act. 

5 of 1898. 
2 crt 1974. 
T 
THE SCHEDULE 
(See section 13) 
CONSEQUENTIAL AMENDMENTS 
1. Section 8.-FoT "member", at both the places 'where it occurs, substi-
tute "enrolled member"'. 
2. Section 9.-1n sub-section (1), fOr "member", substitute "enrolled 
member". 
3. Section 10.-0init "supervisory officer and". 
4. Section 12.- (a) In sub-section (1), omit "any supervisory officer, 
or"; 
(b) in sub-section (2), for "Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898", substi-
tute ICCode of Criminal Procedure, 1973". 
5. Section 13.-0mit "supervisory officer or". 
6. Section 14.- (a) For "Inspector-General", wherever it occurs, 
$1Lbstitute "Director-General"; 
(b) in sub-section (1) ,-
(i) omit "supervisory officers and"; 
(m) omit "officers and"; 
(c) in sub-6ection (2), omit "officers and", wherever they occur; 
(d) in sub-section '(3), omit "officer and". 
7. Section 15.- (a) In &1lb-section (1), omit "supervisory officer and"; 
(b) in sub-section (2), omit "supervisory officer or". 
8. Section 17.-(a) In sub-section (1), for "a member", substitute "an 
enrolled member"; 
(b) in sub-section (3), faT "Insp-etcor-General", su.bstitute "Director-
General". 
9. Section 19.-0mit "supervisory officers and". 
10. Section 21.-0mit "supervisory officer or", wherever they occur. 
11. The Schedule.-FoT "a member", at both the places where they 
occur, substitute "an enrolled member", 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Central Industrial Security Force has been constituted under 
the Central Industrial Security Force Act, 1968 with the object of 
providing for the better protection and security of industrial under-
takings owned by the Central Government, as well as those in public 
sector. This Force has now been in existence for a period of about 
13 years. During this period, the sanctioned strength of the Force has 
grown from about 2,000 to about 49,000 officers and men and the Force is at 
present deployed in 115 industrial 'Undertakings. The respoQsibilities of 
the Force have also grown Jlreatly in magnitude as well as complexity. 
The" Force is today concerned interr alia with providing security to highly 
sensitive undertakings like the installations of Department of Space, 
Department of Atomic Energy, Oil Refineries, Petro-chemical Plants, 
Steel Plants and major ports. The security of these installations 
has a bearing not only on economic and industrial growth but 
also on the security and defence of the country. In view of these 
circumstances and also based on actual experience of the working of 
the Force, an urgent need has been felt for makin~ the Force an armed 
force of the Union and for giving some additional powers for dealing 
with the problems of security of the industrial undertakin~. It is 
therefore proposed to amend the Central Industrial Security Force Act 
to convert the Force into an armed force of the Union and to make it 
a more effective instrument for providing security to vital industrial 
undertakings. 
2. The following are prinCipal features of the Bi1l:-
(a) The Force will be made an armed force of the Union and 
consequential changes made in the rank, structure and nomenclature 
of the Force (clauses 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 13 of the Bill). 
(b) Power of the members of the Force to arrest without 
warrant is being extended so as to cover assaults. use of criminal 
force, wrongful restraint and voluntarily causing hurt to members 
of the Force. This promion broadly covers offences under section 
353 !PC (assault on public servant in discharge of duties) and 
section 332 !PC (voluntarily causing hurt to a public servant in 
discharge of duties). Power to arrest withou~ warrant. is also heing 
extended to cover offences ar,(ainst property which may be lying 
in the premises of an industrial undertaking or installation. 
Similarly. power to arrest without warrant has been extended to 
cognizable offences involving imminent danger to the life of per-
sons engaged in carrying on the work of the undertaking (elaule 
9 of the Bill). I 
8 

• 
(c) Restrictions have been proposed on the right to form 
association on the lines of similar restrictions in other anned forces 
of the Union (clause 10 of the Bill). 
(d) Punishment for offences which may be committed by 
members of the Force, such as violation of duty, wilful breach of 
rules, regulations, lawful orders, cowardice, etc., has been enhanced 
from six months to one year. A provisIon has been made for 
investment of powers of a Magistrate on the Commandant for 
inquiring into or trying such offences under certain clreumstanctll 
(clause 11 of the Bill). 
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
N£w DI:Lm; P. C. SETHI. 
Th. 17th February, 1983. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to substitute for sulHlection (1) of section 
4 of the Central Industrial Security Force Act, 1968, a new sub-section 
which provides for the appointment of a Director-General, Inspectors-
General, Deputy Inspectors-General, Commandants, Deputy Comman-
dants and Assistant Commandants of the Force. The intention is not to 
create any new posts and it is only proposed to re-designate the existing 
posts. In view thereof, the provisions of the Bill, if enacted and brought 
into operation, would not involve any expenditure from the Consolidated 
Fund of India. 
10 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
The Bill s~eks to convert the Central Industnal Security .Force into 
an armed force of the Union. As a sequel thereto, sub-section (2A), 
as proposed to be inserted in section 18 of the principal A.ct by clause 
11 of the Bill, provides, as in the other laws relating to armed forces. 
for the inquiry into, and trial of, offences committed by enrolled 
members of the Force by Commandants. The proviso to the said new 
sub-section (2A) empowers the prescribed authority to require ordinary 
criminal courts to deal with offences by enrolled members falling under 
the categories mentioned in the proviso.. The rules under the Act wiD 
have to provide as to who will be the prescribed authorities for the 
purpose of the proviso. 
2. New clause (ggg) as proposed to be inserted in sub-section (2) 
of section 22 of the principal Act by clause 12(a) (ii) of the Bill seeks to 
empower the Central Government to make rules regulating the matters 
with respect to the disposal of cases relating to offences 'Wlder the Act 
and specifying the places in which persons convicted under the Act may 
be confined. 
3. New clause (gg) as proposed to be inserted in SUb-section (2) of 
section 22 of the principal Act hy clause 12 (a) (ii) of the Bill seeks to 
empower the Central Government to make rules regulating the matters 
with respect to Force-custody under the Act including the procedure to 
he followed for taking persons into such custody. Provisions by way 
of Force-custody are also consequential to the conversion of the Central 
Industrial Security Force into an armed force of the Union. 
4. The matters in respect of which rules may he made under the 
aforementioned prOVisions pertain to ptocedure or matters of detail and 
the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 
It 

DeJlni-
tiODll. 
Constitu-
tionofthe 
Force. 
Appoint. . 
mentaDd 
powers of 
mper-
visor")' 
ofBcerl. 
ANNEXURE 
Ex'l'RAC'l'S FROM 1"HE CENTRAL INDUSTRIAL SEcuBrrY FORC& A~. 1_ 
(50 01' 1968) 
.' • • • • 
An Act to provide fOr the constitution and regulation of a Force called 
the Central Industrial Security Force for the better protection and 
security of certain industrial undertakings. 
• • • • • 
2. (1) In this Act, wess the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "Force" means the Central Industrial Security Force 
constituted under section 3; 
• • • • • 
(d) "Inspector-General" means the Inspector-General of the 
Force appointed under section 4; 
• • • • • 
(f) umember of the Force" means a person appointed to the 
Force under this Act, other than a supervisory oftlcer; 
• • • • • 
(2) Any reference in this Act to a law which is not in force in the 
State of Jammu and Kashmir shall, in relation to that State, be 
construed as a reference to the corresponding law, if any, in force in 
that State. 
3. (1) There shall be constituted and maintained by the Central 
Government a Force to be called the Central Industrial Security Force 
for the 'better protection and security of industrial undertakings owned 
by that Government. 
(2) The Force shall be constituted in such manner, shall consist of 
such number of supervisory officers and members of the Force who 
shall receive such pay and other remuneration 88 may be prescribed. 
4. (1) The Central Govenunent may appoint a person to be the 
Inspector-General of the Force and may appoint other persons to be 
Deputy Inspectors-General, Chief Security Oftlcers or Security omeara 
of the Force. 
(2) The Inspector-General and every other supervisory oftlcer 110 
appointed shall have, and may exercise, such powers and authorlt,- u 
11 provided by or under this Act. 

13 
5. The appointment of members of the Fotce shall rest with the 
Inspector-General who shall exercise that power in accordance with 
rules made under this Act: 
Provided that the power of appointment under this section may 
also be exercised by such other supervisory officer as the Central Govern-
ment may by order specify in this behalf. 
G •. (1) Every member of the Force shall receive on his appointment 
a certificate in the form specilled in the Schedule, under the seal of 
the Inspector-General or such other supervisory officer as the Inspector-
General may specify in this behalf, by virtue of which the person hold-
ing such certihcate shall be vested WIth the powers of a member of the 
Force. 
(2) Such certificate shall cease to have effect whenever the person 
.ramed in it ceases for any reason to be a member of the ]force . 
. '. 7. (1) The superintendence of the l!'orce shall vest in the Central 
Government, and subject thereto the administration of the Force shall 
vest in the .Lnspector-General and shall be carried on by him J..ll accord-
ance with the provisions of t~ Act and of any l'wes made thereunder. 
(~) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), the awuinistraLl.Oll 
of the ,iI'orce within such local limi16 as may be ,prescrlbed shall be 
carried on by a Deputy Inspector-General, Cl-uei Security Oflicer or 
SeC'UIity Officer ill accordance with the provisions of this Act and of 
any rules made thereunder and every supervisory officer placed in charie 
of the protectIon and security of an mdustrial undertaking shall, sub-
ject to any directions that may be given by the Central Governr.a.ent III 
this behal1, discharge his 1unctions under the general supervision, 
direction and control of the Managing Director of that undertaking. 
~i. Subject to the provislons of article 311 of the Constitution and to 
such rules as the Central Government may make under ihis Act, any 
supervisory ofiioo.l.' may-
(i) dismiss, suspend or reduce in rank any member of the E'orce 
whom he thinks remiss or negligent in the discharge of his duty, 
or unfit for the same; or 
. (ii) award anyone or more of the fol!owiIlg pWlishments to 
any member of the Force who discharges his duty in 'a careless or 
negligent manner, or who by any act of his own renders himself 
unfit for the discharge thereof, namely:-
(a) fine to any amount not exceeding seven days' payor 
reduction in pay scale; 
(b) drill, extra guard, fatigue or other duty; 
(c) remov8.l from any office of distinction or deprivation of 
any special emolliment. 
9, (1) Any member of the Force aggrieved by an order made under 
section 8 may, within thirty days from the date on which the order is 
communicated to him, prefer an appeal against the order to such authority 
as may be prescribed, and subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), 
the decision of the said authority thereon shall be final: 
Appoint-
mento! 
memberl 
of the 
Force. 
Ce,rlifi-
cates of 
members 
of the 
FOIl'ce. 
Superin. 
tendence 
and ad. 
ministra-
tion of the 
Force. 
Dis_ 
missal, 
removal. 
etc., of 
members 
of the 
Force. 
Appeal 
and 
revision. 

Duties of 
~embers 
of the 
Force. 
Power to 
arrest 
without 
warrant. 
Power-to 
aeareh 
without 
wan:ant. 
'4-
Provided that the prescribed authority may entertain the appeal after 
the expiry of the said Period of thirty days, if it is satis1led that the . 
appell"ant was prevented by sufficient cause trom filing' the appeal in 
time. 
• ... ... • • 
10. It shall be the duty of every supervisory officer and member of 
the Force-
(a) promptly to obey and execute all orders lawfully issued to 
him by his superior authority; 
(b) to protect and 'safeguard the industrial undertakinlJ$ owned 
by the Central Government together with such other installations 
as are specified by that Government to be vital for the carrying on 
of work in those undertakings, situate within the local limits of his 
jurisdiction :w 
Provided that befote any installation not owned or controlled 
by the Central Government is so specified, the Central Government 
shall obtain the consent of the Government of the State in which 
such installation is situate. 
(c) to protect 'and safeguard such other industrial undertakings 
and installations for the protection and security of which he 1s 
deputed under section 14; 
(d) to do any other act conducive to the better protection and 
security of the industrial undertakings referred to in clauses (b) 
and (c). 
11. (1) Any supervisory officer or member of the Force may, 'Without 
any order from a Magistrate and without a warrant, arrest any person 
who has been concerned in, or against whom a reasonable SUlpicion 
exists of his having been concerned in, or who is :found taking precau-
tions to conceal his presence under circumstances which afford reason 
to believe that he is taking such precautions with a view to commit-
ting, a cognizable offence relating to,-
(i) the property belonging to any industrial undertaking, or 
(ii) the other installations, 
referred to in clauses (b) and (c) of section 10. 
(2) If any person is fO'llnd trespassing on the premises of any 
industrial undertaking referred to in clauses (b) and (c) of section 
10, be may, without prejudice to any other proceedings which may be 
taken again~ him, be removed from such premises by any supervisory 
officer or member of the Force. 
12. (1) Whenever any supervisory officer, or any member of the Force, 
not below the· prescribed rank, bas reason to believe that any such 
offence as is referred to in section 11 has been or is being committed 
and that a search warrant cannot be obtained without affording the 
offender an opportunity of escaping or of concealing evidence of the 
offence, he may detain the offender and search his person and belong. 
ings forthwith and, if he thinks proper, arrest any person whom he baa 
reason to believe to have committed the oftence. 

80fl888. 
15 
(2) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, mIat-
ing tp searches under that Code shall, so far a$ may be, apply to 
searches under this section. 
13. Any supervisory officer or member of the Force making an 
arre~t under this Act, shall, without unnecessary delay, make over the 
person so arrested to a police officer, or, in the absence of a police 
officer, take,such person or cause him to be taken to the nearest police 
station together with a report of the circumstances occasioning the 
arrest. 
14.(1) Subject to any general directions which may be issued by 
the Central Government, it shall be lawful for the Inspector-General, 
on a request received in this behalf from the Managing Director con-
cerned of an industrial undertaking in public sector, showing the 
necessity thereof, to depute such number of supervisory officers and 
members of the Force as the Inspector-General may consider necessary 
for the protection and security of that industrial undertaking and any 
installations attached thereto and the officers and members of the Force 
10 deputed shall be at the charge of the Managing Director: 
Provided that in the case of an undertaking, owned, controlled or 
managed,-
(i) by a Government company of which the. Central Government 
1s not a member; 
(U) by a corporation established by or under a Provincial or 
State Act, 
no such request shall be entertained unless it is made with the consent 
of the Government of the State in which the undertaking is situate. 
(2) If the Inspector-General is of the opinion that circumstances 
necessitating the deputation of the officers and members of the Force in 
relation to an industrial undertaking under sub-section (1) have ceased 
to exist, or for any other reason it is necessary so to do, he may, after 
Informing the Managing Director of that industrial undertaking, with-
draw the otBcers and members of the Force so deputed: 
Provided that the Managing Director may, on giving one month's 
notice in writing to the Inspector-General require that the officers and 
members of the Force so deputed shall be withdrawn, and the Manag-
ing Director shall be relieved from the charge from the date of expira-
tion of such notice or from any earlier date on which the Force is so 
withdrawn. 
<S) Every ofBcer and member of the Force, while discharging his 
fIlnctions during the period of deputation, shall continue to exercise the 
same powers and be subject to the same responsibilities, discipline and 
penalties as would have been applicable to him. under this Act, if he had 
been discharging those functions in relation to an industrial undertaJdn, 
owned by the Central Government. 
Proce-
dure to be 
followed 
after 
arrest. 
Deputa • 
. tion of 
the Force 
to indus-
trial 
under-
takinll 
inpubUe 
eector. 

Omeera 
and 
members 
of the 
Force to 
be consi· 
deredaL 
wayson 
du'tyand 
liable to 
be em. 
ployed 
anywhere 
in India. 
Surren-
derat 
certifi-
cate, arms, 
etc., by 
persons 
ceasing 
to be 
members 
of the 
Force. 
Penalties 
for neglect 
of duty, 
etc. 
Applica-
tion of 
Act 22 of 
1922 to 
oBlcers 
andmem-
berlof 
tIleJ'oree. 
Pr0tec-
tion 
of aetsof 
officers 
andmem. 
hers of 
the 
Force. 
16 
15. (1) Every supervisory officer and member of the Force shall, for 
the purpose of this Act, be considered to be always on duty, and shall, at 
any time, be liable to be employed at any place within India. 
(2) Save as provided in section 14, no supervisory officer' or member 
of the Force shall engage himself in any employment or office other than 
his duties under this Act. 
• • • • • 
17. (1) Every person who for any reason ceases to be a member Of 
the Force, shall forthwith surrender to any supervisory officer empower-
ed to receive the same, his certificate of appointment~ the arms, 
accountrements, clothing and other articles which have been furnished 
to him for the performance of duties as a member of the Force. 
.' • • • • 
(3) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to any article 
which, under the orders of the Inspector-General, has· become the pro-
perty of the person to whom the same was furnished. 
18. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in section 8, 
every member of the Force who shall be guUty of any violation of duty 
or wilful breach or neglect of any rule or regulation or lawful order 
made by a supervisory officer, or who shall withdraw from the duties of 
his oftice without permission, or who, being absent on leave, fails, without 
reasonable cause, to report himself for duty on the expiration. of the 
leave, or who engageS' himself without authority in any employment 
other than his duty as a member of the Force, or who shall be guUty Of 
cowardice, shall, on conviction, be punished with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to six months. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1898, an offence punishable under this section shall be cogniz-
able. 
• • • • • 
19. The Police (InCitement to Disaffection) Act, 1922, shall apply to 
supervisory officers and members of the Force as it applies to members 
of.a police force. 
• • • • • 
21. (1) In any suit or proceeding against any supervisory oftleer 
or member of t.he Force for any act done by him in the discharge of bt. 
duties, it shall be lawful for him to plead that such act was &me by him 
under the orders. of a competent authority. 
(2) Any such plea may be proved by the production of the order 
directing the act, and if it is so proved, the supervisory ofticer or member 
01 the Force shall thereupon be discharged from any liability in respect 
1011_. 

17 
of the act so done by him, notwithstanding any defect in the jurisdiction 
of the authority which issued such order. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the 
time being in force, any legal proceeding, whether civil or. criminal, 
which may lawfully be brought against any supervisory officer Or mem-
ber of the Force for anything done or intended to be done under the 
powers conferred by, or in pursuance of, any provision of this Act or the 
rules thereunder shall be commenced within three months after the act 
complained of shall have been committed and not otherwise; and notice 
in writing of such proceeding and of the cause thereof shall be given to 
the person concerned and his supervisory officer at least one month before 
the commencement of such proceeding. 
2%. (1) • • ... ... • 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
forego;ng powers, such rules may provide for-
(a) regulating the classes, ranks, grades, pay and remu leration 
of supervisory officers and members of the Force and their conditions 
of service in the Force; 
(b) regulating the powers and duties of supervisory officers and 
members of the Force authorised to exercise any functions by or 
under this Act; 
(e) fixing the period of service for supervisory officers and mem-
bers of the Force; 
• • • • • 
(h) the terms and condition'S subject to which supervisory officers 
and members of the Force may be deputed under section 14 and the 
charges therefor; and 
(i) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed. 
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may 
be after it is made before each House of Parliament while it is in session 
for a total period of thirty days, which may be comprised in one session 
or in two successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the session in 
which it is so laid or the session immediately following. both Houses 
agree in making any modification in the rule. or both Houses agree 
that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; 
so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejud;ce to the validity of anythmg previously done under that rule . 
• • ... 
THE SCHEDULE 
(See section 6) 
• • 
A.B. has been appointed a member of the Central Industrial ~ecurity 
Force under the Central Industrial Security Force Act, 1968, and is vested 
with the powers, functions and privilages of a member of the Force. 
Power to 
make 
rules. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Central Industrial Security Force Act, 1968. 
(Shri P. C. Sethi, Minister of Home Affairs.) 