Bill No. 41 of 1"1 ··_4· _ _ ... _-. ..... ,,_ ...... 
TI-lE INDIAN PENAL CODE 
(AMENDMENT). BILL, 1961 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
ON 10TH AUGUST, 1961) 
... 

Act 4S of 
1860. 
DUI No. 11 of 1"1 
THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) 
. BILL, 1961 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Indian Penal Code. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twelfth Year of the Repub-
lic of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Shon title. 
Act, 1961. 
5 Z. For section 153A of the Indian Penal Code (hereinafter refer- Substitution 
10 
15 
red to as the Code), the following section shall be substituted, of n~w 
I ~~b 
name y,- section 1 S3A 
"153A. Whoever-
(a) by words, either spoken or written, or by signs Promotina 
or by visible representations or otherwise, promotes, or enmityd.ftibel ween 1 cr-attempts to promote, on grounds of religion, race, language, ent groups 
caste or community or any other ground whatsoever, feel- ~r :i~~~ 
Ings of enmity or hatred between different religious, racial face, langu-
or language groups or castes or communities or ~, etc., and , dOll1, acts 
• .., " • prejudicial (b) commIts any act which IS preJudicial to the maID- to mainten. 
tenance of harmony between different religious, racial or ahnce of annony. 
language groups or castes or communities and which dis-
turbs or is likely to disturb the public tranquillity, 
shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to 
three years, or with fine, or with both." . 
• 

Amendment 
of section 
:a~SA. 
Amendment 
of section 
50 S. 
2 
3. In section 295A of the Code,-
(a) for the words "by words, either spoken or written, or 
by visible representations", the words "by words, either spoken 
or written, or by signs or by visible representations or other-
wise" shall be substituted; S 
(b) for the words "two years", the words "three years" 
shall be substituted. 
4. In section 505 of the Code, for the words "two years", 
words "three years" shall be substituted. 
the 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In order effectively to check fissiparous communal and separatist 
tendencies whether based on grounds of religion, caste, language or 
community or any other ground, it is proposed to amend section 
153A of the Indian Penal Code so as to make it a specific offence 
for anyone to promote or attempt to promote feelings of enmity or 
hatred between different religious, racial or language groups or 
castes or communities. The Bill also seeks to make it an offence 
for anyone to do any act which is prejudicial to the maintenance of 
harmony between different religious, racial or language groups or 
castes or communities and which is likely to disturb public tran-
quillity. Section 295A of the Indian Penal Code is being slightly 
widened and the punishment for the offence under that section and 
under section 505 of the Code is being increased from two to three 
years. 
NEW l>ELHI; LAL BAHADUR. 
The 5th Au.gu.st, 1961. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE. 1860 
(No. 45 01' 1860) 
• • • • • 
153A. Whoever by words, either spoken or written. or by signs, Promoting 
or by visible representations, or otherwise, promotes or attempts to ::n ' 
promote feelings of enmity or hatred between different classes of classes. 
the citizens of India, shall be punished with imprisonment which 
may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
Explanation.-It does not amount to an offence within the mean-
ing of this section to point out, without malicious intention and with 
an honest view to their removal, matters which are producing or 
have a tendency to produce, feelings of enmity or hatred between 
different classes of the citizens of India . 
• • • • • • 
ZHA. Whoever, with deliberate and malicious intention of out- Deliberate 
raging the religious feelings of any class of citizens of India. by a!1d mali-
words, either spoken or written, or by visible representations in- f=da;~Sto 
suIts or attempts to insult the religion or the religious beliefs of that ~~e 
class, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description fe:~~': of 
for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with ~y c1lt~ ~Y l111U In. Its 
~~ ~~~ 
• • • • 
505. Whoever makes, publishes or circulates 
rumour or report,-
• . ' 
• • 
• 
any 
• 
relisious 
beliefs • 
statement, Statements 
conducin. to 
public 
mischief • 
• 
shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to two 
years, or with fine, or with both. 
• • • • • 

LO~SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Indian Penal Code. 
(Shri LaJ Bahadur Shastri, 
Minister of Home Affairs.) 