1
THE SCHEDULED CASTES HAMLETS (PROVISION OF BASIC
FACILITIES) BILL, 2012
By
SHRI KODIKUNNIL SURESH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for certain basic facilities to the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes
and living in hamlets and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  ( 1) This Act may be called the Scheduled Castes Hamlets (Provision of Basic
Facilities) Act, 2012.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 41 of  2012
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, “hamlet” means a small village or
a cluster of houses inhabited by the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, within a period of one year from the date of
coming into force of the Scheduled Castes Hamlets (Provision of Basic Facilities) Act,
2012, identify the hamlets inhabited by the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes.
(2) For the purpose of identifying hamlets under sub-section (1), the Central Government
shall use such methods as it may deem fit.
4. The Central Government shall provide adequate funds to the State Governments for
the purposes of providing the following basic facilities free of cost to the persons belonging
to the Scheduled Castes and living in hamlets identified under section 3, namely:—
(i) potable water;
(ii) electricity;
(iii) sewage facilities;
(iv) toilet facilities;
(v) road connectivity;
(vi) primary health centres;
(vii) parks;
(viii) crematorium; and
(ix) pucca dwelling units.
5. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Definition.
Identification
of hamlets
inhabited by
persons
belonging to
Scheduled
Castes.
Act not to be
in derogation
of any other
law.
Funds to the
State
Governments
for providing
certain basic
facilities.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes have been, for centuries, the most
neglected, marginalized and exploited. After independence, the polity of our nation has
realized the importance of development of weaker sections specially the Scheduled Castes.
Consequently, planned efforts have been made for their upliftment by the successive
Governments. However, the benefits of affirmative action by the successive Governments
for the welfare of persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes have reached only to a small
section of these persons in the last sixty-four years. Majority of persons of these castes are
facing a lot of problems due to poor living conditions in the hamlets where they live in. They
do not have access to the basic necessities of life like potable water, sanitation, pucca
houses, electricity etc., and are, therefore, unable to live a dignified life.
Therefore, it is proposed that all hamlets inhabited by the persons belonging to the
Scheduled Castes should be provided with all basic facilities to improve their standard of
living.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KODIKUNNIL SURESH
March 26, 2012.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for identification of hamlets inhabited by the persons
belonging to the Scheduled Castes. Clause 4 provides that the Central Government shall
provide adequate funds to the State Governments for providing certain basic facilities to the
persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and living in hamlets. The Bill, therefore, if
enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that
a sum of rupees five thousand crore would be involved as recurring expenditure per annum.
A sum of rupees ten thousand crore would be involved as a non-recurring expenditure.
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for certain basic facilities to the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes
and living in hamlets and for matters connected therewith
————
(Shri Kodikunnil Suresh, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—43LS(S3)—17.04.2012.