\ ae

S\64aLs,

५9७५ २.६

Bill No. 41 of 2002
—_——

THE PROMOTION OF INDIGENOUS IRON AND STEEL
INDUSTRIES BILL, 2002
By
Sunt Suni KHAN, M.P.
A
BILL

fo promote use and development of indigenous iron and steel in industries keeping in
view the liberalisation of economic policy and changes introduced in trade policies
thereunder

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (7) This Act may be called the Promotion of Indigenous Iron and Steel Industries
2002.

(2) Iteextends to the whole of India,
(3) It shall apply to all projects, industrial or business enterprises set up or to be set
up with the grant and aid of public money.
(4) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notifica-
tion in the official Gazette, appoint.
2 It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the public interest to help, promote and
consolidate the growth and development of indigenous iron and steel industries in the
context of the liberalised economic policy.

Short title,
extent,
application
and

Declaration as
piacere
of promotion
of indigenous
iron and steel
industries.


2

Definitions. 3. (a) "industrial establishment” means any premises including the precincts thereof
where any systematic activity is carried on by owner, or through any agency, including a
contractor or sub-contractor, for manufacture, production, supply or distribution of goods
or services for sales or business or both with a motive to make any gain or profit and includes
ancillary industrial undertakings;

(0) "factory" means any premises, including the precincts thereof, in any part of which
a manufacturing process is carried on or is being ordinarily carried on with the aid of power
and where twenty or more workers are working there on any day of the preceding twelve
months;

(०) "goods" means goods as defined in the Sale of Goods Act, 1930 and includes all
material, articles, commodities and all other kind of moveable properties relatable to
"industry" or "industrial undertaking" including "ancillary industrial undertakings" within
the meaning of this Act;

(d) “indigenous iron and steel" means all iron and steel products including all kinds of
products therefrom, which are manufactured or produced in India, but excluding the product
rolled/manufactured out of conversion of any imported input material;

(०) "owner" in relation to an industrial undertaking, means the person, who, or the
authority which, has the ultimate control over the affairs of the undertaking, and, where the
said affairs are entrusted to a manager, managing director or managing agent, such manager,
managing director or managing agent, as the case may be, shall be deemed to be the owner
of the undertaking;

(0 "power" means electrical energy or any other form of energy which is mechanically
generated and transmitted and is not generated and transmitted by human or animal agency;

(g) “public fund" means and includes all financial facilities, assistance or grant pro-
vided by the Central or a State Government, its agencies or financial institution.

(h) "public works" means all such project works exceeding rupees one crore which are
being undertaken with the assistance of public fund or for public service.

Compulsory 4. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained contrary in any law for the time being in

Log of force, it shall be mandatory to use iron and steel mined, produced or manufactured in the

indigenous for every—

(a) Public works, factory, industrial establishment including an ancillary indus-
trial establishment owned wholly or partly by the Central Government ora State Gov-
emment or run with the aid and assistance of public fund:

Provided that it shall not apply where use of such iron and stee! manufactured in
India is detrimental to the public interest or to the project or not available in specified
qualities or within delivery schedule.

(b) Contract for construction, modification, modernisation, installation, altera~
tion, repairs of any public work or industrial establishment undertaken with the aid and
assistance of public fund:

Provided that it shall not apply where use of such iron and stec] manufactured in
the country is impracticable for successful completion of the work and cost: of procure-
ment exceeds rupees one crore. ,

(c) person including an owner, occupier, head of an industrial establishment,
contractor, sub-contractor, agent carrying on an industrial undertaking or executing
any job or work in any such industrial establishment.

Declaration to 5. (1) Every person undertaking execution of any contract or work or job requiring
७३० imported procurement of iron and steel and other material input from outside the country shall furnish
ion and steel. 5 declaration to the head of the industrial establishment to that effect.

|


10

15

1० 1956.

35

(2) The head of industrial establishment shall forward the reasons for procurement or
importing iron and steel from outside the country in the prescribed format to the Central
Government.

(3) The Central Government shall examine reasons and facts furnished by an industrial
establishment and recommend for procurement of iron and steel which is essential for comple-
tion and execution of the work.

6. (J) Any person including an owner, occupier, head of an industrial establishment,
contractor, sub-contractor or agent who contravenes the provisions of this Act shall be
punishable with fine which may extend upto five times of the price difference between the
iron and steel materials produced indigenously and the same procured or imported from
outside India and in case of continuing contraventions, with an additional fine which may
extend upto two times of the fine imposed as aforesaid for every fortnight during the con-
tinuance of the contravention.

(2) If the person contravening any of the provisions of the Act or the rules framed
thereunder is a company, every person, who at the time the offence was committed was in-
charge of and responsible to the company for the counduct of the business of the company
as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the contravention.

Explanation:— For the purpose of this section—

“company” means a body corporate duly incorporated under the Indian
Companies Act, 1956 and includes a partnership firm or other association of individuals.

7. Any person who is required under the provisions of this Act or rules made
thereunder to make any statement or furnish any information deliberately makes false state-
ment and furnishes false information, he shall be punishable with imprisonment which may

extend to three years or with fine which may extend upto rupees fifteen thousand or with
both.

8. No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act except on
a report in writing of the facts constituting such offence made by any interested perons.

9. Where any person is charged with contravening any of the provisions of this Act or
rules framed thereunder the burden of proving innocence shall be on him.

10. No court inferior to that of a Presidency Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the
First Class shall try any offence punishable under this Act.

11. If the Central Government is of the opinion, having regard to the small amount of
the public fund involved in the project or of the strategic importance, it may exempt subject
to such conditions as it may think fit to impose on any industrial undertaking or ancillary
industrial undertaking or factory or group of industrial undertakings, ancillary industrial
undertakings, or factories as it may specify in the notification from the operation of all or any
of the provisions of this Act or any rules or orders made thereunder.

12. (1) No suit or prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person for
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or arule or order
made thereunder.

(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Government for any damage
caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done
in pursuance of this Act or any rule or order or direction made thereunder.

13. The Central Government, may by notification in Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.

Punishment
for
contravention
of the
provisions of
the Act.

Punishment
for false
information.

Cognizance
of offence.

Burden of
proof.

Jurisdiction
of courts.

Power to
exempt in
certain cases.

Protection of
action taken
under this
Act.

Power to
make rules.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

There is an urgent need to encourage the use and development of indigenous iron and
steel in industries by giving constructive preference in procurement. In view of the major
changes introduced in the Indian economy through liberalization since July, 1991, the need
is felt for giving encouragement to articles, materials, supplies which have been mined,
produced or manufactured within the country for safeguarding and promoting the interest of
domestic industries.

In a developing country like India, the Government’s role in infrastructure projects
like power, road, national highway, ports, communication, railway tracks and bridges, defence
activities, refineries, etc. continues to be predominant. The public procurement of raw materials
and inputs for the purpose of various ongoing and incoming projects plays a crucial role in
generating a high demand for various industrial products in a country, like India which is at
the threshold of take-off stage of all round economic development.

It is the primary concern of the State, be it highly developed or developing, to see that
the domestic industries set up with the help of massive investment, manpower and technology
continue to receive a positive support in the form of higher demand generation. In situations
where the inputs procured from the domestic sources satisfy all eligibility criteria like prices,
technical dimensions and delivery schedules and the onus of providing the finance either
from any public resources or from borrowed fund by State or public agency is crucial for
these projects of national importance, it can have a preferential treatment for procurement
from domestic sources. Such measure is compatible to the agreements internationally
undertaken. The iron and steel projects (ferrous metal) including structurals plates, sheets,
coils and special products in that category are indigenously available and globally accepted.
However, exports of steel from India has been subjected to various duty restrictions imposed
by other countries. On the other hand, due to import liberalized scenario, substantial torrages
of steel products at very low prices some of whom are seconds and rejects are being imported
into the country. This has caused irreparable damage to the domestic industry who have
made massive investment to install state-of-the-art technology to cater to the changing
pattern of demand. It is expedient in the public interest to develop the indigenous industries
without affecting in any way the quality and other aspects of the overall development, As
such the Bill intends to encourage the growth and development of indigenous industry in
the country.

New Delhi; SUNIL KHAN
April 5, 2002.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 13 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to the matters of detail only.

The delegation of legislative power, therefore, is of anormal character.


A

BILL jt
4
view the liberalisation of economic policy and changes introduced in trade policies a
; thereunder

(Shri Sunil Khan, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MAND—6421S—0905-2002.