10

As INTRODUCED IN Lok 58818

न Y2MAY woe

Bill No. 41 of 2006

THE PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES (EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES,
PROTECTION OF RIGHTS AND FULL PARTICIPATION)
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006

By
Suri M. Suivanna, M.P.

A
BILL

further to amend the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of
Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities,
Protection of Rights and Full Participation) (Amendment) Act, 2006.

(2) It shall come into force at once.

2. For section 31 of Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights
and Full Participation) Act, 1995, (hereinafter referred to as the Principal Act), the following
section shall be substituted, namely:— ,

"31. All educational institutions shall provide or cause to be provided amanuensis
to all such disabled students at the time of final examination or otherwise as the
institutions deem fit.

Short title and
commencement.

Substitution of

new sections
for section 31.

Educational
institutions
to provide
amanuensis to
all disabled
students.


2 ँ

Reservation 31A. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other rule, order or law for '
है ner of the time being in force, or any judgement of any court or any other judicial authority
isl

or tribunal, every educational institution whether under the State or privately

managed, including an institution imparting higher and technical education, shall

oe at least five per cent., of seats in that institution in favour of disabled
दर Beet f

persons.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

At present there is no provision for reservation for disabled persons in educational
institutions including those imparting higher and technical education. The Persons with
Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995 ought
to have provided for this, but did not provide for reservation.

Moreover, educational institutions should be sensitised more about the concerns of
disabled persons. The disabled persons, though intelligent, are not able to score high marks
due to their physical disabilities. At present, only blind or partially blind candidates are
allowed the use of scribe. This facility should be extended to all disabled persons. Therefore,
it is proposed that all disabled persons may be allowed to use scribe to take the examination
on their behalf.

The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.

New एड; M.SHIVANNA
March 6, 2006.


Educational
institutions
to provide
amanuensis
to students
with visual
handicap.

= ANNEXURE
Extract from the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights
and Full Participation) Act, 1995
“. (ActNo. 1 oF 1996)

* * * * * *

31. All educational institutions shall provide or cause to be provided amanuensis to _
blind students and students with or low vision. :

* * * * * *



- LOK SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of
Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995.

(Shri M. Shivanna, M.P)

MGIPMRND—206LS(S3)—01-05-2006.