1
THE SENIOR CITIZENS (PROVISION OF GERIATRIC AND
DEMENTIA CARE) BILL, 2014
By
SHRI BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB, M.P .
A
BILL
to provide for care of senior citizens suffering from dementia and provision of geriatric
care facilities and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Senior Citizens (Provision of Geriatric and Dementia
Care) Act, 2014.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government",—
(i) in relation to a Union territory, means the Central Government;
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. 41 of  2014
Definitions.
5
AS  INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(ii) in relation to a State, means the Government of that State;
(b) "children" includes son, daughter, grandson and grand-daughter but does
not include a minor;
(c) "dementia patient" means a person suffering from Alzheimer's disease, vascular
dementia, fronto-temporal dementia or any other related cognitive disorder;
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made by the appropriate Government
under this Act; and
(e) "senior citizens" means any person being a citizen of India, who has attained
the age of sixty years.
3. (1) The appropriate Government shall set up a Geriatric Care Unit in every district
headquarters hospital to provide care in geriatric disorders to senior citizens.
(2) Every hospital, whether run by the Government or a private entity, with a capacity
of two hundred beds for in-patient treatment, shall have a department of Geriatrics.
(3) The appropriate Government shall constitute day-care centres for senior citizens
in every district.
4. Every State shall develop, in at least one medical college situated in the State, the
facilities for imparting education in geriatric medicine and imparting training in geriatric
care to nurses and other paramedical staff.
5. Every appropriate Government shall constitute in hospitals run by it, a sub-speciality
Dementia Care Unit, whether under the Geriatric Care Unit constituted under section 3 or
otherwise.
6. The appropriate Government shall conduct a survey of patients suffering from
dementia and a State-wise database of such patients shall be maintained.
7. Every dementia patient shall be paid a monthly attendance allowance at such rate as
may be prescribed by the appropriate Government:
Provided that in the case of a patient suffering from the Alzheimer's disease or such
other severe variant of dementia as may be specified by the appropriate Government, the
attendance allowance payable shall not be less than twice the amount of old age pension
granted or grantable by the appropriate Government to senior citizens.
8. (1) The maintenance and care of dementia patients shall be the responsibility of their
children.
(2) The abandonment or disregard of dementia patients by their children shall be an
offence which shall be punishable with imprisonment upto six months or fine upto rupees
fifty thousand or both.
9. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty.
10. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument having
effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
Geriatric care
for senior
citizens.
Education in
geriatric
medicine and
training in
geriatric care.
Constitution
of Dementia
Care Unit.
Survey of
Dementia
Patients.
Attendance
allowance to
dementia
patients.
Duty of
children of
dementia
patients to
look after
their parents.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power of
Central
Government
to make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have efect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
India has a sizeable population of senior citizens and is growing by the day. Almost all
senior citizens suffer from geriatric disorders—most common among them being the cognitive
disorders. Severe forms of such disorders are the Alzheimer's disease and other forms of
dementia. The patients suffering from such disorders often do not get proper care from their
children and are even abandoned by them. The Government too has not paid enough attention
to the need to provide geriatric care and treatment in general, and to the people suffering
from different forms of dementia in particular.
2. Keeping in view the above hardships being faced by senior citizens the Bill seeks to
make the following provisions:—
(i) setting up of geriatric care units and day-care centres in all districts for senior
citizens;
(ii) promotion of geriatric medicine education and training in geriatric care;
(iii) survey of dementia patients, constitution of dementia care units in hospitals
and attendance allowance to dementia patients; and
(iv) abandonment and disregard of dementia patients by their children to be an
offence.
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; BHARTRUHARI  MAHTAB
June 26, 2014.
4

5
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for setting up of Geriatric Care Units and Day-Care
Centres for senior citizens in all districts. Clause 4 provides for developing facilities for
education and training in geriatrics and geriatric care while clause 5 provides for constitution
of Dementia Care Units in certain hospitals. Clause 6 provides for survey of dementia patients
and clause 7 provides for grant of attendance allowance to such patients.
The expenditure on account of implementation of above provisions in Union territories
shall be met out of the Consolidated Fund of India. A non-recurring expenditure of about
rupees one crore and a recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty lakh per annum may be
involved in constituting and maintaining geriatric care units, day-care centres and dementia
care units in each district. The development of facilities for education and training under
clause 4 may involve non-recurring expenditure of rupees fifty crore and a recurring
expenditure of rupees five crore per annum. The expenditure on attendance allowance cannot
be estimated as it would depend upon the number of dementia patients identified by the
survey to be conducted.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make, by notification in the
Official Gazette, rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The rules made by the Central
Government are required to be laid before each House of Parliament.
The matters in respect of which rules may be made or notification issued in accordance
with the aforesaid provisions of the Bill are matters of procedure and administrative details
and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative
power is, therefore, of a normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for care of senior citizens suffering from dementia and provision of geriatric
care facilities and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—779LS(S3)—01.07.2014.