As introduced in Lok Sabha
                   
                                                       
          
Bill No.  41 of  2024
THE PROMOTION OF RATIONAL THOUGHT BILL, 2024 
By
Shri Benny Behanan,  M.P.
A
BILL
to promote rational thought, critical thinking and evidence-based decision-making 
 in society with a view to create an environment that fosters the  
cultivation of reason and intellectual discourse.
Whereas, rational thought and critical thinking are essential for informed decision-
making, fostering innovation and creating a society based on reason and evidence; 
And Whereas, a culture that values rational discourse contributes to the well-being of 
individuals, communities and the nation as a whole; 
Now, Therefore, it is expedient to enact legislation to promote and uphold the principles 
of rational thought,
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—      
1. (1) This  Act may be called The Promotion of Rational Thought Act, 2024. Short title, 
extent and 
commencement.

(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,–
(a) “Appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of 
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “Board” means the Board for the Promotion of Rational Thought and Critical 
Thinking constituted under section 6; 
(c) “critical thinking” means the intellectually disciplined process of actively and 
skillfully conceptualizing, applying, analyzing and /or evaluating information to make 
a reasoned decision about any concept;  
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and 
(e) “rational thought” means the thought based on reason and logic to consider and 
analyze any information with a view to arrive at systematic conclusion.
 3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, it 
shall be duty of the appropriate Government to—
(i) promote rational thought and critical thinking in educational institutions, 
workplaces and public discourse;
(ii) encourage evidence-based decision-making in their policies, public 
programmes and social initiatives; and
(iii) foster a culture that values intellectual discourse, respectful debate and open-
mindedness, 
in such manner as may be prescribed.
4. The appropriate Government shall, for the purposes of promotion of rational thought 
and critical thinking by notification in the Official Gazette, formulate a policy provided 
that,–
(i) every educational institution may incorporate curricula and teaching 
methodologies that emphasize critical thinking, logic and scientific reasoning; and
(ii) teacher training programmes shall include component for fostering rational 
thought among students;
(iii) public awareness campaigns to promote the importance of rational thought, 
critical thinking, and evidence-based decision-making may be initiated in such manner 
as may be prescribed; and
(iv) the media organizations be encouraged to contribute in awareness campaigns 
initiated under clause (iii) by providing requisite platforms for rational discourse and 
fact-based reporting.
  5 . The Central Government shall provide requisite funds to institutions who 
are engaged in research on cognitive science, logical reasoning and educational 
methodologies that enhance rational thought and critical thinking.
2
5
10
20
35
30
Appropriate 
Government 
to promote 
rational thought 
and critical 
thinking in 
educational 
institutions and 
workplaces.
Formulation 
of policy for 
integration 
of critical 
thinking, logic 
and scientific 
reasoning in 
education.
15
25
Definitions.
Central 
Government to 
provide funds 
to institutions 
for research 
on cognitive 
science, logical 
reasoning and 
educational 
methodologies.

 6 . ( 1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute a Board to be known as the Board for the Promotion of Rational Thought 
and Critical Thinking for implementing the provisions of this Act.
      ( 2) The Board shall consist of a Chairperson and such other members as may be 
prescribed.
 ( 3) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service 
of the Chairperson and members of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed. 
7. The Board shall– 
     (1) monitor the proper implementation of the provisions of this Act; and
     (2) evaluate the impact of rational thought and critical thinking in the society, 
in such manner as may be prescribed.
8. The Board shall prepare, in such form and at such time each financial year, as may 
be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of its activities during the previous 
financial year, and submit the report to the Central Government.
9. Any person or institution found violating the provisions of this Act shall be liable for 
penalties as prescribed by regulations.
10. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament 
by law in this behalf, provide adequate funds, from time to time, for carrying out the 
purposes of this Act.
11. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other 
law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act.
12. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
      (2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon 
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule.
     (3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.
 
3
5
Functions of the 
Board.
10
15
Annual report.
Power to make 
rules.
20
25
30
Constitution of 
Board for the 
promotion of 
rational thought 
and critical 
thinking.
Penalties.
Central 
Government to 
provide funds.
Act to 
supplement 
other laws.

STATEMENT  OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 Rational thought and critical thinking are the bedrock of a progressive and informed 
society. In recognizing the fundamental importance of fostering intellectual curiosity, 
logical reasoning, and evidence-based decision-making, the proposed Bill seeks to:—
 ( a) emphasize the integration of curricula and teaching methodologies in 
educational institutions that focus on nurturing critical thinking skills, logical 
reasoning, and scientific inquiry; 
 ( b) foster an environment that encourages questioning and analysis aimed to 
empower individuals with the tools necessary for sound decision-making;
 ( c) promote the use of empirical evidence and rational analysis  in government 
policies, public programmes, and societal initiatives, evidence-based decision-making 
to ensure that decisions are grounded in facts rather than unsupported opinions;
 ( d) cultivate a culture that values intellectual discourse, respectful debate, and 
open-mindedness by encouraging individuals to engage in constructive conversations 
based on reason and evidence and seeks to build a society that celebrates diverse 
perspectives while upholding the principles of rational thought;
 ( e) recognize the influential role of media in shaping public opinion, by 
encouraging media organizations to contribute to the promotion of rational thought;
 ( f) provide platforms for well-informed discussions and fact-based reporting is 
essential in countering misinformation and promoting public understanding;
 ( g) advance our understanding of cognitive processes and effective educational 
methodologies, allocate resources to support research in areas such as cognitive 
science and logical reasoning as a commitment to research is essential for continually 
refining educational practices that enhance rational thought;
  (h) establish a monitoring and evaluation mechanism to assess the impact of its 
provisions on society; and
 ( i) submission of reports to the Parliament to provide insights into the progress 
made and areas requiring further attention, ensuring the continuous improvement of 
initiatives promoting rational thought. 
 In conclusion, the proposal  "Promotion of Rational Thought Bill" is a forward-looking 
legislative initiative aimed at fortifying the intellectual foundations of our society. By 
prioritizing critical thinking, evidence-based decision-making, and a culture of reasoned 
discourse, the Act envisions a society better equipped to navigate the complexities of the 
modern world. 
 Hence this Bill.
     New Delhi;                                           BENNY BEHANAN
July 3,  2024
4

 FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
 Clause 5 of the Bill provides that Central Government to provide requisite resources 
for research on cognitive science, logical reasoning and educational methodologies.  
Clause 6 provides for constitution of Board for the promotion of rational thought and critical 
thinking. Clause 10 provides that the Central Government shall provide adequate funds  
for implementing the provisions of the Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees two 
hundred and fifty crore will be involved as recurring expenditure per annum from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. 
 A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be involved.
 
5

 MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
 Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only the delegation 
of legislative power is of normal character. 
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to promote rational thought, critical thinking and evidence-based decision-making 
 in society with a view to create an environment that fosters the  
cultivation of reason and intellectual discourse.
————
(Shri Benny Behanan, M.P.)