BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Special Irrigation Development Fund (For Forest
Areas) Act, 2009.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) 'forest area' means any district where more than thirty-three percent of the
total geographical area is covered by forests and has been declared as the forest area
by the State Government concerned or the Central Government, as the case may be, for
the purposes of this Act;
(b) 'Fund' means the Special Irrigation Development Fund constituted under
section 3 of this Act; and
(c) 'prescribed' means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Bill No.  41 of  2009
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Definitions.
Short title and
extent.
5
10
THE SPECIAL IRRIGATION DEVELOPMENT FUND
(FOR FOREST AREAS) BILL, 2009
By
SHRI HANSRAJ GANGARAMJI AHIR, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the setting up of a Special Irrigation Development Fund for the development
of irrigation facilities in the forest areas and for matters connected therewith.

2
3. (1) The Central Government shall set up a Fund to be known as the Special Irrigation
Development Fund for the development of the irrigation facilities in the forest areas of the
country.
(2) The Central Government shall, from time to time, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, contribute such amount to the Fund as may be necessary
to carry out the provisions of the Act.
4. (1) A State Government or the Union territory Administration, as the case may be,
shall forward the details of the required infrastructure and the estimated cost of the irrigation
development project of the forest areas falling in their respective territories to the Central
Government.
(2) The Central Government, on receipt of such details, shall provide funds to the
State Government or the Union territory Administration, as the case may be, for the
development of irrigation facilities in the forest areas in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The funds provided under sub-section (2) shall be used for the following purposes:—
(i) expeditious completion of ongoing irrigation projects in forest areas;
(ii) construction of small ponds for the use of farmers in the forest areas;
(iii) digging wells and bore wells in the forest areas;
(iv) installing electric pumps for irrigation in the forest areas;
(v) providing pipes for irrigation to the farmers living in the forest areas;
(vi) meeting costs incurred on implementing the "Lift Irrigation Scheme" based
on the water resources of the forest areas;
(vii) renovation of old ponds and water reservoirs in forest areas; and
(viii) construction of canals.
(4) The State Governments and the Union territory Administrations getting funds
under sub-section ( 2) shall furnish the details of  expenditure incurred on the irrigation
development works in forests areas to the Central Government in such manner and in such
time as may be prescribed.
(5) In case any State Government or Union territory Administration fails to utilise the
funds for the purpose it was released or fails to produce the details under sub-section (4), the
Central Government shall withhold sanction of funds to such State Government or Union
territory Administration.
5. (1) The Central Government may make rules for carrying out the purposes of this
Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification  in the rule or both
the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.
State
Government/
Union
territory
Administration
to send details
of the
infrastructure
and cost
required for the
development
of irrigation
facility in
forest areas.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Special
Irrigation
Development
Fund.

\\SERVER5 \F\ BILL_2009 /RS/ 2454RS
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980, has put some  restrictions on the use of forest
land for non-forest purposes. Due to this, irrigation projects and other development activities
cannot be undertaken in the forest areas. It is neither justifiable nor appropriate to deprive
the people who have been living in forest areas since time immemorial from getting facilities
for their upliftment. A large number of proposals relating to irrigation projects in the forest
areas are pending approval in the Ministry concerned. Due to lack of irrigation facilities,
people living in the forest areas have to depend on rain despite having the water reservoirs.
Due to non-availability of irrigation facilities, the production in forest areas is low which
compels them to live in extreme poverty. The agricultural production has suffered due to
increase in number of small holdings as a result of division in families. The small holding has
also made it difficult for them to run their families. In case, the irrigation facility is provided
even to small holdings of land it may enable the farmers to sustain their lives. Therefore, the
Government should take initiative to create a Fund for the betterment of farmers.
It is becoming more and more difficult for the farmers living in forest areas to cultivate
their lands due to non-availability of irrigation facilities. Farmers are committing suicide due
to heavy indebtedness to local money lenders who charge high rates of interest. To save the
farmers of the forest areas from the hardship presently being faced by them, there is a need
to constitute a Special Irrigation Development Fund for the forest areas.
State Governments do not have sufficient funds for the development of Irrigation
Projects in the forest areas. Therefore, there is a need to set up a Fund by the
Central Government for the development of Irrigation Projects in the forest areas to facilitate
better irrigation facilities in the forest areas and to ensure better living standard to the
farmers of these areas.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; HANSRAJ GANGARAMJI AHIR
June 22, 2009.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the setting up of a Special Irrigation Development
Fund for the forest areas. Clause 4 provides for the release of funds to the State Government
for the development of irrigation projects in the forest areas. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, is
likely to involve an annual recurring expenditure of rupees fifty thousand crores from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five thousand crores is also likely to be
involved.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

GMGIPMRND—2458LS(S5)—06.07.2009.
LOK   SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for the setting up of a Special Irrigation Development Fund for the development
of irrigation facilities in the forest areas and for matters connected therewith.
—————
(Shri Hansraj Gangaramji Ahir, M.P.)