As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

"3 DEL 200

Bill No, 41 of 2004

THE RURALLABOUR WELFARE FUND BILL, 2004
BY
‘Suri SuREsH CHANDEL, M.P.
A
BILL

to provide for the establishment of a rural labour welfare fund for the welfare of the
rural labour employed in the agriculture and other rural occupations and for matters
connected therewith,

Be itenacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (7) This Act may be called the Rural Labour Welfare Fund Act, 2004. Short title,
extent and

(2) It extends to the whole of India. commencement.

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Definitions.


2

(a) "employer" means the cultivator, orchard owner, pouliry farm owner, agency,
Society including co-operative society or any establishment in a rural area which
employs rural labour;

(6) "Fund" means the Rural Labour Welfare Fund established under section 3;

(०) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and

(4) "rural labour" means any person engaged in agriculture, sericulture, poultry,
horticulture, handicrafts or any related occupation in rural areas as a wage earner,
whether in cash or kind, for his livelihood and includes a person engaged through a
Contractor or engaged as a self employed person.

Establishment 3. (0) With effect from such date, as the Central Government may, by notification in

of Fund, the Official Gazette, specify inthis behalf, there shall be constituted for the purposes ofthis
Acta Fund fo be called the Rural Labour Welfare Fund which shall be operated by an
Authority with its headquarters at Shimla in the State of Himachal Pradesh,

(2) The Central Government shail after due appropriation made by Parliament in this
behalf, credit to the Fund in each financial year such sums of money as it considers necessary
for carrying out the purposes of this Act,

Utilisation of 4 ‘The Fund shall be utilized by the Central Government to meet the expenditure in

Fund. Connection with measures which in the opinion of the Central Government, after consulting
the Goveraments of the States and Union territories, are necessary or expedient to promote
the welfare of the rural labour and in particular;—

(2) to defray the cost of measures to be carried out for the benefit of rural labour
towards—

(0 providing water supply for drinking and other purposes;
(i providing educational facilities:

(iii) the improvement of standard of living and nutrition;
(8) amelioration of the social conditions;

0) providing housing and recreational facilities;

(7) rendering financiat assistance in case of infirmity or disability due to
accident, old age, etc.

(vii) providing such other welfare measures as may be prescribed,

(4) to grant loan, assistance or Subsidy to Government of any State, Union
Territory Administration, local authority or any organisation for. any scheme approved
by the Central Government for the purposes connected with the welfare of rural labour;

(०) to pay annually grant-in-aid to Government of ‘any State or Union territory
administration, local authority or an employer or any other organisation which provides
to the satisfaction of the Central Government such welfare measures and facilities of
the prescribed standard for the benefit of rural labour;

(4) to meet the cost of administering the Fund;

(०) any other expenditure which the Central Government may direct to be defrayed
from the Fund.

State 5. (1) The Central Government may constitute as many Advisory Committees as it
Advisory deens fit to advise the Central Goveramenton. such matters arising out of the: implementation
Committees. oFthe provisions of this Actor administration of the fund:

Provided that at least one. Advisory Committee for each State and Union territory
shal! be cotistituted by the Central Government in consultation with the respective
State Government and Union. territory administration.


3

(2) The Chairman and such nuinber of other members, as may be prescribed, ofeach
| ‘Committee shall be appointed by the Central Government.

(3) the term of office and other conditions of service of the Chairman and other members
‘shall be such as may be prescribed.

6. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Central Advisory Committee to
coordinate the work of the Advisory Committees constituted under section Sand to advise
७ Central Government on any matter arising out of the implementation of provisions of
this Act.

(2) The Chairmax: and such number of other members as may be prescribed of the
itral Advisory Committee shali be appointed by the Central Government.

(3) The term of office and other conditions of service of the Chairman and other
1005 shall be such as may be prescribed.

7. (1) The Central Goverament may appoint as many as Rural Labour Welfare Fund.

Commissioners, Inspectors and such other officers and staff as it deems necessary for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.

(2) Every person appointed under this section shall be deemed to be a public servant
lin the meaning cf section 2! of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.

(3) Any officer or inspector appointed under this Act, may,

(०) with such assistance, if any, as he may deem fit, inspect at any reasonable
time in any place which he considers necessary for carrying out the purposes of this
Act;

(6) do within such place anything necessary for the proper discharge of his
duties; and

(०) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed.

8. The Central Government may require a State Government or a Union Territory
inistration or a local authority or an employer to furnish for the purposes of this Act,
statistical and other information in such form and within such period as may be prescribed.

9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
or carrying out the purposes of this Act.

(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
may provide for, —

(a) the manner in which the fund may be applied;
(8) the conditions governing the grant of loans or subsidy;
(c) the conditions governing grant-in-aid;

(4) the standard of welfare measures and facilities to be provided out of the
fund;

(e) the composition of the Advisory Committees and Central Advisory Committee
constituted under sections 5 and 6 respectively and the manner in which the members
thereof shall be appointed;

(/ the term of office of such members, the allowances, ifany, payable to them and
the manner in which the Advisory Committee and the Central Advisory Committce
shall conduct their business;

(g) the recruitment, conditions of service and duties of all persons appointed
under section 7;

(h) the powers that may be exercised by an officer or inspector appointed under
section 7.

Central
Advisory
Committee,

Appointment
°
Commissioners,
Inspectors
and other
officers,

State
Government,
ete. to furnish
requisite
information

Power 16
make rules


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS.

India resides in villages and 85 percent, of its population earns its livelihood from
agriculture. There are cultivators, orchard owners, poultry owners, agricultural workers and
home based workers in the rural areas. However, their wages and income are meagre and
many of them do not get employment throughout the year. This rural labour also becomes an
easy prey to the debt trap of the landlords and money lenders who force them to become
bonded labourers. Most of them are very poor and are living in distress for generations. In
a Welfare State like ours there are no welfare schemes or funds for these hapless rural
labourers whereas in the industrial sector there are Labour Welfare Boards and cess is levied
and collected through legislative measures in order to provide them with various amenities
including housing, education and medical care. But the rural labour are unorganized and
thus are neglected even by the State,

It is, therefore, necessary that in order to ameliorate the plight of rural workers the
Central Government should establish a Rural Labour Welfare Fund for financing adequately
and systematically the welfare measures to be carried out for the rural and agricultural labour
throughout the country so as to achieve the goals of welfare State in its true sense.

Hence this Bill.

‘New Delhi; SURESH CHANDEL
June 25,2004,


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Rural Labour Welfare Fund,
Clause 5 provides for the constitution of Advisory Committees. Clause 6 provides for
constitution of a Central Advisory Committee. Clause 7 provides for appointment of Rural
Labour Welfare Commissioners, Inspectors and such other officers and staff for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. The therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India but it is not possible at this stage to give the precise details of
the expenditure that would be involved. It is, however, estimated that it will involvea recurring
expenditure of about rupees two hundred twenty five crore per annum.

It will also involve a non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty five lakh.



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 9 of the Bill provides that the Central Government may make rules for carrying

out the purposes of this Bill. The delégation of legislation power will relate to matters of
details only and is of a normal



LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the establishment of a rural labour welfare fund for the welfare of the rural
labour employed in the agriculture and other rural occupations and for matters connected
therewith.

(Shri Suresh Chandel, M.P.)

MGIPMRNO—1265LS—14.07.2004.