                                  As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 41 of 2021
  THE CLIMATE CHANGE (NET ZERO CARBON) BILL, 2021
By
SHRI JAYANT SINHA, M.P.
ARRANgEmENT Of ClAUsEs
—————
CHAPTER I
PRElImINARY
ClAUsEs
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
THE Climate Change COmmIssION
3. Establishment of Climate Change Commission.
4. Functions of the Commission.
5. Commission to act independently.
6. Reports of the Commission.
7. Laying and publication of Reports of the Commission, etc.
CHAPTER III
EmIssION REDUCTION 2050 TARgET
8. Target for 2050.
9. Review of inclusion of emissions from international shipping and   
 aviation in 2050 target.
10. Other 2050 target reviews.
11. Recommendations to amend 2050 target.
12. Government to achieve 2050 target, etc.
13. Setting Emissions Budget.
14. Contents of Emissions Budget.
15. Commission to recommend on Emissions Budget.
16. Government’s response to Commission.
17. Publication of emissions budgets in Gazette, etc.
18. Revision of emissions budgets.
19. Power to bank or borrow.

ii
20. Requirement for emissions reduction plan.
21. Commission to advise on emissions reduction plans.
22. Government to prepare and make emissions reduction plans    
 publicly available.
23. Commission to monitor progress towards meeting emissions budgets.
24. Commission to report annually on results of monitoring.
25. Commission to report at end of emissions budget period.
26. Effect of failure to meet 2050 target and emissions budgets.
27. Guidance for Departments, etc.
28. National climate change risk assessment.
29. National adaptation plan.
30. National adaptation plan to be laid before each House of     
 Parliament and made publicly available.
31. Progress reports on national adaptation plan.
32. Power to request information .
33. Regulations relating to requiring provision of information.
CHAPTER V
MIsCEllANEOUs
34. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Commission.
35. Power to remove difficulties.
36. Power of Central Government to make rules.
37. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.
ClAUsEs

As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 41 of 2021
THE CLIMATE CHANGE (NET ZERO CARBON) BILL, 2021
By
SHRI JAYANT SINHA, M.P.
A
BILL
to  provide  for  a  framework by which India may develop and implement clear 
and stable climate change policies that contribute to the global efforts 
under the Paris Agreement to limit the global average temperature 
increase to 1.5° Celsius above pre-industrial levels and  
allows India to prepare for, and adapt to, the effects 
of climate change and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto.
WHEREAS India has made significant commitments in its Intended Nationally 
Determined Contribution (NDC) submitted to the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in 2015 as part of the Paris Agreement;
AND WHEREAS India’s headline Paris pledge was to reduce the emission 
intensity of its Gross Domestic Product (GHG emission per unit GDP) by 33-35% 
over 2005 levels by  2030;

2
AND WHEREAS the Paris Agreement is a legally binding international treaty 
on climate change; it was adopted by 196 Parties COP 21 (known as Conference of 
the Parties) in Paris, on 12 December 2015 and entered into force on 4 November 
2016; its goal is to limit global warming to well below 2, preferably to 1.5 degree 
Celsius, compared to pre-industrial levels;
AND WHEREAS it is considered necessary to achieve this long-term 
temperature goal, countries aim to reach global peaking of greenhouse gas 
emissions as soon as possible to achieve a climate neutral world by mid-century.
BE it enacted  by  Parliament  in  the  Seventy-second  Year of  the Republic of 
India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRElImINARY
 1. (1) This Act may be called the Climate Change (Net Zero Carbon)  Act, 2021. 
     (2) It extends to the whole of India.
    (3)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the official Gazette, appoint. 
 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —
(a) “2050 target” means reduction in net account emission of green house  
gases, other than biogenic methane, to zero by the calendar year beginning  
1 January, 2050. 
(b) “biogenic methane” means all methane greenhouse gases produced 
from the agriculture and waste sectors (as reported in the India Greenhouse Gas 
Inventory);
(c)  “Commission” means the Climate Change Commission established 
under section 3;
(d)  “emission” means emissions of greenhouse gases;
(e) “emissions budget” means the quantity of emissions permitted in each 
emissions budget period as a net amount of carbon dioxide equivalent;
(f) “emissions budget period” means the five year period for the years 
2022 to 2050, as specified under sub-section ( 3) of section 16 except for the 
period 2022 to 2025 which is a four year period;
(g) “emissions reduction plan” means a plan for achieving an emissions 
budget prepared in accordance with sections 25 to 27;
(h) “Fund” means the Environmental Relief Fund established under        
sub-section (3) of section 7A of the Public Liability Insurance Act, 1991;
(i)  “Government” means the Central Government;
(j) “gross emissions” means India’s total emissions from the agriculture, 
energy, industrial processes and product use, and waste sectors (as reported in 
the India Greenhouse Gas Inventory);
(k) “India Greenhouse Gas Inventory” means the annual inventory report 
under Article 4  of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change;
(l) “net accounting emiss ions” means the total of gross emissions and 
emissions from land use, land—use change and forestry (as reported in the India 
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
6 of 1991
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

3
Greenhouse Gas Inventory), except— 
(a) removals, including from land use, land—use change, and forestry 
(as reported in the India Greenhouse Gas Inventory); and
(b) offshore mitigation 
(m) “offshore mitigation” means emissions reductions and removals, or 
allowances from emissions trading schemes— 
 (i) that originate from outside India; and 
 (ii) that are expressed as a quantity of carbon dioxide  equivalent; and 
 (iii) that are robustly accounted for to ensure that, among other things, 
double counting is avoided; and 
 (iv) that either represent an actual additional, measurable, and verifiable 
reduction or removal of an amount of carbon dioxide equivalent; or 
 (v) that are an emissions trading scheme allowance that triggers the 
reduction of carbon dioxide equivalent; 
(n) “Paris Agreement” means the agreement adopted in Paris on  
12 December 2015, and includes any amendments that are binding on India, 
from time to time;
(o) “Peoples Biodiversity Register” means the Register as defined by the 
Biological Diversity Act, 2002;
(p) “removals” means in relation to a removal activity—
(i) carbon dioxide equivalent greenhouse gases that are, as a result of 
the removal activity, removed from the atmosphere; or 
(ii) not released into the atmosphere; or 
(iii) a reduction from emissions reported in— 
(a) India’s annual inventory report under sub-section ( 2) of  
section 24; or 
(b) any emissions report from India under a successor international 
agreement. 
CHAPTER II
ClImATE CHANgE COmmIssION
3. (1) With effect from such date as the Government may, by notification, 
appoint, there shall be established for the purposes of this Act a Commission to 
be known as the Climate Change Commission.
 (2) The Commission shall consist of: —
 (a) A Chairperson, to be recommended by a panel comprising of 
the Prime Minister of India, the Leader of Opposition in the House of 
the People and the Chief Justice of India:
       Provided that in case of the post of Leader of Opposition in the 
Lok Sabha lying vacant, the Leader of the single largest party in the 
Opposition in the House of the People shall be included in the panel.
 (b) A Deputy Chairperson;
Establishment of 
the Climate Change
Commission.
18 of 2003
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
 (c) not exceeding five members from indigenous communities and 
appointed as per the Peoples Biodiversity Register;
 (d) not exceeding three specialists who have technical and 
professional skills, experience, expertise and innovative approaches, 
relevant to the environmental, ecological, social, economic and 
distributional effects of climate change and climate change policy 
intervention, to be appointed by the Government in such manner as 
may be prescribed:
      Provided that at least one-fifth members of the Commission shall 
be women and at least two-fifth members shall belong to the Scheduled 
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.
(3) The members, other than the Chairperson shall be recommended by 
a Nominating Committee to be constituted by the Government comprising the 
following members, namely:—
 (a) the Chairperson of the Commission; and
 (b) four or more persons who, in the opinion of the Government, have 
the relevant skills or experience to identify suitably qualified candidates:
      Provided that if the post of Chairperson is lying vacant, the 
Nominating Committee shall comprise of five or more persons who, in 
the opinion of the Government, have the relevant skills or experience to 
identify suitably qualified candidates.
(4) The Nominating Committee constituted under sub-section (3) shall, —
(a) on request of the Government, nominate one or more person who, 
in its the opinion, are suitably qualified to be appointed to be members of 
the Commission;
 (b) before nominating a person for appointment,—
(i) publicly call for expressions of interest in being appointed; and
(ii) consult any person or group who may have an interest in being a 
member of the Commission, including— 
 (a) those included in the Peoples Biodiversity Register; and
 (b) any person or group that the Government has identified as 
having an interest.
(5) A member may resign from his office by giving notice in writing to the 
Government and on such resignation being accepted, he shall be deemed to have 
vacated his office.
(6) A person shall be disqualified from being nominated or appointed if he,—
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

5
(i) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central 
Government, involves moral turpitude, or;
(ii) has been adjudged an insolvent, or;
(iii) is of unsound mind and stands so declared so by a competent court.
(7) The Government may in consultation with the Chief Justice of India and the 
Leader of Opposition in the House of the People, at any time, remove from office 
any member, after giving him a reasonable opportunity of being heard against the 
proposed removal if such member —
(i) has been adjudged an insolvent, or;
(ii) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central 
Government, involves moral turpitude, or;
(iii) is of unsound mind and stands so declared so by a competent court, 
or;
(iv) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect 
prejudicially his functions as a minister, or
(v) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office 
prejudicial to public interest.
(8) The Government shall, provide such number of officers and other 
employees to the Commission as it may consider necessary for the purpose of 
effective implementation of the provisions of this Act.
(9) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions 
of appointment of Chairperson, Deputy-Chairperson, members, officers and 
employees of the Commission shall be such as may be prescribed:
         Provided that in recommending the appointment of a member of the 
Commission, the Government shall recommend a term of office that ensures that 
not more than two members have their terms of office expire in any calendar  
year.
4. (1) The Commission shall,—
 (a) review the 2050 target and, if necessary, recommend changes to the  
target;
 (b) provide independent, expert advice to the Government on mitigating 
climate change (including through reducing emissions of greenhouse gases) 
and adapting to the effects of climate change; 
 (c) monitor and review the Government’s progress towards its emissions 
reduction and adaptation goals;
 (d) advice the Government to enable the preparation of emissions budgets;
Functions of the 
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

6
 (e) recommend necessary amendments to emissions budgets;
 (f) advice the Government about the quantity of emissions that may be 
banked or borrowed between 2 adjacent emissions budget periods;
 (g) advice the Government to enable the preparation of an emissions 
reduction plan;
 (h) monitor and report on progress towards meeting emissions budgets and 
the 2050 target; 
 (i) prepare national climate change risk assessments;
 (j) prepare reports on the implementation of the national adaptation plan 
and other reports as may be requested by the Government; and
 (k) undertake such other activities as may be assigned to it, from time to 
time, for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Commission shall, while performing its functions under sub-section 
(1), consider, where relevant—
 (a) current available scientific knowledge; 
 (b) existing technology and anticipated technological developments, 
including the costs and benefits of early adoption of these technologies in 
India; 
 (c) the likely economic effects; 
 (d) social, cultural, environmental, and ecological circumstances, including 
differences between sectors and regions; 
 (e) the distribution of benefits, costs, and risks between generations; 
 (f) responses to climate change taken or planned by parties to the Paris   
 Agreement or to the Convention;
 (g) proactive engagement with experts to perform its functions, duties, and  
 exercise powers; 
 (h) participation by the public where it considers necessary;
 (i) publishing and inviting submissions on discussion papers and draft 
reports; and
 (j) undertake any other type of consultation that it considers necessary for 
the performance of its functions and duties under this Act.
5. (1) The Commission shall act independently while performing its functions 
and duties and exercising its powers under this Act:
          Provided that the Government may direct the Commission to have regard 
Commission to act
independently.
5
10
15
20
25
30

7
to the Government policy including,—
(a) recommending unit supply settings of the India emissions trading   
 scheme; and
(b) providing advice about India’s nationally determined contributions under 
the Paris Agreement in the report requested under sub-section (1) of section 6.
6. (1) The Government may, at any time, direct the Commission to prepare 
reports on matters related to reducing emissions of greenhouse gases and adapting to 
the effects of climate change.
(2) The Government shall, while directing the commission under sub-section 
(1), specify the terms of reference for the report, including— 
(a) the scope of the report; 
(b) requirements concerning consultation; 
(c) matters relating to the Commission working jointly with other agencies 
(including overseas agencies) concerned with the subject matter of the report; 
and
(d) the date by which the Commission shall submit its report to the 
Government.
(3) The Commission shall, on receiving directions from the Government under 
sub-section (1),—
(a) as soon as practicable, make the terms of reference publicly available; 
(b) prepare a report in accordance with the terms of reference; and
(c) submit the report to the Government.
7. (1) The Government shall cause to be laid a copy of every document including 
advice, report, recommendations or an assessment, received from the Commission, 
as soon as may be, but not later than ten days of its receiving, before each House of 
Parliament. 
CHAPTER III
EmIssION REDUCTION 2050 TARgET
8. (1) The Commission shall set the target for emissions reduction to be known 
as the 2050 target stating that net accounting emissions of greenhouse gases in a 
calendar year, other than biogenic methane, are zero by the calendar year beginning 
on 1 January 2050 and for each subsequent calendar year:
        Provided that the emissions reductions that meet or exceed those required 
by the target, the 2050 target shall be deemed to have met the target.
(2) The Commission shall, in addition to the 2050 target set under  
sub-section ( 1), set the target for biogenic methane emissions after undertaking 
relevant research and consultation.
Reports of the 
Commission.
Laying of          
documents received 
from Commission 
before Houses of 
Parliament.
Target for 2050.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

8
9. The Commission shall, as soon as practicable, recommend to the Government 
to amend target 2050, if necessary to include emissions from international shipping 
and aviation and, if so, the mechanism for amendment for such target.
10. (1) The Commission shall review the 2050 target and set an emissions budget 
for an emissions budget period beginning on or after 2036.
 (2) The Commission shall submit a detailed report on outcome of any review, 
including any recommendations made in accordance with section 11.
11. (1) The Commission may, on the basis of review under section 10, recommend 
a change to —
(a) the time frame for achievement of the 2050 target or a part thereof;
(b) the levels of emission reductions required by the 2050 target or a part 
thereof;
(c) the greenhouse gases, emissions and removals to which the 2050 target 
or a part thereof applies; and
(d) the mechanism to meet the 2050 target or a part thereof including limits 
on removals and offshore mitigation.
(2) The Commission may consider the following factors while recommending 
any change to the 2050 target under sub-section (1) —
 (i) global action in regard to reduction in emission;
 (ii) scientific understanding of climate change;
 (iii) India’s economic or fiscal circumstances;
 (iv) India’s obligations under relevant international agreements;
 (v) technological developments;
 (vi) distributional impacts;
 (vii) equity implications including generational equity;
 (viii) the principal risks and uncertainties associated with emissions 
reductions and removals; and
 (ix) social, cultural, environmental and ecological circumstances.
12. (1) The Central Government and the State Government shall endeavour 
towards achieving 2050 target.
 The Government shall, within twelve months after receiving a recommendation, 
inform the Commission in writing about reasons for departure, if any, from the 
Review of inclu-
sion of emissions 
from internation-
al     shipping and 
aviation in 2050 
target.
Other 2050 target 
reviews.
Recommendations 
to amend 2050 
target.
Government  to 
achieve 2050 target.
5
10
15
20
25
30

9
recommendation of the Commission.
(2) The Government shall, as soon as practicable, but not later than ten working 
days after it has informed to the Commission, upload the reasons on its website for 
information of the public.
13. (1) The Government shall set a series of emissions budgets, —
 (a) to meet the 2050 target set under sub-section (1) of section 8;
 (b) to contribute to the global efforts under the Paris Agreement to limit the 
global average temperature increase to 1.5° Celsius above pre-industrial levels; 
and
 (c) to meet emissions budgets domestically; and
 (d) to provide greater predictability for all those affected including 
households, businesses and investors, by giving advance information on the 
required emissions reductions and removals.
 (2) Emissions budgets set under sub-section (1) shall,—
  (a) from 31 December 2021, be three consecutive emissions budgets, one 
current and two prospective, in place at any one time;
  (b) be notified in the Gazette under section 17 as follows:—
  (i) for the emissions budget period from 2022 to 2025, by 31 December 
2021;
  (ii) for the emissions budget period from 2026 to 2030, by 31 December 
2021;
  (iii) for the emissions budget period from 2031 to 2035, by 31 December 
2021;
  (iv) for the emissions budget period from 2036 to 2040, by 31 December 
2025;
  (v) for the emissions budget period from 2041 to 2045, by 31 December 
2030;
  (vi) for the emissions budget period from 2046 to 2050, by 31 December 
2035; and
  (vii) for any subsequent emissions budget period, by 31 December not 
less than ten years before that emissions budget period commences.
 ( 3) The Government shall ensure that the net accounting emissions do not 
exceed the emissions budget for the relevant emissions budget period.
Setting emissions 
budgets.
5
10
15
20
25
30

10
14. (1) Each emission budget set under sub-section ( 1) of section 13 shall state 
the total emissions that may be permitted for the relevant emissions budget period, 
expressed as a net quantity of carbon dioxide equivalent including greenhouse gases.
(2) Each emission budget set under sub-section ( 1) of section 13 shall, as far as 
possible, meet through domestic emissions reductions and domestic removals:
       Provided that international emissions data may be used in setting emission 
budget if there has been a significant change of circumstance that affects, —
 (a) the considerations on which the relevant emissions budget has been 
based; and
 (b) the ability to meet the relevant emissions budget domestically.
15. (1) The Commission shall recommend to the Government on the following 
matters which are relevant to set an emission budget under sub-section ( 1) of  
section 13, namely:—
 (a) the recommended quantity of emissions that may be permitted in each 
emissions budget period; 
 (b) the rules that may apply to measure progress towards meeting emissions 
budgets and the 2050 target; 
 (c) the mechanism to achieve emissions budgets and the 2050 target, 
including by pricing and policy methods; 
 (d) the proportions of an emissions budget that may be met by domestic 
emissions reductions and domestic removals;
 (e) the amount by which emissions of each greenhouse gas shall be reduced 
to meet the relevant emissions budget and the 2050 target; and
 (f) the appropriate limit on offshore mitigation that may be used to meet an 
emissions budget, and an explanation of the circumstances that justify the use of 
offshore mitigation.
(2) The Commission shall, while preparing the recommendations for the 
Government under sub-section ( 1), for meeting emissions budget and 2050 target, 
take into consideration the following factors:—
 (a) the key opportunities for emissions reductions and removals in India; 
 (b) the principal risks and uncertainties associated with emissions reductions 
and removals;
(c) the emission and removal of greenhouse gases projected for the emissions 
budget period;
(d) a broad range of domestic and international scientific advice;
Commission to 
recommend on 
emission budget.
Contents of
emissions budgets.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

11
(e) existing technology and anticipated technological developments, 
including the costs and benefits of its early adoption in India;
(f) the need for emissions budgets that are ambitious but likely to be 
technically and economically achievable;
(g) the results of public consultation on an emissions budget;
(h) the likely impact of actions taken to achieve an emissions budget and the 
2050 target, including on the ability to adapt to climate change;
(i) the distribution of those impacts across the regions and communities of 
India, and from generation to generation;
(j) economic circumstances and the likely impact of the Government’s 
decision on taxation, public spending and public borrowing;
(k) the implications, or potential implications, of land—use change for 
communities;
(l) responses to climate change taken or planned by parties to the                        
Paris Agreement or to the Convention; and
(m) India’s relevant obligations under international agreements.
(3) The Commission shall, before recommending the Government on an 
emissions budget,—
(a) make the proposed recommendations publicly available and invite 
comments thereon; and
(b) allow adequate time and opportunity for any submissions to be received, 
heard and considered by the Commission.
 (4) The Commission shall provide its advice to the Government in the case of,—
 (a) the first three emissions budgets, at least six months before  
31st  December, 2021;
(b) all subsequent emissions budgets, at least twelve months before an 
emissions budget is notified under section 17 or at least fifteen months before, if 
a general election is to take place in that year.
16. (1) The Government shall, prior to setting an emissions budget under  
sub-section (1) of section 13, ensure that adequate consultation has taken place with 
all the stakeholders before making the proposed emissions budget publicly available.
(2) The Government shall, while setting and notifying an emissions budget 
under section 17 in accordance with the dates set out in   sub-section ( 2) of  
section 13, provide reasons for departure, if any, from the commission’s advice 
tendered under this Act.
Government’s 
response to 
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

12
17. ( 1) The Government shall, before an emissions budget is notified in the 
Gazette under sub-section (2) and laid before each House of Parliament, consult the 
representatives of each of the political parties represented in each House of Parliament. 
(2) Every emissions budget finalised by the Government shall be—
(a) notified in the Gazette, stating the date on which the emissions budget 
period commences and ends; 
(b) laid before each House of Parliament; and
(c) made publicly available at the direction of the Government in such 
manner as may be prescribed.
18. (1) The Commission may at any time, recommend that any emissions budgets 
notified under section 17 be revised if,—
(a) there have been methodological improvements to the way that emissions 
are measured and reported; or
(b) one or more significant changes have affected the considerations listed 
in sub-section (2) of section 15 on which an emissions budget has been based.
(2) The Commission may, at any time the 2050 target is revised, recommend that 
the relevant emissions budgets be revised to reflect the change in the 2050 target.
(3) An emissions budget notified under section 17 may be revised only if the 
Commission recommends the revision.
(4) The Government shall, on recommendations by the Commission, determine 
whether to revise an emissions budget, taking into account—
 (a) the matters set out in sub-section (2) of section 15; and
 (b) follow the procedure set out in sections 16 and 17:
     Provided that the Government shall not revise an emissions budget,—
 (i) after an emissions budget period has begun, unless the circumstances 
are exceptional; or
 (ii) after the end of the emissions budget period to which it relates; or
 (iii) in any way other than that required if any of the circumstances 
described in  sub-section (1) or (2) apply.
(5) If the Government determines to revise an emissions budget, it shall present 
before each House of Parliament an explanation of the reasons for revising the 
original emissions budget, having regard to—
 (a) the matters specified in clauses (a) and (b) of sub-section(1); and
 (b) the prohibition on revising an emissions budget and any exceptional 
Revision of
emissions budgets.
Publication of 
emissions budgets 
in Gazette, etc.
5
10
15
20
25
30

13
circumstances that led to the Government’s decision. 
19. (1) If the total emissions in an emissions budget period are lower than the 
emissions budget for that period, the excess reduction may be carried forward and 
banked to the next emissions budget period:
        Provided that if  the excess reduction has been carried forward and banked 
to the next emissions budget period under sub-section ( 1), the emissions budget for 
the next emissions budget period shall be increased by the amount carried forward.
(2) If the total emissions in an emissions budget period are greater than the  
emissions budget for that emissions budget period, an amount from the next emissions 
budget may be carried back and borrowed to the preceding emissions budget period:
      Provided that if  the excess reduction has been carried back and borrowed to 
the preceding emissions budget period under sub-section ( 2), the emissions budget 
for the next emissions budget period shall be reduced by the amount carried back:
     Provided further that the amount carried back under sub-section (2) shall not 
exceed one per cent. of the emissions budget for the next emissions budget period.
(3) The Government shall decide whether to bank or borrow the emissions budget 
for the next emissions budget period under sub-sections (2) and (3) and determine the 
extent to which such banking or borrowing be permitted.
(4) The Government shall, before taking a decision under sub-section (3), ensure 
that the Commission in its report on an emissions budget period has recommended 
on the quantity of emissions that may be banked or borrowed between two adjacent 
emissions budget periods and considers such advice necessary.
20. (1) The Government shall prepare and make publicly available a plan setting 
out the policies and strategies for meeting the next emissions budget, including the 
policies and strategies for meeting emissions budgets that have been notified under 
section 17 in accordance with the dates set out in sub-section (3) of section 15.
(2) The plan under sub-section (1) shall include— 
(a) sector specific policies to reduce emissions and increase removals;
(b) a multi-sector strategy to meet emissions budgets and improve the ability 
of those sectors to adapt to the effects of climate change; and
(c) a strategy to mitigate the impacts that reducing emissions and increasing 
removals will have on employees and employers, regions, indigenous and wider 
communities, including the funding for any mitigation action; and
(d) any other policies or strategies that the Government deems necessary.
(3) The plan under sub-section (1) shall be prepared and published—
 (a) after the relevant emissions budget has been notified under section 17; and
Requirement for 
emissions reduction 
plan.
Power to bank
or borrow.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

14
 (b) before the commencement of the relevant emissions budget period.
21. (1) The Commission shall, as soon as possible but not later than twenty-four 
months before the beginning of an emissions budget period,  prepare and forward 
to the Government necessary emissions reduction plans for that emissions budget 
period.
 ( 2) The Commission shall, while preparing its recommendations, take into 
consideration the provisions of sub-section ( 2) of section 15 as if it referred to 
preparing an emissions reduction plan.
22. (1) The Government shall, while preparing a plan and supporting policies 
and strategies for an emissions budget period,—
(a) consider the emissions reduction plans received from the Commission 
under section 21 for meeting emissions budgets; and
(b) ensure that the consultation has been adequate with sector 
representatives, affected communities and indigenous communities whether or 
not included in the Peoples Biodiversity Register, 
(2) The Government shall, before the relevant emissions budget period 
commences, publish in the Gazette the plan, policies, and strategies.
(3) The Government may, at any time, amend the plan and supporting policies 
and strategies to adhere to the 2050 target—
(a) using the same process as required for preparing the plan; or
(b) in the case of a minor or technical change, without repeating the 
process used for preparing the plan. 
(4) The Government shall,—
(a) make an emissions reduction plan publicly available twelve months 
before the commencement of a budget period; and
(b) cause to be laid a copy of each emissions reduction plan before each 
House of Parliament.
23.(1) The Commission shall regularly monitor and report on progress 
towards meeting an emissions budget and the 2050 target in accordance with  
sections 24 and 25. 
(2) The Commission shall carry out its monitoring function in accordance with 
the rules referred to in clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of section 15 which relates to 
measuring progress towards meeting emissions budgets and the 2050 target.
24. (1) The Commission shall prepare an annual report for the most recent year 
of the emissions budget period for which data is available including,—
 (a) the latest projections for current and future emissions and removals; and
 (b) an assessment of the adequacy of the emissions reduction plan and 
Government to 
prepare and make 
emissions reduc-
tion plan publicly 
available.
Commission to 
monitor progress 
towards meeting 
emissions budgets.
Commission to 
report annually
on results of
monitoring.
Commission to
advise on emissions 
reduction plan.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

15
progress in its implementation, including any new opportunities to reduce 
emissions.
(2) The Commission shall also prepare an India Greenhouse Gas Inventory for 
measuring emissions and removals.
(3) The Commission shall, not later than three months after the publication of 
an India Greenhouse Gas Inventory report, provide its annual report prepared under 
sub-section (1) to the Government.
(4) The Government shall, not later than three months after receiving the annual 
report under sub-section (3), cause to be laid before each House of Parliament and 
make publicly available a report that—
(a) sets out the response of the Government to the report of the Commission 
and recommendations; 
(b) describes the progress made in implementing the current emissions 
reduction plan; and
(c) proposes any amendments to that plan.
25. ( 1) The Commission shall, not later than two years after the end of an 
emissions budget period, prepare a report for the Government evaluating the progress 
made in that emissions budget period towards meeting the emissions budget in the 
next emissions budget period, including—
(a) an evaluation of how well the emissions reduction plan has contributed 
to that progress; 
(b) recommendations on any banking and borrowing that would                               
be appropriate; and
(c) an assessment of the amount of offshore mitigation required to meet 
the emissions budget for the period to which the report relates, subject to 
the limit proposed by the Commission under clause ( e) of sub-section ( 1) of 
section 15.
 ( 2) The response of the Government to the report of the Commission shall,—
(a) provide reasons for any failure to meet the relevant emissions budget 
and for any departures from the recommendations of the Commission; and
(b) be made publicly available in such manner as may be prescribed.
26. ( 1) The Commission shall, in case of failure under section 13 in meeting 
the 2050 target or the emissions budget target refer the case to the National Green 
Tribunal for fixing the responsibilities for failure.
 ( 2) The National Green Tribunal shall have powers to levy penalty of rupees 
one thousand crore on the Government, which shall be remitted to the Environmental 
Relief Fund established under sub-section (3) of section 7A of the Public Liability 
Insurance Act, 1991.
Commission to 
report at end of 
emissions budget 
period.
Effect of failure to 
meet 2050 target 
and emissions 
budgets.
6 of 1991
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

16
     ( 3) If the Commission fails to perform its functions under section 4, an 
appellant who may be any citizen of India as defined under Part II of the Constitution 
may approach the National Green Tribunal.
(4) Every appeal against the judgement or order of the  National Green Tribunal 
under sub-section (2) shall lie with the Supreme Court of India.
27. ( 1) The Government may issue guidelines for its departments on how to 
take the 2050 target or an emissions budget into account in the performance of their 
functions, powers, and duties.
 ( 2) The Government shall, as soon as practicable after issuing the guidelines 
under sub-section (1), make it publicly available in such manner as may be prescribed.
 ( 3) Any person or body may, in exercising or performing a public function, 
power or duty conferred on that person or body by or under law, take into account—
  (a) the 2050 target; or
  (b) an emissions budget; or
  (c) an emissions reduction plan. 
28. ( 1) The Commission shall, undertake and prepare a national climate 
change risk assessment,—
 (a) assess the risks to India’s economy, society, environment and ecology 
from the current and future effects of climate change; and
 (b) identify the most significant risks to India based on the nature of the 
risks, their severity and the need for coordinated steps to respond to those 
risks in the next six year period:
 Provided that the first national climate change risk assessment shall be 
prepared including any evidence commissioned to support its preparation publicly 
available by the Government, not later than one year after the commencement of this 
Act:
       Provided further that the first national climate change risk assessment shall 
be laid before each House of Parliament by the Government.
(2) The Commission shall, while undertaking a national climate change risk 
assessment, take into account the following:—
(a) economic, social, health, environmental, ecological, and cultural effects 
of climate change;
(b) the distribution of the effects of climate change across society, taking 
particular account of vulnerable groups or sectors;
(c) India’s relevant obligations under international agreements;
Guidelines for 
departments, etc.
National climate 
change risk
assessment.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

17
(d) how the assessment aligns or links with any other relevant national risk 
assessments produced by Central Government entities;
(e) current effects and likely future effects of climate change;
(f) any information received as a result of requests made under section 34;
(g) scientific and technical advice;
 (h) opportunities arising for India’s economy, society, and environment as a 
result of the effects of climate change; and
(i) any other factor that it thinks is relevant or appropriate.
(3) The Commission shall, not later than six years after the date on which the 
latest national climate change risk assessment was made available on public domain, 
undertake the next national climate change risk assessment and make such assessment 
available on public domain.
(4) The Commission shall, while making a national climate change risk 
assessment publicly available in compliance with sub-section (3), make any evidence 
commissioned to support its preparation publicly available.
29. (1) The Government shall, in response to each national climate change risk 
assessment prepared under sub-section (1) of section 28, prepare a national adaptation 
plan for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) A national adaptation plan prepared under sub-section (1) shall set out—
 (a) the objectives of the Government for adapting to the effects of climate 
change;
(b) the  strategies, policies, and proposals of the Government for meeting 
its objectives;
(c) the time frames for implementing the strategies, policies and proposals; 
(d) how the matters in clauses (a) to (c) address the most significant risks 
identified in the most recent national climate change risk assessment; 
(e) the measures and indicators that may enable regular monitoring of and 
reporting on the implementation of the strategies, policies and proposals; and
(f) any other matter that the Government considers relevant.
(3) The Government shall, while preparing a national adaptation plan under  
sub-section (1), take into account the following:—
(a) economic, social, health, environmental, ecological, and cultural effects 
of climate change, including effects on indigenous communities whether or not 
included in the Peoples Biodiversity Register;
(b) the distribution of the effects of climate change across society, taking 
National
adaptation plan.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

18
particular account of vulnerable groups or sectors:
 (c) India’s relevant obligations under international agreements;
(d) any information received as a result of requests made under section 32;
(e) any relevant advice or reports received from the Commission;
(f) the ability of communities or organisations to undertake adaptation 
action, including how any action may be funded;
(g) scientific and technical advice; and
(h) any other matter that the Government thinks are relevant or appropriate.
(4) The Government shall, while preparing a national adaptation plan under   
sub-section (1), undertake public consultation on the draft plan in such manner as 
may be prescribed.
30. The Government shall, not later than two years after the date on which the 
most recent national climate change risk assessment is made available on public 
domain, cause such national adaptation plan to be laid before each House of 
Parliament and make it publicly available in such manner as may be prescribed:
     Provided that the Government may make minor or technical changes to a 
national adaptation plan and make any new version  available on public domain, but 
need not cause new version of national adaptation plan to be laid before each House 
of Parliament.
31. (1) The Commission shall, for each national adaptation plan under                 
sub-section (1) of section 29, provide the Government with a progress report that 
evaluates the implementation of the adaptation plan and its effectiveness,—
(a) two years after the adaptation plan is made available on public domain; 
(b) four years after the adaptation plan is made available on public domain; 
and
(c) six years after the adaptation plan is made available on public domain.
     (2) Each progress report under sub-section (1) shall include— 
(a) an assessment of the progress made towards implementing the strategies, 
policies, and proposals included in the plan; 
(b) an assessment of the degree to which the objectives of the plan have been 
achieved and how well the plan responds to the most significant risks posed by  
climate change; 
(c) an identification of any known barriers to the implementation and 
effectiveness of the current plan, including recommendations for how those 
barriers might be addressed or overcome in future; and
National adapta-
tion plan to be laid 
before each House 
of Parliament and 
made publicly 
available.
Progress reports on 
national adaptation 
plan.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

19
(d) any other relevant matters required to support the report.
      (3) The Government shall, not later than six months after the date on which 
the Government receives a progress report under sub-section (2),—
(a) respond in writing to the progress report; and
(b) to be laid before each House of Parliament and make it publicly available 
in such manner as may be prescribed.
32. (1) The Government or the Commission shall, as the case may be, request a 
reporting organisation in writing to provide all or any of the following information:—
  (a) a description of the governance of the organisation in relation to the risks 
of, and opportunities arising from climate change;
  (b) a description of the actual and potential effects of the risks and 
opportunities on the business, strategy and financial planning of the organisation;
  (c) a description of the processes that the organisation uses to identify, assess, 
and manage the risks;
  (d) a description of the metrics and targets used to assess and manage the 
risks and opportunities, including, if relevant, timeframes and progress; and
  (e) any matters specified in regulations.
(2) It shall be the responsibility of the reporting organisation to comply with the 
request made under sub-section (1).
(3) The Government shall, as soon as practicable, provide the Commission with 
a copy of any information received in response to a request made by the Government.
(4) The Commission shall, as soon as practicable, provide the Government with 
a copy of any information received in response to a request made by the Commission.
(5) The Government and the Commission shall not publicly disclose any 
information received except those in public domain in response to a request, 
unless disclosure of the information is necessary to enable the Government or the 
Commission to perform a function or duty imposed by this Part, as the case may be:
     Provided that before publicly disclosing any information received in response 
to a request, the Government or Commission shall consult with the person to whom 
the information relates, as the case may be.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, disclosure of information 
by the Government or the Commission shall be subject to relevant provisions of the 
Right to Information Act, 2005, as the case may be.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section and section 33, the following 
shall be the reporting organisations:—
Power to request 
information.
22 of 2005
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

20
(a) the State, as defined under article 12 of the Constitution;
(b) a body which is an agency of the State whereby State is defined as per 
article 12 of the Constitution; and
(c) Public Sector Undertakings, as defined in sub-section ( 45) of section 2 
of the Companies Act, 2013.
33. ( 1) The Government may make regulations specifying all or any of the 
following:—
(a) requirements that relate to information that is provided in response to a 
request under sub-section (1) of section 32, including different requirements for 
different sectors, classes of activity, or geographical areas;
(b) a date by which or time within which requested information must be 
provided;
(c) ongoing or recurring reporting requirements including requiring the 
provision of further information at regular intervals following a request;
(d)  any administrative matters relating to responses and requests.
  (2) The Government shall, while preparing the regulations, consider:—
 (a) the ability to tailor a request to reflect the size and capability of the 
reporting organisation;
(b) the potential extent and significance of climate change effects on the 
functions of the reporting organisation; and
(c) the avoidance of unnecessary duplication of information provided within 
existing reporting frameworks.
(3) The Government shall, before recommending the making of the regulations, 
consult the Commission and the reporting organisations that the Government 
considers may be affected by the proposed regulations.
CHAPTER IV
MIsCEllANEOUs
34. No act or proceedings of the Commission shall be invalid merely by reason 
of: — 
 (a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Commission; or 
 (b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member of the 
Commission; or
 (c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Commission not affecting the 
merits of the case.
Regulations
relating to
requiring
provision of
information.
Vacancies, etc.,
not to invalidate 
proceedings of
Commission.
18 of 20135
10
15
20
25
30

35. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear it to be necessary or 
expedient for removing the difficulty:
          Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of 
three years from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, 
be laid before each House of Parliament.
36. (1) The Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
to carry out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the time and place of the meetings of the Commission and the procedure 
to be followed at such meetings under sub-section ( 1) of section 3 and the 
expenditure incurred on such meetings;
(b) the qualifications and experience of those whose names are to be 
recommended for appointment as Chairperson to the panel under clause ( a)     
sub-section (3) of section 3;
(c) the procedure for giving effect to clause ( b) of sub-section ( 3) of          
section 3 by the Nominating Committee under sub-section (4) of section 3;
(d) the qualifications and experience of the officers and other employees 
of the Commission in the field of climate change or such other field under              
sub-section (9) of section 3; 
(e) the functions, powers, and terms and conditions of service of officers 
and other employees of the Commission under sub-section (9) of section 3; and
 (f) any other matter which is to be or may be, prescribed or in respect of 
which  provision is to be made by the Government by rules.
37. Every rule and every regulation made by the Government under this Act 
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, 
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both 
the Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or both Houses 
agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice 
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.
Power of
Government to 
make rules.
Rules and
regulations to be 
laid before
Parliament.
21
Power to remove 
difficulties.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

22
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 For the world in the 21st century, ‘Climate Change’ will be the zeitgeist that 
will continue to define life on the planet well beyond mere decades. Every single 
aspect of human existence will be defined by how countries react to climate change. 
Shifting climatic conditions can have catastrophic consequences on food production 
and food security; rising sea levels can jeopardize the very existence of coastal 
habitats, and geo-political considerations will also be hued by climate change and 
the policies surrounding it. The impact of climate change will thus be drastic and 
unprecedented in both scale as well as type.
Green House Gases (GHGs) are naturally occurring gases in the atmosphere 
and essential to the survival of life on the planet. They keep back some of the Sun’s 
heat and warm the temperature, aid plants in photosynthesis, and thus make the 
Earth livable. However, anthropogenic activities over centuries have inflated the 
amount of GHGs leading to global warming. It is a well-established scientific fact 
that the concentration of GHGs in the atmosphere is directly linked to the average 
global temperature on Earth, and that both of these have been steadily rising since 
the Industrial Revolution. Carbon dioxide which accounts for two-third of GHG 
emissions is largely the product of burning fossil fuels.
The fifth assessment report of the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change (IPCC) found that between 1880-2012, the average global 
temperature increased by 0.85 °C. At the current rate of emissions of GHGs, the 
global mean temperature will continue to rise beyond pre-industrial levels by the 
turn of the century. The world’s oceans will warm and the polar ice will continue to 
melt leading to irreversible damage and devastating consequences. 
In 2018, a special report of the IPCC highlighted that drastic and immediate 
steps would be essential to ensure that global warming does not increase beyond 
1.5°C above the pre-industrial level. While certain aspects of climate change will 
have become irreversible even then, yet a 1.5°C increase compared to even a 2°C 
increase would have clear benefits to people and the natural ecosystem. This would 
require ensuring net zero transmission of human-caused CO 2 emissions by the year 
2050 through sustainable and equitable development plans. The Paris Agreement 
seeks to accelerate actions and investments needed in this regard.
In view of the above, the Climate Change (Net Zero Carbon) Bill, 2021 seeks to 
provide for a framework by which India can develop and implement clear and stable 
climate change policies that allows India to prepare for, and adapt to, the effects of 
climate change. 
The Bill, provides inter alia– 
(a) setting a net zero carbon emissions target for 2050;
(b) constitution of a Climate Change Commission that will provide independent, 
22

23
expert advice to the Government of India on mitigating climate change 
(including through reducing emissions of GHGs) and adapting to the effects 
of climate change; and monitor and review the Government’s progress 
towards its emissions reduction and adaptation goals;
(c) setting emissions budgets in a way that allows those budgets to be met 
domestically; and that provides greater predictability for all those affected, 
including households, businesses, and investors, by giving advance 
information on the emissions reductions and removals that will be required;
(d) undertaking the National Climate Change Risk Assessments to assess the 
risks to India’s economy, society, environment, and ecology from the current 
and future effects of climate change; and to identify the most significant 
risks to India, such that, based on the nature of the risks and their severity, 
the need for coordinated steps to respond to those risks can be appropriately 
determined;
(e) preparation of the National Adaptation Plan consequent to the Risk 
Assessments so as to outline the Government’s policy responses to adapt to 
the effects of climate change; the timelines for implementing such proposals; 
and the measures and indicators that will enable regular monitoring of, and 
reporting on the implementation of the strategies, policies, and proposals.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
    NEw DElHI; JAYANT SINHA 
January 21, 2021.     

24
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Climate Change 
Commission. It also provides for the appointment of Chaiperson, Deputy Chairperson, 
specialist and officers and staff to the Commission. It further provides for constitution 
of a Nominating Committee for the appointment of members to the Climate Change 
Commission. Clause 28 provides for preparing and undertaking the National Climate 
Change Risk Assessments. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure 
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of 
about rupees one hundred and fifty crore per annum would be involved from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. 
A  non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to 
be involved.
24

25
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
 Clause 36 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for 
the purpose of carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation, inter alia , 
including the time and place of the meetings of the Commission and the procedure to 
be followed at such meetings under sub-section (1) of section 3 and the expenditure 
incurred on such meetings, etc. As the matters in respect of which rules may be made 
by the Central Government are matters of procedure and administrative details and 
it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself, the delegation of legislative 
power is, therefore, of a normal character.
25

                                
LOK SABHA
_________
A
BILL
to provide for a framework by which India may develop and implement  
clear and stable climate change policies that contribute to the global efforts
under the Paris Agreement to limit the global average temperature
increase to 1.5° Celsius above pre-industrial levels and
allows India to prepare for, and adapt to, the effects
of climate change and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
__________ 
( Shri Jayant Sinha, M.P . )