                                                            Bill No. 41 of 2023
THE COMPULSORY YOGA PRACTICE IN SCHOOLS AND
OTHER EDUCATION INSTITUTIONS BILL, 2023
By
DR. SUKANTA MAJUMDAR, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory yoga practice from primary to senior secondary level in
all the schools and other education institutions throughout the country in order
to prepare talent of sports from school level and thereby ensuring good
and sound health of students and for making it obligatory for the
Central and State Governments to provide requisite infrastructure
for the purpose and for matters connected therewith
and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of
India as follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Yoga Practice in Schools
and other Education Institutions Act, 2023.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.5
 AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title,
extent and
commencement.

2
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the
Government of the State, and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “education institution” means an university or college imparting
education to student, by whatever name such institution is called;
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(d) “school” means any Government school or a Government aided
school or a private school, which imparts education from primary to senior
secondary school level;
(e) “sports infrastructure” means requisite resources required for
playing game such as playground with necessary facilities, articles of sports,
sports instructors and requisite environment as are required for sports in the
school; and
(f) “yoga” means teaching of yoga postures or asanas and such other
yoga exercises as would promote the control of the body by bringing in
flexibility, strength and endurance and of the mind by enhancing alertness
and meditation.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but not later
than one year after the commencement of this Act, formulate a National Policy
for providing yoga practice and ensuring requisite infrastructure and other
facilities required for yoga practice in all schools of the country.
(2) The national policy referred to in sub-section (1) shall provide
for,—
(a) imparting free yoga practice to all the students as per their
ability and physical condition in the schools and other education
institutions;
(b) encouraging yoga practice and creating awareness of the
importance of yoga among the school students;
(c) ensuring the availability of yoga teacher in all the schools
and other education institutions;
(d) providing adequate funds for infrastructure development
for yoga practice in all the schools and other education institutions;
(e) incorporating yoga as compulsory subjects in all the schools
and other education institutions;
(f) preparing standard and qualitative syllabus for yoga practice as
per the age and physical capacity of the students under the guidance of
experts and universalisation thereof;
(g) providing scholarship and stipend to those students whose
performance in yoga has been outstanding;
(h) providing weightage to marks obtained in yoga for admission
in colleges, universities, and institutions of national importance;
5
10
15
National policy
for Yoga
Practice and
infrastructure.
20
25
30
35
40
Definitions.

3
(i) according preference to the outstanding sports persons in
direct recruitment under the Central and State Government services;
and
(j) such other provisions, as the Central Government may deem fit
and necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
4. (1) It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to implement
the National Policy formulated under section 3.
(2) The appropriate Government shall review the progress and quality
of yoga practice being imparted by the schools and other education institutions
from time to time, in such manner as may be prescribed.
5. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the provisions of this
Act shall apply to minority institutions only if the management of such
institutions convey to the appropriate Government their willingness to include
the yoga practice in their school curriculum.
6.  Any school which violates the provisions of this Act shall be liable for
punitive action by the appropriate Government, including withdrawal of
recognition of the school in such manner and with such conditions, as may be
prescribed.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide requisite funds, from time to
time, for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
8. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation
of any other law for the time being in force dealing with the subject matter of
this Act.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2)  Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be
after it is made, before each House of the Parliament, while it is in session,
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in
two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree
that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity
of anything previously done under the rule.
5
10
15
20
Implementation
of National
policy.
Act to apply to
minority
educational
institutions in
certain situation.
Penalty.
Central
Government to
provide funds.
30
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to make
rules.
25
35

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Yoga is being practiced in our country since the time immemorial for
good health and longevity. It keeps the body and mind healthy and sound
and its various asanas cure even serious diseases. Now, yoga is not
confined to India only but has become international and International Yoga
Day is held every year on 21st June throughout the world.
It is, therefore, felt that yoga should be introduced right from childhood
to make it a part and parcel of everyone’s life so that we can foster confidence
and self-esteem in the minds of our upcoming generations in schools and
other Education Institutions.
Similarly, various sports activities make us healthy, fit and fine. They are
essential for the overall development of people and in particular, the children
and youth. Some sports are even very rewarding and outstanding sportspersons
of these sports earn enormous wealth in their career. Many international sports
events such as Olympics, Commonwealth Games, Asian Games etc. are held
from time-to-time and winning in these events brings laurels for the country.
Thus, the process of learning sports shall start from the school itself to prepare
talents for national and international events.
Our country currently has the largest youth population and majority of
them are sports lovers. In fact, there is no dearth of talent in various sports in
the country. The only shortcomings are that they seldom get proper resources,
training and well equipped infrastructure to sharpen their talent to become
international sportspersons.
It is felt that compulsory yoga and sports education in schools and other
education institutions will definitely identify talent and make our nation excel
in the global sports and competitions, apart from building a fit and healthy
nation.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide for making sports and yoga education
compulsory in all educational institutions right from primary school level to
senior secondary level in order to make it a part of school curriculum.
Hence this Bill.
   NEW DELHI;                                    SUKANTA MAJUMDAR
January 11, 2023.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the formulation of a national policy
for providing yoga practice and infrastructure development in schools and
other education institutions. It also provides for creating awareness of yoga
among students, financial assistance for infrastructure development,
scholarship and stipends for outstanding students in yoga in schools and
other education institutions. Clause 7 makes it obligatory for the Central
Government to provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of the
Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. At this stage, it is difficult to give an exact
estimate of the actual expenditure to be incurred on it. However, it is
estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees one lakh crore per annum
would involve from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees one hundred crore may
also be involved for creating various assets throughout the country from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters
of detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory yoga practice from primary to senior secondary level in
all the schools and other education institutions throughout the country in order
to prepare talent of sports from school level and thereby ensuring good
and sound health of students and for making it obligatory for the
Central and State Governments to provide requisite infrastructure
for the purpose and for matters connected therewith
and incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Sukanta Majumdar, M.P .)