Bill No. 41 of 2005
THE ACTUARIES BILL, 2005
_______
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
________
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
INSTITUTE OF ACTUARIES OF INDIA
3. Incorporation of Institute.
4. Transfer of assets, liabilities, etc., of Actuarial Society.
5. Objects of Institute.
6. Entry of names in register.
7. Associates  and fellows.
8. Honorary, affiliate and student members.
9. Certificate of practice.
10. Members to be known as Actuaries.
11. Disqualifications.
12. Composition of Council of Institute.
13. Annual General meetings.
14. Re-election to Council.
15. Settlement of dispute regarding election.
16. Establishment of Tribunal.
17. President, Vice-President and Honorary Secretary.
18. Resignation from membership and filling up of casual vacancies.
19. Functions of  Council.
20. Staff, remuneration and allowances.
21. Committees of Council.
22. Finances of Council.
CHAPTER III
R
EGISTER OF MEMBERS
23. Register.
24. Removal of name from  register.
25. Re-entry in  register.
CHAPTER IV
M
ISCONDUCT
26. Disciplinary Committee.
27. Appointment of Prosecution Director.
28. Authority, Council, Disciplinary Committee and Prosecution Director to have powers
of civil court.
29. Action by Council on disciplinary Committee’s report.
30. Member to be afforded opportunity of being heard.
31. Professional misconduct defined.
T
O BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

CHAPTER V
APPEALS
CLAUSES
32. Constitution of Authority.
33. Term of  Members of Authority.
34. Allowances and conditions of service of  Members of Authority.
35. Procedure, etc., of Authority.
36. Officers and other staff of Authority.
37. Appeal to Authority.
CHAPTER VI
P
ENALTIES
38. Penalty for falsely claiming to be  a member, etc.
39. Penalty for using name of  Institution, awarding degrees of actuarial science, etc.
40. Companies not to engage in actuarial practice.
41. Unqualified person not to sign documents.
42. Offences by companies.
43. Sanction to prosecute.
CHAPTER VII
Q
UALITY REVIEW BOARD
44. Establishment of Quality Review Board.
45. Functions of Board.
46. Procedure of Board.
47. Terms and Conditions of Chairman and Members of  Board.
48. Expenditure of Board.
CHAPTER VIII
D
ISSOLUTION OF THE ACTURIAL SOCIETY OF INDIA REGISTERED UNDER
THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT
49. Dissolution of Actuarial Society of India.
50. Provisions respecting employees of  dissolved society.
CHAPTER IX
MISCELLANEOUS
51. Maintenance of more than one offices by Actuary.
52. Reciprocity.
53. Power of Central Government to issue directions.
54. Protection of action taken in good faith.
55. Members, etc., to be public servants.
56. Power of Central Government to make rules.
57. Power to make regulations.
58. Power of Central Government to issue directions for making or amending regulations.
59. Laying of rules and regulations.
60. Power to remove difficulties.
THE SCHEDULE.

THE ACTUARIES BILL, 2005
A
BILL
to provide for regulating and developing the profession of Actuaries  and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Actuaries Act, 2005.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and
any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as
reference to the coming in to force of that provision.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. 41 of 2005

2
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Actuary” means a person skilled in determining the present effects of future
contingent events or in finance modelling and risk analysis in different areas of
insurance, or calculating the value of life interests and insurance risks, or designing
and pricing of policies, working out the benefits, recommending rates relating to
insurance business, annuities, insurance and pension rates on the basis of empirically
based tables and includes a statistician engaged in such technology, taxation, employees’
benefits and such other risk management and investments;
(b)   “Actuarial Society” means the Actuarial Society of India registered under
the Societies Registration Act, 1860 and the Bombay Public Trusts Act, 1950;
(c) “appointed day” means the date on which the Institute is constituted under
sub-section (1) of section 3;
(d)  “Authority” means the Appellate Authority referred to in section 32;
(e)  “Board” means the Quality Review Board constituted under sub-section (1)
of section  44;
(f) “Council” means the Council of the Institute as referred to in section 12;
(g) “fellow” means a fellow member of the Institute;
(h)  “Institute” means the Institute of Actuaries of India constituted  under
section 3;
(i)   “member” means an individual whose name appears in the register of
members maintained by the Institute;
(j)   “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(k)    “register” means the register of members maintained by the Institute  under
this Act;
(l)   “specified” means specified by regulations made under this Act;
(m)   “Tribunal” means a Tribunal established under sub-section (1) of section 16;
(n)   “year” means the period commencing on the 1st day of April of any year
and ending on the 31st  day of March of the succeeding year.
(2)   Save as otherwise provided in this Act, a  member of the Institute shall be deemed
“to be in practice” when individually or in partnership with Actuaries in practice as a member
or an employee of a company,  he, whether or not in consideration of remuneration received
or to be received,—
(i) engages himself in actuarial profession; or
(ii) offers to perform or performs services involving the application of actuarial
techniques in the fields of insurance, pension, investment, finance and management;
or
(iii) renders such other services as, in the opinion of the Council, are or may be
rendered by an actuary in practice; or
(iv) is in employment of a person engaged in one or more of the activities
mentioned in clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) above;
and the words “to be in practice” with their grammatical variations and cognate expressions
shall be construed accordingly.
CHAPTER II
I
NSTITUTE OF ACTUARIES OF INDIA
3. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint, all persons whose names are entered in the register of
the  Actuarial Society  at the commencement of this Act and all persons who may
Definitions.
21 of 1860.
Bombay
Act No.
XXXIX
of 1950.
Incorporation
of Institute.

3
thereafter have their names entered in the register to be maintained under this Act, so
long as they continue to have their names borne on the register, are hereby constituted
a body corporate by the name of the Institute of Actuaries of India and all such persons
shall be known as members of the Institute.
(2) The Institute shall have perpetual succession and a common seal and shall
have power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable,
and shall by its name sue or be sued.
(3) The head office of the Institute shall be situated at such place as may be
decided by the Central Government.
4.   On the appointed day,—
(a) all the assets and liabilities of the Actuarial Society shall stand transferred
to, and vested in, the Institute;
Explanation.— The assets of the Actuarial Society shall be deemed to include
all rights and powers and all properties, whether movable or immovable, including, in
particular, cash balances, deposits and all other  interests and rights in, or arising out
of, such properties as may be in the possession of the said Society and all books of
accounts and other documents relating to the same; and liabilities shall be deemed to
include all debts, liabilities and obligations of whatever kind;
(b) without prejudice to the provisions of clause ( a), all debts, obligations
and liabilities incurred, all contracts entered into and all matters and things engaged to
be done by, with or for the Actuarial Society immediately before that day, for or in
connection with the purpose of the said Society, shall be deemed to have been incurred,
entered into or engaged to be done by, with or for, the Institute;
(c) all sums of money due to the Actuarial Society immediately before that
day shall be deemed to be due to the Institute; and
(d) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or which could have been
instituted by or against the Actuarial Society immediately before that day may be
continued or may be instituted by or against the Institute.
5.   The objects of the Institute shall be to —
(a) promote, uphold and develop the standards of professional education, training,
knowledge, practice and conduct amongst Actuaries;
(b) promote the status of the Actuarial profession;
(c) regulate the practice by the members of the profession of Actuary;
(d) promote, in the public interest, knowledge and research in all matters relevant
to actuarial science and its application; and
(e) do all such other things as may be incidental or conducive to the above
objects or any of them.
6. (1) Any of the following persons shall be entitled to have his name entered in the
register, namely:—
(a) any person who immediately before the appointed day was an associate or a
fellow (including an honorary fellow) of the Actuarial Society;
(b) any person who has passed the examination conducted by the Actuarial Society
and has completed training either as specified by the said Society or as specified by
the Council, except any such person who is not a permanent resident of India;
(c) any person who has passed such examination and  completed such  training,
as may be specified for membership of the Institute;
Transfer of
assets,
liabilities, etc.,
of Actuarial
Society.
Objects of
Institute.
Entry of names
in register.

4
(d) any person who has passed such other examination and completed such
other training outside India as is specified as being equivalent to the examination and
training specified under this Act for membership of the Institute:
Provided that in the case of any person belonging to any of the classes mentioned in
this sub-section who is not permanently residing in India, the Central Government or the
Council may impose such further conditions as it may deem necessary or expedient in the
public interest.
(2) Every person mentioned in clause (a) of sub-section (1) may have his name entered
in the register without the payment of any entrance fee.
(3) Every person belonging to any of the classes mentioned in clauses (b), (c) and (d)
of sub-section (1) shall have his name entered in the register on an application being made
and granted in the specified manner and on payment of such fees, as may be specified.
(4) The Council shall take such steps as may be necessary for the purpose of having
the names of all persons belonging to the class mentioned in  clause ( a) of sub-section (1)
entered in the register before the appointed day.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the Council may confer on any
person honorary fellow membership, if the Council is of the opinion that such person has
made a significant contribution to the profession of  Actuary and thereupon the Council shall
enter the name of such person in the register but such person shall not have any voting rights
in any election or meetings of the Institute and shall not also be required to pay any fee to the
Institute.
7. (1)  The members of the Institute shall be divided into two classes designated
respectively as associates and fellows.
(2) Any person other than a person to whom the provisions of sub-section (3) apply,
shall, on his name being entered in the register, be deemed to have become an associate and
as long as his name remains so entered,  shall be entitled to use the letters “AIAI” after his
name to indicate that he is an associate.
(3) Any person who was a fellow of the Actuarial Society and who is entitled to have
his name entered in the register under  clause  (a) of  sub-section   (1)  of  section 6  shall  be
entered in the register as a fellow.
(4) Any person whose name is entered in the register as fellow shall, so long as his
name remains so entered, be entitled to use the letters “FIAI” after his name to indicate that
he is a fellow.
8. (1) The Council may choose, in such manner as may be specified , any person of
eminence in matters relating to and of interest to the profession of  Actuary as an honorary
member of the Institute provided that he is not practicing as an Actuary.
(2) Any person, who is a fellow member, or is a holder of membership considered
equivalent to the fellow membership of the Institute, of any other institution similar to the
Institute, whether within or outside India, may be admitted as an affiliate member for such
period, and on such terms and conditions as may be specified.
(3) Any person who enrolls himself for examination of the Institute, and possesses
such academic qualifications as may be specified, may be admitted as a student member of
the Institute on such terms and conditions as may be specified.
(4)  An honorary member or an affiliate member or a student member shall have no
right to vote on any matter or resolution in any meeting of the Institute.
9. (1)  No member of the Institute shall be entitled to practice, unless he has obtained
from the Council a certificate of practice.
Associates and
fellows.
Honorary,
affiliate and
student
members.
Certificate of
practice.

5
(2) A member who desires to be entitled to practice shall make an application in such
form and pay such annual fee, for certificate of practice as may be specified and such fee
shall be payable on or before the first day of April in each year.
(3)  The certificate of practice obtained under sub-section (1) may be cancelled by the
Council under such circumstances as may be specified.
10.  Every member of the Institute in practice shall, and any other member may,  use
the designation of an Actuary and no member using such designation shall use any other
description whether in addition thereto or in substitution therefor:
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to prohibit any such
member from adding any other description or letters to his name, if entitled thereto, to
indicate membership of such other Institute, whether in India or elsewhere, as may be
recognised in this behalf by the Council, or any other qualification that he may possess, or to
prohibit a firm, all the partners of which are members of the Institute and in practice, from
being known by its firm name as Actuaries.
11.  Notwithstanding anything contained in section 6, a person shall not be entitled to
have his name entered in, or borne on, the register if he—
(a) has not attained the age of twenty-one years at the time of his application for
the entry of his name in the register; or
(b) is of unsound mind and stands so adjudged by a competent court; or
(c) is an undischarged insolvent; or
(d) being a discharged insolvent, has not obtained from the court a certificate
stating that his insolvency was caused by misfortune and without any misconduct on
his part; or
(e) has been convicted by a competent court whether within or outside India, of
an offence involving moral turpitude and punishable with imprisonment or of an offence,
not of a technical nature, committed by him in his professional capacity unless in
respect of the offence committed he has either been granted a pardon or, on an
application made by him in this behalf, the Central Government has, by an order in
writing, removed the disqualification; or
(f) has been removed from the membership of the Institute on being found on
inquiry to have been guilty of a professional or other misconduct:
Provided that a person who has been removed from  the membership for a specified
period shall not be entitled to have his name entered in the Register until the expiry of such
period.
12. (1) There shall be a Council of the Institute for the management of the affairs of the
Institute and for discharging the functions assigned to it by or under this Act.
 (2)  The Council shall be composed of the following persons, namely :—
(a)  a minimum of eight and not more than twelve persons from amongst fellow
members to be elected by the fellow and the associate members of the Institute in such
manner as may be prescribed; and
(b) (i)  one person from the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority
constituted under the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999
nominated by the Central Government; and
(ii)  not more than three persons having knowledge in the field of life insurance,
general insurance, finance, economics, law, accountancy or any other discipline which
in the opinion of the Central Government, would be useful to the Council, to be
nominated in such manner as may be prescribed:
Members to be
known as
Actuaries.
Disqualifica-
tions.
Composition of
Council of
Institute.
41 of 1999.

6
Provided that till such time as the Council is constituted under this Act, the Executive
Committee of the Actuarial Society shall discharge all the functions and shall have all the
powers of the Council.
(3) No person holding an office of profit under the Central Government or a State
Government, as the case may be, shall be eligible for election to the Council under clause (a)
of sub-section (2).
(4) One-third of the members of the Council referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (2)
shall retire at every annual general meeting of the Institute by rotation but shall be eligible
for re-election.
(5) Any person nominated under clause (b) of sub-section (2) shall hold office during
the pleasure of the President for a period of five years from the date of nomination and shall
be eligible for re-nomination.
13. The Council shall every year hold an annual general meeting  of the Institute to
elect its members under  clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 12, or to discuss any matter
which it deems fit, and not more than fifteen months shall elapse between the date of one
annual general meeting of the Institute and that of the next:
Provided that from the appointed day the Institute may hold its first annual general
meeting within a period of not more than eighteen months and if such general meeting is
held within that period, it shall not be necessary for the Institute to hold any general meeting
in that year:
Provided further that the Central Government may, for sufficient reasons, extend the
time within which any general meeting shall be held.
14.  (1) A member of the Council elected under clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section
12 shall be eligible for re-election but not for more than three consecutive terms.
(2)  A member of the Council, who is or has been elected, as President under sub-
section (1) of section 17, shall not be eligible for re-election as a member of the Council.
15.  In case of any dispute regarding any election under clause (a) of sub-section (2) of
section 12, the aggrieved person may make an application within thirty days from the date of
the declaration of the result of the election to the Council which shall forward the same
forthwith to the Central Government.
16.  (1) On receipt of any application under section 15, the Central Government shall,
by notification, establish a Tribunal consisting of a Presiding Officer and two other Members
to decide such dispute and the decision of such Tribunal shall be final.
(2)  A person shall not be qualified for appointment,—
(a)  as a Presiding Officer of the Tribunal unless he has been a member of the
Indian Legal Service and has held a post in Grade I of the service for at least three
years;
(b) as a Member unless he has been a member of the Council for at least one full
term; and
(c) as a Member unless he holds the post of a Joint Secretary to the Government
of India or any other post under the Central Government carrying a scale of pay which
is not less than that of a Joint Secretary to the Government of India.
(3) The terms and conditions of service of the Presiding Officer and Members of the
Tribunal, their place of meetings, remuneration and allowances shall be such as may be
prescribed.
(4)  The expenses of the Tribunal shall be borne by the Council.
Re-election to
Council.
Annual General
meetings.
Settlement of
disputes
regarding
election.
Establishment
of Tribunal.

7
17.  (1) The Council shall, at its first meeting, elect three of its members from amongst
persons referred to in clause ( a) of sub-section ( 2) of section 12, to be respectively the
President, Vice-President and Honorary Secretary thereof, and as often as the office of the
President, Vice-President and Honorary Secretary falls vacant, the Council shall choose
another member in the same manner:
Provided that the Chairperson of the Council of the Actuarial Society shall continue to
hold such office as President after the commencement of this Act, until such time as a President
is elected under the provisions of this sub-section.
(2) The President shall be the Chief Executive Officer of the Council.
(3) The President, the Vice-President or the Honorary Secretary shall hold office for a
period of two years from the date on which he is chosen provided that he continues to be a
member of the Council.
(4) The President and the Vice-President shall, notwithstanding the expiration of his
term, continue to hold office until his successor enters upon his office.
(5) In the event of occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the President, the Vice-
President shall act as the President until a new President is elected in accordance with the
provisions of this section to fill such vacancy and enters upon his office.
(6) When the President is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence, illness
or any other cause, the Vice-President shall discharge his functions until the President resumes
his duties.
18.   (1) Any member of the Council may at any time resign his membership by writing
under his hand addressed to the President, and the seat of such member shall become vacant
when such resignation is accepted and notified by the Council.
(2) A member of the Council, other than a member nominated under clause (b) of sub-
section (2) of section 12 shall be deemed to have vacated his seat if he is declared by the
Council to have been absent without sufficient reason from three consecutive meetings of
the Council, or of any of the Committees constituted by the Council, and of which he is a
member or if his name is, for any cause, removed from the register under the provisions of
sections 24 and 30.
(3) If the seat of a member becomes vacant before the expiry of his term of membership,
the resulting casual vacancy may be filled up by the Council in such manner as may be
specified:
Provided that any person filling the casual vacancy shall hold the   membership of the
Council till vacancy is filled up in accordance with clause ( a) of sub-section ( 2) of
section 12.
(4)   No act done by the Council shall be called in question on the ground  merely of
the existence of any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution of the Council.
19.  (1) The duty of carrying out the functions under the provisions of this Act shall be
vested in the Council.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the
functions of the Council shall include—
(a) the holding of examination of the candidates for enrolment and specifying
fees therefor;
(b) the specifying of qualifications for entry in the register;
(c) the recognition of foreign qualifications and training for the purposes of
enrolment;
(d) the granting of or refusal to grant the certificate of practice under this Act;
President,
Vice-President
and Honorary
Secretary.
Resignation
from member-
ship and filling
up of casual
vacancies.
Functions of
Council.

8
(e) the maintenance and publication of a register of persons qualified to practice
as Actuaries;
(f) the levy and collection of fees from members, students, examinees and other
persons;
(g) the removal of names from the register and the restoration to the register of
names which have been removed;
(h) the regulation and maintenance of the status and standard of professional
qualifications of members of the Institute;
(i) to issue guidelines for the observance of the members, including the student
members;
(j) to receive gifts, grants, donations or benefactions from the Central or State
Governments and to receive bequests, donations and transfer of movable or immovable
properties from testators, donors or transferors, as the case may  be;
(k) co-operating with educational or other institutions in any part of the world
having objects wholly or partly similar to those of the Institute by exchange of members
and generally in such manner as may be conducive to achievement of  their common
objects;
(l) instituting and awarding fellowships, scholarships, prizes and medals;
(m) giving gifts, grants, donations or benefactions to other institutions or bodies
having objects similar to those of  the Institute;
(n) carrying out, by financial assistance to persons other than members of the
Council,  or in any other manner, research in the actuarial science;
(o) the maintenance of a library and publication of books, journals and periodicals
relating to actuarial science;
(p) the exercise of disciplinary powers conferred by this Act;
(q) establishing such regional council or councils as may be decided from time
to time and fixing their headquarters; and
(r) doing all such things as may be necessary, incidental or conducive to the
attainment of all or any of the objects of the Institute.
20.  (1) For the efficient performance of its functions, the Council may—
(a) appoint an Executive Director, a Treasurer and such other officers and
employees as it deems necessary and fix their salaries, fees, allowances and other
conditions of service; and
(b) fix the allowances of the President, the Vice-President, the Honorary Secretary
and other members of the Council and its Committees,
in such manner as may be specified.
(2) The Executive Director of the Council shall be entitled to participate in the meetings
of the Council but shall not be entitled to vote thereat.
21.  (1) The Council may constitute such committees from amongst its members, and
co-opt therein persons who are not members of the Institute, as it deems necessary for the
purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every committee constituted under this section shall elect its own Chairman :
Provided that—
(i) where the President is a member of such committee, he shall be the Chairman
of such committee, and in his absence, the Vice-President, if he is a member of such
committee, shall be its Chairman; and
Staff,
remuneration
and allow-
ances.
Committees of
Council.

9
(ii) where the President is not a member of such committee but the Vice-President
is a member, he shall be its Chairman.
(3) The committees shall exercise such functions and be subject to such conditions as
may be specified.
22. (1) There shall be established a fund under the management and control of the
Council into which shall be paid all moneys (including donations and grants) received by the
Council and out of which shall be met all expenses and liabilities incurred by the Council.
(2) The Council may invest any money for the time being standing to the credit of the
fund in any Central or State Government security as it may deem prudent consistent with the
considerations of security of such investments and maximum returns thereon.
(3) The Council shall keep proper accounts of the fund distinguishing capital account
from revenue account.
(4) The annual accounts of the Institute shall be subject to audit by a Chartered
Accountant in practice within the meaning of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 to be
appointed annually by the Council:
Provided that no member of the Council who is a Chartered Accountant or  a person
who is in partnership with such member shall be eligible for appointment as an auditor under
this sub-section.
(5) As soon as may be practicable at the end of each year, but not later than the 30th
day of September of the year next following, the Council shall cause to be published in the
Gazette of India, a copy of the audited accounts and the report of the Council for that year
and copies of the said accounts and report shall be forwarded to the Central Government and
to all the members of the Institute.
(6) The Council may borrow from a scheduled bank, as defined in the Reserve Bank
of India Act, 1934, or from any public financial institution—
(a) any money required for meeting its liabilities on capital account on the security
of the fund or on the security of any other asset, for the time being belonging to it ; or
(b) for the purpose of meeting current liabilities,  pending the receipt of income,
by way of temporary loan or overdraft.
Explanation.—The expression “public financial institution” means a financial
institution specified in section 4A of the Companies Act, 1956.
CHAPTER III
R
EGISTER OF MEMBERS
23. (1) The Council shall maintain in the specified manner a register of the members
of the Institute.
(2) The register shall include the following particulars about every member of the
Institute, namely :—
(a) his full name, date of birth, domicile, residential and professional addresses;
(b) the date on which his name is entered in the register;
(c) his qualifications;
(d) whether he holds a certificate of practice; and
(e) any other particulars which may be specified.
(3) The Council shall cause to be published in such manner as may be specified a list
of members as on the 1st day of April each year,  and shall, if requested to do so by any such
member, send him a copy of such list, on payment of such amount as may be specified.
Finances of
Council.
Register.
38 of 1949.
2 of 1934.
1 of 1956.

10
(4) Every member of the Institute shall, on his name being entered in the register, pay
such annual membership fee as may be specified by the Council.
24.  The Council may, by order, remove from the register the name of any member of
the Institute—
(a) who is dead; or
(b) from whom a request has been received to that effect; or
(c) who has not paid any specified fee required to be paid by him; or
(d) who is found to have been subject to, at the time when his name was entered
in the register, or who at any time thereafter has become subject to, any of the
disqualifications mentioned in section 11; or
(e) who for any other reason has ceased to be entitled to have his name borne on
the register.
25.   The Council may, re-enter the name of a member, whose name has been removed
from the register for reasons mentioned in clauses (b), (c), (d) and (e) of section 24, by an
order, and on paying such fees, and after satisfying such conditions and requirements as may
be specified.
CHAPTER IV
M
ISCONDUCT
26.  ( 1)  The Council shall constitute a Disciplinary Committee consisting of the
President or the Vice-President of the Council as the Presiding Officer and two members of
the Council elected by the Council and two members to be nominated by the Central
Government from amongst the persons of eminence having experience in the field of law,
education, economics, business, finance, accountancy or public administration :
Provided that the Council may constitute more regional Disciplinary Committees as
and when it deems fit.
(2)  The Disciplinary Committee in making the inquiry under the provisions of this
Act shall follow such procedure and submit the report to the Council within such time as
may be prescribed.
27. (1)  The Council may, by notification, appoint a Prosecution Director  and such
other employees for making inquiries in respect of any information or complaint received by
it under the provisions of this Act.
(2) In order to make inquiries under the provisions of this Act, the Prosecution Director
shall follow such procedures as may be prescribed.
28.  For the purposes of an inquiry under the provisions of this Act, the Authority, the
Council, the Disciplinary Committee and the Prosecution Director shall have the same powers
as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, in respect of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him
on oath;
(b) the discovery and production of any document; and
(c) receiving evidence on affidavit.
29. (1) On receipt of a report from the Disciplinary Committee, if the Council is satisfied
that the member of the Institute is guilty of any professional or other misconduct, it shall
record its findings accordingly and shall proceed in accordance with the provisions of
section 30.
Removal of
name from
Register.
Re-entry in
register.
Disciplinary
Committee.
Appointment
of Prosecution
Director.
Authority,
Council,
Disciplinary
Committee and
Prosecution
Director to
have powers of
civil court.
Action by
Council on
Disciplinary
Committee’s
report.
5 of 1908.

11
(2)  In case the Council is not satisfied with the report of the Disciplinary Committee
and is of the opinion that it requires further inquiry, it may refer the report again to the
Disciplinary Committee for such further inquiry as may be directed through an order of the
Council.
(3)  If the Council disagrees with the findings of the Disciplinary Committee, it may
direct the Prosecution Director to make an appeal to the Authority.
30. Where the Council is of the opinion that a member is guilty of a professional
misconduct mentioned in the Schedule, it shall afford to the member a reasonable opportunity
of being heard before making any order against him and may thereafter take any one or more
of the following actions, namely :—
(a) reprimand the member; or
(b) remove the name of the member from the register permanently or for such
period, as it thinks fit.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section “member of the Institute” includes a
person who was a member of the Institute on the date of the alleged misconduct although he
has ceased to be a member of the Institute at the time of the inquiry.
31. For the purpose of this Act, the expression “professional misconduct” shall be
deemed to include any act or omission mentioned in the Schedule or as may be prescribed,
but nothing in this section shall be construed to limit or abridge in any way the power conferred
or duty cast on the Council to inquire into the conduct of any member of the Institute under
any other circumstances.
CHAPTER V
A
PPEALS
32.  The Appellate Authority constituted under sub-section (1) of section 22A of the
Chartered Accountants Act, 1949, shall be deemed to be the Appellate Authority for the
purposes of this Act subject to the modification that for clause (b) of said sub-section (1), the
following clause has been substituted, namely:—
“(b)  the Central Government shall, by notification appoint two part-time
Members from amongst the persons who have been members of the Council of the
Institute of Actuaries for at least one full term;”.
33. A person appointed as a Member shall hold office for a term of five years from the
date on which he enters upon his office or until he attains the age of sixty-seven years,
whichever is earlier.
34.  (1) The allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of the
Members shall be such as may be prescribed.
(2)  The allowances to the Members shall be paid by the Council in such manner as
may be prescribed.
35.  The provisions of section 22D and section 22F of the Chartered Accountants Act,
1949 shall apply to the Appellate Authority in the discharge of its functions under this Act as
they apply to it in the discharge of its functions under the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949.
36.  (1) The Council shall make available to the Authority such officers and other staff
members as may be necessary for the efficient performance of the functions of the Authority.
(2)  The salaries and allowances and conditions of service of the officers and other
staff members made available to the Authority shall be such as may be specified.
37.  (1)  Any member of the Institute aggrieved by any order of the Council imposing
on him any of the penalties referred to in section 30, may within thirty days of the date on
which the order is communicated to him, prefer an appeal to the Authority:
Member to be
afforded
opportunity of
being heard.
Professional
misconduct
defined.
Constitution of
Authority.
Term of
Members of
Authority.
Allowances
and conditions
of service of
Members of
Authority.
Procedure, etc.,
of Authority.
Officers and
other staff of
Authority.
Appeal to
Authority.
38 of 1949.
38 of 1949.

12
Provided that the Authority may entertain any such appeal after the expiry of the said
period of thirty days, if it is satisfied that the member was prevented by sufficient cause from
filing the appeal in time.
(2)  The Authority may, after calling for the records of any case, revise any order made
by the Council under section 30  and may—
(a)  confirm, modify or set aside the order;
(b)  impose any penalty or set aside, reduce, or enhance the penalty imposed by
the order;
(c) remit the case to the Disciplinary Committee for such further inquiry as the
Authority considers proper in the circumstances of the case; or
(d) pass such other order as the Authority thinks fit:
Provided that no order of the Council shall be modified or set aside unless the Council
has been given an opportunity of being heard and no order imposing or enhancing a penalty
shall be passed unless the person concerned has also been given an opportunity of being
heard.
CHAPTER VI
P
ENALTIES
38. Subject to the provisions of section 10, any person  who,—
(a)  not being a member of the Institute,—
(i) represents that he is a member of the Institute in any of the manners
mentioned in section 7; or
(ii) uses the designation “Actuary”; or
(iii) uses the letters “AIAI” or “FIAI” after his name; or
(iv) practices the  profession of an Actuary; or
(b) being a member of the Institute, but not having a certificate of practice,
represents that he is in practice, or practices as an Actuary,
shall be punishable on first conviction with fine which may extend to  ten thousand rupees,
and on any subsequent conviction with imprisonment which may extend to six months, or
with fine which may extend to twenty-five thousand rupees, or with both.
39. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no person shall—
(a) use a name or a common seal which is identical with the name or the common
seal of the Institute or so nearly resembles it so as to deceive or as is likely to deceive
the public; or
(b) award any degree, diploma or certificate or bestow any designation which
indicates or purports to indicate the position or attainment of any qualification or
competence in actuaryship similar to that of a member of the Institute; or
(c) seek to regulate in any manner whatsoever the profession of Actuaries.
(2) Any person contravening the provisions of sub-section (1) shall, without prejudice
to any other proceedings, which may be taken against him, be punishable with fine, which
may extend on first conviction to fifty thousand rupees and on any subsequent conviction
with imprisonment which may extend to one year, or, with fine which may extend to one
lakh rupees, or with both.
(3) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to any University or other institution
established by law or to any body affiliated to the Institute.
Penalty for
falsely
claiming to be
a member, etc.
Penalty for
using name of
Institution,
awarding
degrees of
actuarial
science, etc.

13
40.  ( 1) No company, whether incorporated in India or elsewhere, shall practice as
Actuaries.
(2) Any company contravening the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be punishable
on first conviction with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, and on any subsequent
conviction with fine which may extend to twenty-five thousand rupees.
41.  (1) No person other than a fellow member of the Institute shall sign any document
on behalf of an Actuary in practice or a firm of such Actuaries in his or its professional
capacity.
(2) Any person contravening the provisions of sub-section (1) shall, without prejudice
to any other proceedings which may be taken against him, be punishable on first conviction
with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees, and on any subsequent conviction with
imprisonment which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to one lakh
rupees, or with both.
42.  (1) If the person committing an offence under this Act is a company, the company
as well as every person in charge of, and responsible to, the company for the conduct of its
business at the time of the commission of the offence shall be deemed to be guilty of the
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person liable
to any punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or
that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), where an offence under
this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed
with the consent or connivance of, or that the commission of the offence is attributable to
any neglect on the part of,  any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company,
such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section —
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association
of individuals; and
(b) “director” in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
43.  No person shall be prosecuted under this Act except on a complaint made by or
under the order of the Council or of the Central Government.
CHAPTER VII
Q
UALITY REVIEW BOARD
44. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, constitute a Quality Review
Board consisting of a Chairman and not more than four Members:
Provided that in case the Board is constituted with two Members, one each shall be
nominated by the Board and the Central Government, respectively.
(2) The Chairman and Members of the Board shall be appointed from amongst the
persons having eminence and experience in the field of law, education, economics, business,
finance, accountancy or public administration.
(3) Two Members of the Board shall be nominated by the Council and other two
Members shall be nominated by the Central Government.
45.  The Board shall perform the following functions, namely :—
(a)  to fix standards for the services provided by the members of the Institute;
(b) to review the quality of services provided by the members of the Institute
including actuarial audit services; and
Companies not
to engage in
actuarial
practice.
Unqualified
person not to
sign docu-
ments.
Offences by
companies.
Sanction to
prosecute.
Establishment
of Quality
Review Board.
Functions of
Board.

14
(c) to guide the members of the Institute to improve the quality of services and
adherence to the various statutory and other regulatory requirements.
46. The Board shall follow in its meeting and in discharging its functions such procedure
as may be prescribed.
47. The terms and conditions of service of the Chairman and the Members of the
Board, their place of meetings, remuneration and allowances shall be such as may be
prescribed.
48.  The expenditure of the Board shall be borne by the Council.
CHAPTER VIII
D
ISSOLUTION OF THE ACTUARIAL SOCIETY OF INDIA REGISTERED UNDER THE SOCIETIES
REGISTRATION ACT
49.  On the appointed day,—
(a)  the Society known as the Actuarial Society of India registered under the
Societies Registration Act, 1860 and the Bombay Public Trusts Act, 1950 shall stand
dissolved and thereafter no person shall make, assert or take any claims or demands or
proceedings against the dissolved society or against any officer thereof  in his capacity
as such officer except in so far as may be necessary, for enforcing the provisions of
this Act;
(b)  the right of every member to, or in respect of, the dissolved society shall be
extinguished, and thereafter no member of the society shall make, assert or take any
claims or demands or proceedings in respect of that society except as provided in this
Act.
50.  ( 1)  Every person employed in the dissolved society and continuing in its
employment immediately before the commencement of this Act shall, as from such
commencement, become an employee of the Institute, shall hold his office or service therein
by the same tenure and upon the same terms and conditions and with the same rights and
privileges as to retirement benefits as he would have held the same under the dissolved
society if this Act  had not been passed, and shall, continue to do so unless and until his
employment in the Institute is terminated or until his remuneration, terms and conditions of
employment are duly altered by the Institute.
(2)  Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 or in any
other law for the time being in force, the transfer of the services of any employee of the
dissolved society to the Institute  shall  not  entitle  any  such employee to any compensation
under that Act or other law, and no such claims shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or
other authority.
CHAPTER IX
M
ISCELLANEOUS
51. (1) Where an Actuary in practice or a firm of such Actuaries has more than one
office  within or outside  India, each one of such offices shall be in the separate charge of a
fellow member of the Institute:
Provided that the Council may in suitable cases exempt any Actuary in practice or
firm of such Actuaries from the operation of this sub-section.
(2)  Every Actuary in practice or a firm of such Actuaries maintaining more than one
office shall send to the Council a list of offices and the person in charge thereof and shall
keep the Council informed of any changes in relation thereto.
52.  (1) Where any country, notified by the Central Government in this behalf in the
Official Gazette, prevents persons of Indian domicile from becoming members of any
Procedure of
Board.
Terms and
conditions of
Chairman and
Members of
Board.
Expenditure of
Board.
Dissolution of
Actuarial
Society of
India.
Provisions
respecting
employees of
dissolved
society.
Maintenance of
more than one
offices by
Actuary.
Reciprocity.
21 of 1860.
Bombay Act
XXXIX of
1950.
14 of 1947.

15
institution similar to the Institute or from practicing the profession of  Actuaries or subjects
them to unfair discrimination in that country, no subject of any such country shall be entitled
to become a member of the Institute or practice the profession of  Actuaries in India.
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), the Council may specify the conditions,
if any, subject to which foreign qualifications relating to actuarial science shall be recognised
for the purposes of entry in the register.
53.  (1)  For the purposes of this Act, the Central Government may, from time to time,
give to the Council such general or special directions as it thinks fit, and the Council shall, in
the discharge of its functions under this Act, comply with such directions.
(2)  If, in the opinion of the Central Government, the Council has persistently made
default in giving effect to the directions issued under sub-section (1), it may, after giving an
opportunity of being heard to the Council, by notification, dissolve the Council, whereafter
a new Council shall be constituted in accordance with the provisions of this Act with effect
from such date as may be decided by the Central Government.
(3)  Where the Central Government has issued a notification under sub-section ( 2)
dissolving the Council, it may, pending the constitution of a new Council in accordance with
the provisions of this Act, authorise any person or body of persons to take over the management
of the affairs of the Council and to exercise such functions as may be mentioned in the
notification.
54.  No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central
Government or the Council or the Disciplinary Committee or the Tribunal or the Authority
or the Board or the Prosecution Director or any officer of that Government, Council,
Committee, Tribunal, Authority or Board, for anything which is in good faith done or intended
to be done under this Act or any rule, regulation, notification, direction or order made
thereunder.
55.  The Chairperson, Presiding Officer, Chairman, Members and other officers and
employees of the Authority, Tribunal and Board, and the Prosecution Director shall be deemed
to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
56.  ( 1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry out the
provisions of this Act.
(2)  In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely :—
(a) the manner of election and nomination in respect of members to the Council
under sub-section (2) of section 12;
(b) the terms and conditions of service of the Presiding Officers and Members
of the Tribunal, place of meeting, remuneration and allowances to be paid to them
under sub-section (3) of section 16;
(c) the procedure of inquiry and submission of report by the Disciplinary
Committee under sub-section (2) of section 26;
(d) the procedure of inquiry by the Prosecution Director under sub-section (2)
of section 27;
(e) any act or omission which may be determined as professional misconduct
under section 31;
(f) the allowances, terms and conditions of service of the Members of the Authority
and the manner of payment of allowances by the Council under section 34;
(g) the procedure to be followed by the Board in its meetings and discharging its
functions under section 46; and
Power of
Central
Government
to issue
directions.
Protection of
action taken in
good faith.
Members, etc.,
to be public
servants.
Power of
Central
Government
to make rules.
45 of 1860.

16
(h) terms and conditions of service of the Chairman and Members of the Board
under section 47.
57.  (1) The Council may, with the previous approval of the Central Government and
subject to the previous publication, by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations
to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the examination and training for the purposes of clauses (b), (c) and (d) of
sub-section (1) of section 6;
(b) the manner of making an application under sub-section (3) of section 6;
(c) the fees payable under sub-section (3) of section 6, sub-section (2) of section 9,
clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 19, sub-section (4) of section 23;
(d) the manner in which the honorary member may be chosen under sub-
section (1) of section 8;
(e) the terms and conditions on which an affiliate member may be admitted
under sub-section (2) of section 8;
(f) the academic qualifications for admission of a student member under sub-
section (3) of section 8;
(g) the form in which an application may be made under sub-section ( 2) of
section 9;
(h) the filling up of a casual vacancy of the Council, as required under sub-
section (3) of section 18;
(i) the transaction of business by the Council for the discharge of its functions
mentioned in sub-section (2) of section 19;
(j) terms and conditions of the services under sub-section (1) of section 20;
(k) the functions and conditions of the committees under sub-section (3) of section
21;
(l) the manner in which the register of the members of the Institute and other
particulars to be maintained under sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 23;
(m) the manner in which the annual list of members of the Institute may be
published under sub-section (3) of section 23;
(n) the conditions and requirements and payment of fee for re-entry in the register
under section 25;
(o) salaries and allowances and conditions of service of the officers and other
staff member of the Authority under sub-section (2) of section 36;
(p) the conditions subject to which foreign qualifications may be recognised
under sub-section (2) of section 52; and
(q) any other matter which is required to be, or may be prescribed under this
Act.
58. (1) Where the Central Government considers it expedient so to do, it may, by order
in writing, direct the Council to make any regulations or to amend or revoke any regulations
already made within such period as it may specify in this behalf.
(2) If the Council fails or neglects to comply with such order within the specified
period, the Central Government may itself make the regulations or amend or revoke the
regulations made by the Council.
Power to make
regulations.
Power of
Central
Government to
issue directions
for making or
amending
regulations.

17
59.  Every rule and regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation
or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation
shall, thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be;
so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity
of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.
60. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary for removing the
difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a
period of two years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament.
Laying of
rules and
regulations.
Power to
remove
difficulties.

THE SCHEDULE
(See section 31)
PART I
Professional misconduct in relation to members of the Institute in practice
An Actuary in practice shall be deemed to be guilty of professional misconduct, if
he—
(1) allows any person to practice in his name as an Actuary unless such person is
also an Actuary in practice and is in partnership with or employed by himself; or
(2) pays by way of remuneration to an employee, pays or allows or agrees to pay
or allow, directly or indirectly, any share, commission or brokerage in the fees or
profits of his professional business, to any person other than a member of the Institute
or a partner or a retired partner or the legal representative of a deceased partner; or
(3) enters into partnership with any person other than an Actuary in practice or
a person resident outside India who but for his residence abroad would be entitled to
be admitted as a member under clause ( c) of sub-section (1) of section 6  or whose
qualifications are recognised by the  Central Government or the Council for the purpose
of permitting such partnership, provided the Actuary shares in the fees or profits of the
business of the partnership both within and outside of India; or
(4) secures either through the services of a person who is not an employee of
such Actuary or who is not qualified to be his partner or by means which are not open
to an Actuary, any professional business; or
(5) accepts an assignment as Actuary previously held by  another Actuary without
first communicating with him in writing; or
(6) charges or offers to charge, accepts or offers to accept in respect of any
professional employment fees which are based on a percentage of profit or which are
contingent upon the findings or results of such employment, except as permitted under
any regulation made under this Act; or
(7) engages in any business or occupation other than the profession of Actuaries
unless permitted by the Council so to engage:
Provided that nothing contained herein shall disentitle an Actuary from being a
director of a company; or
(8) accepts a position as an Actuary  previously held by some other Actuary in
practice in  such conditions as to constitute undercutting; or
(9) allows a person not being a member of the Institute in practice, or a member
not being his partner to sign on his behalf or on behalf of his firm, any valuation report
or financial statement; or
(10) discloses information acquired in the course of his professional engagement
to any person other than his client so engaging him, without the consent of such client,
or otherwise than as required by any law for the time being in force; or
(11) certifies or submits in his name, or in the name of his firm,  a valuation
report or a financial statement unless the examination of such statement  and the related
records has been made by him or by a partner or an employee in his firm or by another
Actuary in practice; or
18

19
(12)  expresses his opinion or valuation reports or financial statements of any
business or any enterprise in which he, his firm, or a partner in his firm has a substantial
interest, unless he has disclosed the interest also in his report; or
(13) fails to disclose a material fact known to him in a valuation report or a
financial statement, but disclosures of which is necessary to make the valuation report
or the financial statement not misleading where he is concerned with such valuation
report or the financial statement in a professional capacity; or
(14) fails to report a material misstatement known to him to appear in a valuation
report or financial statement with which he is concerned in a professional capacity; or
(15) is grossly negligent in the conduct of  his professional duties; or
(16) fails to obtain sufficient information to warrant the formation of an opinion
in regard to any matter contained in any valuation report or financial statement prepared
by him or on his behalf; or
(17) fails to invite attention to any material departure from the generally accepted
procedure or professional work applicable to the circumstances, in any valuation report
or financial statement prepared by him or on his behalf.
PART II
Professional misconduct in relation to the members of the Institute in service
A member of the Institute (other than a member in practice) shall be deemed to be
guilty of professional misconduct, if he being an employee of any company, firm or person,—
(1) pays or allows or agrees to pay directly or indirectly to any person any share
in the emoluments of the employment undertaken by him; or
(2) accepts or agrees to accept any part of fees, profits or gains by way of
commission or gratification; or
(3) discloses confidential information acquired in the course of his employment
except as and when required by law or except as permitted by his employer.
PART III
Professional misconduct in relation to members of the Institute generally
A member of the Institute, whether in practice or not, shall be deemed to be guilty of
professional misconduct, if he—
(1) includes in any statement, return or form to be submitted to the Council any
particulars knowing them to be false; or
(2) not being a fellow member of the Institute acts himself as a fellow member
of the Institute; or
(3) does not supply the information called for or does not comply with the
requirements asked for by the Council or any of its Committees; or
(4) contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or the regulations made
thereunder or any guidelines issued by the Council under clause (i) of sub-section (2)
of section  19; or
(5) is guilty of such other act or omission as may be specified by the Council.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The insurance sector has already been opened to private sector with the enactment of
the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999. In addition to the six
nationalized insurance companies, which were transacting insurance business, twenty-one
private sector companies have started transacting insurance business in the country.
2. Traditional responsibilities of Actuaries in life and general insurance business include
designing and pricing of policies, monitoring the adequacy of  the funds to provide the
promised benefits, recommending fair rate of bonus where applicable, valuation of the
insurance business, ensuring solvency margin and other insurance risks like legal liability,
loss of profit, etc. They also define the risk factors, advise on the premia to be charged and
re-insurance to be purchased, calculate reserve for outstanding claims and carry out financial
modeling. An Actuary works as consultant either individually or in partnership with other
Actuaries in multi-disciplines like insurance, information technology, taxation, employees
benefit, risk management, investment, etc. Evidently, the scope of the functions and duties
of an Actuary has increased considerably under the changed conditions.
3. At present, the Actuarial Society of India, which is registered under the Societies
Registration Act, 1860 and the Bombay Public Trust Act, 1950 manages the affairs of the
actuarial profession in India. It is proposed to regulate the profession of Actuaries through
an enactment on the same lines as the professions of Chartered Accountants, Cost and Works
Accountants and Company Secretaries are regulated under the Chartered Accountants Act,
1949, the Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959 and the Company Secretaries Act, 1980,
respectively.
4. The Institute of Actuaries of  India, to be constituted under the proposed Bill will
have the responsibility for conducting examinations for the profession of Actuaries, regulating
the profession including professional misconduct, and creating necessary facilities for the
growth and training of the members of the profession. It is also proposed to dissolve the
Actuarial Society of India and transfer the assets and liabilities of the said Society to the
proposed Institute of Actuaries of India. The Bill, inter alia, makes provision for an Appellate
Authority, a Tribunal, a Quality Review Board, etc., for the purposes of the Bill.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
P. CHIDAMBARAM.
N
EW DELHI;
The 24th February, 2005.
20

Notes on clauses
Clause 2 defines the various expressions used in the Bill and in particular, the expression
“Actuary” which the Bill intends to deal with.
Clause 3 provides for the incorporation of the Institute of Actuaries of India.  It also
provides that the head office of the Institute shall be at such place as the Central Government
may decide.
Clause 4 provides for the transfer and vesting of assets, obligations and liabilities of
the Actuarial Society of India to the Institute of Actuaries of India.
Clause 5 seeks to enumerate the basic objects of the Institute relating to various aspects
of the actuary, the actuarial profession and actuarial science.
Clause 6 provides as to persons who are entitled to have their names entered in the
register of the Institute of Actuaries of India.
Clause 7 seeks to designate the members of the Institute into two classes i.e. as associates
and fellows.
Clause 8 provides for choosing of honorary members, admission of affiliated members
and student members in such manner as may be specified.
Clause 9 seeks to provide that no member of the Institute shall practice without obtaining
a certificate of practice from the Council and also makes provision for cancellation of
certificate of practice under specified circumstances.
Clause 10 deals with the use of designation of an actuary and other related conditions.
Clause 11 seeks to provide for the disqualifications regarding entry of names of persons
in the register of the members of the Institute of Actuaries of India.
Clause 12 provides for the composition of the Council of the Institute of Actuaries of
India which shall be responsible for the management of its affairs and for discharging the
functions assigned to the Council by or under the Bill.
Clause 13 seeks to provide for the annual general meetings of the Institute to elect its
members or to discuss any matter which it deems fit.
Clause 14 makes provisions with respect to re-election of a member to the Council
and restricts his consecutive terms in the Council to three.  It further provides that the President
of the Council cannot be re-elected as a member.
Clause 15 provides for settlement of disputes regarding election to the Council.
Clause 16 provides for establishment of a Tribunal by the Central Government to
decide disputes regarding election to the Council.
Clause 17 seeks to provide for the election of President, Vice-President and Honorary
Secretary of the Council and their term of office.
Clause 18 provides for the resignation from membership of the Council and filling up
of the causal vacancies.
Clause 19 vests in the Council the duty of carrying out the functions under the provisions
of the Bill and seeks to enumerate its various functions.
Clause 20 seeks to provide for appointment of staff of the Council, fixation of their
salaries and allowances and the allowances of the President, the Vice-President, the Honorary
Secretary and its other members and that of the Committees.
21

22
Clause 21 seeks to provide for the constitution of various committees of the Council.
Clause 22 seeks to provide for the establishment of a fund to be managed by the
Council, its maintenance and auditing of annual accounts, and causing to be published the
audited accounts and the report of the Council at the end of each year.
Clause 23 require the  Council to maintain a register of the members of the Institute
containing specific particulars about every member in such manner as may be specified by
regulations.
Clause 24 seeks to provide for the removal of the name of a member from the register
of the Institute in certain cases.
Clause 25 seeks to provide for the manner of re-entry of the name of a member in the
register of the Institute of Actuaries of India.
Clause 26 provides for constitution of Disciplinary Committee by the Council which
may make inquiry relating to any professional or other misconduct of any member of the
Institute and submit a report in this regard.
Clause 27 authorises the Council to appoint a Prosecution Director and such other
employees for making inquiries in respect of any information or complaint received by it
against any member of the Institute.
Clause 28  provides that the Authority, the Council, the Disciplinary Committee and
Prosecution Director shall have the powers of a civil court which are necessary for the
purposes of an inquiry.
Clause 29 provides for action by the Council on the report of Disciplinary Committee
and for appeal to the Appellate Authority if the Council disagrees with such report.
Clause 30 provides for a member of the Institute to be afforded opportunity of being
heard before making any order or taking any action against him.
Clause 31 seeks to describe the expression “professional misconduct”.
Clause 32 provides that the Appellate Authority constituted under sub-section (1) of
section 22A of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949, shall be deemed to be the Appellate
Authority for the purposes of this Bill.
Clause 33 provides for the term of office of the members of the Appellate Authority.
Clause 34 provides that the allowances and other terms and conditions of service of
members of the Appellate Authority shall be such as may be prescribed by rules.
Clause 35 provides that the procedures etc. of the Appellate Authority in the discharge
of its functions shall be governed by section 22D and section 22F of the Chartered Accounts
Act, 1949.
Clause 36 provides for making available officers and other staff to the Authority, and
to specify by regulations their salary and allowances and other conditions of service.
Clause 37 seeks to provide for an appeal by an aggrieved member against the order of
the Council.  It also provides for an opportunity of hearing to the Council before modification
of its order, and to the person concerned before an order imposing or enhancing penalty is
passed against him.
Clause 38 provides for penalty for falsely claiming to be a member of the Institute, or
being a member of the Institute, but not having a certificate of practice, represents or practices
as an Actuary.
Clause 39 provides for the penalty for using the identical name or common seal of the
Institute or award of degree or diploma, etc., of actuarial science in contravention of the
provisions of this Bill.

23
Clause 40 prohibits companies from practicing the profession of actuaries and provides
penalty for contravention.
Clause 41 prohibits any person other than a fellow member of the Institute from signing
any document on behalf of an Actuary in practice or a firm of such Actuaries and provides
for penalty for violation of these provisions.
Clause 42 seeks to provide for liabilities of persons in respect of the offences committed
by a company.
Clause 43 prohibits prosecution of any person, except on a complaint made by, or
under the order of, the Council or the Central Government.
Clause 44 provides for establishment of Quality Review Board to review the quality
of services provided by the members of the Institute of Actuaries of India.
Clause 45 enumerates the functions of the Quality Review Board.
Clause 46 is an enabling provision under which the procedure to be followed by the
Quality Review Board in discharging its functions can be prescribed.
Clause 47 provides for prescribing the terms and conditions of service of the Chairman
and the members of the Board, their remuneration and allowances and the place of meetings,
etc.
Clause 48 provides that the expenditure of the Board shall be borne by the Council.
Clause 49 seeks to provide for the dissolution of the existing Actuarial Society of
India.
Clause 50 seeks to provide for transfer of services of the employees of the Actuarial
Society to the Institute of Actuaries of India on the same tenure and upon the same terms and
conditions and with the same rights and privileges as to retirement benefits as they would
have held under the dissolved society; and that such transfer shall not entitle any such employee
to any compensation under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 or any other law and that such
claim shall not be entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority.
Clause 51 seeks to provide for manning more than one offices of Actuary or a firm of
Actuaries within or outside India by putting each offices in separate charge of a fellow
member of the Institute and to keep the Council informed of any changes in the list of offices
and person incharge thereof.
Clause 52 seeks to provide for reciprocity to the subjects of other countries in case
persons of Indian domicile are prevented from becoming members of similar Institution in
that country, and for recognition of foreign qualifications relating to actuarial science.
Clause 53 seeks to empower the Central Government to issue directions to, or dissolve
the Council.  It also provides that in the event of such dissolution, pending the constitution
of a new council, it may authorise any person or body of persons to exercise such functions
of the council as it may direct by notification.
Clause 54 seeks for protection of action taken in good faith by the Central Government,
Council, Authority and such other statutory bodies under the Bill.
Clause 55 provides for Chairperson, Members etc. of the Authority, Tribunal and
Board and the Prosecution Director to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of
the Indian Penal Code.
Clause 56 empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry out the provisions
of the Bill.  It enumerate matters with respect to  which the Central Government shall have
the powers to make rules under the Bill.
Clause 57 seeks to empower the Council to make regulations for carrying out the
provisions of this Bill with the previous approval of the Central Government and subject to

24
the previous publication in the Official Gazette.  It also enumerate matters relating to which
such powers may be exercised.
Clause 58 seeks to empower the Central Government to direct the Council to make
regulations or to amend or revoke such regulations where it considers expedient so to do,
within a specified period and in the event of failure or negligence to comply with such
directions the Central Government may itself make, amend or revoke the regulations made
by the Council.
Clause 59 seeks to provide for laying of rules and regulations before each House of
Parliament.
Clause 60 seeks to empower the Central Government to remove the difficulties that
may arise in giving effect to the provisions of the Bill or in its implementation, within a
specified period.
The Schedule to the Bill seeks to define professional misconduct and categorises the
misconduct into three parts such as professional misconduct in relation to (1) Members of
the Institute in practice, (2) Members of the Institute in service and (3) Members of the
Institute generally.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
The Central Government proposes to establish a professional body by converting the
existing Actuarial Society of India into the Institute of Actuaries of India under clause 3 of
the Bill. The new Institute is expected to be self-financing and self-supporting and does not
envisage any budgetary support from the Central Government.
25

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 56 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry out the
provisions of the Bill in its implementation. Clause 57 empowers the Council of the Institute
of Actuaries of India to make regulations generally for the purpose of carrying out the
provisions of the Bill.
The regulations made by the Council under this Bill shall be subject to the condition
of previous publication and approval of the Central Government. These matters are of
procedural character. The rules and regulations made under the Bill will have to be laid
before each House of  Parliament and they will be subject to the scrutiny of Parliament. The
delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
26

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CHARTERED ACCOUNTANTS ACT, 1949
(38 OF 1949)
* * * * *
22A. (1) Any member of the Institute aggrieved by any order of the Council imposing
on him any of the penalties referred to in sub-section ( 4) of section 21, may, within thirty
days of the date on which the order is communicated to him, prefer an appeal to the High
Court;
Provided that the High Court may entertain any such appeal after the expiry of the said
period of thirty days, if it is satisfied that the member was prevented by sufficient cause from
filing the appeal in time.
(2) The High Court may, on its own motion or otherwise, after calling for the records
of any case, revise any order made by the Council under sub-section (2) or sub-section (4) of
section 21 and may—
(a) confirm, modify or set aside, the order;
(b) impose any penalty or set aside, reduce, confirm, or enhance the penalty
imposed by the order;
(c) remit the case to the Council for such further inquiry as the High Court
considers proper in the circumstances of the case; or
(d) pass such other order as the High Court thinks fit:
Provided that no order of the Council shall be modified or set aside unless the Council
has been given an opportunity of being heard and no order imposing or enhancing a penalty
shall be passed unless the person concerned has also been given an opportunity of being
heard.
Explanation.—In this section “High Court” and “member of the Institute” have the
same meanings as in section 21.
* * * * *
27
Appeals.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for regulating and developing the profession of Actuaries  and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
 ————
(Shri P. Chidambaram, Minister of Finance)
MGIPMRND—4975LS(S3)—11.03.2005.