As IN'ltIOwcm DJ 1.oJ[ SABIIA ON 
.. 
, . 
Bill No. a of u. 
THE TEA (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1986 
A 
BILL 
ftwther to «mend the Tea Act, 1953. 
Bz it enacted. by Parliament in the Thirty-seventh Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Tea (Amendment) Act, 1986. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Gove.mmentt 
5 may, by notift.cation in the Ofticlal Gazette, appoint 
29 of 1953. Z. In section 25 of the Tea Act, 1953 (hereinafter referred to as the 
principal Act), in sub-section (l),-
(a) in 'the opening paragraph, for the words "at the rate of four 
paise per kilogram", the words "at such rate not exceeding fifty paise 
10 per kilogram as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
OfBdal G~tte, fix" shall be substituted.; 
(b) for the proviso, the following pro.-iso shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"Provided that different rates may be fixed for difterent 
15 varieties or grades of tea having regard to the location of, and 
Short title 
aDd co. 
mencemeaL 
Ameadment 
of Be\."lioo 
25: 

2 
the climatic conditions prevaiUng in, the tea estates or ga.rdeDI 
producing such varieties or grades of tea and. any other cl.reum-
stances applicable to such production.". 
lucrtiOil of 3. After section 28 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
DOW aectiOD be inserted, namely:- 5 
ZSi\. 
Writiq oft 
of 10lleS. 
Amead-
DlCDt of 
leClioa 49. 
"28A. Subject to such conditions as may be specified ,:by the 
Central Government, where the Board is of opinion that any amount 
due to, or any 1088, whether of money or of property, incurred by, 
the Board is irrecoverable, the Board may, with the previous ap-
proval of the Central Government, sanction the writing off finally 10 
of the said amount or loss: 
Provided that no such approval of the Central Government shall 
be necessary where such irrecoverable amount or lOBS does not 
exceed in any individual case and in the aggregate in any year such 
amounts as may be prescribed!'. 15 
. 
4. In section 49 of the principal Act, in sub-sedtion (2), after clause 
(;). the following clause shall be inserted, namely:-
CC (;eI) the amounts for the purposes of the proviso to section 28A;". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under section 25 01 the Tea Act.. 1953 (29 of 1963), the Cenwal Gov-
ernment is empowered to levy and collect as a cess, a 4uty of excI8e OIl 
all tea produced. in India at the rate of four paise per kil~ The 
Central Government is, however, empowered to fix a higher ~te of·08I8 
not exceeding 8.8 paise per kilogram. The present rate of cess of eight 
·paise per kilogram was made effective from August, 1978. Although, thia 
'rate i8 almost at the maximum rate allowed under the Act, the amount 
of cess collected has become insufllcient to meet the expenditure of the 
various developme1ltaland other activities of the Tea Board. The p.p 
between the proceeds from the cess and the actual expenditure of the 
Tea Board is likely to widen further in view of the higher level of 
expenditure envisaged in the Seventh Plan. The ceiling of B.B paise per 
kilogram, therefore, needs to be revised. It is, accordingly, proposed to 
amend section 25 of the Act for providing higher ceiling of levy of cess 
at a rate not exceeding fifty paise per kilogram as the Central Govem-
ment may, from time to time, fix by notification. It is also proposed to 
empower the Central Govern,ment to fix different rates for different 
varieties and grades of tea having regard to the geographical cItmatic 
and other circumstances relating to the pt'oduction of the di1ferent varie-
ties and grades of tea. .. 
2. Opportunity is being avaUed of to include, in pursuance of the 
recommendations of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation of the 
Lok Sabha, an express provision In the Act relating to the powers of the 
Tea Board to write off losses as irrecoverable. 
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objects. 
NEW DELHI; P. SHIV SHANKER. 
The 7th April, 1986. 
3 
. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED Ll!JGISLATION 
. ClatHle 4 of the BtU leek. to insert a new dause (ja) in sulHection 
(2)" of section 41 of the Tea Act, 1_, 80 u· to empower 18 •. Central Gov .. 
enunent to preserlbe by ral. the jnC8dUre to be followed In wriUDg off 
.1dIee8 aDd waiving recoverl. under new aection 28A. 
2. The matteta with respect to which the Centl'al Govermnent would 
make ruB under the new elause are matterJ in respect of whieh it tl not 
praCtticable to make exprea proviIice in the lC!1ia1atien I_If. The du" 
ptton of legislative power is thai normal in character. 
, :; 
, .' 
• !.~ ': t, i .. 
4 

(29 OJ' 19119) 
• • • • • 
25. (1) There shall be levied and collected as a cess for the purposes 
of this Act, a duty of excise on all tea produced in India at the rate of 
four paise per kilogram: 
Provided that the Central Government may from time to time fix, by 
notiftcation in the Official Gazette, a higher rate, not exceeding 8.8 paise 
per kilogram. at which the duty of excise shall be levied and collected . 
• • • • • 
49. (1) • • • • • . 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, such rules may provide fOr all or any of the following. 
matters, namely:-
• • • • • 
5 
Imposition 
of ceu OD 
tea produc-
ed ill Jadla. 
Po". of 
o.tra1 
Oovem-
IIlIIIt to 
make rulea. 

----
A 
BII.J.. 
further to amend the Tea Act, 1953. 
(Shrl P. Shiv Shankar .. M'inister of Com.m.erce.) 