DU .0. a 011811. 
THE INDIAN TEA OONTROL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1952. 
(As INTBODUOED IN THE HOUSK OF THB PEoPLE) 
0\ 
Bll.L 
further to Gmena the Indian Tea Control Aot, _1988. 
BB it enacted by Parliament as followa:-
1. Short tltle.---.This A'ct may be called the Indian Tea Control 
_ (Amcndmf-nt) Abt, 1952. 
2. .AmeD4ment of .cttcm 8, Act VIII of 1988.-J n section 3 of the 
Indian Tea Control Act, 1938 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), 5 
for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-
"(2) Members nominated or elected under sub-section (1) shall 
hold office for such period as may be prescribed." 
8. Amendment of aectlon 10, Act VIII of 1988.-tn section 10 of the 
prin<:ipal Act, in clause (h), after the word 'regulating' the words 'the 10 
term of office of nominated or elected members of the Committee and' 
shall be inserted.· 
4. Substitution of new section for section 28, Act VIII of 198B.-For 
section 26 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substitute!!, 
namely:- -
"26. Methoa of control of extension of tea cultivation.-(1) So 
16 
long Ill!! this Act remains in force, no one shall plr.nt tea in Bny land 
which was not planted with tea on the 31st day of Ma.rch, 1950, unless 
permission has been granted to him in writing by or on behalf of the 
Committee, Bnd such permil>sion was in force on the date aforesaid or JO 
was granted after that date. 
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall also apply to the reo 
placing of tea areas by planting teo. on area not planted with tea to 
the same extent but not exceeding two per cent. in each year of the 
totll'J permissible acreage of the tea estate as on the 31st day of March, 
1950, subject to such replacements being accompanied by simultaneous 
uprooting of the tea bushes in the area. so replaced. 
(3) Nothing in this section shall prohibit or be deemed to prohibit 
the infilling or supplying of vacancies on land planted with tea on the 
81st day of March, 1950, or the replanting ot tea upon-
(I) land planted with tea on the 81st day of ){a.rch, 1950, from 
which the original bushes have been uprooted, or 
(ii) land planted with tea on the 31st day of March, 1948, from 
which the original bushes have been uprooted." 
30 

2 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Indian 'fea Licensing Committee which .. tiministers the Indian Tea 
()ontl'ol Act, 1988, consists of elected and nominated members. Under 
section lO(h) of the Act as originally enscted, the Ceutral Government had 
power to make rules reguillting the term of office of all members of the 
Committee; but, during the war, in view of trausport a.nd other difficulties, 
tho> Act. was amended so Sf; to provide that all members shall hold office 
for the duration of the .Act. Such a. provision is DO longer necessary and 
it is proposed, therefore, to restore the original position. 
Under section 26 of the Act, the permission of the TeG: Licensing Com-
mittee is lIot required for the replacing of tea areas by planting tea on 
arellF. not planted with tea to the same extent but not exceeding ~ per cent. 
in each year of the total permissible acreage of the teli: estate IlS on the 
31st day of March, H150. It is now considered uecessary for the purpose 
of ensuring strict observance of our obligations under the Internntional 
'l'en Agreement that this Ill&tter also should be subject to the permission 
of the Tea I.icensing Committee. 
'I'he Bill gives effect to both these proposals. 
NEW DBLHI; 
Th8 28th May, 1952. 
T. T. KRISHNAMACHARI. 

a 
ANNEXURE 
};XTUAC'fS FROM THE INDIAN TEA CONTROL ACT, 1988 (VIII OF 1938) 
Section 3(2) 
8. OoD8t1tutlon of the Indian Tea LlceDaiDg Oommlttee.-
• • '. • • 
(2) Members nominated or elected under sub-section (1) shall hold office 
for the duration of this Act. ' 
• • • • • 
Section lO(h) 
10. Power to make ruleI.-The Central Government may, by notification 
in the official Gazett-e, make rules-
• • • • • • 
(h) reguluting the circumstances in which and the authority by 
which members of the Committee may be .removed; and 
• • • • • 
Section 26 
is. Kethod of contrOl of exteDllon of tea cUltlvatlon.-So long as this 
Act remains in force, no one shall plant tell in any land which was not 
planted with tea Oll the B1st duy of Marcb, 1950, unle~s permission has been 
granted in writing by or on behalf of the committee and such permission 
was in force on the date aforesfiid or was rented after that date: 
.Provided that this section shall apply to the replucing of tea areas by 
,planting new areas, but nothing in this section shall prohibit-
(a) the iufilling or supplying of vacancies on land planted with 
tea on the 31st day of March, 1950, or the replanting of tea upon-
(i) land planted with tea on the 31st day of March, 1950, from 
which the original bushes have been uprooted, or 
(ii) land plallted with tea on the 31st day of March, 1948, from 
which the original bushes have been uprooted; or, 
(b) the replacing of tea areas by planting tea on area. llot planted 
'With tea to the same extent, but not exceeding two per cent. in each 
year of the total permissible acreage of the tea estate as on the Slst day 
of March, 19tso, subject to suoh replacement being accompanied by 
simultaneous uprooting of the te&: bushes in the area 80 replaced. 

HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Indian Tea Control Act, 1938. 
(SAri T. T. K ,.itJhnamachari, 
Minister Jor Oommercc and JnduBtry.} 
GIPD-LAD-318PS -6.8·6J-l.40C 