14 of 
194'1. 
, "' .\ 
>wi i"; C 
Bill No. 42 of 1984 
THE INDUST~ DISPUifES (AMENDMENT) B~ 19M 
A 
BllL 
fu.rther to amend the Inctustria:l Dispwtes Act, 194'7. 
BE it enacted. by .Parllament in the Thirty-fifth Year of the Republic 
of .1ndia as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Industrial Disputes (Amendment) 
Act, 1984. . -... -~ 
5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notltJ.catlon in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates 
may be appointed for difterent provisions of this Act. 
2. In section 2 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter 
referred to as the principal Act), in clause (00), after sub-clause (b), 
10 the following sub-cJ.ause shall be inserted, namely:- . 
"(bb) termination of the service of the workman as a result of 
the non-renewal of the contract of employment between the emplo-
yer and the workman concerned on its explry or of such contract 
being terminated. under a stipUlation in that behalf contained there-
in; or". .. 
15 3. In section 25F of the principal Act, in claust (a), the proviso shall 
be omitted. 
20 
.L . .-;.-I 
4. In section 25M of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "with the previous pei"mis-
sion of such authority as may be specified by the appropriate Gov-
ernment by notification in the Official Gazette, unless such lay-
off is dUe to shortage of power or to natural calamity", the words 
and brackets "with the prior permission of the appropriate Gov-
ernment or such autho.rity as may be specified by that Govern-
ment by notification in the Official Gazette (hereafter in this section 
referred to as th~ specified authority), obtained on an application 
made in this behalf, unless such lay-off is due to shortage of power 
or to natural calamity, and in the case of a mine, such lay-off is due 
also to fire, flood, excess of inflammable gas or explOSion" shall be 
substituted; 
Short 
title 
and 
com· 
mence. 
mat 
Amend-
mentot 
section J, 
Amend-
Mento! 
section 
B'. 
Amend-
mentor 
section 
25M. 

(b) for sub-sections ,(2) to (5), the following sub-':t"eCtions shall 
be substituted., nameby:-
"(2) An application for permission under sub-section (1), 
shall be made by the employer in the prescribed manner stating 
clearly the reasons for the intended lay-off and a copy of sach 5 
application shall also be served simultaneously on the worlanen 
concerned in the prescribed manner. 
(3) Where the workmen (other than badli workmen or 
casual workmen) of an industrial establishment, being a mine, 
have been laid-off under sub-section (1) for reasons of fire, 10 
flood or excess of inflammable gas or explosion, the employer., 
in relation to such establishment, 'Shall, within a period: at 
thirty days from the date of commencement of such lay-oft', 
apply, i,n the prescribed manner, to the appropriate Government 
or the specified authority for permission to continue the lay-off. 15 
(4) Where all application for permission under sub.osection 
(1) or sub-section (3) has been made, the appropriate Gov-
ernment or the specified authori,ty, after making such enquiry 
as it thinks fit and afte.r giving a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard to the employer, the workmen concerned and the 20 
persons interested in such lay-off, may, having regard to the 
genuineness and adequacy of the reasons for such lay-off, 
the interests of the workmen and all other .relevant factors, by 
order and for reasons to be recorded in writing, grant or refuse 
to grant such permission and a copy of such order shal~, be 25 
communicated to the employer and the workmen. 
(5) Where an application for permission under sub-seCtion 
(1) or sub-section (3) has been made and the appropriate { 
Government or the specified authority does not communicate . 
the order gl'anting or refusing to grant permisSion to the So 
employer within a period of 'Sixty days from the date on which 
such application is made, the permission applied for shall be 
deemed to have been. granted on the expiration of the said 
period of sixty days. 
(6) An. order of ,the appropriate Government or the 
specified authority granting or refusing to grant permission 35 
shall, subject to the provisions of sub-section (7), be final and 
binding on all the part:es concerned and shall remain in' force 
for one year from the date of such order. 
(7) The appropriate Government or the specified authority 
may, eithe.r on its own motion or on the application made by 40 
the emp10yer or anYl workman, review its order granting or 
refusing to grant permission under SUb-section (4) or refer 
the matter or as the case may be, cause it to be referred to a 
Tribunal for adjudication: ' 
45 
Provided that where a reference has been made to a Tribu-
nal under this sub-section, it shall pass an .award within a 
period of thirty days from the date of such reference, 

3 
(8) Where no application for permission under sub-section 
(1) is made, or where no application for permission under sub-
section (3) is made within the period specified therein, or where 
the permission for any lay-off has been refused, such lay-off shall 
5 be deemed to be illegal from the date on which the workmen 
had been laid-off and the workmen shall be entitled to all the 
benefits under any law for the time being in force as if they 
had not been laid-off. 
(9) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoflle 
10 provisions of tID'S section, the appropriate Government may, if 
it is satisfied that owing to SUCh exceptional circumstances as 
accident in the establishment or death of the employer or the 
like, it is necessary so to do, by order, direct that the provisions 
of sub-section (1), or, as the case may be, sub-section (3) shall 
I'; not apply in relation to such establishment for such period as 
mlay be specified in the order."; 
(c) 'Sub-secUon (6) shall be re-numbered as sub-section (10). 
S. For section 25N of the principal Act, the following s.!Ction shall SubBt;tu-
t>e substituted, namely:- tionof 
:ao . 
30 
40 
, 
"25N. (1) No workman employed in any industrial establish-
ment to which this Chapter applies, who has been in continuous 
service for not less than one year under an employer shall be 
retrenched by that employer untit,-
(a) the workman has been given three months' notice in 
writing indicating the reasons for retrenchment and the period 
af notice has expired, or the workman has been paid in lieu of 
such notice, wages for th':! period of the notice; and 
(b) the prior permission of the appropriate Government or 
such autpority as may. be speCified by .that Government by noti-
fication in the Official Gazette (hereafter in this section referred 
to as the specified authority) has been oetained on an application 
made in this behalf. 
. (2) .. An application for permission under 'Sub-section (1) shall 
ll,e made. by the emploYE;r in th~ prescribed manner stating clearly 
the reaso'ns for .the intended retrenchm~nt and a copy of such appli-
cation shall also be served simultaneously on the workmen concerned 
i~ ·the p~escribed manner. 
(3) Where an application for permission under sub-section (1) 
has been made, the appropriate Government or the specified autho-
roty, after making such enquiry as it thinks fit and after giving a 
reasonabl<;! opportunitv of being heard to the employer, the work-
men concerned ann t.he· persons interested in such retrenchment, 
rna,., havin~ re.~a.,.d to the .genuineness and adequacy of the reasons 
stated bv the employer, the interests of the workmen and all other 
relevant factors, by order and for reasons to be recorded in wrltin~, 
grant or refuse to grant such permission and a copy of such ol'der 
shaJil be communicated to the employer and the workmen . 
. (4) Wbe~ an application for permission has been made under: 
sub-section (1) and the appropriate Government or Hie specified 
new 
section 
for sec-
tion25N. 
Conditions 
precedent 
ot 
retrench-
mentot 
workmen. 

Amend-
mentof 
eectlon 
25Q. 
Amend-
mentof 
kt460f 
1"2. 
authority does not com'l1unicate the order granting or refusing to 
grant permission to the employer within a period of sixty days from 
the date on which sHci: application is made, the permission applied 
far shall be deemed to have been granted on the expiration of the 
said period of sixty day:;. !) 
(5) An order of Le appropriate Government or the spec1Aed 
authority granting 0:' ldusing to grant permission shall, sUbject to 
the provisions of suI; -section (6), be final and binding on aU the 
parties con~rned and ~haltl remain in force for one year from the 
date of such order. 10 
(6) The app,ropri ate Government or the specified authority may. 
either on its own mc~ion or on the application made by the employer 
or any workman, rniew its order granting or refusing to grant 
permission under SU:l-section (3) or.refer the matter or, as the 
case may be, cause it to be referred, to n Tribunal for adjudication: 15 
Provided that W:lere a reference has been made to a TribUnal 
under this sub-secti(.n, it shall pass an award within a pe.riod of 
thirty days from thc' d,lte of such reference. 
(7) Where no application for permiS'Sion under sub-section (1) 
is made, or where the permission for any retrenchment has been 20 
refused, such retrenchment shall be deemed to be illegal from the 
date on which the notice of retrenchment was given to the work 
man and the workman shall be entitled to all the benefits under 
any law for the time being in force as if no notice had been given 
to him. 25 
(8) Netwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing pro-
visioll$ of this section, the 'appropriate Government may, if it is 
sati'sfied that owing to such exceptional circumstances as accident in 
the establishment or death of the employer or the like, it is necessary 
so to do, by order, direct that the provisions of sub-section (1) shall 30 
not apply in relation to such establishment for such period as may be 
~ecified in the order. 
(9) Where permission for retNnchment ha'Sbeen granted unc1el 
sub-section (3) or where permission for retrenchment is deemed to 
be granted under sub-section (4), every workman who is employed 35 
in that establishment immediately before the date of appliCYation . for 
permis:>i(}n under thi's section shall be entitled' to 'receive- at the 
time ot retrenehment, c·ompenn.tion which shaU be equivalent, to 
fifteen days' a~rage pay for every completed yeU of C021tmuoua 
service or any part thereof in excess of six months.". 40 
8. In section 25Q of the principal Act, the words, brackets, letter and 
figures "clause (c) of sub-section (1) or sub-section (4) of" shall be 
omitted. 
7. In the Industriar Disputes (Amendment) Act, 1982,-
(a) in sub-section (2) of section 1, after the' words "by not1fica- 45 
tion in the Official Gazette, appoint", the words ", and cWferent dates 
m~y be appointed for different p.rovir.ions ot this Act" shall be in-
serted; 
(b) 'leCtion 13 shall be omitted .. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947', provides the machinery and pro-
cedure for the investigation and settlement of industrial disputes. The 
provisions of the Act had been amended from time to time in the light of 
experience gained in its actual working, case laws and industrial relations 
policy of the Government. 
2. The amendments proposed in the Bill are mainly to clarify certain 
'doubts expressed by Courts on the validity of certain provisions of the 
'Act. The Bill, inter alia, seeks to make the following amendments in 
the Act, namely:-
(i) Difficulties have arisen in the interpretation of the expres-
sion "retrenchment". It is proposed to exclude frQm the definition of 
"retrenchment" as contained in the Act termination of the service 
of a workman as a result of the non-renewal of the contract of em-
ployment on its expiry and of the termination of such contract in 
accordance with the provisions thereof; 
(ii) Following the decision of the Supreme Cow-t in the Excel 
Wear case (A.I.R. 1979 S.C. 25), some High Courts have declared 
invalid the special provisions relating 1:0 lay-off and retrenchment 
contained in the Act which applied to establishments employing 300 
or more workmen. It is proposed. to .redraft these provisions on 
the same lines as the amended provision relating to closure, which 
was inserted by the Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act, 1982, 
(46 of 1982), after taking into consideration the observations of the 
Supreme Court in the above case, 
3. The Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act, 1982, was passed 
by Parliament in August, 1982. A number of provisions of that 
Act confer considerable benefits to workmen. In order to provide that 
the various sections of that Act can be rwtified for enforcement separa-
tely and with effect from different dates, it is proposed to amend suitably 
seo~on 1 (2)' of that Act. 
NEW D!:LHI; VEERENDRA PATIL. 
Tho 12,th April, 1984. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 4(b) of the Bill proposes to substitute sub-sections (2) to (5) 
of section 25M of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947. New sub-seeUon (2) 
requires the employer, who intends to lay-off any of his workmen, to 
app1y for prior permission to the appropriate Government, and a copy 
of such application shall also be served simultaneously on the work-
men concerned, in the manner prescribed by rules. The new sub-section 
(3) also requires the employer in relation to a mine to apply in the 
n1anner prescribed by rules for permission to continue any lay-off de-
clared. in respect of that mine. 
2. Clause 5 of the Bill proposes to substitute a new section for the 
existing section 25N of the Act. Sub-section (2) of new section 25N 
requires the employer, who intends to retren.ch any workman, to apply 
for prior permission to the appropriate Government, and a copy ot such 
appUcation shall also be served simultaneously on the workmen concel11-
ed, in the manner prescribed by rules. 
'3. The matters in respect of which rules may be made under the above 
provisions are matters of detail or procedure. The delegation of legisla-
tive power is thus normal in character. 
6 

ANNE:xtlkP! 
ExTRAcTs FROM 1'H'Il INDUS'l'IUALDI.iPUTIIS ACT, 19067 
(14 OF 1947) 
• III • • • 
2. In this Act, unless there is anythipg repugnlUlt in the subject or 
context,-
... * 
I 
* • 
(00) "retrenchment" meana :the termination by the employer of 
tho service of, a workman for any reason whatsoever, ()t~ ~an 
as a punishment inflicted by way of dJscipbnary action, but does 
not include-
. ~ 
• • 
ZSF. No workman employed in any industry who has been in conti-
nuous service for not less than one year under an employer shall be re-
trenched by that employer until-
(a.) the workman has been given one month'lJ notice in writing 
indicating the reasons for ret,rencnment and the period of notice has 
expired, or the workman has been paid in lieu of such notk.oe, wages 
for the period of the notice: 
Provided that no such notice shall ,be necessary if the retrench-
ment is under an agreement which, specifies a date fm- tthe tennma-
tion of service; J' • 
• • 
DeJlni· 
tions. 
Conditione 
precedent 
to retren-
chment 
of work-
meD. 
25M. (1) No workman (other than a ~li workman or a casual Pl'ohibi-
workman) whose name is borne on the muster rolls of an industrial tion of 
establishment to which this Chapter applies shall be 18.ld-off by his em- la,)"-off, 
ployer except with tne previous permission of such authority as may be 
s~ed by the appropriate Government by notification in th.e Official 
Gazette, unless such lay-off is due to shortage of power or to natural 
calamity. 
(2) Where the workmen (other than badli workmen or casual 
workmen) of an industrial establishment .referred to in sub-section (1) 
have been laid-ofi before the commencement of the Industrlal Disputes 
(Amendment) Act, 1976 and such lay-off continues at such conunenee-
ment, the employer in relation to such estabhahment shall, within a 
perio~ of fitteen days from such commencement, apply to the authority 
spec;ified under sub-section (l) for permission to continue the lay-off. 
(3) In the case of every application for permission Wlder sub-section 
(1) or sub-section (2), the authority to whom the application has been 
made may, after making such inquiry as he thinks fit, grant or ~, 
for reasons to be l'ecorded in writing, the permission applied for. 
'(4) Where an application fCir permission has been made under sub. 
section (1) or sub-section (2) and the authority to whom the application 
is made docs not communi.cate the permiSSion or the refusal to grant 
the permission to the employer within a period of two months from the 
date On which the application is made, the permission applied for shall 
be deemed to have been granted on the expiration of the said period of 
two months. 
(5) Where no application for permJssion undersub-sectiQD (1) is 
made, or where no applicat:on for permission under sub-section (2) bas 
7 

Conditions 
precedent 
to retren-
chment 
of work-
men. 
8 
been made withtn the period spemfied therem, or where the permiII10n 
tor the .lay-ott or the conl.lnuance ot the lay-ott .nBS been reluaed, such 
lay-ott sna.u De deemed to be illegal from the d.aT.e on whlcb ttle workmen 
have oeen .l8lC.l-0n and. the V{OrlUllen snaH De ent.Ued to all We benents 
und.er any law fol' Ule tune btnng m Iorce as it tney had not been !&ld-
off. 
• • • • 
ZSN. (1) No. worlanan employed in any industrial est.ablishment to 
whIch· this ChIlpter appl.t.'s, WhO has been in contmuous serVice for not 
less tnau one year unaer an employel' iihall be retrenched by that em-
ployer untll,- . , i ).~_;.....:.... 
la) the workman has been given three months' noUce in writing 
indJcatmg the reasons for retrencrunem and the per.lOd 01 notice baa 
explreQ, or toe worKman has been paId. m !leu 01 such nOt.lC8, wages 
lor the period. of the notice: 
.t'rovlued that no such not.ce Silall be necessary if the retrench-
ment IS uuuer an agreem&nt, Wfucn spcclnes a C1ate for termmat...on 
01 service; 
(0) ,·he workn.an has been paJd, at the time of re1.rencmnem. 
compeJlsaUOh willeh snaHbe e4ulvalent to ntteen d.ays· average pay 
tor every compieLeU year ot contmuous serVIce or any part thereo1 m 
exce3S of six monthS; and . 
(c) notice in the prescribed manner is served on the appropr1ate 
Government or sucn authOrIty as may be SpecIfied. by toe appropnate 
Government by notificatlon 10 the Officla! Gazette, and. the perm. 
SIOn ot such Government or authonty is obtamed 'under sub-sectlon 
(2). 
(2) On l'eceipt of a nC'tice under clause (c) of sub-section (1) the 
appropriate Government or authority may, after making such inquiry u 
such Government or authority thinks fit, grant or refuse, for reasons to 
be recorded in writmg, the permission for the retrenchment to which the 
notice relates. 
(3) Where ,the Government or authority does not communicate the 
permission or the refusal to grant the permiSSion to the employer Within 
three months of the date of service of the notice under clause (c) of sub-
seetion (1), the Government or authority shall be deemed to have granted 
permission for such retrenchment on the expiration of the said period of 
three ~onths. . 
(4) Where at the commencement of the Industrial Disputes (Amend-
ment) Act, 1976, the period of notice giV:en under clause (a) of section 
25F for the retrenchment of any workman has not expired, the employer 
shall not retrench the workman but shall, within a period of fifteen days 
from such commencement, apply to the appropriate Government or to 
the authority specified in sub-section (2) for permiSSion for retrenchment. 
(5) Where an ~pplica~ion for permission has been made under sub-
section (4) and the appropriate Government or the authority, as the case 
may be, does not communicate the. permission or the refusal to grant the 
permission to the employer w:thin a period of two months from the date 
on which the application is made, the permission applied for shall be 
deemed to haVe been granted on the expiration of the said period of two 
months. I 
82 of 
1976. 

9 
. (6) Where no application for permission under clause (c) of S'Ub-
section (1) is made, or where no applitation for permission under sub-
section (4) if. made within the period specified therein or where the per-
mission for the retrenchment has been refused, such retrenchment shall 
be deemed to be illegal from the date on which the notice of retrench-
ment was given to the workman and the workman shall be entitled to 
all the beneAts under any law for the time being in foree as if no notice 
had been given to him. 
(7) Where at the commencement of the Industrial Disputes (Amend-
32 of 1976. ment) Act, 1976, a dispute relating, either solely or in addition to other 
matters, to the retrenchment of any workman or worlanen oj an ind~ 
trial establishment to which this Chapter applies is pendingbefore a 
conciliation officer or the Central Government or the State Government, 
as the case may be, and-
(a) there is an allegation that such retrenchment is by way of 
victimisation; or 
(b) the appropriate Government is of the opinion that such re-
trenchment is not in the interests of the maintenanc\! of industrial 
peace, 
the appropriate Government, if satisfied that it is necessary so to do, 
may, by order, withdraw such dispute or, as the case may be, such dis-
pute in so far as it relates to S'Uch retrenchment and transfer the same -
to an authority (being an authority specified by he appropriate Gov-
ernment by notification in the Official Gazette) for consideration whether 
lIuch retrenchJllent is justified and any order passed by such authority 
shall be flnal and binding on the employer and the workman or workmen . 
• '" '" '" '" 
ZSQ. Any employer who contravenes the provisions of section 25M 
or clause (c) of sub-section (1) or' sub-section (4) of section 25N shall 
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one 
month, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with 
both. 
'" '" '" '" '" 
EXTRACTS FROM THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES (AMENDMENT) ACT, 1982 
(46 OF 1982) 
'" • '" '" '" 
1. (1) '" '" '" '" '" 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Ga7.ette, appoint. 
'" '" '" '" '" 
13. In section 25M of the principal Act,-
(II) in Rub-section (1), after the words "or to natural calamity", 
the words u, and in the case of a mine, such lay -ot! is due also to fire, 
flood. excess of inflammable gas or explosion" shall be inserted; 
Penalty 
forlq-d 
and 
retrench-
ment 
without 
previous 
permis-
sion. 
Short 
Htleand 
com-
mence· 
DlE'nt. 
Amend-
ment Of 
E:ection 
25M. 

10 
(b) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be ill. 
liIerted, namely:-
"(2A) Where the workmen (other than bAdli wQ1'kmen or 
casual workmen) of an industrial establishment be~ a mine 
have been laid-off under sub-section (1) for reasons of fire, flood 
or excess of inflammable gas or explosion, the employer in rela-
tion to such establishment shall, within a period of thirty days 
from the date of commencement of such lay-off, apply to the 
authority specified under sub-section (1) for permission to con-
tinue the lay-off."; 
(c) in sub-sections (3), (4) and (5), after the words, brackets 
and figure "under sub-section (2) ", the words, brackets, figure and 
letter "or sub-section (2A)" shall be inserted . 
• • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Industrial Disputes Act, IM'7. 
(Sh,ri VHre7&d1"(& Pa.til, 
Ministef! ~ La.bour a.nd 
RehabilitAtlion ) 