| i As mrropucen IN Lox Sarna ON

6 MAR 199८

Bill No. 42 of 1992
a ae

THE CITIZENSHIP (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1992

A
BILL

further to amend the Citizenship Act, 1955.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-third Year of the Republic of
India as follows:—

1. This Act may be called the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 1992.

2, In section 4 of the Citizenship Act, 1955 (hereinafter referred to as the
5 principal Act),—

(a) in sub-section (1),—

(i) for the opening portion beginning with the words “A person
porn outside India” and ending with the words “at the time of his birth”
the following shall be substituted, namely:—

10 “A person born outside India,—

(@ on or after the 26th January, 1950, but before the
commencement of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 1992,
shall be a citizen of India by descent if his father is a citizen of
India at the time of his birth; or
15 मे (0) on or after such commencement, shall be a citizen of
India by descent if cither of his parents is a citizen of India at
the time of his birth:”;

(ii)_ in the opening portion of the existing proviso, after the words
“if the father of such a person”, the words “referred to in clause
(@” shall be inserted ;

Short title.

Amendment
of section 4.


2

(ii) after the existing proviso, as so amended, the following provise
shall be inserted, namely:—

“Provided further that ifeither of the parents Of such a person referred
to in clause (6) was a citizen of India by descent only, that person shalt
not be a citizen of India by virtue of this section unless—

(०) his birth is registered at an Indian consulate within one
year of its occurrence or the commencement of the Citizenship
(Amendment) Act, 1992, whichever is later, or, with the permission of
the Central Government, after the expiry of the said period; or

(6) cither of his Parents is, at the time of his birth, in service
under a Government of India.”

(6) in sub-section (3), for the words ‘any male person”, the words “any
Person” shall be substituted.

Ameodueot 3. Jn section 8 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the words *:

‘a mare
ofsection 8. person”, the words “a person” shall be substituted.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

5 a Signatory to the Convention on elimination of all forms of disert-
ion against women adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations.
rticle 9 (2) of the Convention requires that the State Parties shall grant women
oa I rights with men with respect to the nationality of their children. Section 4 (1)
of the Citizenship Act, 1955 provides that a person born outside India on or after
26th Jamary, 1950 shall be a citwzen of India by descent if his father is an Indian
citizen at the time of his birth, With a view to eliminate discrimination against
‘Women in respect of citizenship of their children and in order to bring the provisions
‘of the Citizenship Act, 1955 in conformity article 9 (2) of the aforesaid
Convention, it is proposed to amend the said Act so as to provide that 8 person
born outside India on or after the coming into force of the provisions of the Bill
shall become a citizen of India by descent ifeither of his paren is a citizen of Indi
at the time of his birth.

2. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objects.

New Devt; $. 8. CHAVAN

The 26th February, 1992.



ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS prom THE CITIZENSHIP Act, 1955
(57 oF 1955)

. * * * *
Citizen ship 4. (1) 4 person born outside India on or after the 26th January, |
by: ॥ shall be a citizen of India by descent if his father is a citizen of India at the ume

of his. birth:

Provided that if the father of such a person was a citizen of India by descent
only, that person shall not be a citizen of India by virtue of this section unless—
(@)_ his birth is registered at an Indian consulate within one year of its
occurrence or the commencement of this Act, whichever is later, or, with the
Permission of the Central Government, after the expiry of the said period; or

(6)"his father is, at the time of his}birth, in service under 4 Government
in India,

oe
. * * * *

> {Aor the purposes of the proviso to. sub-section (7), any male person
born outside undivided India who was, or wos deemed to be, a citizen of India
{tthe commencement of the Constitution shell he deemed to be a citizen of India
by descent only,

* * नि डे *
Renuciation 8. (0) है i
Ch (2) Where a male person ceases to be a citizen of India under sub-section

(2), every minor child of that person shall thereupon cease to be a citizen of India:

Provided that any such child may, within one year after attaining full age,
make a declaration that he wishes to resum2 Indian citizenship and shall thereupon
again become a citizen of India.

* * * * *


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Citizenship Act, 1925,

(Shri S. B. Chavan, Minister of Home Afi-irs)