As intropucen IN Lok SABHA.

4 2 JUN 1998

Bill No. 42 of 1998,

| WITH DISABILITIES (EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES,
PROTECTION OF RIGHTS AND FULL PARTICIPATION)
AMENDMENT BILL, 1998

By
‘SHRI BHAGWAN SHANKER Rawat, M.P.

A
BILL

ond the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights
Participation) Act, 1995.

‘it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
is Act may be called the Persons With Disabilities (Equal Opportunities,
of Rights and Full Participation) Amendment Act, 1998.

In section 33 of the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of
Full Participation) Act, 1995,—

the words "in the posts identified for each disability:", the words “in all Posts:
sof services identified for each disability:” shall be substituted;

Short title.

Amendment of
section 33.


2
(ii) the existing section shall be renumbered as sub-section (1) thereof and after
section (1) as so renumbered, the following sub-section and explanation shall be inse1
namely,—

"(2) Notwithstanding any judgement, decree or order of any court or tribunal |
other authority to the contrary, the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be deemed to ha
come into force from the date of coming into force of the Act.

Explanation: For the purposes of this section, the expression “appoint” incl
appointment by promotion also.”.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Parliament enacted the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of
Rights and Full participation) Act, 1995 with a view to provide statutory rights to the
Physically handicapped persons in various spheres of life, including employment. The
said Act is of far reaching consequences and has turned out to be a healing gesture to the
members of the society, who on account of their physical deficiencies, are not able to
compete with their fellow countrymen.

‘The Act enjoins reservation of not less than three per cent for physically handicapped
persons in every establishment under Government.

At present reservation in promotion in favour of physically handicapped person is
available only in some groups of services.

With a view to put things beyond controversy and to remove existing anomaly and also
to make the benefits of reservation available invariably in all groups of services, even
where the appointments are being made only from Promotional avenues, it would be
expedient to modify the said Act suitably.

It is further proposed to implement the provisions of reservation from the date of
coming into force of the Act in order to do justice to the handicapped. The Bill would goa

Jong way and would ensure a fair and just treatment to those members of the society, who
need it the most,

New Devut; BHAGWAN SHANKER RAWAT
May 5, 1998.


ANNEXURE

EXTRACT FROM THE PERSONS wrTH DisaBILiTiEs (EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES, PROTECTION oF RIGHTS
|; AND FULL Participation) Act, 1995
* . * * *
Reservation of 33. Every appropriate Government shall appoint in every establishment such
percentage of vacancies not less than three per cent for persons or class of persons with
disabilities of which one per cent each shall be reserved for persons suffering from—

(i) blindness or low vision;
(ii) hearing impairment;
(iii) locomotor disability or cerebral palsy, in the posts identified for each
disability:

Provided that the appropriate Government may, having regard to the type of work
carried on in any department or establishment, by notification subject to such conditions,
if any, as may be specified in such notification, exempt any establishment from the
provisions of this section.

* * * *. *


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to amend the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and
Full Participation) Act, 1995.

(Shri Bhagwan Shanker Rawat, M.P.)

F\BILLS\322Is98.PM5