8W No. 43 of .". 
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE 
PEOPLE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1961 
(To BE INDODUCPD IN Lox SABRA) 

BUr No 1! ot 1,41 
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1961 
(To BE INTRODUCED IN LolC SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1950, and 
the Representation of the People Act, 1951, and to make certain 
minor amendments in the Two-Member Constituencies (A,boli-
tion) Act, 1961. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twelfth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
$ 1. (1) This Act may be called the Representation of the People Sbor title and Q)JD-
10 
(Amendment) Act, 1961. IQenc:ement. 
(2) It shan come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Offtcial Gazette, appoint. 
CHAPTER II 
AMENDMENT 01' THE REPIlESENTATION OF THE PRoPLE Acr, 1850 
2. In section 23 of the Representation of the People Act, 1950 ~~Dt 
(hereinafter referred to as the 1950-Act), sub-sections (4) and (5) of~'::~~ ~ 
shall be omitted. 19S0. 
3. After section 23 of the 1950-Act, the following sections shall be IDlertio~ of 
• __ ...... ....:1 1 . neW lectlOns 
IS UlIfC'HC\.I, name y. - after IeCtiOD 
"24. An appeal shall lie within such time and in such manner ~~ •. 
as may be prescribed-
(4) to the Chief Electoral Oftlcer, from any order of the 
Electoral Relistration Offtcer under section 22 or section 23, 
and 

Fee for 
appliCations 
and 
appeals. 
Amendment 
of KCtioQ 27. 
~ 
(b) to the Election Commission, from any order of thi 
Chief Electoral Officer under section 23. 
25. Every application under section 22 or section 23 and f!!Very 
appeal under section 24 shall be accompanied by the prescribed fee 
which shall, in no case, be refunded.". S 
4. In section 27 of the 1950-Act,-
(a) in sub-section (5)-
(i) in clause (a), for the words "on the qualifying date 
was", the word "is" and for the words "before that date", the 
words "before the qualifying date" shall be substituted; 10 
(ii) in -clause (b), for the words "on the qualifying date 
was", the word "is" and for the 'WOrds "before that date", the 
words "before the qualifying date" shall be substituted; 
(b) for sub-secti~n (6), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely: - 15 
"(6) For the purposes of sub-sections (4) and (5), the 
qual~ing -date sball be the 1st day of November of the year 
in whiehthepreparatioR or revision of the electoral roll is 
commenced.". 
5. In section 28' of the 1950-Act, for sub-section (8), the following :'0 
~=i':e~t sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-
Amendnllm 
of the Pourth 
Sabedule. 
" (3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as 
may be after it is made before each House of Parliament while it 
is in session for a total period of thirty days which maybe com-
prised in one session or in two successive seaions, and if, before 2( 
the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the sessiOft im-
mediaely foUowiDg, both Ijouses agree that the rule shuuld be 
either modified. o.r annulled, the rule shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect. as the case may 
be; so, however that any such modification or annulment shall30 
be Wlithout prejudice to the- vaUdity of anything previously done 
under that rUle.". 
6. In the FO\lrth Schedule to the 1950 Act-
(a) the heading "BOMBAY" and the entries under that head. 
iDg shall .. be omitted; '3' 
(b) after the heading "MADRAS" and the entries ther.eunder, 
the following heacling ,and entries shall be inserted, namely:-
"MAHARASHTRA 
1. M~icipal Committees. 
I 
I 
2. Diatrlct Local Boarda. I 

5 
'--., 1'1) 
3. Cantonment Boards. 1 
4. District Boards. I 
5. Town Committees. 
6. Janapada Sabhas (Rural Circle) "; 
(c)·under the heading "MYSORE"-
(1) for the entry "2. District Boards and District Local 
Boards." the entry "2. Taluk Development Boards." shall 
be substituted; 
(2) the entry "5. Village Panchayats with a population 
10 of not less than five thousand." shall be omitted. 
I, 
20 
CHAPTER TIl 
AMENDMENT OF THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE ACT, 1951 
7. In section 30 of the 1951 Act,-
(a) in clause (a), for the words "tenth day", the words 
"seventh day" shall be substituted; 
(b) in clause (b), for the words "third day", the words 
"second day" shall be substituted. 
Alnendmeat 
of JlCtioa 30 
8. In section 33 of the 1951-~ct, for sub-section (6), the follow- Amendmellt 
ing sub-section shall be substituted, namely:- of section 33. 
"(6) Nothing in' this sectIon shall prevent any candidate 
from being nominated by more than one nomination paper: 
Provided that not more than four nomination papers shall 
be presented by or on behalf of any candidate or accepted by . r 
the ~etuming 9mcer for election in the same constituency,". ~4/1.' fv-"' 
~ tt;,.....{' tu. ~. ')1.< 'd' ~ ~ ~ t£ ~.~ 1, 
I. In section 36 of the 1951 Act- AmendmeDt 
. . . oflectioa ". (a) lD sub-sectIon (2), lD claus~ (a), for the words "that 
the candidete", the words Uthat on the date fixed for the 
scrutiny of nominations the candidate" shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub--section (5), in the proviso, for the words "an 
objection is made", the words "an .objection is ·raised by the 
returning officer or is made by any other person" shall be 
substituted. I 

4 
Amen~ment 10. In section 37 of the 1951-Act, for sub-section (3) I the follow-
ofsectlOD 17. ing sub-aection shall be substituted, namely:-
"(3) The returning officer shall, on being satisfied as to the 
genuineness of a notice of withdrawal and the identity of the S 
person delivering it under sub-section (1), cause the notice to 
be affixed in some conspicuous place in his office.". 
Amendment 11. In section 39 of the 1951-Act, in sub-section (1), in clause 
of section 3". 
Omission of 
Slc:tion ! •. 
Substitution 
or new 
sectODfor 
sectiOD !8. 
Presb pell 
in theca of 
ciestnlct, n, 
eta. of ballot 
boxes. 
(a), for the words "tenth day", the words "seventh day" shall be 
substituted. 
12. Section 54 of the 1951-Act shalJ be omitted. 
13. For section 58 of the 1951-Act, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"58. (1) If at any election,-
10 
(a) L'ly ballot box used at a polling station or at a 
place fixed for the poll is unlawfully taken out of the cus- IS 
tody of the presiding officer or the returning officer, or is 
accidentally or intentionally destroyed or lost, or is dam-
aged or tampered with, to such an extent, that the result 
of the poll at that polling station or place cannot be 
ascertained, or ~o 
(b) ~y such error or irregularity in procedure as is 
likely to vitiate the poll is committed at a polling station 
or at a place fixe"- for the poll, 
the returning officer shall forthwith report the matter to 
the Election Commission. 
(Z) Thereupon, the F;lection Commission shall, after taking 
all material circumstances into account, either 
(4) declare the poll at that polling station or place to 
be void, appoint a day, and fix the hours, for taking a fresh 
poll at that polling station or place and notify the day 10 30 
appointed and the hours 10 fixed in such manner as it 
may deem fit, or 

10 
, 
(b) if satisfied that the result of a fresh poll at that 
polling station or place will not, in any way, affect the result 
of the election or that the error or irregularity in procedure 
is not material, issue such directions to the' returning officer 
as it may deem proper for the further conduct and comple-
tion of the election. I 
(3) The provisions of this Act and of any rules or orders 
made thereunder shall apply to every such fresh poll as they 
apply to the original poll.". 
14. Section 63 of the 1951-Act shall be omitted. Omission of 
section 63. 
15. In section 67A of the 1951-Act, the word and figures "section Amen~ent 
54" shall be omitted. ~~~Ion 
16. In section 73 of the 1951-Act- Amendment 
of section 73. 
(a) for the words "the appropriate authority", the words 
IS "the Election Commission" shall be substituted, 
(b) the words "together with the names of the persons, if 
any, nominated by the President or Governor to that House or 
Assembly, as the case may be;" shall be omitted. 
~ In section 81 of the 1951-Act, after sub-section (2) the follow- Amendme~t , of sectIon 
20 iIlg sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- 81. 
"(3) Every election petition shall be accompanied by as 
many copies thereof as there axe respondents mentioned in 
the petition and one more copy for the use of the Election Com-
mission, and every such copy shall be attested by the petitioner 
2S under his own signature to be a true copy of the petition.". 
18. In section 83 of the 1951-Act, in sub-section (1), the follow- Amendment 
ing proviso shall be inserted at the end, namely:- 8~. section 
"Provided that where the petitioner alleges any corrupt 
practice, the petition shall also be accompanied by an affidavit 
30 in the prescribed form in support of the allegation of such 
corrupt practice and the particulars thereof.". 
19. In section 86 of the 1951-Act, for sub-section (1), the follow- Amendment 
ing sub-section shall be substituted, namely: _ ~~. section 
cc (1) If the petition is not dismissed under section 85, the 
3S Election Commission shall send by post a copy thereof to 
ea~h respondent and shall refer the petition to an Election 
Tribunal for trial.". 

Amendment 
of section 
90· 
Amendment 
of section 
106. 
Amendment 
ofsoction 
uM. 
Amendment 
of section 
117· 
Amendment 
of section 
120. 
Amendment 
of section 
U3· 
-.. ..... -
6 _.' ---". -
ZOo In section 90 of the It51-Act,-
(a) in sUb-section (3), for the words and figures "section 
82 or section 117", the words and figures "or section 82" shall 
be substituted; 
(b) in sU.h-section (6), for the words "publication of the 5 
copy of the petition in the Official Gazette", the w.ords "reference 
of the petition to the tribunal for trial" shall besubstituf..ed. 
21. In section 106 of the 1951-Act, the words "and shall cause 
the order to be published" and clauses (a) and (b) shall be 
omitted. 10 
Z2. In section 116A of the 1951-Act,-
(a) in sub-section (4), after the word and ftgures "section 
98", the words and figures "or section 99" shall be inserted: 
(b) in sub-section (6), for clauses (a) and (b), the follow-
ing shall be substituted, namely:- IS 
"forward copies thereof to the authorities to which 
copies of the order of the tribunal were forwarded under 
section 106.". 
23. In section 117 of the 1951-Act, for the words "one thouaand 
rupees", the words "two thousand rupees" shall be substituted. 20 
24. In section 120 of the 1951-Act, in sub-section (1), the follow-
ing proviso shall be added at the end, namely:-
"Provided that where a petition is dismissed under clause 
(a) of section 98, the returned candidate shall be entitled to 
the costs incurred by him in contesting the petition and 25 
accordingly the Tribunal shall make an order for costs in favour 
of the returned candidate.". 
25. In section 123 of the 1951-Aet,-
(a) in clause (3)-
(i) the word "systematic" shall be 'omitted, 30 
(ii) for the words "caste, race, community or religion", ' 
the words "religion, race, caste, community or language" 
shall 'be substituted; 

,.. ~. 
, 
, 
(b)after clause (3), the following clause shall be insertecl, 
namely:-
"(SA) The promotion of, or attempt to promote, feel-
ings of enmity or hatred between different classes of the 
citizens of India on grounds of religion, race, caste, com-
munity, or language, by a candidate or his agent or any 
other person with the consent of a candidate or his election 
agent for the furtherance of. the prospects of that candidate's 
election.". 
10 28. In Chapter III of Part VII of the 1951-Act, before section 126, !:'i!~o~ 
the following section shall be inserted, namely:- 125 IIi In 
Chapter 
of Part VII. 
"125. Any person who in connection with an election un- Promotinl 
der this Act promotes or attempts to promote on grounds of enmitylbet- s . " ween c asse religion, race, caste, commumty or language, feelmgs of enmity in conneC-
or hatred between different classes of the citizens of India shall til on ~ith e ceuon. be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may ex-
tend to three years or with fine or with both.". 
27. In section 126 of the 1951-Act, for sub-section (1), the fol- Amendment 
hall b . ed I of section lowing' sub-sections e substltut ,name y: - 6 IZ . 
ao "(1) No person shall convene, hold or attend any public 
meeting within any polling area within twenty-four hours before 
the date of commencement of the poll or on the date or dates 
on which a poll is taken for an election in that polling area.". 
28. After section 127 of the 1951-Act, the following section shall Insertion of 
25 be inserted. namely: - new 8ecti«;>n , after section 
30 
IS 
127· 
"127A. (1) No person shall print any circular, placard, pam- .' . Ratrl cuan. phlet or poster havmg a reference to an election in any cons- on the print-
tituency unless a declaration by the publisher of such circu-~' of Cire:-
lar, placard, pamphlet or poster as to his identity attested by Ie:: ~:.P -
not less than two persons to whom the publisher is personally bevin, refelecr-eoce to c: -known is delivered to the printer by the publisher. don. 
(2) No person shall print or publish any such circular, 
placard, pamphlet or poster as is referred. to in sub-section (1) 
which does not bear on its face the names and addreS&es of the 
printer and the publisher thereof. 
(S) Th~ printer of every such circular, placard, pamphlet 
or poster as is referred to in sub-section (1) shall, immediately 
after the circular, placard, pamphlet or poster is printed, lend 

.~. 
Amendment 
of section 
13,. 
AmendmeRt 
of section 
141. 
Amendment 
of section 
IS8. 
Amendment 
of section 
169· 
bhe printed copy thereof together with the declaration refer-
red to in sub-section (1) to the returning officer of the consti-
tuency. 
(4) Any person who contravenes the provisions of sub-
section (1), sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) shall be punish- 5 
able with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six 
months or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees 
or with both.". 
29. In section 139 of the 1951-Act, in sub-section (1), in clause 
(b), for the word and figures "section 135", the words and figures 10 
"section 125 or section 135" shall be substituted. 
30. In section 141 of the 1951-Act, in clause (a), for the word 
and figures "section 135", the words and! figures "section 125 or 
section 135" shall be substituted. 
31. In section 158 of the 1951-Act, in sub-section (4), for the I, 
words "one-sixth" wherever they occur, the words "one-fifth" 
shall be substituted. 
32. In section 169 of the 1951-Act, for sub-section (3), the fol-
lowing sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-
.. (3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as 1000 20 
as may be after it is made before each House of Parliament 
while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions, 
and if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid 
or the session immediately following, both Houses agree that 2, 
the rule should be either modified or annulled, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no 
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modifica-
tion or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule.". 30 
CHAPTER IV 
MINOR AMENDMENT IN THE Two-MEMBER CONSTITUENCIES (ABOLITION) 
Ac:r. 1961 
Minor 33. In the Two-Member Constituencies (Abolition) Act, 1961, the 
~mendment. follOWing amendments relating to matters of minor detail shaU be 35 
In Act 1 of d I 1961 . ma e, name y:-
(a) in section 7, in sub-section (1), for the words "the 

s 
10 
15 
9 
C!ommission shall", the following words shall be substit11ted, 
namely:-
"the Commission may make such minor adjustments 
in the extent and boundaries of the constituencies as appea 
to it to be necessary or expedient in view of changes, if 
any, made in administrative units and shall thereafter"; 
(b) in section 8, for clause (b), the following clause shall 
be substituted, namely:-
"(b) where the boundaries or name of any district or 
any territorial division mentioned in a Schedule to the said 
Order or of any area within such district or division are or 
is altered, make such minor adjustments in the extent and 
boundaries of the constituencies as appear to it to be neces-
sary or expedient in view of such alteration and thereafter 
make such amendments as appew to it to be necessary for 
bringing the Schedule up-tCHfate.". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Election Commission in its Report on the Second General 
Elections made a number of recommendations for' the amendment 
of the election law. Some of these recommendations have already 
been implemented by making suitable amendments to the Repre-
sentation of the People Act, 1951, by the Representation of the Peo-
ple (Amendment) Act, 1958 (58 of 1958) and also by the new 
Conduct of Elections Rules, 1961. The question of reservation of 
seats in single-m.ember constituencies has been settled by the enact-
ment of the Two-Member Constituencies (Abolition) Act, 1961. 
2. The Election Commission, after reconsidering the other re-
commendations contained in' the Report and reviewing the entire 
election law in the light of recent experience, has made a number 
of proposals for the amendment of the Representation of the People 
Acts, 1950 and 1951. Apart from these proposals of the Election 
Commission, certain other proposals for amendments to the election 
law, have been found necessary. The Bill seeks to give effect to aU 
these proposals. i 
3. The important provisions of the Bill are explained in the Notes 
on Clauses. 
ASOKE K. SEN. 
NEW DELHI; 1 
The 8th August, 1961. 
10 

Notes on Clauses 
Clauses 2 and 3.-At present there is no provision for an appeal 
against orders of an Electoral Registration Officer under section 22 
amending, transposing or deleting entries in electoral rolls or refus-
ing to do so. This sometimes leads to dissatisfaction. Under section 
23 also, the existing right of appeal is restricted to cases where an 
application for inclusion of a name is rejected by the Electoral Regis-
tration Officer or by the Chief Electoral Officer, and not where it is 
accepted despite contention. It is proposed to provide for an appeal 
against every order made under section 22 or section 23. Further, 
it is considered that a small fee may be prescribed for applications 
under section 22 as it is already prescribed for applications under 
section 23. 
Clause 4.-Under sub-section (5) of section 27, a person has to 
be ordinarily resident on the qualifying date in a graduates' /teachers' 
constituency in order to be eligible for registration as an elector in 
that constituency. If he shifts his place of ordinary residence during 
the year from one constituency to another, he will have to wait till 
the next year's revision for getting himself enrolled in the appro-
priate electoral roll. As in the case of pe.rliamentary and assembly 
electoral rolls, ordinary residence need not be tied up to the qualt-
fying date. It is accordingly proposed to amend sub-section (5) of 
section 27 to enable a graduate or teacher to apply for enrolment 
as soon as he takes up ordinery residence in a constituency. 
Under sub-section (6) of section 27, the qualifying date for en-
rolment in the electoral roll for graduates' or teachers' constituen-
des is the 1st day of January of the year in which the roll is prepared 
or revised. Since the biennial elections in these constituencies have 
to be held in most of the States in the months of Marchand April, 
the revision of the Tolls has to be rushed through. In order to allow 
more time, it is proposed that the qualifying date should be the 1st 
nay of November of the year in which the preparation or revision 
of the electoral roll is commenced. 
Clause G.-The Government of Maharashtra has intimated that 
at present there are no District Panchayats in the State of Maha-
rashtra; and the Government of Mysore has sooted that District 
Boards and District Local Boards have been replaced by Taluk 
Development Boards and that even larger village pancheyats need 
not be treated as eligible local bodies for elections to the Sta~ Legis-
lative Council from the locel authorities' constituencies. By thi~ 
II 

12 
clause it is accordingly proposed to amend the list of local authori-
ties for Maharashtra and Mysore. 
Clause 9.-In order to reduce the overall period of elections, it 
is proposed to curtail the time available for making nominations as 
well as for scrutiny of nominations by reducing the period from 
ten days to seven days and from three days to two days, respeet1vely. 
Such reduction will incidentally tend to keep the election expenses 
low. . 
ClaUle lO.-The number of nomination papers which a candidate 
may present is not now restricted by law and this omission appears 
to have been taken undue advantage of by some candidates. A mul-
tiplicity of nomination papers tUed by the same candidate unneces-
sarily increases the labour of the returning oftlcer and the other 
candidates during scrutiny. The Election Commission accordingly 
recommended in Chapter XII of its Report on the Second General 
Elections that the maximuru number of nomination papers that may 
be presented by or on bebalf of the same candidate in the same 
constituency should be restricted to four only. 
Clause It.-There have been doubts as to the exact date to which 
the Qualification or disqualification of a candidate should be related 
under clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 36. This is sometimes 
material, e.g., in re~rd to the age of a candidate or in regard to the 
subsistence 'of a contract with the appropriate government, etc. To 
remove these doubts, it is proposed that the qualification or dis-
aualification of a candidate should be related to the date fixed for 
the scrutiny of nominations. ; 
Similllrly. under the proviso to sub-section (5) of this section it 
is not clear whp.ther an obiection to a person's candidature can be 
made only by another candidate Or also by any other person includ-
in~ the returninll officer. The proDOsed amendment of the proviso 
to sub-section (5) seeks to makp it clear that such objection may 
be rRised by eny p,.rson including the returning offtcer. 
Clause 12.-At present there is no provision' in the Act reCluirln~ 
thp rptllrnin~ officer to be satisfied about the genuineness of any 
notice of withdfllwal of c~ndidature. Under section 37, as soon as 
a noticE' of withdraws 1 i!l df'livered to the .retufnin~ officer, it is 
affixed in somP. consnicuouR tllacp. in his office. The Election Com-
mission hv recommendation No. 7 in Chapter XXX of its Report 
SU!!t'~t~d tholt. the retllrnin~ ofticer should be satisfied as to the 
~p'luinf'nf>Ss of anv' notice of wi·thdrawal and the identity of the 
nprgon df'1iverin~ it. beforp causinq the notice to be affixed in Rf)me 
conspicuou!ol place in his oftice. This recommendation of the Elec-
thm Commh:ion ill sou~ht to be implemented by this c1auRe. 

13 
Clauses 15 and 17.-After the abolition of two-member parlia-
mentary and assembly canstltuencies sections 54 and 63 have become 
9Uperfluou!J. 
Clause I6.-The Election Commission has recommended that the 
Commission should be vested with a greater discretion in ordering 
a fresh poll under section 58. Section 58 has accordingly been 
suitab1y amended to give effect to this recommendation. 
Clause 19.-At present the final notification under sectiorl 73 
which may be called the "due constitution" notification is issued by 
~ President in the case of the Lok Sabha and by the Governor 
in the case of the State Legislative Assembly. Sometimes, the 
issue of this notification is held up for the sake of obtaining names 
of nominated members. "Due constitution" of the Lok Sabha or 
the State Legislative Assembly on a General Election ha9 very 
little to do with the nomination of members by the President or 
the Governor. Further, the function of notifying the names of all 
elected members in a consolidated form after the General EI~ction 
may more appropriately be performed by the Election Commission 
which, under the Constitution (article 324) is responsible for the 
conduct of the General Elections. Hence the flmendments proposed 
in this clause. 
/~la1L8e 21.-At present gection' 81 of the Act, which deals with 
the presentation of electir.n petitions, does not require the peti-
tioner to supply the nece~sary nun;tber of copies of the petition to 
the Election Commission; the result is that the requisite number 
of copies for being served on the respondents are prepared in the 
Commission's office. When the petition is a lengthy one with a 
number of schedules and annexures and the number of respondents 
is also large, the task of preparing the requisite number of copies 
takes an appreciable time of the staff of tHe Commission. By re-
commendation No. 23 in Chapter XXX of its Report, the Commis-
14ion has accordingly suggested that a legal provision should be 
madE! making it obligatory for every petitioner to file with the 
election petition suftlcient number of copies of the .~etition. The 
Commission has recently reiterated this recomm.endation~h spe-
cific proposals in "thi~behalf. By this clause this recomm~ation 
is proposed to be implemented. . 
./ Clause 22.-Undet section 83 of the Act, every election petition 
is to be verified in the manner laid down itt' the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908, for the verification of pleadings. In spite of such 
verification, it has been found in practice that petitioners some-
times make allegation of corrupt practice in a careless manner 

• 
r4 
without realising the seriousness of the allegation. It is accord-
ingly proposed that where a petitioner alleges any corrupt prac-
tice in an election petition, the petition shall be accompanied by an 
affidavit in the prescribed form in support of the allegation of such 
corrupt practice and the particulars thereof. . 
Clause 23.-Sub-section (1) of section 86 as it stands at present 
requires the publication of each election petition in the Gazette 
of India or the State Official Gazette, as the case may be. This, 
however, in the opinion of the Election Commission, does not serve 
any useful purpose, as Oftl"cial Gazettes are seldom read by the 
public. This compulsory publication in the Official Gazette besides 
being expensive to Government also involves some delay in refer-
ring the petition to a tribunal for trial. It is accordingly propos-
ed to amend sub-section (1) of section 86 to give effect to this pro-
posal .. Incidentally, this will also have the effect of giving effect 
to recommendation No. 17 in Chapter XXX of the Report of the 
Commission. 
/ Clause 24.-The Election Commission has urged that the ques-
tion whether a petitioner has deposited the requisite amount under 
section 117 as security. for costs should be left entirely to the Com-
mission to decide. The Commission invariably satisfies itself whe-
ther this deposit has been made· or not. There is no reason why 
the question should be allowed to be agitated once again before the 
tribunals or the courts. As a matter of fact, sub-section (3) of 
section 90 has been responsible for a numher of writ petitions and 
appeals right up to the Supreme Court and enormous· delay in the 
disposal of some election petitions. It is accordingly proposed to 
delete the re~erence to section 117 occurring in sub-section (3) of 
section 90. 
Clause 25.-Under section 106, every judgment of the tribunal 
is to be published in the Official Gazette. This is not at all necessary 
from the practical point of view as very few of the general public 
have access t.o the Official Gazette or care to read it. Nobody 
really benefits from such publication which usually takes place 
two or three months after the pronouncement of the judgment. 
The Commission has accordingly recommended that the require-
ment as to publication in the Official Gazette may be safely done 
away with. 
• 
Clause 26.-While sub-section (1) Qf section 1I6A provides for 
appeals from orders made under section 99, the power to stay ope-
ration of the order appealed from is limited under sub-section (4) 

loS 
to orders made under clause (b) of section 98. this sometimes 
gives rise to difficulties. The Election Commission has accordingly 
l't"COJnmended that the scope of sub-section (4) of section 116A 
should be extended to orders under section 99. 
Clau.se 27.-The sum of one thousand rupees which a petitioner 
is required to deposit along with an election petition does not 
appear to be sufficient. Hence it is proposed to increase this amount 
to two thousand rupees. 
Clause 2S.-At present, under section 120, the rule is that costs in-
curred in connection with an election petition are in every case in the 
discretion of the Tribunal. But this discretion does not appear always 
to have been judicially exercised. It has been found that even in cases 
where an election petition has been dismissed at the conclusion of the 
trial, Tribunals have not awarded costs to the returned candidate with· 
out any reasonable justification. It is, therefore, proposed to make an 
exception to the general rule by providing in section 120 that in the 
case of dismissal of an election petition, the returned candidate shall 
be entitled to the costs incurred by him in contesting the petition. 
Clauses 29, 30, 33 and 34.-For curbing communal and separatist 
tendencies in the country it is propiJsed to widen the scope of the cor-
rupt practice mentioned in clause (3) of section 123 of the 1951-Acf 
(as in sub-clause (b) of clause 29), and to provide for a new corr.upt 
practice (as in sub-clause (c) of clause 29) and a new electoral offence 
(as in clause 30) for the promotion of feelings of hatred and enmity 
on grounds of religion, race, caste, community or language. It is also 
proposed that conviction for this new offence will entail disqualifica-
tion for membership of Parliament and of State Legislatures and also 
for voting at any election. This is proposed to be done by suitable 
amendments in section 139 and section 141 of the 1951-Act as in clauses 
33 and ~4 respectively. 
Clause 3l.-Under section 126 public meetings are prohibited within 
any polling area only on the polling day. The Election Commission is, 
however, of the opinion that for the smooth and orderly conduct of 
elections no meetings should be allowed to be held also within twenty-
four hours before the qate of the poll. 
Clause 32.-It has been found that during election time, many cir-
culars, placards, pamphlets, etc. of an objectionable natw::e are issued 
• without the names of the printer and the publisher shown thereon, or 
with faked names. These objectionable practices should be stopped. 
It is, t~erefore, proposed that no printer shall print any circular, pla-
card, pamphlet, etc. unless a declaration by the publisher attested by 
• 

18 
at least two witnesses is delivered to the printer and that no teaSoti 
shall print or publish any circular, placard, pamphlet, etc. without the 
names and addresses of the printer and the publisher shown thereon. 
Provision is also proposed to be made requiring the printer to send one 
printed copy of every circular, placard, pamphlet, etc. to the return-
ing officer together with the declaration of the publisher. A contra-
vention of any of these provisions will be an offence punishable with 
imprisonmfmt for a term which may extend to six months or with 
fine which may extend to two thousand rupees or with both. 
Clause 35.-Undue multiplicity of candidates at an election is un-
desirable and confusing. Effective checks should be devised to curb 
light-hearted participation in electoral contests. The Election Com-
mission by recommendation No. 11 (a) in Chapter XXX of its Report 
accordingly suggested an amendment of section 158 so as to require a 
candidate to poll one-fifth of the valid votes instead of one-sixth before 
he is considereg to be entitled to a refund of the deposit made by him. 
Section 158 is accordingly proposed to be amended to give effect to this 
recommendation. 
Clause 37.-1n the course of bifurcation of two-member constituen-
cies, the Election Commission has found that changes in administra-
tive units have taken place in many constituencies necessitating minor 
adjustments in the extent and boundaries of the constituencies. But 
the Commission has no power at present to make such adjustments. A 
few minor amendments in sections 7 and 8 of the Two-Member Consti-
tuencies (Abolition) Act, 1961 have accordingly been proposed. 

ANNEXUR1t 
EXTRACTS FROM THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE ACT, 1950 • 
• • • • 
23. • • • • Inclulion of 
5 • 
(4) Where an application made under this section is rejected an ~=~r!f 
appeal shall lie within such time and in such manner as may be rolls. 
prescribed-
(a) to the chief electoral officer, where the application is 
rejected by the electoral registration officer; and 
(b) to the Election Commission. where the application is 
rejected by the chief electoral officer. 
(5) Every application and appeal under this section shall be 
accompanied by the prescribed fee which shall in no case be refund-
ed. 
• • 
27. • • 
• • 
• • Preparation 
of electoral 
(5) Subject to the foregoing provisions of this section- rolls. t~rl Coonel 
(a) every person who on the qualifying date was ordinarily ~~~i~:~u­
resident in a graduates' constituency and has, for at least three 
years before that date, been either a graduate of a university in 
the territory of India or in possession of any of the qualifications 
specified under clause (a) of sub-section (3) by the State Gov-
ernment concerned, shall be entitled to be registered in the 
electoral roll for that constituency; and 
(b) every person who on the qualifying date was ordinarily 
resident in a teachers' constituency, and has, within the six years 
immediately before that date for a total period of at least three 
years, been engaged in teaching in any of the educational insti-
tutions specified under clause (b) of sub-section (3) by the State 
Government concerned shall be entitled to be registered in the 
electoral roll for that constituency. 
(6) For the purposes of sub-sections (4) and (5) the qualifying 
date shall be the 1st day of January of the year in which the electoral 
roll is prepared or revised. 
• • • • 
17 

Power to 
mate meso 28. • 
I~ 
PART V 
GENERAL 
• • III 
(3) All rules made under this Act shall, as soon as may be after 
they are made, be laid for not less than thirty days before both 
Houses of Parliament and shall be subject to such modifications as 
Parliament may make during the session in which they are so laid 
or the session immediately following. 
• • • 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE 
• • 
1. MWlicipalities. 
2. District Local Boards. 
S. Cantonment Boards. 
4. District Boards. 
5. District Panchayats. 
6. Town Committees. 
BOMBAY 
7. Janapada Sabhas (Rural Circle) . 
• • • 
MYSORE 
• • • 
• 
• 
• 
2. District Boards and District Local Boards. 
• • • • 
• 
• 
• • 
• 
• 
5. Village Panchayats with a population of not less than five 
thousand. 
• • • • • 

EXTRACTS FROM THE REPR§ENTATION OF THE PEoPLE ACT, 1951 • 
• • • • 
Chapter III.-Disqualifications 
• • • • • 
PART V 
CONDUCT OF ELECTIONS 
Chapter I.-Nomination of Candidates 
30. As soon as the notification calling upon a constituency to Appointmen 
elect a member or members is issued, the Election Commission shall, of ~te. !or . .. ., nommatlon. by notIfication m the OffiClal Gazette, appomt- etc.' 
(a) the last date for making nominations, which shall be 
the tenth day after the date of publication of the first-mentioned 
notification or, if that day is a public holiday, the next succeed-
ing day which is not a public holiday; 
(b) the date for the scrutiny of nominations, which shall be 
the third day after the last date for making nominations or, if 
that day is a public holiday, the next succeeding day which is 
not a public holiday; , 
• • • • 
33. • 
Presentation 
• • • of nomina-tion paper 
(6) Nothing in this section shall prevent any candidate from be- ~~~:1:r:­
ing nominated by more than one nomination paper for election in va1!d nom!-
the same constituency. nation . 
• • 
36. • • 
• • 
• • ScrudnJ 
ofnomi· 
(2) The returning officer shall then examine the nomination nations. 
papers and shall decide all objections which may be made to any 
"nomination and may, either on such objection or on his own motion, 
19 

20 
after such summary inquiry, if any, as he thinks necessary, reject 
any nomination on any of the following grounds:-
(a) that the candidate either is 1')ot qualiftedor is disquali-
fied for being chosen to fill the seat under any of the following 
provisions that may be applicable, namely:-
Articles 84, 102, 173 and 191, and Part II of this Act, 
or 
(b) that there has been a failure to comply with any of 
the provisions of section 33 or section 34; or 
(e) that the signature of the candidate or the proposer on 
the nomination paper is not genuine . 
• • • • 
(5) The returning officer shall hold the scrutiny on the date 
appointed in this behalf under clause (b) of section 30 and shall 
not allow any adjournment of the proceedings except when such 
proceedings are interrupted or obstructed by riot or open violence 
or by causes beyond his control: 
Wlthdra "'al 
ofcandi-
daWe. 
Nomination 
ofcandi-
dates at 
other 
electionS. 
Provided that in case an objection is made the candidate con-
cerned may be allowed time to rebut it not later than the next day 
but one following the date fixed for scrutiny, and the returning 
officer shall record his decision on the date to which the proceed-
ings have been adjourned. 
• '" '" • • 
37. • '" '" • '" 
(3) The returning officer shall, on recelvmg a notice of with-
drawal under sub-section (1), as soon as may be thereafter, cause 
a notice of the withdrawal to be affixed in some conspicuous place 
in his office. 
• • • • 
39.· (1) AP. soon as the notification calling upon the elected mem-
bers or the members of the Legislative Assembly of a State or the 
members of the electoral college of a Union territory to elect a 
m~m ber or members is issued. the Election Commission shall, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint-
(a) the last date for making nominations, which shall be 
the tenth day after the date of publication of the 1b-st-mentioned 

21 ~v 
notification or, if that day is a public holiday, the next suc-
ceeding day which is not a public holiday; 
• • • • • 
• • • • • 
• • • • • 
54. (1) The provisions of this Section shall apply in relation to ~J;::1::0-
any election in a constituency where the seats to be filled include elccti.ons in 
one or more seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes or for the Sche- ~:sst~r;:::e-
duled Tribes (hereinafter referred to as "reserved seats"). seats are re-served for 
Scheduled 
(2) If the number of contesting candidates qualified to be chosen Castes or 
to fill the reserved seats is equal to the number of such, seats, all t~b~~ICd 
those candidates shall be forthwith declared to be elected to fill the 
reserved seats, and the procedure laid down in section 53 shall be 
followed for filling the remaining seat or seats. 
(3) If the number of contesting candidates qualified to be chosen 
to fill the reserved seats exceeds the number of such seats, but the 
total number of contesting candidates is equal to the total num-
ber of seats to be fillpd, the returning officer shall first select by 
lot, to be drawn by him in such manner as he may determine, the 
candidates to be declared elected to the reserved seats out of the' 
candidates qualified to be chosen to fill those se'ats and then dec-
lare the candidates so selected to be duly elected to fill the reserv-
ed seats and thereafter declare the remaining candidates to be duly 
elected to fill the remaining seats. 
(4) If the number of contesting candidates qualified to be 
chosen to fill the reserved seats exceeds the number of such seats, 
and the total number of contesting candidates also exceeds the 
total number of seats to be filled, a poll shall be taken; and after 
the poll has been taken, the returning officer shall first declare 
those who, being qualified to be chosen to fill the reserved seats, 
have secured the largest number of votes, to be duly electedi to fill 
the reserved seats, and then declare such of the remaining candi-
dates as have secured the largest number of votes to be duly elect-
ed to fill the remaining seats. 
Illu.stration.-At an election in a constituency to fill four seats 
of which two are reserved there are six contesting candidates A, B, 
C, D, E and F, and they secure votes in descending order, A securing 
the largest number. B, C and D are qualified to be chosen to fill the 
reserved seats, while A, E and F are not so qualified. The return-

22 
ing officer will first declare Band C duly elected to fill the two 
reserved seats, and then declare A and D (not A and E) to fill the 
remaining two seats. 
(5) If the number of contesting candidates qualified to be choSen 
to fill the reserved seats is less than the number of such seats,-
(a) all those candidates shall be forthwith declared to be 
duly elected to fill reserved seats; 
(b) the procedure laid down in section 53 shalr be follow-
ed for filling the seats other than the reserved seats; and 
(c) the Election Commission shall, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, call upon the constituency to elect a person 
or persons to fill the remaining reserved seat or seats: 
Provided that where a constituency having been already so 
called upon has failed to elect a person or the requisite number of 
persons to fill the reserved seat or seats, the Election Commission 
shall not be bound to call again upon the constituency to elect 
a person or persons to fill the vacancy or vacancies until it is 
satisfied that if called upon again, there will be no such failure on 
the part of the constituency or such members . 
• • • • • 
Fresh poll 58. (1) If at any elec~ion, any ballot box used at a polling station 
Jd·n the ~se of or at a place fixed for the poll is unlawfully taken out of the custody estructton, . . .. etc •• of ballot of the presldmg officer or the returmng officer, or IS any way tampe-
boxes. red with, or is accidentally or intentionally destroyed, lost or dama-
ged, and the returning officer is satisfied that in consequence thereof 
the result of the poll at that polling station or place cannot be as-
certained, he shall-
(a) declare the polling at that polling station or place to 
be void; 
(b) report the matter forthwith to the Election Commission 
and to the appropriate authority; 
(c) with the previous approval of the Election Commission, 
appoint a day, and ftx the hours for taking a fresh poll at the 
polling station or place; and' 
(d) notify the day so appointed and the hours so fixed by 
him in such manner as the Election Commission may direct. 

23 
(2) The provisions of this Act and of any rules or orders made 
thereunder shall apply to every such fresh poll as they apply to the 
original poll. ' 
• • '" '" 
63. (1) In plural member constituencies other than Council cons- Method of 
tituencies every elector shall have as many votes as there are mem- votins. 
bers to be elected, but no elector shall give more than one vote to 
anyone candidate. 
(2) If an elector gives more than one vote to anyone candidate 
in contravention of the provisions of sub-section (1), then, at the 
time of counting of votes not more than one of the votes given by 
him to such candidate shall be taken into account and all the other 
votes given by him to such candidate shall be rejected as void. 
'" '" '" '" 
67A. For the purposes of this Act, the date on which a candidate Date of 
is declared by the returning officer under the provisions of section election of 
53, section 54 or section 66, to be elected to a House of Parliament candidate. 
or of the Legislature of a State shall be the date of election of that 
candidate. j 
'" '" '" '" '" 
73. Where a general election is held for the purpose of constitu- ., 
ting a new House of the People or G new State Legislative Assembly, ~;~:!~n of 
there shall be notified by the appropriate authority in the Oftlciall,eneral elcc-. . tlons to the Gazette, as soon as may be after the date orlgmally fixed for the Houle of 
completion of the election under clause (e) of section 30, the names th~ thPgople 
of the members elected for the various constituencies by that dete ~aiSktiv~atc 
together with the names of persons, if any, nominated by the Presi- A,d,emfblies an 0 names dent or Governor to that House or Assembly, as the case may be; of persons 
and upon the issue of such notification that House or Assembly shall nhominated . t creta. be deemed to be duly constituted: 
Provided that the issue of such notification shall not be deemed-
(a) to preclude the completion of the election in any Par-
liamentary or any Assembly constituency or constituencies for 
which time has been extended under the prOvisions of section 
153i or 
• 

Appoint-
ment of 
Bleaion 
Tribunal. 
24 
(b) to affect the duration of the House of the People or the 
State Legislative Assembly, if any, functionine immediately 
before the issue of the said notification . 
• • • • • 
Chapter III.-Trial of Election Petitions 
86. (1) If the petition is not dismissed under section 85, the Elec-
tion Commission shall cause a copy thereof to be published in the om. 
cial Gazette and a copy to be served by post on each respondent, and 
shall then refer the petition to an Election Tribunal for trial. 
(2) For the purpose of cOIl6tituting such Tribunals, the Election 
Commission shall obtain from the High Court of each State (other 
than Jammu and Kashmir) a list of persons who are district judges in 
the State and are in the opinion of the High Court fit to be appointed 
as members of Electi m Tribunals and shall maintain the list by mak· 
ing such alterations therein as the High Court may, from time to time, 
direct. 
Explanation.-In this sub-section, the expression "district judge" 
includes judge of a city civil court, additional district judge, joint 
district judge and cldef judge of a small cause court. 
(3) Every Tribunal shall consist of a single member selected by 
the Election Commission from any of the lists maintained by it under 
sub-section (2): 
Provided that where the petition is in respect of an election to the 
Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council of a State, no person who 
is a district judge in another State shall be selected for appointment as 
a member of the Tribunal except with the consent of the Government 
of that other State: 

2S 
Provided further that if the Election Commission considers it expe-
dient so to do, it may appoint a person who has been a judge of a High 
Court as the member of a Tribunal. 
(4) If for any reason a vacancy occurs in the office of member of a 
Tribunal, the Election Commission shall, as soon as practicable, 
appoint a person to fill the vacancy in accordance with the foregoing 
provisions of this section; and upon his joining the Tribunal, the 
trial of the petition shall be continued as if he had been on the 
Tribunal from the beginning: 
Provided that the Tribunal may, if it thinks fit, recall and re-exa-
mine any of the witnesses already examined . 
... '" '" 
90. '" '" ... ... ... '" ... Procedure 
(3) The Tribunal shall dismiss an election petition which does not 
comply with the provisions of section 81, section 82 or section 117 not-
withstanding that it has not been dismissed by the Election Commis-
sion under section 85. 
'" ... '" '" 
(6) Every election petition shall be tried as expeditiously as possi-
ble and endeavour shall be made to conclude the trial within six 
months from the date of publication of the copy of the petition in the 
Official GaZette under sub-section (1) of section 86 . 
... ... ... ... ... '" 
b;lore [he 
Tribunal. 
106. As soon as may be after the receipt of any order made by the Tnnsmis-
Tribunal under section 98 or section 99, the Election Commission shall ~ionhe0f order to t appro-
forward copies of the order to the appropriate authority and, in the .lrbte autho-
case where such order relates to an election to a House of Parliament ~ity. ebtc,: and . Its pu aca-
or to an election to the House or a House of the Legislature of a don. 
State, also to the Speaker or Chairman, as the caSe may be, of the 
House concerned, and shan cause the order to be published-
(a) where the order relates to an election to a House of 
Parliament, in the Gazette of India as well as in the Official 
Gazette of the State concerned; and 
(b) where the order relates to an election to the House or a 
House of the Legislature of the State, in the Oftlcial Gazette of the 
State. 
• • ... • • 

p 
ia 
de 
elo 
be 
Appeals 
qlinst 
orders of 
Elecrion 
Tribunals. 
Deposit of 
security. 
Corrupt 
practice •• 
26 
Chapter IV A.-Appeals 
1l6A. (1) An appeal shall lie from every order made by a Tribunal 
under section 98 or section 99 to the High Court of the State in which 
the Tribunal is situated . 
... ... ... ... ... 
(4) Where an appeal has been preferred against an order made 
under clause (b) of section 98 the High Court may, on sufficient cause 
being shown, stay operation.of the order appealed from and in such a 
case the order shall be deemed never to have taken effect untter sub-
section (1) of section 107 and a copy of the stay order shall immediate-
ly be sent by the High Court to the "Election Commission and the 
Speaker or Chairman, as the case may be, of the House of Parliament 
or of the State Legislature concerned. . 
... ... ... ... • 
(6) • * 
oil oil ... 
(a) forward copies thereof to the authorities to which copiee 
of the order of the Tribunal were forwarded under section 106, and 
(b) cause the decision to be published in the gazette or gazet-
tes in which that order was published under the said section. 
... oil ... • ... 
Chapter V.-Costs and Security 101' Com 
117. The petitioner shall enclose with the petition a Government 
Treuury receipt showing that a deposit of one thousand rQPees has 
been made by him either in a Government Treasury or in the 
Reserve ·Bank of India in favour of the Election Commission u 
security for the costs of the petition. 
• ... ... ... 
; PART vn I 
CoRRUPT Plw:nCES AND ELr.crollAL OITENCI'S 
Chapter I.-COfTUpt Practica, 
• 
us. The following shall be deemed to be corrupt practice.s for 
the purposes of this Act: - I 
oil • ... • ... 

27 
(3) The systemotic appeal by a candidate or his agent or by any 
other person with the consent of a candidate or his election agent, 
to vote or refrain from voting on grounds of caste, race, community 
or religion or the use of,' or appeal to, religious symbols or the use 
of, or appeal to, national symbols, such as the national flag or the 
national emblem, for the furtherance of the prospects of that candi-
date's election. 
L • • • • • 
Chapter lII.-Electoral Offences 
126. (1) No person shall convene, hold or attend any public Prohibition 
meeting within any polling area on the date or dates, on which a ~!e~~~~ on 
poll is taken for an election in that polling area. the election 
day. 
• • • • • 
PART VIII 
DISQlJALInCATlONS 
Chapter I.-Disqualifications for membership 
1.39. (1) The following offences shall entail disqualification for Offences 
membership of Parliament and of the Legislature of every State, entai.lins ~il-
1 quaMicatlon. namey:-
• • • • • 
(b) offences punishable under section 135 or clause (0) of 
sub-section (2) of section 136 of this Act. 
• • • • • 
Chapter lI.-DisqUGlificationa lor voting 
• • • • • 
141. • • • • • Disqualifiea-
( ) . . ted f ff . h bl 'th' . tion arisil'S a 1S convlC a an 0 ence pums a e WI ImprlSOn-OUt of con-
ment under section 171E or section 171F of the Indian Penal viction and 
Code, or of an offence punishable under section 135 or clause ~:f~. 
(a) of sub-section (2) of section 136 of this Act, or 
• • • 
151. • • • 
• 
• • 
• 
Return or 
forfeiture or 
(4) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), the deposit shall ::~~te's 
be forfeited if at an election where a poll has been taken, the candi-
• 

Power to 
make rules. 
28 
date is not elected and the number of valid votes polled by him does 
not exceed one-sixth of the total number of valid votes polled by all 
the candidates or in the case of election of more than one member at 
the election, one-eixth of the total number of valid votes so polled 
divided by the number of members to be elected: 
Provided that where at an election held in accordance with the 
system of proportional representation by means of the single transfer-
able vote, a candidate is not elected, the deposit made by him shall be 
forfeited if he does not get more than one-sixth of the number of votes 
prescribed in this behalf as sufficient to secure the return of a candi-
date. 
... • 
189. • • 
... 
PART XI 
GiNmw. 
• 
... ... 
... • 
(3) All rules made under this Att shall, as soon as may be after 
they are made, be laid for not less than thirty days before both Houses 
of Parliament and shall be subject to such modifications as Parliament 
may make during the session in which they are so laid or the session 
immediately following. 
... ... • • ... 

EXTRACTS FROM THE Two-MEMBER CONSTITUENCIES (ABOLmON) Ac.T, 
1961 (1 OF 1961) 
* * * * * • • 
7. (1) After all the notifications have been published under clause ~~v~~::nf! 
(c) of section 4 and the order referred to in sub-section (5) of section tationOrcier. 
19 cf the Bombay R~rganisation Act, 1960, has been made, the Com-
milSion shall-
* • * • 
8. • • • 
• • 
• • 
• 
• • Power to 
maintain 
(b) h h b d · f dis' Delimitatioa W ere t e oun arIes or name 0 any trict or any Order up-to 
territorial division mentioned in a Schedule to the said Order date. 
are or is altered, make such amendments as appear to it to be 
necessary or expedient for bringing the Schedule up-to-date . 
.. 
29 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BlLL 
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1950, 
and the Representation of the People Act, 1951, and to make certajn minor amendments in the Two- Aiember 
Constituencies (Abolition) Act, 1961. 
(Shri Asoke K. Sen, 
Minister of lAfO) 
• 