1
Bill No.  42 of  2018
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of section 141.
45 of 1860.
THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
By
SHRI BHAIRON PRASAD MISHRA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After section 141 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, the following proviso shall be
inserted, namely:—
“Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to peaceful protest by
recognised National Political Parties on public roads or streets.”
AS INTRODUCED IN  LOK SABHA
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Section 141 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 declares an assembly of five or more persons
as unlawful for various purposes including holding public meetings by the road side. The
Division Bench of Kerala High Court has banned holding public meetings beside public roads
and directed the police, public works department and local self-Government not to grant
permissions to hold such meetings and asked the police to take legal action against violation.
The Constitution also allows the State to impose reasonable restrictions on the
fundamental rights. But it also explains the concrete conditions in which such restrictions can
be imposed. The Constitution states that such restrictions can be imposed only in the interest
of the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly relations with
foreign countries, public order, decency or morality or in relation to contempt of court or
defamation or incitement of an offence.
The Bill proposes to protect the fundamental rights of the national political parties  from
any infringement due to State intervention.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BHAIRON PRASAD MISHRA
January 15, 2018.
2

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
(45 OF 1860)
* * * * *
141. An assembly of five or more persons is designated an “unlawful assembly”, if the
common object of the persons composing that assembly is—
First—To overawe by criminal force, or show of criminal force, the Central or any
State Government or Parliament or the Legislature of any State, or any public servant
in the exercise of the lawful power of such public servant; or
Second—To resist the execution of any law, or of any legal process; or
Third—To commit any mischief or criminal trespass, or other offence; or
Fourth—By means of criminal force, or show of criminal force, to any person, to
take or obtain possession of any property, or to deprive any person of the enjoyment
of a right of way, or of the use of water or other incorporeal right of which he is in
possession or enjoyment, or to enforce any right or supposed right; or
Fifth—By means of criminal force, or show of criminal force, to compel any
person to do what he is not legally bound to do, or to omit to do what lie is legally
entitled to do.
Explanation.— An assembly which was not unlawful when it assembled, may
subsequently become an unlawful assembly.
* * * * *
Unlawful
Assembly.

LOK   SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
————
(Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—3926LS(S3)—08-02-2018.