Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
THE PROHIBITION ON USE OF CASTE OR RELIGIOUS TITLE
BILL, 2007
By
SHRI L. RAJAGOPAL, M.P.
A
BILL
to prohibit the use of caste name or title relating to caste or religion as prefix or suffix
with names by the citizens and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (a) This Act may be called the Prohibition on Use of Caste or Religious Title  Act,
2007.
(b) It extends to the whole of India.
(c) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases the Central Government;
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 42  of 2007
Definitions.
5
10

2
(ii) “document” includes letter head, name plate, visiting card, educational
certificate or paper relating to rights in or over property; and
(iii) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. No person, or body of individuals or association or institution shall write or indicate
caste or any title relating to his caste or religion with his name on any document.
4. No establishment, organisation or institution whether owned or controlled by the
appropriate Government or a private company or institution whether incorporated or not
shall require any person to write or indicate his caste or any title relating to his caste or
religion in any of its documents or forms prescribed for the purposes of admission in
educational institutions, grant of scholarship or employment.
5. The provisions of this Act shall not apply to,—
(i) any person who writes or indicates the name of his caste or title of his caste
or religion in the form prescribed for the purpose of applying for or obtaining caste
certificate from the competent authority of the appropriate Government; and
(ii) any competent authority who requires any person to write or indicate his
caste or any title relating to his caste or religion in the form prescribed for the purpose
of issue of caste certificate to any person belonging to a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled
Tribe or any Other Backward Classes.
Explanation: For the purpose of this section, competent authority means such
officer or authority as the appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, appoint as the competent authority for the purposes of issuing caste certificate.
6. After the commencement of this Act, no person shall give a name to a new born baby
which signifies his caste or any title relating to his caste or religion.
7. No document which has been issued or made prior to coming into force of this Act
shall be void on the ground of inconsistency with the provisions of this Act.
8. Whoever acts in contravention of the provisions of this Act shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend to
twenty-five thousand rupees or with both.
9. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Prohibition of
use of caste
name or title
relating to caste
or religion.
Organisations
or institutions
not to require
any person to
state his caste
name or title
relating to his
caste or religion
in any of their
documents.
Exemptions.
Prohibition   of
use of caste
name  or  title
relating to caste
or religion with
the names of
new born baby.
Saving of
documents
issued or made
prior to the
commencement
of the Act.
Penalty.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
India is a secular country, Our Constitution aims to establish a classless and casteless
society. Even after nearly six decades of independence, our dream of a casteless and classless
society remains a dream. The cherished objectives cannot be achieved unless there is a
legislative framework to prohibit the use of caste name or any title relating to caste or religion
in the names as prefix or suffix by the citizens. From time to time, the casteism and the
religious fundamentalism raise their ugly head and hampers the endeavour to build up a
homogeneous society. The divisive forces are continuously trying to divide the country
along caste and religious lines by fomenting caste and religious feelings of the citizens.
The use of caste titles, caste names and religious titles in all of their forms should be
discouraged in order to strengthen the secularism and build up a homogeneous society.
This Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; L. RAJAGOPAL
February  23, 2007.
3

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGA TED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only. The delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
4

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to prohibit the use of caste name or title relating to caste or religion as prefix or suffix with
names by the citizens and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri L. Rajagopal, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—1149LS(S5)—19-03-2007.