THE COMPENSATORY AFFORESTATION FUND BILL, 2008
A
BILL
 to provide for the establishment of a Fund and crediting thereto the  monies received from
the user agencies towards compensatory afforestation, additional compensatory
afforestation, penal compensatory afforestation, Net Present Value and all other
amounts recovered from such agencies under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980;
constitution of an Authority for administration of the Fund and to utilise the monies
so collected for undertaking artificial regeneration  (plantations) assisted natural
regeneration, protection of forests, infrastructure development, Green India
Programme, wildlife protection and other related activities and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
W
HEREAS the Supreme Court in Writ Petition (C) No. 202 of 1995-T.N. Godavarman
Thirumalpad Vs. Union of India and others has observed that a Compensatory Afforestation
Fund be created in which all the monies received from the user agencies towards compensatory
afforestation, additional compensatory afforestation, penal compensatory afforestation, Net
Present Value of the diverted forest land or Catchment Area Treatment Plan shall be deposited;
A
ND WHEREAS it has also been observed that the money received from the user agencies
in cases where forest land diverted falls within Protected Areas, that is, areas notified under
the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 for undertaking activities related to protection of
biodiversity or wildlife shall also be deposited in this Fund;
53 of 1972.
AS PASSED BY LOK SABHA
ON 23.12.2008
Bill No.  42-C of 2008

2
AND WHEREAS the Court has directed that, besides artificial regeneration (plantations),
the Fund shall also be utilised for undertaking assisted natural regeneration, protection of
forests, infrastructure development, wildlife protection and other related activities and an
independent system of concurrent monitoring and evaluation should be evolved and
implemented through the Compensatory Afforestation Fund to ensure effective and proper
utilisation of funds;
A
ND WHEREAS in its direction dated the 5th May, 2006, the Supreme Court had directed
that since the Government had not constituted a Compensatory Afforestation Fund
Management and Planning Authority (CAMPA), an ad hoc CAMPA should be constituted
till CAMPA becomes operational and directed to centrally pool the money recovered on
behalf of CAMPA lying in the States and Union territories into the ad hoc CAMPA;
A
ND WHEREAS in compliance of the directions of the Supreme Court including its
order dated the 5th May, 2006, over rupees five thousand crores as collected by the State
Government and Union territories have been placed under the ad hoc CAMPA, and deposited
in the nationalised banks;
N
OW, THEREFORE , based on the above orders, directions and observations of the
Supreme Court, it is proposed to create a Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management
and Planning Authority by an Act of Parliament under Entry 17A of the Concurrent List
of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, to implement the directions of the Supreme
Court to create a Fund namely, Compensatory Afforestation Fund, to bring all the funds so
far collected under this Fund, and to create the Compensatory Afforestation Fund
Management and Planning Authority.
B
E  it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Y ear of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
 1. (1) This Act may be called the Compensatory Afforestation Fund Act, 2008.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, it shall come into force on such date as the
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Authority” means Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and
Planning Authority constituted under section 7;
(b) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Authority;
(c) “compensatory afforestation” means afforestation done in lieu of the
diversion of forest land for non-forestry use under the Forest (Conservation) Act,
1980;
(d) “environmental services” means—
(i) provision of goods such as wood, non-timber forest products, fuel,
fodder, water and provision of services such as grazing, tourism, wildlife protec-
tion and life support;
(ii) regulating services such as climate regulation, disease control, flood
moderation, detoxification, carbon sequestration and health of soils, air and
water regimes;
(iii ) non-material benefits obtained from ecosystems, spiritual,
recreational, aesthetic, inspirational, educational and symbolic;
Short title,
extent  and
commence-
ment.
Definitions.
69 of 1980.
5
10
15
20

3
(iv) supporting such other services necessary for the production of
ecosystem services, biodiversity, nutrient cycling and primary production;
(e) “Fund” means the Compensatory Afforestation Fund established under
sub-section ( 1) of section 3;
(f) “Green India Programme” means locating a land area of one acre or more
of degraded forests or other land for reforestation projects or such other
afforestation projects as may be determined by the Central Government in this
regard and planting the area by trees or other woody plants by utilising the
Compensatory Afforestation Fund having regard to the conservation of ecology
and environment;
(g) “Net Present V alue” means the quantification of the environmental services
provided for the forest area diverted for non-forestry uses, as may be determined
by an expert committee appointed by the Central Government from time to time in this
regard;
(h) “penal compensatory afforestation” means afforestation work to be
undertaken over and above the prescribed compensatory afforestation under the
Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980, in lieu of the extent of area over which non-
forestry activities have been carried out without obtaining prior approval of the
competent authority under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980;
(i) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made by the Central Government;
(j) “user agency” means any person, organisation or company or Department
of the Central or State Government making a request for diversion or de-notification
of forest land for non-forest purpose or using forest land for non-forest purpose in
accordance with the provisions contained in the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980
and the rules and guidelines issued thereunder.
CHAPTER II
E
STABLISHMENT, MANAGEMENT AND UTILISATION OF COMPENSATORY AFFORESTATION FUND
3.  (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there shall be established for the purposes of
this Act, a special Fund to be called the “Compensatory Afforestation Fund” under public
account of India.
(2) The Fund shall be under the control of the Central Government and managed by
the Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authority in such manner
as may be prescribed.
(3) On the date of the establishment of the Fund, all monies collected by the
State Governments and Union territories, which has been placed under the ad hoc
Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authority and
deposited in the nationalised Banks, under the management of the Central
Government, in compliance of the directions of the Supreme Court dated the
5th May, 2006, shall be credited in the Consolidated Fund of India, which shall be transferred
to the Fund under the public account of India.
(4) There shall be credited into the Fund —
(i) receipt of all monies from user agencies towards compensatory
afforestation, additional compensatory afforestation, penal compensatory
afforestation, Catchment Area Treatment Plan or any money  for compliance
of conditions stipulated by the Central Government while according approval
under the provisions of the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980;
(ii) the unspent funds already realised by the States or Union territories
and not transferred to the Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management
and Planning Authority for crediting into the Fund by the respective States
or  Union territories from user agencies within six months from the date of
69 of 1980.
Establish-
ment of
Compensa-
tory
Afforestation
Fund.
69 of 1980.
69 of 1980.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
50
45

4
commencement of this Act and any compensatory afforestation funds which have
not yet been realised shall be realised by the States and Union territories and
transferred to the Authority for crediting into the Fund;
(iii) the funds recoverable from the user agencies in cases where forest land
diverted falls within the protected areas, that is, areas notified under section  18,
26A or 35 of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 for undertaking activities relating
to the  protection of biodiversity and the wildlife to be maintained under a separate
head; and
(iv) Net Present Value of the forest land diverted for non-forestry purposes,
collected under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980, and the rules and the guidelines
issued thereunder and in pursuance of the judgment of the Supreme Court dated the
29th  October, 2002 from the user agencies.
(5) The monies received in the Fund shall—
(a) be an interest bearing fund under public account of India; and
(b) the balance in the Fund shall be non-lapsable and get    interest as per the
rate declared by the Central Government on year-to-year basis.
4.  The Fund shall be utilised for meeting—
(i) development, maintenance and protection of forests and wildlife and the
Green India Programme;
(ii) the non-recurring as well as recurring expenditure for the management of
the Authority including the salary and allowances payable to its officers and other
employees by utilising a part of the income by way of accrued interest on the funds
invested by the Authority excluding income from the funds recoverable from the
user agencies in cases where forest land diverted falls within the protected areas,
that is, areas notified under section 18, 26A or 35 of the Wildlife (Protection) Act,
1972 for undertaking activities related to protection of biodiversity and the wildlife;
(iii) the expenditure incurred on monitoring and evaluation;
(iv) disbursement on such other projects relating to afforestation as the Central
Government may prescribe.
(v) expenses of the Authority in the discharge of its functions having regard
to the purposes for which such grants or loans as are received and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto;
(vi) expenses on objects and for purposes authorised by, or under, this Act.
5. The Central Government may, by rules, prescribe an accounting procedure to
regulate the manner of crediting the monies already collected, to the Fund as provided in
sub-section ( 3) of section 3, crediting of all future receipts in the Fund as provided in
sub-section (4) of section 3 and for transferring the fund to the Authority for the purpose of
utilisation as contained in sub-section ( 4) of section 3 in a year.
6.  (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the Fund shall be utilised in States and
Union territories having regard to lands in respect of which such payments have been
received.
(2) The Authority shall accomplish the afforestation for which money is deposited
in the Fund within a period of one year or two growing seasons after project completion,
as may be appropriate, after receipt of the money.
(3) The money received towards compensatory afforestation, additional
compensatory afforestation and penal compensatory afforestation may be used as per the
site specific schemes received from the States and Union territories along with the
proposals for diversion of forest land under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980.
53 of 1972.
Utilisation of
Fund.
69 of 1980.
Accounting
Procedure.
53 of 1972.
Disbursement
of Funds.
69 of 1980.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
(4) The money received in the Fund towards Net Present V alue shall be used for
artificial regeneration (plantation), assisted natural regeneration, forest management,
protection, infrastructure development, Green India Programme, wildlife protection and
management, supply of wood and other forest produce saving devices and other allied
activities.
(5) All monies realised from the user agencies in accordance with the decision
taken by the Standing Committee of the National Board for Wild Life constituted under
section 5A of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 or the orders of the Supreme Court
involving cases of diversion of forest land in protected areas shall form the corpus and
the income therefrom shall be used exclusively for undertaking protection and
conservation activities in protected areas of the States and the Union territories and in
exceptional circumstances, a part of the corpus may also be used subject to prior approval
of the Authority.
(6) The Authority shall release monies to the concerned State and Union territory
in predetermined instalments through the State Management Committee as per the annual
plan of operation finalised by the concerned State and the Union territory.
(7) The monies received in the Fund from a State or Union territory as specified in
sub-section (4) and the income earned thereon after deducting the expenditure incurred by
the Authority on its establishment, monitoring and evaluation on a pro rata basis, shall be
used only in that particular State or Union territory and in cases of transboundary forestry
or environmental implication of diversion of forest land for non-forestry purposes in a
particular State or Union territory, if found expedient and necessary by the Authority, the
monies received from that particular State or Union territory may be used, in such proportion
as may be determined by the Authority for the purpose, in the adjoining State or Union
territory to mitigate transboundary adverse impact on forest or environment.
(8) All work at the ground level shall be executed through Joint Forest Management
Committee except in matters where the nature of work demands execution by any other
agency.
CHAPTER III
C
ONSTITUTION  OF AUTHORITY
7.  ( 1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there shall be constituted
an Authority to be called as the “Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management
and Planning Authority”.
 ( 2) The Authority shall be responsible for the management of the Fund and its
utilisation for the purposes of the Act.
(3) The Authority shall consist of a Governing Body and shall be assisted by
an Executive Body, Monitoring Group and administrative support mechanism.
(4) The Governing Body of the Authority shall consist of the following, namely:—
(i) Minister of Environment and Forests— Chairperson;
(ii) Minister of Finance — Member;
(iii) Minister of Science and Technology — Member;
(iv) Minister of Rural Development — Member;
(v) Minster of Panchayati Raj — Member;
(vi) Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission— Member;
(vii) Secretaries of the Ministries of Environment and Forests, Finance
(Department of Expenditure), Science and Technology, Rural Development,
Panchayati Raj, Government of India — Members;
53 of 1972.
Constitution
of Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
(viii) Director General of Forests and Special Secretary, Ministry of Environment
and Forests, Government of India — Member;
(ix) Additional Director General of Forests (Wild Life) Ministry of Environment
and Forests, Government of India — Member;
(x) Financial Advisor, Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of
India — Member;
(xi) three Principal Chief Conservator of Forests, one from six regions, to be
nominated every year by the Ministry of Environment and Forests on rotation
basis — Member;
(xii) Inspector General of Forests (Forest Conservation), Ministry of Environment
and Forests, Government of India — Member;
(xiii) three eminent non-government organisation experts, one each in the field
of forestry, wildlife and ecology, for a period of two years subject to not more than
two consecutive terms— Member.
(5) The Central Government may appoint an officer of the rank of an Inspector
General of Forests as the Chief Executive Officer who shall be the Member-
Secretary of the Governing Body and the Executive Body.
8.  (1) The Governing Body of the Authority shall, in performance of its functions
and powers under the Act, be assisted by the Executive Body and the Monitoring Group.
 (2) The Executive Body shall consist of the following, namely:—
(i) Director General of Forests and Special Secretary, Ministry of Environment
and Forests, Government of India — Chairperson;
(ii) Additional Director General of Forests (Wild Life) Ministry of Environment
and Forests, Government of India — Member;
(iii) Inspector General of Forests (Forest Conservation), Ministry of Environment
and Forests, Government of India — Member;
(iv) Financial Advisor, Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of
India — Member;
(v) A representative each of the Ministries of Finance (Department of
Expenditure); Science and Technology; Rural Development and Panchayati Raj,
Government of India —  Members;
(vi) Chairman, National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development —
Member;
(vii) three non-official experts, one each from the field of forestry, forest
economy development and wildlife — Members;
(viii) Chief Executive Officer of the Authority — Member Secretary.
(3) The Monitoring Group shall consist of six experts in the field of environment,
economics, wildlife, forests and social sector.
(4) The following officers shall be appointed by the Authority for a period
not exceeding five years, to assist the Executive Body in performance of its functions
and powers under the Act:—
(i) Joint Chief Executive Officer of the rank of Conservator of Forests;
(ii) Financial Advisor and Chief Accounts Officer of the rank of Director
in the Government of India; and
(iii) Deputy Chief Executive Officers of the rank of Deputy Conservator
of Forests.
Executive
Body and
Monitoring
Group of
Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
9. The terms of office and other conditions of the service of the members of the
Authority, Executive Body, Monitoring Group shall be such as may be prescribed.
10.  A person shall be disqualified for being appointed as a member of the Authority,
Executive Body, Monitoring Group, if he—
(i) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which, in
the opinion of the Central Government, involves moral turpitude; or
(ii) is an undischarged insolvent; or
(iii) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by the competent court; or
(iv) has been removed or dismissed from the service of the Government or
organisation or undertaking owned by the Government; or
(v) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, such financial or other
interest in the Authority as is likely to affect the duties discharged by him of his
functions as a member.
CHAPTER IV
P
OWERS AND FUNCTIONS
11.  (1) The functions of Governing Body of the Authority shall inter alia, include:
(i) overseeing programme known as Green India for massive afforestation of
the degraded forest land of the country, utilising financial resources, partly provided
under the Fund and the remaining fund mobilised from the market, development
partner associations, carbon credits, income from tree felling at ecologically appropriate
intervals and to augment funds, and service debts;
(ii) overseeing watershed development or forest conservation works within
forest areas undertaken and financed under the Fund;
(iii) maintaining a separate account in respect of the funds received under the
provisions referred to in clause ( iii) of sub-section ( 4) of section 3 and allocate the
earmarked funds for wildlife protection as well as to provide funds for activities
approved by the National Board of Wildlife;
(iv) laying report each year in Parliament on the progress of the Green India
Programme and other works under the Fund as well as present it as a Report to the
public;
(v) creating transparency for Green India and mobilise citizens support therefor;
(vi) mobilising additional resources to scale up the activity under Green India
Programme;
(vii) enlisting assistance from financial institutions for afforestation;
(viii) working towards making the Authority  eligible for international assistance
under the climate change agenda;
(ix) adopting a principle of allocation to States and Union territories based on
the share  contributed by them and having regard to the Supreme Court orders;
(x) earmarking at least five per cent. of the funds for communication, social
mobilisation, monitoring and evaluation.
(2) The Governing Body of the Authority shall—
(i) formulate the broad policy framework including the allocation formula to
States and the Union territories;
Term of
office and
conditions of
service of
members.
Disqualifica-
tions.
Functions and
powers of
Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

8
(ii) approve the  rules for the management of Compensatory Afforestation
Fund, to be notified by the Central Government;
(iii) monitor the progress of the utilisation of funds released by the Authority;
(iv) approve the annual report and audited accounts of the Authority;
(v) review reports on decision taken by Executive Body including investment
decisions and Monitoring Group.
(3) The Governing Body of the Authority shall meet at least once in six months.
(4) The Governing Body, Executive Body and the Monitoring Group of the Authority
shall meet at such places and shall observe such rules and procedures in regard to transaction
of business at its meetings (including the quorum thereat) as may be prescribed.
12.  (1) The Executive Body shall decide:
(i) approval of work plans and deployment of funds;
(ii) deployment of staff on contractual basis or on deputation;
(iii) financial procedure;
(iv) delegation of financial or administrative powers;
(v) other day-to-day working in respect of receipts of funds;
(vi) investment of funds;
(vii) expenditure on establishment and other overheads including office
accommodation subject to the approval of the annual budget by the Governing Body;
(viii) on being satisfied that the funds released to a particular State or the Union
territory are not being utilised properly,  the Executive Body shall have the power to
withhold or suspend the release of remaining funds or part thereof provided that
reasons shall be recorded on such action and submit the same to the Governing Body
for approval;
 (ix) to present its decisions to the Governing Body for information;
(x) maintain and update a public information system on the Authority and
present all information on its transaction in the public domain.
(2) The Executive Body shall meet at least once in every three months.
13.  (1) The Monitoring Group shall—
(i) evolve independent system for concurrent monitoring and evaluation of the
works implemented in the States and Union territories utilising the funds released by
the Authority to ensure effective and proper utilisation of funds by utilising the
services of the Regional Offices of the Central Government in the Ministry of
Environment and Forests;
(ii) monitor and evaluate the implementation of the Green India Programme;
(iii) inspect and undertake financial audit of works executed by utilising the
funds released by the Authority in the States and Union territories;
(iv) devise measures for transparency and accountability.
(2) The Monitoring Group shall meet at least once in three months.
CHAPTER V
F
INANCE, ACCOUNTS, AUDIT AND ANNUAL REPORT
14.  (1) The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament
by law in this behalf, make to the Authority grants and loans of such sums of money as
Powers and
functions of
Executive
Body.
Functions of
Monitoring
Group.
Grants and
loans to
Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

9
that Government may consider necessary, which shall be credited to the Fund to be utilised
for the purposes of this Act.
(2) There shall also be credited to the Fund—
(a) grants or aid received;
(b) any loan taken by the Authority;
(c) any other sums received by the Authority by way of benefaction, gift or
donations.
  15.   ( 1) The Authority shall prepare, in such form and at such time in each
financial year as may be prescribed, its budget for the next financial year, showing
the estimated receipts and expenditure of the Authority and forward the same to the
Central Government.
(2) The Authority, with the prior approval of the Central Government, shall adopt
financial regulations and procedures, in particular the procedure for drawing up and
implementing the Authority’s budget.
16.  The Authority may invest its funds (including any reserve fund) in the securities
of the Central Government and in scheduled banks in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that the grants received from the Central Government shall not be invested
and shall be utilised for the purpose and in the manner attached to it.
17.  (1) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and
prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed in consultation
with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The accounts of the Authority shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in
connection with such audit shall be payable by the Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor-
General.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General and any other person appointed by him in
connection with the audit of the accounts of the Authority shall have the same rights and
privileges and authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-
General generally has in connection with the audit of the Government accounts and, in
particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected
vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect the office of the Authority.
(4) The accounts of the Authority as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General  or any other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report
thereon, shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government by the Authority.
(5) The Comptroller and Auditor General may, within a period of six months from
the date of commencement of this Act, audit the accounts of the Fund for a period
comprising of the date of its inception, that is, the 29th October, 2002 and the date of
commencement of this Act and shall submit the report to the Central Government under
this section.
(6) The Central Government shall have the power to conduct the special audit or
performance audit of the Fund and of the Authority through the Comptroller and Auditor-
General.
18.  (1) The Authority shall prepare in such form and at such time, for each financial
year, as may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of its activities during
the previous financial year and forward a copy thereof to the Central Government.
Budget of
Authority.
Investment of
funds.
Accounts and
audit  of
Authority.
Annual
Report of
Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

10
 (2) The annual report shall, inter alia, provide for—
(i) the number and location of each reforestation, afforestation and construction
activity subject to the requirements of this section;
(ii) the amount and location of lands in acres cleared, conserved, and planted in
connection with the activity; and
(iii) the amount of afforestation money collected and expended.
19.  The Central Government shall cause the annual report together with a memorandum
of action taken on the recommendations contained therein and the audit report to be laid as
soon as may be after the reports are received before each House of Parliament.
CHAPTER VI
M
ISCELLANEOUS
20.  (1) The Central Government may, in consultation with the States and the Union
territories, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for constituting the State
Management Committee, State Steering Committee and Joint Forest Management
Committee, their composition, powers and functions for carrying out the provisions of
this Act.
(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
to carry out the provisions of this Act and such rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) manner of management of Fund by the Authority under sub-section ( 2) of
section 3;
(b) the disbursement of fund for such other projects relating to afforestation
under clause ( iv)  of section 4;
(c) the accounting procedure regulating the manner of crediting the monies
under section 5;
(d) terms of office and conditions of service of members of the Authority,
Executive Body, Monitoring Group under section 9;
(e) rules for the transaction of business at meetings of the Governing Body,
Executive Body and the Monitoring Group of the Authority under sub-section ( 4)
of section 11;
(f) the form and time of preparing budget under section 15;
(g) the manner of investment of fund under section 16;
(h) the form of annual statement of accounts to be maintained by the Authority
under sub-section ( 1) of section 17;
(i) the form and time of preparing annual report under section 18;
(j) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall, thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
21.  ( 1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act, the Authority
shall in exercise of its powers or the performance of its functions under this Act, be
bound by such directions on questions of policy, as the Central Government may give it in
writing from time to time.
(2) The decision of the Central Government, whether a question is one of policy or
not, shall be final.
Annual report
and audit
report  to be
laid before
Parliament.
Power of
Central
Government
to constitute
State
Management
Committee,
State Steering
Committee
and Joint
Forest
Management
Committee
and to make
rules.
Power of
Central
Government
to issue
directions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

LOK   SALOK   SABHABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a Fund and crediting thereto the  monies received from
the user agencies towards compensatory afforestation, additional compensatory
afforestation, penal compensatory afforestation, Net Present Value and all other
amounts recovered from such agencies under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980;
constitution of an Authority for administration of the Fund and to utilise the monies
so collected for undertaking artificial regenesration  (plantations), assisted natural
regeneration, protection of forests, infrastructure development, Green India Programme,
wildlife protection and other related activities and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
————
(As passed by Lok Sabha)
GMGIPMRND—4662LS(S5)—23.12.2008.