1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE PROMOTION OF ONE TREE PER CHILD NORM BILL, 2020
By
SHRI T.N. PRATHAPAN,  M.P .
A
BILL
to provide for promotion of one tree per child norm by the parents for every child
born in the family in order to protect and conserve the environment
for future generation and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Promotion of One Tree Per Child Norm Act,  2020.
(2) It extends to the whole of  India.
(3)  It shall come  into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
Bill  No. 42 of  2020
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Definitions.
5

2
(b) "parent" means father or mother whether biological, adoptive or step father
or step mother, as the case may be; and
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. It shall be the responsibility of the appropriate Government to promote, encourage
and motivate the parents to opt for one tree per child norm with a view to protect and
conserve the environment for future generation.
4. (1) It shall be the responsibility of every parent to plant a tree within sixty days
of the birth of a child to them either in their residential premises or in such other area as
may be specified by the local authority.
(2) The trees planted under sub-section (1) shall be such as will be suitable to the
location, climate and topography of the area concerned and the local authority shall also
specify trees to be planted in a particular area.
5.  No parent shall be issued certificate of birth of the child unless such parent has
sworn in an affidavit regarding plantation of a tree as prescribed under sub-section (1) of
section 4.
6. For the purposes of this Act, the local authority shall—
(a) maintain a seedling bank as a ready source of seedling to enable parents to
plant tree on the birth of a child; and
(b) provide suitable care and facilities to seedling or plants planted by the parents.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
8. If difficulties arise in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central Government
may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not inconsistent with
the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the
difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a
period of three years from the commencement of  this Act.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modifications, or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Appropriate
Government to
promote one
tree per child
norms.
Responsibility
of parents to
plant a tree.
Tree planting a
requirement for
birth certificate.
Responsibility of
local Authority.
Central
Government to
provide adequate
funds.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Trees offer many environmental benefits; it improves the air quality by filtering harmful
dust and pollutants such as ozone, carbon monoxide and sulfur dioxide from the air we
breathe. Trees release oxygen that we need to breathe; roots of trees hold soil and prevent
soil erosion. The impacts of the increasing population, urbanization and consumption patterns
are evident in the widespread degradation of land and natural resources and also in ever
increasing poverty. Trees can help to solve these because of their ability to restore degraded
ecosystem, produce food and medicine and provide environmental and economic benefits.
Trees are a precious resource and this call for judicious management of it for saving it
for the future generation. It is need of the hour that the country rises above the political,
ideological and regional differences and come together to make the environment sustainable
to live.
Therefore, to ensure the sustainability of the environment, a law should be enacted
that mandatorily require the parents to plant a seedling within sixty days of birth of a child in
the family. To ensure the compliance, the concerned local authority shall release the certificate
of birth of the child only upon the presentation of sworn statement of compliance by the
parents in this regard.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; T.N.  PRATHAPAN
January  30, 2020.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that it shall be the responsibility of the Government to
promote, encourage and motivate the parents to opt for one tree per child norm. Clause 7 of
the Bill provides for the Central Government to provide adequate funds. The Bill, therefore,
if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimate that
a recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore per annum would involve from
the Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for promotion of one tree per child norm by the parents for every child born
in the family in order to protect and conserve the environment for future generation
and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri T.N. Prathapan,  M.P .)
MGIPMRND—5345LS(S3)—24-02-2020.