1
THE W ATER (PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF POLLUTION)
AMENDMENT BILL, 2014
By
SHRI BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB, M.P .
A
BILL
further to amend the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth  Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Amendment
Act, 2014.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In section 2 of the Water (Prevention and Control of  Pollution) Act, 1974 (hereinafter
referred to as the principal Act)—
(i) the existing clause ( a) shall be re-numbered as clause ( aa) and before
clause (aa) as so re-numbered, the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(a) “Authority” means in the case of a State, the State River Conservation
Authority constituted under section 18B, and in all other cases, the National
River Conservation Authority constituted under section 18A;’; and
(ii) after clause (gg), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
Bill No. 42 of  2014
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of section 2.
5
10
6 of 1974.

2
“(gga) ‘sewerage authority’ means a corporation, municipality or any other
authority, by whatever name called, which is responsible for collection, treatment
and disposal of sewage;”.
3. In section 16 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in clause (g), for the words “lay
down, modify or annul”, the words “subject to the provisions of section 18D, lay down,
modify or annul” shall be substituted.
4. In section 17 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in clause (g), for the words “to
lay down, modify or annul effluent standards for the sewage and trade effluents”, the words
“subject to the provisions of section 18D, to lay down, modify or annul effluent standards
for the sewage and trade effluents” shall be substituted.
5. After Chapter IV of the principal Act, the following Chapter shall be inserted, namely:—
“CHAPTER IV A
NATIONAL AND STATE RIVER CONSERV ATION AUTHORITIES
18A. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute an Authority to be known as the National River Conservation Authority.
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and common seal, with power, to acquire, hold and dispose of property both
movable and immovable, and to contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
(3) The Authority shall consist of—
(a) a Chairperson; and
(b) not more than five members,
to be appointed by the Central Government.
(4) The Chairperson and the members shall be selected from amongst persons who
have practical knowledge and experience in the field of environment conservation and
advocacy on environmental matters.
18B. (1) Each State Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a State River Conservation Authority:
Provided that two or more States may agree to constitute a single authority with such
terms and conditions as the State Governments may prescribe.
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate, having perpetual succession and common
seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property both movable and immovable, and
to contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
(3) The Authority shall consist of—
(a) a Chairperson; and
(b) not more than three members,
to be appointed by the State Government.
(4) The Chairperson and the members shall be selected from amongst persons who
have practical knowledge of and experience in environment conservation and advocacy on
environmental matters.
18C. The National River Conservation Authority and the State River Conservation
Authorities shall carry out periodic assessment of requisite sewage treatment capacity and,
where there is capacity deficit, recommend to the Central Government or the State Government,
as the case may be, to enhance sewage treatment capacity to such an extent that the installed
capacity is commensurate with the quantum of sewage generated.
Amendment
of section 16.
Constitution
of State River
Conservation
Authority.
Amendment
of section 17.
Constitution
of National
River
Conservation
Authority.
Assessment of
sewage
treatment
capacity.
Insertion of
new Chapter
IV A.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
18D. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the State River Conservation
Authority, in the case of a State, and the National River Conservation Authority, in case of
Union territories, shall lay down parameters for effluent quality in sewage treatment plants:
Provided that different parameters may be laid down for different States and
Union territories or parts within a State or a Union territory.
18E. (1) The Chairperson and every member of the National River Conservation
Authority and the State River Conservation Authority shall hold office for a term of five
years and shall be eligible for reappointment.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (1), the Chairperson and the members of
the National River Conservation Authority and the State River Conservation Authority shall
not be eligible to hold office after attaining the age of seventy years.
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson and the members of the National River Conservation Authority
and the State River Conservation Authority shall be such as may be prescribed by the
Central Government:
Provided that the salary and allowances and other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson and the members shall not be varied to their disadvantage
during their tenure.
(4) The Chairperson and members of the National River Conservation Authority or the
State River Conservation Authority may be removed from office only on the ground of
proved misbehaviour or incapacity:
Provided that the State Government shall consult the National River Conservation
Authority before removing the Chairperson or a member of a State River Conservation
Authority.
18F. The power to inspect sewage effluent and sewage treatment plants, to take sewage
samples and other information, to review plants, specifications or other details relating to
such plants, and to evolve methods of treatment and disposal of sewage shall be exercised
by the Board under the superintendence, supervision and control of the National River
Conservation Authority or the State River Conservation Authority, as the case may be.”.
6. In section 24 of the principal Act,—
(i) in clause (a) of sub-section (1), for the words “laid down by the State Board”,
the words “laid down by the State Board or the National River Conservation Authority
or the State River Conservation Authority, as the case may be", shall be substituted;
and
(ii) in sub-section (3), the following proviso shall be added at the end, namely:—
“Provided that no exemption under this sub-section shall be granted to a
sewarage authority except with the prior approval of the National River Conservation
Authority or the State River Conservation Authority, as the case may be.”.
7.  In section 34 of the principal Act, for the words “contributions to the Central
Board as it may think necessary to enable the Board to perform its functions”, the words
“contributions to the National River Conservation Authority and the Central Board as it
may think necessary to enable the Authority and the Board to perform their functions"
shall be substituted.
8. In section 35 of the principal Act, for the words “contributions to the State Board as
it may think necessary enable the Board to perform its functions”, the words “contributions
to the State River Conservation Authority and the State Board as it may think necessary to
enable the Authority and the Board to perform their functions” shall be substituted.
Term of
office,
salaries, and
allowances of
Chairperson
and members
of National
River
Conservation
Authority and
State River
Conservation
Authority.
Superintendence
and control
over certain
functions of
Board.
Amendment
of section 24.
Amendment
of section 34.
Amendment
of section 35.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Laying down
parameters
for sewage
effluent
quality.
40
45

4
9.  In section 43 of the prinicpal Act, for the words “one year and six months but which
may extend to six years and with fine”, the words “two years but which may extend to
ten years and with fine” shall be substituted.
10.  In section 44 of the principal Act, for the words "One year and six months but
which may extend to six years and with fine", the words "two years but which may extend to
ten years and with fine" shall be substituted.
11.  In section 45 of the principal Act, for the words "shall not be less than two years
but which may extend to seven years and with fine", the words "shall not be less than three
years but which may extend to twelve years and with fine" shall be substituted.
Amendment
of section 43.
Amendment of
section 44.
Amendment of
section 45.
5

5
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The level of pollution in rivers across India has been on the rise despite the launch of
dedicated projects to cleanse rivers. Among various causes of pollution of rivers and streams,
municipal sewage is today a major contributor. It is ironical that while new projects are being
conceived to effectively cleanse our rivers, various authorities are adding to the problem by
discharging untreated sewage into rivers.
The main cause for discharge of sewage into rivers is the lack of treatment capacity.
Even after spending huge funds under various action plans, there is a huge deficit in treatment
capacity. To make matters worse, the existing treatment plants are being underutilized resulting
in inefficient treatment of sewage. The Central and the State Boards constituted under the
Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 have not been able to make much
headway in checking water pollution caused by municipal sewage.
Therefore, in view of alarming level of pollution of rivers in India and increasing
contribution of municipal sewage is accentuating the problem, the Bill purposes to amend
the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 to achieve the following
objectives:—
(i) constitution of the National River Conservation Authority and the State River
Conservation Authorities to lay down parameters for effluent quality for sewage
treatment plants and to supervise and control the functions of the Central Board and
the State Boards in preventing water pollution caused by sewage;
(ii) assessment of requirement of sewage treatment capacity by National River
Conservation Authority and the State River Conservation Authorities so as to facilitate
further capacity creation to bridge the gap between the existing capacity and the
required capacity;
(iii) making prior approval of the National River Conservation Authority or the
State River Conservation Authority compulsory for granting exemption to a sewerage
authority for using a stream or a well for disposal of polluting matters, etc.; and
(iv) prohibiting discharge of sewage and other polluting matters into a stream
and providing rigorous penalties for contravention of the provisions of the Act.
Hence this Bill.
NEW DELHI; BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB
June 26, 2014.

6
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the National River Conservation
Authority. Clause 7 provides that the Central Government shall make such contributions to
the National River Conservation Authority as it may think necessary to enable the Authority
to perform its functions.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees fifty crore would be involved as recurring
expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

7
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE WATER (PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF POLLUTION) ACT, 1974
(6 OF 1974)
* * * * * * *
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Board" means the Central Board or a State Board;
* * * * * * *
16. (1) * * * * * *
(2) * * * * * *
(g) lay down, modify or annul, in consultation with the State Government
concerned, the standards for a stream or well:
Provided that different standards may be laid down for the same stream or well or
for different streams or wells, having regard to the quality of water, flow characteristics
of the stream or well and the nature of the use of the water in such stream or well or
streams or wells;
* * * * * * *
17. (1) * * * * * *
(g) lay down, modify or annul effluent standards for the sewage and trade effluents
and for the quality or receving waters (not being water in an inter-State stream) resulting from
the discharge of effluents and to classify waters of the State;
* * * * * * *
24. (1) Subject to the provision of this section,—
(a) no person shall knowingly cause or permit any poisonous, noxious or polluting
matter determined in accordance with such standards as may be laid down by the State
Board to enter (whether directly or indirectly) into any stream or well or sewer or on
land; or
* * * * * * *
(3) The State Government may, after consultation with, or on the recommendation of,
the State Board, exempt, by notification in the Official Gazette, any person from the operation
of sub-section (1) subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the notification
and any condition so specified may by a like notification and be altered, varied or amended.
* * * * * * *
34.  The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, make in each financial year such contribution to the Central Board as it may
think necessary to enable the Board to perform its functions under this Act.
35.  The State Government may, after due appropriation made by the Legislature of the
State by law in this behalf, make in each financial year such contributions to the State Board
as it may think necessary to enable that Board to perform its functions under this Act.
* * * * * * *
Definitions.
Functions of
Central Board.
Prohibition on
use of stream
or well for
disposal of
polluting
matter, etc.
Contributions
by Central
Government.
Functions of
State Board.
Contributions
by State
Government.

8
43.  Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 24 shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year and six months but which may
extend to six years and with fine.
44.  Whoever contravenes the provision of section 25 or section 26 shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
1 [one year and six months] but
which may extend to six years and with fine.
45.  If any person who has been convicted of any offence under section 24 or 25 or  26
is again found guilty of an offence involving a contravention of the same provision, he shall,
on the second and on every subsequent conviction, be punishable with imprisonment for a
term which shall not be less than
1 [two years] but which may extend to seven years and with
fine:
Provided that for the purpose of this section on cognizance shall be taken of any
conviction made more than two years before the commission of the offence which is
being punished.
Penalty for
contravention
of provisions
of section 24.
Penalty for
contravention
of provisions
of section 25
or section 26.
Enhanced
penalty after
previous
conviction.

GMGIPMRND—777LS(S3)—01.07.2014.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974.
————
(Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab, M.P .)