THE NATIONAL SKILLS UNIVERSITY BILL, 2017
By
DR. KIRIT SOMAIYA, M.P.
——————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
——————
CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title and commencement.
2. Declaration of National Skills University to be institution of national importance.
3. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
ESTABLISHMENT OF N ATIONAL S KILLS U NIVERSITY
4. Agreement for establishment of National Skills University.
5. Establishment of National Skills University.
6. National Skills University as not-for-profit legal entity.
CHAPTER III
N
ATIONAL SKILLS U NIVERSITY
7. Objects of National Skills University.
8. Autonomy, powers and functions.
9. National Skills University open to all.
10. Admissions to National Skills University.
CHAPTER IV
A
UTHORITIES AND OFFICERS OF NATIONAL SKILLS UNIVERSITY
11. Board of Governors.
12. Term of office of Chancellor and Members of the Board.
13. Disclosure of interest by Chancellor or Member.
14. Powers and functions of the Board of Governors.
15. The Senate.
16. Powers and functions of Senate.
17. The Vice Chancellor.
18. Committees and officers of National Skills University.
19. The Visitor.
A
S INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 42 of 2017

CLAUSES
CHAPTER V
REVIEW OF NA TIONAL SKILLS UNIVERSITY
20. Review of National Skills University.
CHAPTER VI
GRANTS, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
21. Grants to Skills University.
22. Statement of Accounts.
23. Audit of accounts of National Skills University.
24. Report of Vice Chancellor.
25. Audited statement of accounts to be placed before the Board and published.
26. Annual Report of National Skill University.
27. Educational loans and credit guarantee.
CHAPTER VII
C
OUNCIL OF NATIONAL SKILLS UNIVERSITIES
28. Council of National Skills Universities.
29. Term of office of Members of Council and their allowances.
30. Functions of Council of National Skills Universities.
CHAPTER VIII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
31. Proceedings not to be invalidated by vacancies.
32. Returns and information.
33. Power of Central Government to make rules.
34. Power of Board to make Statutes.
35. Power of Senate to make Ordinances.
36. Power to remove difficulties.
37. Laying of rules and notifications before Parliament.
THE SCHEDULE.
(ii)

1
Short title and
commencement.
THE NATIONAL SKILLS UNIVERSITY BILL, 2017
By
DR. KIRIT SOMAIYA, M.P.
A
BILL
to promote quality skill education in an integrated manner with higher education in
the context of the demographic dividend and meeting the qualified skill requirements
of a growing national economy and for that purpose to address gaps in the
institutional delivery  framework in skill education by establishing
National Skills Universities as institutions of national importance for
imparting skill education and to develop qualified youth with
skill proficiencies and standardised competencies around
national principles and to provide for certain other
matters connected with such institutions or
incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Skills Universities Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 42 of  2017
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Declaration of
National Skills
University to
be institution
of national
importance.
2. Whereas the objects of every National Skills University, established under this
Act, are of national importance, it is hereby declared that every such Skills University
shall be an institution of national importance.
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,
(a) “academic quality” means the quality of skills education, teaching and
learning and includes physical infrastructure, human resources (including faculty and
trainers), administration, curricula, skills training, admission, assessment and
evaluation procedures, governance structures, and students job placements of the
institution of skills education;
(b) “accreditation” with the grammatical variations means the process of quality
control in skills education, whereby, as a result of evaluation or assessment or by
any other scientific method, an institution of skills education or training establishment
is recognized by it as conforming to specific parameters of academic quality and
benchmarking of such academic quality determined by the national Skills University;
(c) “affiliation” together with its grammatical variations, includes, in relation
to an institution of skills education or training establishments either government
or privately owned, recognition of such institution and training establishment by,
association of such institution and training establishment with, and admission of
such institution and training establishments to the privileges of, the National Skills
University;
(d) “All India Council for Technical Education” means the All India Council for
Technical Education established under the All India Council for Technical Education
Act, 1987;
(e) “appointed day” means the date of establishment of the National Skills
University established under sub-section (1) of section 5;
(f) “appropriate Government” means in respect of matters relating to the
National Skills University located in—
(i) a Union territory without Legislature, the Central Government; or
(ii) the Union territories with Legislature, the Government of the
National Capital Territory of Delhi or, as the case may be, the Government
of Union territory of puducherry; or
(iii) A State, the State Government;
(g) “appropriate State Legislature” means such Legislature of the State or
Union Territory as has jurisdiction over the matter;
(h) “Board”, in relation to any National Skills University, means the Board
of Governors referred to in sub-section ( 1) of section 11;
(i) “certificate” means such award granted by any National Skills University
certifying that the recipient has successfully completed a course of study of less
than nine months duration;
(j) “Chancellor” means the Chancellor of the National Skills University
appointed under sub-section (3) of section 11;
(k) “competency” means the ability to use acquired knowledge and learning
and development of character for performing a job role successfully or efficiently;
(l) “Council” means the Council of National Skills Universities established
under sub-section ( 1) of section 28;
Definitions.
52 of 1987.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(m) “Council of Architecture” means the Council of Architecture constituted
under the Architects Act, 1972;
(n) “credit framework” means the framework, developed by the National Skills
University, built on measured units of education, skills and learning credits for a
student to achieve the competency for performing a job role successfully or efficiently;
(o) “curriculum package” means the competency based curriculum package
consisting of syllabus, textbooks, student’s manual, trainers guide, training manual,
assessment and evaluation guidelines and all such material, including electronic
material, required to impart skills education and teaching to prepare a student to
acquire the performance outcomes, skills and competencies required of a person
engaged or likely to be engaged, in a particular job role;
(p) “degree” means any such degree, as may be, with the previous approval of
the Central Government and the National Skills Qualification Committee, listed in the
national Qualifications Register maintained by the National Skills Development
Agency;
(q) “diploma” means such award, not being a degree, granted by any National
Skills University certifying that the recipient has successfully completed a course of
study of not less than nine months duration;
(r) “Indian Institute of Technology” means Indian Institute of Technology
incorporated as such by the Institutes of Technology Act, 1961;
(s) “industry partner” means an individual, or a trust established under the
Indian Trusts Act, 1882, or company established under the Companies Act, 2013,
or society formed and registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860, or a
combination of one or more of such industry partner, and providing, in partnership
with an appropriate Government, funds for capital investment for establishment of a
National Skills University and for its maintenance;
(t) “Indian Medical Council” means the Indian Medical Council established
under the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956;
(u) “National Council for Vocational Training” means the National Council for
V ocational Training established by that name by the Central Government;
(v) “National Institute of Technology” means an institution listed in the
Schedule to the national Institutes of Technology Act, 2007;
(w) “National Occupational Standards” means National Occupational Standards
developed by Sector Skill Councils or by the National Skills University concerned
and defines the measurable performance outcomes, skills and competencies required
of a person engaged or likely to be engaged, in a particular job role forming the
benchmarks for education, training or recruitment for particular employments;
(x) “National Skill Development Agency” means the National Skill Development
Agency notified as such by the Central Government;
(y) “National Skill Development Corporation” means the National Skill
Development Corporation notified as such by the Central Government;
(z) “National Skill Qualification Framework” means the qualifications assurance
framework for skills, notified as such by the Central Government, based on national
principles, organizing qualifications according to a series of levels of knowledge and
skills defined in terms of learning outcomes regardless of how such knowledge skills
or competency is acquired;
(za) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette and
the expression “notify” shall be construed accordingly;
20 of 1972.
59 of 1961.
2 of 1882.
1 of 2013.
21 of 1860.
102 of 1956.
29 of 2007.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(zb) “Pharmacy Council of India” means the Pharmacy Council of India
established under the Pharmacy Act, 1948;
(zc) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(zd) “prospectus” includes any publication, whether in print or otherwise,
issued for providing fair and transparent information, relating to a National Skills
University or an institution of skills education affiliated to it, to the general public
(including those seeking admission in such institution) by such Skills University
or such institution;
(ze) “public private partnership” means such partnership which provides for
establishment of a National Skills University involving collaboration between the
Central Government, appropriate Government and the industry partner or industry
partners;
(zf) “Schedule” means the Schedule to this Act;
(zg) “Sector Skill Council” means such Sector Skill Council recognised as
such, by the National Skills Development Corporation, for any sector of the
economy, or a part of it;
(zh) “Senate”, in relation to any Skill University, means the Senate thereof;
(zi) “skills” means the qualification and competency achieved through
education and learning for performing a job role successfully and efficiently;
(zj) “Skills University” means any National Skills University notified by the
Central Government under sub-section (1) of section 5 and included in the Schedule
to this Act;
(zk) “Statutes” and “Ordinances”, in relation to any Institute, mean the Statutes
and Ordinances of that Skills University made under this Act;
(zl) “Vice Chancellor” means the Vice Chancellor of the National Skills
University appointed under sub-section ( 3) of section 17; and
(zm) “Visitor” means the President of India.
CHAPTER II
E
STABLISHMENT OF NATIONAL SKILLS UNIVERSITY
4. ( 1) The Central Government may, with the concurrence of an appropriate
Government, establish, either with or without public-private partnership, a
National Skills University in such State under this Act.
(2) For the purposes of establishment of a Skills University in the public-private
partnership mode, the appropriate Government shall identify one or more industry partners
for collaboration and submit a proposal to the Central Government in such form and manner
as may be prescribed.
(3) For the purposes of establishment of a Skills University without public-private
partnership, an appropriate Government shall submit a proposal to the Central Government
in such form and manner as may be prescribed.
(4) The Central Government shall examine the proposal, referred to in sub-section
(2) or (3), on the basis of such criteria as may be prescribed and such criteria shall include
the following, namely:—
(a) the capital investment required for establishing the proposed Skills
University and its phasing;
(b) the expertise and standing of the industry partners referred to in sub-section (2);
8 of 1948.
Agreement for
establishment
of National
Skills
University.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
(c) the assessment of the capability and financial and other resources of the
industry partners referred to in sub-section (2), if any, to support the Skills University;
(d) the availability of adequate land, free of cost, for establishment of the
Skills University;
(e) the availability of, or the commitment of the appropriate Government to
make available, adequate physical and social infrastructure at the proposed site for
establishment of the Skills University;
(f) the commitment of the appropriate Government and the industry partners
referred to in sub-section ( 2), if any, for supporting the Skills University after its
establishment.
(5) The Central Government may suggest modifications to the proposal submitted to it
under sub-section (2) or (3).
(6) The Central Government shall, on acceptance of the proposal, referred to in sub-
section (2) or (3), with modifications, if any, under sub-section (5), enter into an agreement
with the appropriate Government and the industry partners, if any, for the establishment of the
proposed Skills University, subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder.
(7) Every agreement referred to in sub-section ( 6) shall contain,—
(a) the name and location of the Skills University in the State;
(b) the appointed date on which the Skills University shall be established;
(c) the capital investment in establishment of the Skills University, the
respective shares in such capital investment of the Central Government, appropriate
Government and industry partners, if any, and the phasing of such capital investment
over a period of five years;
(d) the first Statutes of the Skills University;
(e) the commitment of the Central Government, appropriate Government and
industry partners, if any, in ensuring autonomy to the proposed Skills University.
(8) Where a proposal submitted by the appropriate Government under sub-section
(2) or (3), with modifications, if any, under sub-section (5), is not acceptable to the Central
Government, it shall communicate its decision to that appropriate Government, specifying
the reasons for such decision.
5. (1) On the agreement being entered into under sub-section (6) of section 4 for the
establishment of the Skills University, the Central Government shall, by notification, include
in the Schedule, such Skills University with such name, location and such appointed date, as
may be specified in the notification; and different notifications may be issued for different
Skills Universities.
(2) On and from the appointed day, each Skills University as may be established
under sub-section (1) shall be a body corporate by such name as is indicated in the Schedule,
having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of
the property, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by that name, sue or
be sued.
6. Every Skills University shall be  not-for-profit legal entity and no part of the surplus,
if any, in revenue of such Skills University, after meeting all expenditure in regard to its
operations under this Act, shall be invested for any purpose other than for the growth and
development of such Skills University or for the attainment of its objects.
Establishment
of National
Skills
University.
National Skills
University as
not-for-profit
legal entity.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

6
CHAPTER III
NATIONAL SKILLS UNIVERSITY
7. The objects of every Skills University shall be to—
(a) emerge as one amongst the foremost institutions of quality in skills education
recognised by industry, nationally and internationally;
(b) develop qualified youth with skill proficiencies and competencies at different
levels built on national principles of skills education;
(c) promote skills education in an integrated and holistic manner with higher
education so as to ensure pathways for progression and mobility across forms of
education and skills;
(d) provide opportunities for flexible learning systems and provide a medium
for lifelong learning and skill development;
(e) engage and promote constant engagement with industry to understand the
skilled manpower needs of industry and build partnerships for youth to learn in a
practical and real-world environment;
(f) develop competent, skilled and capable youth imbued with skills, learning
and the spirit of entrepreneurship to meet the skilled employment needs of the
country and the world;
(g) promote and maintain transparency of the highest order in matters of
admission, appointments, evaluation, accreditation, administration and finance.
8. (1) Every Skills University shall comply, except in so far as may be specifically
provided for in this Act, with the National Skills Qualification Framework.
(2) Every Skills University shall have autonomy in financial, administrative and
academic matters in regard to the attainment of its objects.
(3) Subject to the provisions of this Act, every Skills University shall have autonomy
in the exercise the following powers and functions, namely:—
(a) to recognise, in such manner and in accordance with such parameters as
may be specified by its Statutes, institutions of skills education or training
establishments and affiliate such institutions and training establishments;
(b) to develop credit framework in accordance with the National Occupational
Standards developed by such body as may be specified, by or under, the National
Skills Qualification Framework;
(c) to develop curriculum packages for each level and each skill as may be
defined, by or under, the National Skills Qualification Framework;
(d) to define norms and parameters of skills education, teaching and instruction,
consistent with the credit framework and curriculum packages, in such skills and
allied areas as the Skills University may deem fit;
(e) to facilitate instruction (through training establishments and Skill
Knowledge provider),in accordance with the credit framework and curriculum
packages, in such skills and allied areas as the Skills University may deem fit, for the
dissemination of knowledge and skills training and consistent with its objects;
(f) to facilitate instruction in such branches of learning, other than skills,
consistent with its objects, as the Skills University may, from time to time, determine;
(g) to award degrees, diplomas, certificates and other distinctions registered
with the ‘National Qualifications Register’ maintained by the National Skill
Objects of
national Skills
University.
Autonomy,
powers and
functions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
development Agency or any other agency entrusted with such task that conform to
the provisions the National Skills Qualification Framework;
(h) to define norms of, examination or any other measure of assessment of
knowledge and competency of a student of, or admission to, the Skills University or
institutions of skills education or training establishment affilitated to it;
(i) to hold examinations or other assessments of knowledge or competency or
accredit the examination or other assessment systems affiliated to it, as the Skills
University may, from time to time, determine;
(j) to recognise industries (as Skill Knowledge Providers) for purposes of practical
training of students in skills and to define norms for recognition of competency attained
by a student in such practical training in industry for the purpose of earning credits;
(k) to define norms and measures of assessment for recognition of prior learning
and competency in skills, based on relevant experience at work or in industry; and to
assign credits for such prior learning or competency in accordance with the credit
framework;
(l) to lay down norms for transfer of credits to promote new learning opportunities
without compromising on learning outcomes;
(m) to institute skills education, teaching or other academic positions, required
by the Skills University, with such qualifications and designations as it may deem fit,
and to appoint persons on tenure, term or otherwise to such positions;
(n) to appoint persons working or having significant experience of working, in
any other University or educational institution or any industry, possessing the required
knowledge or competency, as adjunct, guest or visiting faculty of the Skills University
on such terms and for such duration as such Skills University may decide;
(o) to lay down parameters for assessment and accreditation of skill educators
and training providers in accordance with the norms specified by or under the National
Skills Qualification Framework, or in their absence, such norms as may be determined
by the Skills University;
(p) to create administrative and other posts and to make appointments thereto;
(q) to determine, specify and receive payment of fees and other charges, as the
Skills University may deem fit, from students and any other person, institution, industry
or body corporate for instructions and other services, including training, consultancy
and advisory services, provided by such Skills University;
(r) to acquire, hold, manage and dispose of any property belonging to, or vested
in, the Skills University in such manner as the Skills University may deem fit for
attainment of its objects:
Provided that where land for the Skills University has been provided free of cost
by an appropriate Government, such land may be disposed of only with the prior
approval of such appropriate Government;
(s) to receive gifts, grants, donations or benefactions from the Central Government
or the appropriate Government and to receive bequests, donations and transfer of
movable or immovable properties from testators, donors or transferors, as the case
may be;
(t) to establish and maintain such infrastructure, including campuses and training
centres within the territories of the Indian Union, as may be necessary for attainment
of its objects;
(u) to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, such studies for assessment of skill
needs as may be required in the future and to prepare and maintain a database of skills
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

8
assessment and requirements in terms of the emerging employment market in the State
concerned, nationally or internationally, as the case may be, relevant to the instructions
imparted or proposed to be imparted in the Skills University;
(v) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions, prizes and medals;
(w) to collaborate with any other university or institution of national importance in
offering  joint degree programmes for bridging skill education with higher education;
(x) to promote international collaboration in skills education with institutions of
skill education for the purpose of developing competency, knowledge and ability to
global standards;
(x) to promote a spirit of entrepreneurship in skills amongst youth; and
(y) to do all such things as may be necessary, incidental or conducive to the
attaintment of all or any of the objects of the Skills University.
9. Every Skills University shall be open to all persons irrespective of sex, religion, race,
caste, creed  or class.
10. (1) All admissions to every programme of study in a Skills University shall be
based on transparent and reasonable criteria disclosed through its prospectus, published
prior to the commencement of the process of admission, by such Skills University.
(2) Every Skills University shall be a Central Educational Institution for the purposes
of the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Act, 2006.
CHAPTER IV
A
UTHORITIES AND O FFICERS OF N A TIONAL S KILLS UNIVERSITY
11. (1) The Board of Governors of each Skills University shall be its principal
executive body.
(2) The Board shall consist of the following members, namely:—
(a) a Chancellor, to be appointed by the Skills University as provided in
sub-section (3), who shall chair the meetings of the Board;
(b) a person from industry with experience in skills education or training, to
be appointed by the Skills University as provided in sub-section ( 5);
(c) a person to be nominated by the National Skill Development Agency;
(d) a person to be nominated by the National Council for Vocational Training;
(e) the Vice-Chancellor of a University in the State, to be nominated by the
appropriate Government, ex officio;
(f) the Director of the National Institute of Technology located in the State in
which the Skills University is located, ex officio;
(g) one person to represent the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, to be
nominated by the appropriate Government;
(h) two senior-most Deans of the Skills University, ex officio; and
(i) the Vice-Chancellor of the Skills University, ex officio, who shall be the
Member-Secretary.
(3) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Skills University from a panel of three
names recommended by a Search Committee consisting of—
(a) a nominee of the Central Government, who shall be a person of standing in
skills education;
National Skills
University
open to all.
Admissions to
National Skills
University.
5 of 2007.
Board of
Governors.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

9
(b) a nominee of the appropriate Government, who shall be a person of standing
in skills education; and
(c) the Chairperson of the National Skills Development Agency, in case of a
Skills University fully funded by the Central or appropriate Government, or a nominee
of the industry partners, in case of a Skills University established in the public-private
partnership mode, to represent industry.
(4) The Secretary in-charge of skills education in the appropriate Government shall be
the convener of the meetings of the Search Committee referred to in sub-section (3) but shall
not participate in its deliberations.
(5) A member of the Board referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (2) shall be appointed
by the Skills University, with the approval of the Board, from a panel of three names
recommended by the appropriate Government, in case of a Skills University fully funded by
the Central Government or appropriate Government, or by the industry partners, in case of a
Skills University established in the public-private partnership mode.
(6) The first Chancellor shall be appointed, by the Visitor, as soon as may be after the
agreement referred to in sub-section ( 6) of section 4 is entered, from a panel of names
recommended by the Search Committee referred to in sub-section (3).
12. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this section, the term of office of the Chanceller
or any other member of the Board, other than an ex officio member, shall be for a period of five
years from the date on which he enters upon office.
(2) The term of an ex officio member shall continue so long as he holds the office by
virtue of which he is a member.
(3) A member of the Board, other than an ex officio member, who fails to attend three
consecutive meetings of the Board, shall cease to be a member.
(4) The Members of the Board shall be entitled to such allowances, as may be specified
by Statutes, for attending meetings of the Board or such other meetings as may be convened
by the Skills University.
(5) The Board shall initiate the process of appointment in respect of any vacancy due
to arise for the office of Chancellor on completion of tenure before a period of six months
from the date on which such vacancy would arise:
Provided that the process of appointment shall be completed before such vacnacy
arises.
(6) Where any unforeseen vacancy has occurred in the office of Chancellor, the process
of appointment shall be completed within a period of three months from the date of arising of
such vacancy:
Provided that the Board may, in consultation with the appropriate Government, assign,
in the interim, temporary charge of the office of Chancellor to any other suitable person
till such time as a Chancellor is appointed and enters upon his office.
(7) When the Chancellor is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence on
leave or otherwise, such one of the other Members, as the Board may authorise in this behalf,
shall discharge the functions of the Chancellor until the date on which the Chancellor resumes
his duties.
(8) The Chancellor may, by notice in writing under his hand addressed to the Board,
resign from his office:
Provided that the Vice-Chancellor shall cause such resignation letter of the Chancellor
to be placed before the Board in an emergent meeting to be convened within a period of
ten days from the date the letter of the Chancellor addressed to the Board is received.
Term of office
of Chancellor
and Members
of the Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

10
13. The Chancellor or any other Member of the Board having any direct or indirect
interest, whether pecuniary or otherwise, in any matter coming up for consideration at a
meeting of the Board, shall, disclose the nature of his interest at such meeting; and shall not
take any part in any deliberation or decision of the Board within respect to that matter.
14. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board of every Skills University shall
be responsible for the general superintendence, direction and control of the affairs of the
Skills University and shall have the power to frame, amend, modify or rescind the Statutes
governing the affairs of the Skills University for attainment of its objects.
(2) Without prejudice to generality of the provisions of sub-section ( 1), the Board
shall have the following powers, namely:—
(a) to decide questions of policy relating to the administration and working of
the Skills University;
(b) to make Statutes governing the administration, management and operations
of the Skills Univesity;
(c) to examine and approve the annual budget estimates and annual statement
of accounts of the Skills University;
(d) to examine and approve the plan for development of the Skills University and
to identify sources of finance for implementation of the plan;
(e) to establish departments, faculties or schools and initiate programmes or
courses of study at the Skills University;
(f) to lay down, by Statutes, the parameters and manner for recognition of
institutions of skills education;
(g) to recognise, in such manner and in accordance with such parameters as
specified by Statutes, institutions of skills education and affiliate such institutions;
(h) to recognise industries for purposes of practical training of students in skills;
(i) to create skills education, teaching and other academic posts, to determine
the number of such posts and emoluments thereof and to define their duties and
conditions of service:
Provided that the Board shall take action only after consideration of the
recommendations of the Senate;
(j) to provide, by Statutes, the qualifications, criteria and processes for
appointment to skills education, teaching, academic, administrative and other posts in
the Skills University:
Provided that the Board shall specify qualifications for appointment to skills
education, teaching and academic posts only after consideratin of the recommendations
of the Senate;
(k) to award degrees, displomas, certificates and other distinctions that are
approved by the National Skills Qualification Committee and is listed in the National
Qualifications Register maintained by the National Skills Development Agency;
(l) to determine, by Statutes, fees and other charges payable for pursuit of
courses or programmes of study in the Skills University;
(m) to cause to be undertaken, such studies for assessment of skill needs as may
be required in the future and to prepare and maintain a database of skills assessment
and requirements in terms of the emerging employment market in the State
concerned, nationally and internationally, as the case may be, relevant to the
instructions imparted or proposed to be imparted in the Skills University;
Disclosure of
interest by
Chancellor or
Member.
Powers and
functions of
the Board of
Governors.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

11
(n) to exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be
conferred or imposed by this Act or Statutes and not specifically conferred on any
other authority or officer of the Skills Univesity:
Provided that the Board may delegate such of its powers for such period of time
and on such conditions to such committees, authorities or officers of the Skills
University as it may deem fit:
Provided further that every power delegated for a period, whether once or by
way of extention, exceeding one year, shall be through statutes providing for such
delegation.
(3) The Board shall in exercise of its powers and discharge of its functions strive to
provide autonomy in academic matters to the Senate and departments or faculties  or schools,
as the case may be.
(4) Where in the opinion of the Chancellor, based on the recommendations of the Vice
Chancellor, the situation is so emergent that immediate action needs to be taken in the
interest of the Skills University, the Chancellor, in consultation with the Vice Chancellor,
may, after recording the reasons for his opinion, issue such order in exercise of the powers
of the Board, as he deems fit:
Provided that each such order shall be placed before the Board for ratification in its
next meeting.
15. (1) The Senate of every Skills University shall consist of the following persons,
namely:—
(a) the Vice Chancellor of the Skills University, who shall chair the meetings of
the Senate, ex officio;
(b) heads of ten departments, faculties or schools, as the case may be, comprising
the Skills University, to be nominated by the Board, ex officio;
(c) deans in charge of academic and student affairs in the Skills University, ex
officio;
(d) five heads of Sector Skills Councils, to be nominated by the Board;
(e) two members of faculty from amongst the Professors of the Skills University,
to be nominated by the Board;
(f) three persons to be nominated by the appropriate Government, in case the
Skills University is fully funded by the Central Government or appropriate Government,
or by the industry partners, in case the Skills University is established in the public-
private partnership mode.
(2) The term of an ex officio member shall continue so long as he holds the office by
virtue of which he is a member.
(3) The term of a member nominated under clause ( b), (e) or ( f) of sub-section ( 1)
shall be for a period of three years from the date of his nomination:
Provided that a member nominated under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1)  shall cease
to be a member if he demits that office by virtue of which he was nominated as member.
(4) The term of a member nominated under clause (d) of sub-section (1) shall be for a
period of two years from the date of his nomination on rotation basis:
Provided that a member nominated under clause (d) of sub-section (1) shall cease to be
a member if he demits that office by virtue of which he was nominated as member.
(5) A member of the Senate under clause (e) or (f) of sub-section (1) who fails to attend
three consecutive meetings of the Senate, shall cease to be a member.
The Senate.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

12
16. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and Statutes, the Senate shall be the
principal academic body of the Skills University and shall have the power to make, amend,
modify or rescind the Ordinances of the Skills University.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1), the Senate
shall have the following powers, namely:—
(a) to develop, by Ordinance, credit framework in accordance with the National
Occupational Standards developed by such body as may be specified, by or under, the
National Skills Qualification Framework;
(b) to develop by Ordinance, curriculum packages for each level and each skill
as may be defined, by or under, the National Skills Qualification Framework:
Provided that while developing the curriculum packages, the Sector Skill
Council concerned shall be consulted;
(c) to define, by Ordinance, norms of skills education, teaching and instruction,
in accordance with the credit framework and curriculum package, in such skills and
allied areas as the Skills University may deem fit;
(d) to define, by Ordinance, norms of examination, or any other measure of
assessment of knowledge and competency of a student, or admission to, the Skills
University or institutions of skills education affiliated to it;
(e) to lay down, by Ordinance, the norms and parameters of examination or other
assessment systems and the procedure for accreditation of such systems of institutions
of skills education affiliated to it;
(f) to accredit the examination and assessment systems of skills education in
accordance with the norms and parameters of such systems and the procedures for
such accreditation;
(g) to define, by Ordinance, norms for recognition of competency attained by a
student in practical training in skills in industry for the purpose of earnings credits;
(h) to define norms and measures of assessment for recognition of prior learning
and competency in skills, based on relevant experience at work or in industry; and to
assign credits for such prior learning or competency in accordance with the credit
framework;
(i) to lay down, by Ordinance, norms for transfer of credits to promote new
learning opportunities without compromising on learning outcomes;
(j) to lay down parameters for assessment and accreditation of skill educators
and training providers in accordance with the norms specified by or under the National
Skills Qualifications Framework, or in their absence, such norms as may be determined
by the Senate, by Ordinance;
(k) to recommend to the Board, proposals for creation of skills education, teaching
and other academic posts and qualifications for such posts;
(l) to specify the academic calendar and approve grant of degrees, diplomas,
certificates and other academic distinctions;
(m) to lay down the parameters and due diligence process to affiliate training
establishments, skill institutions and the industry Skill Knowledge partners; and
(n) to exercise such other powers and discharge such other functions as may be
assigned to it, by Statutes or by the Board.
(3) Every Ordinance under this Act shall be placed, as soon as may be after it is made
or issued, before the Board.
Powers and
functions of
Senate.
5
20
30
35
40
45
10
15
25

13
(4) The Board shall have the power to make any modification in the Ordinance or direct
that the Ordinance should not be made or issued:
Provided that the Ordinance shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that Ordinance.
17. (1) The Vice Chancellor shall be the principal executive officer of the Skills
University and shall be responsible for implementation of the decisions of the Board and
Senate and for the day-to-day administration of the Skills University.
(2) The Vice Chancellor shall exercise such other powers and discharge such other duties
as may be assigned to him by this Act or Statutes or Ordinances or delegated by the Board.
(3) The Vice Chancellor shall be appointed by the Board from a panel of names
recommended by a Search Committee consisting of—
(a) the Chancellor, who shall be the Chairperson of the Search Committee;
(b) the Chairperson of the National Skill Development Agency, in case of a Skills
University fully funded by the Central or appropriate Government, or a nominee of the
industry partners, in case of a Skills University established in the public-private
partnership mode, to represent industry;
(c) a nominee of the Central Government from amongst Directors of Indian
Institutes of Technology or National Institutes of Technology;
(d) a nominee of the appropriate Government from amongst those, who are or
have been, Vice Chancellors of Universities in the State in which the Skills University
is located; and
(e) a nominee of the Board of Governors from amongst its members.
(4) The Vice Chancellor shall, except on account of resignation or removal or discharge,
hold office for a period of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office or until
he attains the age of seventy years, whichever is earlier.
(5) The Vice Chancellor may, by notice in writing under his hand addressed to the
Chancellor, resign from his office.
(6) The Vice Chancellor may be removed by the Board on proven charges of corruption
or misconduct:
Provided that the Vice Chancellor shall not be removed from his office, except by an
order made by the Board after an inquiry in this behalf by the Board, and after giving him a
reasonable opportunity of being heard:
Provided further that a resolution for initiating an inquiry into charges of corruption or
misconduct shall be brought before the Board only if a notice declaring intent to move such
a resolution and detailing the charges is signed by not less than one half of the members of
the Board in position and presented to the Chancellor before the meeting:
Provided also that where a proposal for institution of an inquiry into charges of
corruption or misconduct against the Vice Chancellor is being contemplated by the Board,
the Vice Chancellor shall refrain from participation in the proceedings of the Board till such
time as the inquiry is completed:
Provided also that the Board may assign temporary charge of the office of Vice
Chancellor to any other suitable person till such time, not exceeding one hundred and twenty
days, as the inquiry into the charges against the Vice-Chancellor is concluded.
(7) The Board shall, on the expiration of three years of term of his office, conduct a
review of the performance of the Vice Chancellor with specific reference to his leadership
in the attainment of the objects of the Skills University.
Vice
Chancellor.
5
20
30
35
40
45
10
15
25

14
(8) The Board may, if it is of the opinion, on the basis of the review of performance
under sub-section (7), that the Vice Chancellor has been unable to provide leadership to
the Skills University and that his continuance may be detrimental to the functioning of
such Skills University, serve a notice of three months upon the Vice Chancellor for discharge
from office:
Provided that the Board may, after giving the Vice Chancellor an opportunity of
being heard, decide to withdraw the notice after giving such directions or imposing such
reasonable conditions as it may deem fit:
Provided further that if the Board decides to confirm the notice of discharge, then it
shall take effect from such date, not less than three months from the date on which the notice
was issued, as the Board may determine.
(9) The Board shall initiate the process of appointment in respect of any vacancy due
to arise for the office of Vice Chancellor on completion of tenure before a period of six
months from the date on which such vacancy would arise:
Provided that the process of appointment shall be completed before such vacancy
arises.
(10) Where any unforeseen vacancy has occurred in the office of Vice Chancellor, the
process of appointment shall be completed within a period of three months from the date of
arising of such vacancy:
Provided also that the Board may assign temporary charge of the office of Vice
Chancellor to any other suitable person till such time as a Vice Chancellor is appointed
and enters upon his office.
(11) The first Vice Chancellor shall be appointed, by the first Chancellor, from a panel
of names recommended by a Search Committee consisting of the following, namely:—
(a) the Chancellor;
(b) the Chairperson of the National Skill Development Agency, in case of a
Skills University fully funded by the Central or appropriate Government, or a nominee
of the industry partners, in case of a Skills University established in the public-
private partnership mode, to represent industry;
(c) a nominee of the Central Government from amongst Directors of Indian
Institutes of Technology or National Institutes of Technology;
(d) a nominee of the appropriate Government from amongst those, who are, or
have been, Vice Chancellors of Universities in the State in which the Skills University
is located;
(e) the Secretary in charge of skills education of the approrpriate Government,
who shall be convenor of the Search Committee.
18. (1) The Board may constitute such committees with such powers and such
functions, as it may deem fit, for efficient management of affairs of the Skills University.
(2) The Board may designate such of the employees of the Skills University as officers
and entrust such powers and functions to them as may be provided by the Statutes:
Provided that the Deans in charge of academic affairs, industry engagement and student
affairs shall be officers of the Skills University and shall have such powers and perform such
functions as the Board may, by Statutes, determine.
19. (1) The President of India shall be the Visitor of every Skills University and shall
have the power to give such directions to the Skills University as he may deem fit, for the
purpose of attainment of its objects.
Committees
and officers of
National Skills
University.
The Visitor.
5
20
30
35
40
45
10
15
25

15
(2) Every such direction under sub-section (1) shall be placed by the Vice Chancellor
before the Board in its immediate next meeting, held not later than fifteen days from the date
of receipt of such direction, along with the action proposed to be taken on such direction.
(3) The Vice Chancellor shall forthwith, on the conclusion of the meeting of the
Board, send a report to the Visitor, explaining the action proposed to be taken to comply
with the direction.
CHAPTER V
R
EVIEW OF NA TIONAL SKILLS UNIVERSITY
20. (1) Every Skills University shall, within seven years from the date of its
establishment and incorporation and thereafter at the expiration of every fifth year, constitute,
with the prior approval of the Central Government, a Committee to evaluate and review the
performance of such Skills University in attainment of its objects during the said period.
(2) The Committee constituted under sub-section (1) shall consist of members of
repute in academia or industry, from relevant fields of skills education and teaching or
experience in leadership positions in any University of repute or institution of national
importance.
(3) The Committee shall assess the performance of Skills University and make
recommendations on—
(a) the extent of fulfilment of the objects of the Skills University and its
contribution to the society;
(b) the promotion of skills education and its impact on industry and society;
(c) the establishment of the Skills University as amongst the national leaders in
the area of skills education;
(d) the extent of achievement of social equality through skills education; and
(e) such other parameters as the Board may consider necessary and specify.
(4) The Board shall consider the recommendations referred to in sub-section (3) and
take such action as it may deem fit:
Provided that the recommendations of the Committee along with an explanatory
memorandum on the action taken or proposed to be taken by the Board, specifying the reasons
thereof, shall be submitted to the Central Government and to the appropriate Government:
Provided further that the Central Government and the appropriate Government shall
cause such recommendations to be laid before each House of Parliament or the appropriate
State Legislature, as the case may be.
(5) The Central Government and the concerned appropriate Government shall have the
power to give such directions, emanating from the recommendations of the Committee,
on policy relating to national purposes, as they may deem fit, and the Skills University
shall comply with such directions:
Provided that if any dispute arises as to whether the direction is a question of policy
relating to national purpose or not, the decision of such Government shall be final.
CHAPTER VI
G
RANTS, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
21. ( 1) The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by
Parliament, by law in this behalf,—
(a) make to each Skills University grants of such sums of money as may
be required for supporting its establishment and infrastructure development,
subject to the agreement referred to in sub-section ( 7) of section 4;
Review of
National Skills
University.
Grants to
Skills
University.
5
20
30
35
40
45
10
15
25

16
(b) provide to each Skills University, grants of such sums of money as are
required to meet the expenditure on scholarships or fellowships instituted by it,
including scholarships or fellowships for students from socially and educationally
backward classes or categories of citizens enrolled in such Skills University.
22. (1) At the first meeting at the beginning of every financial year, the Vice Chancellor
shall lay before the Board, a statement of accounts comprising—
(a) the unaudited balance sheet as at the end of the previous financial year; and
(b) the statement of income and expenditure for that period.
(2) Every statement of accounts of such Skills University shall give a true and fair view
of the state of affairs of such Skills University as at the end of the previous financial year
and shall, subject to the provisions of this section, be in such form and in accordance with
such general instructions and accounting standards as may be prescribed, or as near thereto
as circumstances admit.
(3) Where the statement of accounts of the Skills University do not comply with the
accounting standards, the Skills University shall disclose in its annual accounts, the following,
namely:—
(a) the deviation from the accounting standards;
(b) the reasons for such deviation; and
(c) the financial effect, if any, arising due to such deviation.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the expression "accounting standards"
means the standards of accounting prescribed by the Central Government based on such
standards defined by the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India constituted under the
Chartered Accountants Act, 1949.
23. (1) The statement of accounts of each Skills University shall be audited by such
auditor as may be appointed in this behalf by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any person appointed by him
in connection with the audit of the accounts of each Skills University shall have the same
rights, privileges and authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India has in connection with the audit of the Central Government accounts, and,
in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected
vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect the offices of the Skills University.
24. (1) There shall be attached to every audited statement of accounts, a report by its
Vice Chancellor, with respect to—
(a) the state of affairs of such Skills University;
(b) the amounts, if any, which such Skills University proposes to carry to any
surplus reserves in its balance sheet;
(c) the extent to which understatement or overstatement of any surplus or shortfall
of income over expenditure has been indicated in the auditor's report and the reasons
for such understatement or overstatement;
(d) qualitative and quantitative benchmarks and internal standards set by the
Skills University and its performance thereon.
(2) The report referred to in sub-section (1) shall also include a statement showing the
name of the ten officers and other employees of the Skills University who received the
highest remuneration (including allowances and other payments made to such officer or
employee) during the preceeding financial year and the contributions made by such officers
or employees to the Skills University during the financial year.
Statement of
Accounts.
38 of 1949.
Audit of
accounts of
National Skills
University.
Report of Vice
Chancellor.
5
20
30
35
40
45
10
15
25

17
(3) The statement referred to in sub-section (2) shall indicate whether any such officer
or employee is a relative of any member of the Board or Senate of the Skills University and if
so, the name of such member and such other particulars as may be required.
(4) The Vice Chancellor and such officer, as may be designated by the Board for
maintenance of accounts of the Skills University, shall also be bound to give the complete
information and explanations in the report referred to in sub-section (1), on every
reservation, qualification or adverse remark contained in the auditor's report.
25. ( 1) The statement of accounts, including the balance sheet, the statement of
income and expenditure, the auditor's report, the report of the Vice Chancellor and other
documents required to be annexed with such statement, shall be brought before the Board
in its meeting at such time immediately, but not later than six months, from the conclusion of
the financial year.
(2) A copy of every statement of accounts (including the balance sheet, statement of
income and expenditure, the auditors' report and every other document required to be
annexed or attached to balance sheet) which is to be laid before the Board of each Skills
University shall, not less than twenty-one days before the date of the meeting, be sent to
every member of the Board.
(3) After the statement of accounts referred to in sub-section (1) has been laid before
the Board of each Skills University, such statement along with all other documents shall
be published and placed on the website of such Skills University.
(4) A copy of the statement of accounts including the balance sheet, the statement of
income and expenditure, the auditor’s report, the report of the Vice Chancellor and all
other documents require to be attached with such statement, shall be submitted to the
Central Government and the appropriate Government, and that Government shall, as soon
as may be, cause the same to be laid before each House of Parliament or the appropriate
State Legislature, as the case may be.
26. (1) The annual report of each Skills University shall be prepared under the
direction of the Vice Chancellor, and shall include, among other matters, the steps taken
by the Skills University towards the attainment of its objects, a review of skills education
being imparted, a needs-based assessment of emerging skills requirements, an outcome
based assessment of the performance of the Skills University,  the placement of students
graduating from the Skills University and the extent of engagement of industry by the
Skills University, and be submitted to the Board on or before such date as may be specified
by the Board and the Board shall consider the report.
(2) The annual report as approved by the Board shall be published and placed on the
website of the Skills University.
27. (1) The Central Government, in consultation with appropriate Governments, may
prepare a scheme for credit guarantee for educational loans taken by students  studying in
the Skills Universities so as to ensure that such loans from banks are easily available to
students for pursuing a programme of study in the Skills University.
(2) The corpus for the scheme for credit guarantee may be contributed by the Central
Government and appropriate Goverments in such share as may be agreed upon between the
Central Government and appropriate Governments.
(3) Every student admitted to any Skills University shall be eligible to receive
educational loan, in accordance with the scheme referred to in sub-section (1), for pursuing
a programme of study at such Skills University.
Audited
statement of
accounts to be
placed before
the Board and
published.
Annual Report
of National
Skills
University.
Educational
loans and
credit
guarantee.
5
20
30
35
40
45
10
15
25

18
CHAPTER VII
COUNCIL OF NA TIONAL SKILLS UNIVERSITIES
28. (1) With effect from such date as may be specified by notification in this behalf, the
Central Government may establish for all the Skills Universities specified in the Schedule,
a body to be called the Council of National Skills Universities.
(2) The Council shall consist of the following members, namely:—
(a) the Minister in-charge of the Ministry or Department of the Central
Government having administrative control over skills education, ex officio,  as
Chairperson;
(b) the Minister in charge of skills education of appropriate Governments of
such States where the Skills Universities are located, ex officio;
(c) the industry partner of each of the Skills Universities established in the
public-private partnership mode;
(d) the Chancellors of each of the Skills Universities, ex officio;
(e) the Vice Chancellors of each of the Skills Universities, ex officio;
(f) the Chairperson of the University Grants Commission, ex officio;
(g) the Chairperson of the All India Council of Technical Education, ex officio;
(h) the President of the Council for Architecture, ex officio;
(i) the President of the Indian Medical Council, ex officio;
(j) the President of the Pharmacy Council of India; ex officio;
(k) the Chairperson of the National Skill Development Agency, ex officio;
(l) the Chairperson of the National Council for V ocational Training;
(m) Secretaries to the Central Government, one each to represent the Ministry or
Department concerned with finance, skills education, higher education, health,
employment and information technology, ex officio;
(n) heads of ten Sector Skill Councils, to be nominated by the Central Government;
(o) three persons from industry, to be nominated by the Central Government,
from a panel comprised of three names recommended by each Skills University;
(p) three persons to represent persons of eminence from academia or civil society
to be nominated by the Council, from a panel comprised of two names recommended
by each appropriate Government of such States where Skills Universities are located;
(q) heads of three national industry associations identified by the Central
Government.
(3) The Council shall have a secretariat with a Secretary to be appointed in such
manner as may be prescribed.
(4) The expenditure on the Council shall be met by the Central Government.
29. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this section, the term of office of a member of the
Council under clause (o) of sub-section (2) of section 28, shall be for a period of two years
from the date of nomination on rotation basis.
(2) Save as otherswise provided in this section, the term of office of a member of
the Council under clause (p
) of sub-section (2) of section 28, shall be for a period of three
years from the date of nomination.
Council of
National Skills
Universities.
Term of office
of Members of
Council and
their
allowances.
5
20
30
35
40
10
15
25

19
(3) The term of a member, other than a member nominated under clauses (o) and (p) of
sub-section (2) of section 28, shall continue so long as he holds the office by virtue of which
he is a member.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
members of the Council shall be such as may be prescribed.
30. (1) The Council shall coordinate the activities of all the Skills Universities.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1), the Council
shall perform the following functions, namely:—
(a) to ensure harmonisation of the credit framework, consistent with the National
Skills Qualification Framework, across all Skills University;
(b) to recommend to the Central Government, institution of scholarships for the
benefit of students belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and
other socially and educationally backward classes of citizens;
(c) to recommend to the Central Government and appropriate Governments,
institution of schemes, including the scheme for credit guarantee for educational loans,
for funding education in the Skills University;
(d) to suggest mechanisms for increasing industry engagement and employment
opportunities for students of the Skills University;
(e) to deliberate on such matters of common interest to Skills Universities as may
be referred to it by any Skills University;
(f) to perform such other functions as may be referred to it by the Central
Government or any appropriate Government:
Provided that nothing in this section shall derogate from the powers and functions
vested by law in the Board or Senate or any other authority of each Skills University.
(3) The Chairperson of the Council shall ordinarily preside over the meetings of the
Council; and in his absence any other member, chosen, from amongst themselves, by the
members present at the meeting, shall preside over the meeting.
CHAPTER VIII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
31. No act or proceedings of any authority or any body of a Skills University shall be
invalid merely by reason of the existence of a vacancy or vacancies among its members.
32. Every Skills University shall furnish to the Central Government and the appropriate
Government such returns or other information with respect to its activities as the Central
Government or the appropriate Government, as the case may be, may, from time to time,
require, within such period as may be specified by that Government.
33. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry out the
provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generally of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the form and manner in which the appropriate Government may submit a
proposal to the Central Government for the purposes of establishment of a Skills University
in the public-private partnership mode under sub-section (2)  of section 4;
(b) the form and manner in which the appropriate Government may submit a
proposal to the Central Government for the purposes of establishment of a Skills
University without public-private partnership under sub-section (3) of section 4;
Functions of
Council of
National Skills
Universities.
Proceedings
not to be
invalidated by
vacancies.
Returns and
information.
Power to
make rules.
5
20
30
35
40
45
10
15
25

20
(c) the criteria on the basis of which the Central Government shall examine a
proposal submitted by an appropriate Government for establishment of a Skills
University under sub-section (5) of section 4;
(d) the form, general instructions and accounting standards in which the balance
sheet and statement of income and expenditure of a Skills University shall be prepared
under sub-section (2) of section 22;
(e) the standards of accounting based on such standards defined by the Institute
of Chartered Accountants of India under section 22;
(f) the manner of appointment of the Secretary to the Council under sub-section
(3) of section 28.
(g) the travelling and other allowances that Members of the Council  shall be entitled
receive for attending meetings of the Council under sub-section (3) of section 29.
34. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board of every Skills University shall,
by publication on its website, make Statutes to carry out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
Statutes may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the parameters and manner for recognition of institutions of skills education
and affiliation of such institutions under clause (a) of sub-section (3) of section 8;
(b) the entitlement of allowances to the members of the Board for attending
meetings under sub-section (3) of section 8;
(c) governance, administration, management and operations of Skills University
under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 14;
(d) the qualifications, criteria and processes for appointment to skills education,
teaching, academic, administrative and other posts under clauses (j) of sub-section (2)
of section 14;
(e) the fees and other charges payable for pursuit of courses or programmes of
study under clause (1) of sub-section (2) of section 14;
(f) the delegation of powers of the Board to committees, authorities or officers
and the period of such delegation under clause (n) of sub-section (2) of section 14;
(g) the powers and duties of Vice Chancellor under sub-section (2) of section 17;
(h) the powers and functions, to the employees of the Skills University designated
as officers, under sub-section (2) of section 18;
(i) the powers and functions of deans under sub-section (2) of section 18;
(3) The Board of Governors of each Skills University may, from time to time, amend or
repeal any Statutes, and each such Statute, its amendment or repeal, as the case may be, shall
come into effect from the date of its publication on the website of the Skills University.
35. (1) The Senate may, by publication on Skills University's website, make Ordinances
to carry out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
Ordinance may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the credit framework in accordance with the National Occupational Standards
developed by such body as may be specified, by or under, the National Skills
Qualification Framework under clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 16;
(b) the curriculum packages for each level and each skill as may be defined, by or
under, the National Skills Qualification Framework under clause (b) of sub-section (2)
of section 16;
Power of
Board to make
Statutes.
Power of
Senate to
make
Ordinances.
5
20
30
35
40
45
10
15
25

21
(c) the norms of skills education, teaching and instruction, consistent with the
credit framework and curriculum packages under clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section
16;
(d) the norms of examinations, or any other measure of assessment of knowledge
and competency of a student, or admission to, the Skills University or institutions of
skills education affiliated to it under clause (d) of sub-section (2) of section 16;
(e) the norms and parameters of examination or assessment systems and the
procedure for accreditation of such systems of institutions of skills education affiliated
to it under clause (e) of sub-section (2) of section 16;
(f) the norms for recognition of competency attained by a student in practical
training in skills, imparted in industry, for the purpose of earning credits under clause
(g) of sub-section (2) of section 16;
(g) the norms for transfer of credits to promote new learning opportunities without
compromising on learning outcomes under clause (i) of sub-section (2) of section 16;
(h) the parameters for assessment and accreditation of skill educators and training
providers consistent with norms specified by or under the National Skills Qualification
Framework, or in their absence, such norms as may be determined by the Senate under
clause (j) of sub-section (2) of section 16;
(3) Every Ordinance made by the Senate, in exercise of powers under this section, shall
be placed, as soon as may be after it is made or published, before the Board.
(4) The Board shall have the power to make any modification in the Ordinance or direct
that the Ordinance should not be made or issued:
Provided that the Ordinance shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that Ordinance.
36. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid
before each House of Parliament.
37. Every notification, Statute and Ordinance made under this Act shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session, for a
total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
notification or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made or notification should not
be issued, the rule or notification shall, thereafter, have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or
notification.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Notification,
Statute and
Ordinance to
be laid before
Parliament.
5
20
30
35
40
10
15
25

THE SCHEDULE
[See section 5(1)]
Sl. Name of National Skills Name of State Location Appointed Date
University
22

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Skill development is one of the key drivers to harness the demographic dividend. For
our economy to grow exponentially and our youth to be gainfully employed, it is imperative
that the requisite skills are acquired. The Central Government has already initiated various
schemes for skill development. However, in the absence of a Skills University, there is a
problem in recognition of skills at the graduate and higher levels. This renders the youth with
little opportunity for upward mobility and would get stuck at the worker level.
Creation of skills University will not only help imparting and recognition of higher
skills but also allow for research and collaboration with similar universities across the globe.
It shall also give a statutory recognition to the qualifications awarded to the students. Skill
development is very different to conventional education in its content delivery mechanism
and scope and the present higher education structure with its institutional model would not
be able to rise to the demand in scale and scope. Since the need is to create a sustainable
national ecosystem for skill development, it is proposed to create universities with national
reach.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KIRIT SOMAIYA
February 8, 2017.
23

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for establishment of National Skills University by the
Central Government with the concurrence of the State Government, establish, either with or
without public-private partnership. Clause 18 empowers the Board to constitute such
committees with such powers and such functions, as it may deem fit, for efficient management
of affairs of the Skills University. Clause 21 provides that Central Government shall provide
to each Skills University grants of such sums of money as may be required for supporting its
establishment and infrastructure development and to meet the expenditure on scholarships
or fellowships instituted by it. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees
thirty six crores per annum would involve from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred crores is also likely to be
involved.
24

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 33 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Act.
2. Clause 34 of the Bill empowers the Board to make the Statutes as specified in the
Schedule to the Bill. It empowers the Board to frame, amend, modify or rescind the Statutes
governing the affairs of the Skills University for attainment of its objects subject to the
assent of the Central Government. The matter in respect of which the Board and the Central
Government may make, amend or repeal the Statutes, include the constitution, powers and
functions of the authorities of the University, the appointment of officers and teachers of the
University, the conditions of service of the employees of the University and matters connected
therewith.
3. Clause 35 empowers the Senate to make, amend, modify or rescind the Ordinances of
the Skills University. The Ordinances may be made, amended or repealed in respect of
matters relating to admission of students, courses of study, fees and fellowships, medium of
instructions and examination, establishment of special centres, specialised laboratories, the
manner of co-operation and collaboration with other Universities and authorities, the
management of colleges and institutions established by the University and such other
matters.
4. Clause 36 empowers the Central Government, by order published in the Official
Gazette, to make provisions to remove certain difficulties, which may appear to be necessary
or expedient and such an order is not to be made after the expiry of a period of three years
from the commencement of the Act and such order shall be laid before each House of
Parliament.
5. The matters for which the Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations may be made pertain
to matters of procedure or detail and it is not possible to provide for them in the Bill. The
delegation of legislative powers is, therefore, of a normal character.
25

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to promote quality skill education in an integrated manner with higher education in
the context of the demographic dividend and meeting the qualified skill requirements
of a growing national economy and for that purpose to address gaps in the
institutional delivery  framework in skill education by establishing
National Skills Universities as institutions of national importance for
imparting skill education and to develop qualified youth with
skill proficiencies and standardised competencies around
national principles and to provide for certain other
matters connected with such institutions or
incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Kirit Somaiya, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4729LS(S3)—03-03-2017.