 Bill No. 42 of 2023
THE WILD LIFE (PROTECTION) AMENDMENT
BILL, 2023
By
ADV. D EAN K URIAKOSE, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of
India as follows:–
1. (1) This act may be called the Wild Life (Protection) Amendment
Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title
and
commencement.
 AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In section 2 of the Wild Life Protection Act, 1972 (hereinafter referred
to as the principal Act),–
(a) existing clause (1) shall be renumbered as clause (1B) and before
clause (1B) as so renumbered, the following clause shall be inserted, namely:–
“(1) “agriculture” with all its grammatical variations and cognate
expressions includes floriculture, horticulture, sericulture, the raising of
crops, grass or garden produce, dairy farming, poultry farming, cutting
of wood or grass, gathering of fruit, raising of man-made forest or rearing
of seedlings or plants;”;
(1A) “agricultural produce” includes paddy, wheat, sugarcane,
millet, barley, ragi, madwa, cotton, maize, soyabean, rapeseed, mustard,
peanut, coconut, sunflower, groundnut, safflower, sesamum, niger seed,
gram, tur, urad, moong, masoor (lentil), peas, jute, cashew nut, pepper,
turmeric, tobacco, potato, tomato, onion, mango, apple, orange, kinnoo,
mousambi and other such foodgrains or commodity as may be prescribed:
(b) after clause (10), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:–
“(10A) “cultivating farm” means a piece of land used for agriculture
or livestock rearing; and
(c) after clause (25B), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:–
(25C) “residential property” means a building or habitation used
for dwelling by any person.”.
3. In Section 11of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:–
“(2A) The killing or wounding of any wild animal by a person inside
his cultivating farm or residential property where the wild animal has
entered and has caused damage to agricultural produce or livestock shall
not be an offence.”.
Amendment of
section 2.
5
10
15
20
25
53 of 1972
Amendment of
section 11.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 is a seminal piece of legislation
that has helped in the preservation of wild life in India. Over the years, it
has led to the protection of many species that are indeed a pride to our
nation and are a treasure to entire mankind. Protection extended to majestic
animals like the Royal Bengal Tiger and the greater-one horned Rhino has
helped in improving their numbers and saving the species from extinction.
However, there is also widespread criticism to the act that it has led to
excessive bureaucratization and has also taken away the rights of common
people. Especially affected are the farmers who inhabit areas bordering
forest lands. Here, they brave the inclement weather and constant threat of
wild animals to create farm goods that is consumed by the whole nation.
Many a times, they are helpless when an animal ravages their land.
Especially is the case of wild boar– an animal that preys upon the helpless
farmers. Many national and international studies have proven that there is
no threat to the wild boar populations in terms of dwindling numbers. In
fact, their numbers have increased in the forests due to ready availability
of food from the farms and farmers being unable to control them by killing
them when they enter farmlands. If the farmer is given the right to kill wild
boars and other animals that enter their farm and cause destruction, it will
help the control the wild board Attack. It will also be a seminal step in
managing the human-wild life conflict.
The resolution of that conflict lies in adopting locally appropriate steps
that include killing of animals that cause extensive damage to the farms. Instead
of taking a one size fits all approach that mandates that the Central Government
declare vermin for any area in the country, more scientific and practical choice
is to allow the farmers kill animals that enter their fields and create destruction
to farms and human life. Also, the people living near forests need to be liberated
from unnecessary legal hassles due to cases registered against them for killing
animals in self-defence or to save a human life.
Hence this Bill.
NEW DELHI;                                DEAN KURIAKOSE
January 16, 2023.
3

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE WILD LIFE (PROTECTION) ACT, 1972
(53 OF 1972)
* * * * *
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(1) “animal” includes amphibians, birds, mammals and reptiles and
their young, and also includes, in the cases of birds and reptiles, their eggs;
* * * * *
11. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the
time being in force and subject to the provisions of Chapter IV,–
(a) * * * * *
* * * * *
(2) The killing or wounding in good faith of an wild animal in defence
of oneself or of any other person shall not be an offence:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall exonerate any person
who, when such defence becomes necessary, was committing any act in
contravention of any provision of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder.
* * * * *
Definitions.
Hunting of
wild animals
to be
permitted in
certain cases.

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
further to amend the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972.
————
(Adv. Dean Kuriakose, M.P .)