1
THE PLAY SCHOOLS (REGULATION) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI MAHEISH GIRRI, M.P .
A
BILL
to regulate the functioning of play schools and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Play Schools (Regulation) Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such a date, as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Bill No.  42  of  2015
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appointed day" means the date of the commencement of this Act;
(b) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(c) "authority" means the Play Schools Education Authority constituted by
appropriate Government under section 3;
(d) "play school" means and elementary school or formal centre or institution
including private schools imparting pre-school or nursery education to children before
their enrolment in the first standard; and
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules under the Act.
3. (1) With effect from the appointed day, the appropriate Government shall, by
notification in the Official Gazette, constitute an authority to be known as the Play Schools
Education Authority to regulate within its territorial jurisdiction, the functioning of play
schools and conditions of service for teachers working in such schools.
(2) The authority shall consist of—
(a) a Chairperson to be appointed by the appropriate Government; and
(b) a maximum of twelve members to be appointed by the appropriate Government:
Provided that the number of members shall, in no case, be less than six.
(3) The Chairperson and other members referred to in sub-section (2) shall be chosen
from amongst the persons who have special knowledge and at least twenty years of
experience in the field of education.
(4) The term of office and conditions of service of the Chairperson and the other
members shall be such as may be prescribed.
(5) The appropriate Government shall appoint such number of officers and staff to
assist the authority, as it considers necessary, for its efficient functioning.
4. (1) It shall be the duty of the authority to regulate the functioning of play schools
and conditions of service of teachers, under its jurisdiction.
(2) Without  prejudice  to  the  generality  of  the  provisions  contained  in
sub-section (1), the authority may,—
(a) fix the student-teacher ratio;
(b) put a ceiling on the tuition fee and other charges;
(c) fix the hours of duty of teachers;
(d) monitor the funds collected by the schools;
(e) suggest the type of infrastructure to be maintained and the safety conditions
to be ensured;
(f) prescribe curriculum;
(g) require setting up of a grievance redressal mechanism;
(h) recommend to the appropriate Government the mechanism for registration
and recognition of play schools; and
(i) perform such functions as may be prescribed.
Constitution
of the Play
Schools
Education
Authority.
Definitions.
Functions of
the Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
5. (1) The Authority may, with the previous approval of the appropriate Government,
make regulations consistent with this Act for regulating the minimum qualifications for
recruitment and the conditions of service of teachers of play schools.
(2) Subject to any regulation that may be made in this behalf, no teacher of a play
school shall be dismissed or removed nor shall his service be otherwise terminated except
with the prior approval of the authority.
6. The salary, allowances, medical facilities, pension, gratuity, provident fund and
other benefits of the teachers of play school shall not be less than those of the teachers
of the corresponding status in schools run by the appropriate Government.
7. No play school shall charge a tuition fee or collect other charges or receive
payments, in excess of the amounts specified by the authority:
Provided that every play School shall obtain prior approval of the authority for
charging tuition fee or collecting other charges or receiving  payments, exceeding the
amounts specified by the authority.
8. If the appropriate Government, on receipt of a report from the authority, is satisfied
that the managing committee of any play school has neglected to perform its duties imposed
on it by or under this Act or any rules or regulations made thereunder and it is expedient
in the interest of the school education to close down such school, it may, after giving
reasonable opportunity of being heard to the managing committee of the school, order
closing down of such school for such period as it may consider appropriate:
Provided that if the school is a recognized play school, the appropriate Government
may also withdraw its recognition.
9. The provisions of this act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other law or rules made thereunder for the time being in force.
10. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this act, as may be necessary for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this sub-section after the expiry of the
two years from the appointed day.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament.
11. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purpose of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a
total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification
in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however,
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of
anything previously done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.
Power to
make
regulations.
Salary,
allowances
and other
benefits to
teachers.
Fee and other
charges.
Closing down
of play school.
Act not to be
in derogation
of other laws.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The non-formal schooling and early childhood care is predominantly in private sector.
The play schools have mushroomed all over the country, especially in urban areas. They
are being governed by laws relating to Establishment of Shops of the concerned States.
The early days of kids are spent in these schools as many parents are now putting their
kids in these schools as early as one year of age. Foundation of mental and physical
development of little children is laid in play schools. Play school now-a-days has become
a big business opportunity. In the absence of any legislative check, complaints of parents
and non-Governmental Organisations are not addressed by these schools. As play schools
are laying foundation of a child's future, they should not be governed by any business
Act but by an education Act.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to regulate the functioning of play schools in the country
not only to ensure quality education and guidance in play schools, but also to protect the
parents from unnecessary exploitation.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW D ELHI; MAHEISH GIRRI
January 15, 2015.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall, within its territorial
jurisdiction, constitute Play Schools Education Authority to regulate the functioning of
the play schools. The expenditure relating to the States shall be borne out of the
Consolidated Funds of the respective States. However, the expenditure in respect of Union
territories shall be borne out of the Consolidated Fund of India. The Bill, therefore, if enacted,
will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that sum of
rupees one crore will be involved as recurring expenditure per annum from the Consolidated
Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees ten lakh is also likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Authority to make regulations for regulating the
minimum qualifications for recruitment and conditions of service of teachers of play schools.
Clause 11 empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the purposes
of the Bill. The matters in respect of which rules and regulations may be made are matters
of administrative details and procedure and, as such, the delegation of legislative powers
is of a normal character.
6

GMGIPMRND—4491LS(S3)—02-03-2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to regulate the functioning of play schools and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Maheish Girri,  M.P .)