Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE PAYMENT OF SUBSISTENCE ALLOWANCE TO FARMERS AND
AGRICULTURAL LABOURERS BILL, 2009
BY
SHRI HANSRAJ GANGARAMJI AHIR, M.P.
A
BILL
to  provide  for  the  payment  of  subsistence  allowance to  farmers  and  agricultural
labourers in order to provide social security to them and their family members and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Payment of Subsistence Allowance to Farmers and
Agricultural Labourers Act, 2009.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "agricultural labourer" means any person who works on land belonging to
others for wages in cash or kind having a total family income of not more than rupees
three thousand per month from all sources;
(b) "applicant" means a farmer or agricultural labourer who has applied for the
subsistence allowance;
Bill No. 42 of 2009
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Definitions.
5
10

2
(c) "appropriate Government" means the Central Government or the State
Government, as the case may be;
(d) "family" means the members of a family related to each other by blood,
marriage or adoption and normally residing together and sharing meals or holding a
common ration card;
(e) "farmer" means any person who owns agricultural land not exceeding four
hectares and includes a share-cropper or a person who cultivates land belonging to
others under the tenancy system having a total family income of not more than rupees
five thousand per month from all sources; and
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the appropriate Government shall pay subsistence allowance at the rate of:—
(a) rupees three thousand per month to every farmer, and
(b) rupees one thousand and five hundred per month to every agricultural
labourer.
4. (1) The appropriate Government shall appoint an officer not below the rank of Sub-
Divisional Officer as the nodal officer for the purpose of identification of beneficiaries under
the provisions of this Act.
(2) The nodal officer shall invite applications in such form, as may be prescribed, for
availing of subsistence allowance under the provisions of this Act from amongst farmers and
agricultural labourers who are eligible for payment of subsistence allowance under the
provisions of this Act and who have been working as such farmer or agricultural labourer for
a period of ten years before the coming into force of this Act.
5. The appropriate Government shall designate an officer not below the rank of Block
Development Officer for the purpose of receiving applications from farmers and agricultural
labourers for payment of subsistence allowance under this Act.
6. Any person who intends to apply for subsistence allowance under this Act shall
apply to the Block Development Officer for registration of his name in such form as may be
prescribed under sub-section (2) of section 4.
7. (1) The Block Development Officer shall collect all the applications and forward
them to the Sub-Divisional Officer.
(2) The Sub-Divisional Officer shall, after holding such inquiry as he may deem
necessary, but, in no case later than thirty days from the date of receipt of applications, either
admit or reject the application:
Provided that in case no decision is made on an application within thirty days, the
applicant shall be deemed to be eligible for payment of subsistence allowance under this Act.
(3) The Sub-Divisional Officer shall record, in writing, the reasons for rejection of an
application, if any, under the Act.
(4) Any applicant aggrieved by the decision of the Sub-Divisional Officer may prefer
an appeal to the District Magistrate in such form and manner as may be prescribed.
(5) The procedure for disposing of an appeal shall be such as may be prescribed:
Provided that before disposing of an appeal, the applicant shall be given a reasonable
opportunity of being heard.
(6) It shall be the duty of the Sub-Divisional Officer to maintain, review and publish a
tehsilwise list of the beneficiaries under the Act once in every six months.
Subsistence
allowance to
the farmers
and the
agricultural
labourers.
Sub-Divisional
Officer to
work as the
nodal officer.
Block
Development
Officer to
receive
applications.
Application
for subsistence
allowance.
Block
Development
Officer to
collect and
forward the
applications.
5
10
20
15
25
30
35
40
45

3
8. The mode of payment of subsistence allowance to the farmers and agricultural
labourers and their family members, in case of death of a farmer or agricultural labourer, shall
be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
9. Every State Government and Union territory administration shall set up a special
cell at the district and the State level for the purposes of monitoring the implementation of
the provisions of the Act.
10. (1) The Central Government shall set up a Fund to be known as the Farmers and
Agricultural Labourers Welfare Fund.
(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute to the Fund
in such ratio as may be prescribed.
(3) There shall also be credited to the Fund such other sums as may be received by
way of donation, contribution or assistance.
(4) The Fund shall be utilized for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
11. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament in
this behalf by law, provide adequate funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
12.  (1) Whoever contravenes the provisions of this Act shall, on conviction, be liable
to a fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.
(2) In case the convicted person is an employee of the Central/State Government/
Union territory administration, the penalty provided under sub-section (1) shall be in addition
to the departmental disciplinary action initiated against him.
13. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in the force but except as above, the
provisions and the rules made under this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of
any other law for the time being in force.
14. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case  may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Mode of
Payment of
subsistence
allowance to
family
members of
agricultural
labourers or
farmers.
Every State
Government
and Union
territory
administration
to set up a
special cell.
Setting up of a
Farmers and
Agricultural
Labourers
Welfare Fund.
Central
Government
to provide
adequate
funds.
Penalty.
Act to have
over riding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
20
15
25
30

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Agriculture is a prominent sector of Indian economy. About two-third population of
the country is dependent on agriculture for their livelihood. Recent times have witnessed
phenomenal growth in other sectors due to heavy public-private investments. Lack of
investment in agriculture has resulted in de-accelerated growth and increase in input-cost of
agricultural produce. To overcome the resource constraints, agriculturalists fall back upon
loans secured at high rates of interests from banks and financial institutions. Failed crops,
ineffective pesticides, poor quality of seeds and high debts have led to multiple incidents of
suicides by farmers across the country.
A healthy agricultural sector is essential not only for food security of the nation but
also to keep inflation and prices of essential commodities under check. An unprofitable and
debt-ridden agricultural sector would not be able to provide for even the basic needs of
farmers, agricultural labourers and their dependants. Therefore, there is an urgent need to
address the basic needs of the farmers and agricultural labourers.
The Central and State Governments are under constitutional obligation to ensure the
survival of the farmers and to provide financial resources for agriculture in order to prevent
any further loss of lives.
In view of the above, the farmers and agricultural labourers need the support of the
State so that their economic handicap do not come in the way of their survival and social
development.
Hence the Bill.
N
EW DELHI; HANSRAJ GANGARAMJI AHIR
June 22, 2009
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for payment of subsistence allowance to the farmers and
the agricultural labourers. Clause 9 provides for setting up of special cells at the District and
State level for the purposes of monitoring the implementation of the provisions of the Act.
Clause 10 provides for setting up of a Farmers and Agricultural Labourers Welfare Fund.
Clause 11 provides for provision of funds by the Central Government for carrying out the
purposes of the Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees ten
thousand crores per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred crores is also likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only.
The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
6

LOK   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the payment of subsistence allowance to farmers and agricultural labourers
in order to provide social security to them and their family members and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Hansraj Gangaramji Ahir, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2495LS(S-5)—06.07.2009.