AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

17 DEC ong

Bill No. 42 of 2004
—_—_——

THE BAN ON COW SLAUGHTER BILL, 2004

By
‘Suri Yoo! Apityanatu, M.P.

A
BILL
10 prohibit the slaughter of cow and its progeny.

‘WitRéas article 48 of the Constitution enjoins on the State to organise agricultural
and animal husbandry on modern and scientific lines and in particular to take steps for
Preserving and improving the breeds and prohibiting the slaughter of cow and its progeny;

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (/) This Act may be called the Ban on Cow Slaughter Act, 2004. Short title

(2) Itshall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification pee
inthe Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise: Tequires, "cow" includes.a bull, bullock, x, Definition.
heifer or calf.


Prohibition
of sale of
beef,

Punishment.

z

3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force or
any usage or custom to the contrary, no person shall slaughter or cause to be slaughtered or
offer or cause to be offered for slaughter any cow in any place.

4. No person shall sell or offer for sale or cause to be sold beef or beef products in any
form for any purpose.

5. Any person who slaughters a cow or is caught selling beef or beef products shall be
Punished with imprisonment which may extend to ten years or with fine which may extend to
rupees one lakh or with both,


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Article 48 of the Constitution enjoins on the State to organise agricultural and animal
husbandry on modern and scientific lines and in particular to take steps for preserving and
improving the breeds and prohibiting the slaughter of cow and its progeny. In view of the
consideration that the cow and its entire Progeny must be saved to provide milk, as well as
manure, it becomes imperative to impose complete ban on the cow slaughter,

YOGI ADITYANATH.
‘New Dewi;

June 25,2004.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
to prohibit the slaughter of cow and its progeny.

(Shri Yogi Adityanath, M.P)

MGIPMRND—1267LS—15.07.2004.