As introduced in Lok Sabha
                   
                                                       
          
Bill  No. 42 of  2024
THE ADVOCATES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024
By
Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Advocates Act, 1961. 
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Advocates (Amendment) Act, 2024.
(2)  It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different provisions 
of this Act.   
Short title and 
commencement.
5

2.  In section 2 of the Advocates Act, 1961, (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) 
in sub-section (1):—
(i)  for clause (a) the following clauses, shall be substituted, namely:—
"(a) "advocate" means an advocate entered in any roll under the provisions of this 
Act and includes an advocate carrying on practice in law with a law firm, by whatever 
name called, and a foreign lawyer registered under any law in a country outside India 
and recognised by the Bar Council of India in such manner as may be prescribed;"; 
(aa) "Advocates Social Security Fund" means the fund maintained by the  
Central Government under section 44B to be specifically used for the purposes 
mentioned under section 44A;";
  ( ii)  after clause (i), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
  (ia) "practicing advocate" means an advocate with twelve or more recorded hearings 
and name in five or more vakalatnamas in a year;";
  ( iii) after clause (n), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
  "(na) " Vakalatnama" means a written document submitted before a court by 
an advocate declaring that his client has authorised him to represent him in a legal 
proceeding;
  (nb) "young practicing advocate" means an advocate under the age of thirty years 
who is practicing for a period of less than three years from the date of registration.".
   3. After section 44 of the principle Act, the following sections shall be inserted, 
namely:—
"CHAPTER   VA
Social Security Benefits
   44A. (1) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the Bar Council of India, 
formulate and notify, from time to time, suitable welfare schemes for practicing lawyers on 
matters relating to—
(a) life and disability cover;
(b) health and maternity benefits;
(c) stipend for young practicing lawyers;
(d) group health insurance cover;
(e) compensation in case of death; and
(f) any other benefits as may be determined by the Central Government.
   (2) The State Government may, in consultation with the State Bar Council formulate 
and notify, from time to time, suitable welfare schemes for practicing advocates, including 
schemes relating to—
(a) housing; and
(b) capacity building of practicing lawyers.
   44B. ( 1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette 
constitute a fund to be called the "Advocates' Social Security Fund" which shall be 
2
10
5
Definition.
15
20Insertion of new 
sections 44A 
and 44B.
25 of 1961.
Welfare Scheme 
for lawyers.
Constitution of 
the Advocates 
Social Security 
Fund.
25
30
35

managed by the Central Government in consultation with the Bar Council of India in 
such manner as may be prescribed.
   (2) There shall be credited to the fund, a compulsory contribution called the social 
security contribution one per cent of the net income after tax or such higher percentage 
as may be prescribed by the Central Government, from time to time from practicing 
advocates having income after tax exceeding rupees one crore.
   (3) There shall also be credited to the Fund—
(a) any voluntary donation or contribution made to the Fund by the Bar 
Council of India, any State Bar Association, any State Advocates' Association or 
other association or institution, or any advocate or other person; and
(b) any grants which may be made by the Central Government or a  
State Government to the Fund.
 
.
3
5
10

STATEMENT  OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 The Preamble of the Constitution of India speaks of a solemn resolution to secure to all 
of its citizens, amongst other things, justice.  Of the entire apparatus put in place to ensure 
timely delivery of justice, the most crucial component is the human resource element— 
the advocate. Even after 75 years after the country’s freedom there is no social security 
scheme for advocates.The importance of the role of advocates is unquestionable and their 
role in shaping our society, already acknowledged. Therefore, the well-being of lawyers and 
a plan for their social security is a matter of grave concern and one that demands the closest 
attention of the Government, Bar Councils, the Bar and the legal fraternity at large. 
 The primary aim of the Advocates Act, 1961, is to constitute a single class of legal 
practitioners, ‘Advocates’ as well as to introduce the powers of the Bar Council of India 
and the State Bar Council. According to this Act, only Advocates, who are enrolled in the 
Bar Council, have the power to practice the law in the court. With the enactment of the 
Advocate’ s Welfare Fund Act, 2001, some steps were sought to be taken in this direction. 
Ineffective implementation of its provisions, however, has rendered it almost defunct.
 This seeks to amend the Advocates Act, 1961 with a view to constitute Advocates’ 
Social Security Welfare Fund and the rules for the disbursement funds to be made by the 
Central or the State Government to create a financial security net for the advocates who have 
retired from practicing because of their age or illness and to the young lawyers who have just 
started out in the profession for their sustenance.
 Hence this Bill.
       New Delhi;                                    SHRIKANT EKNATH SHINDE
   July 2,  2024
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
 Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of the Advocates' Social Security Fund 
to be managed by the Central Government. It also provides for the Central Government 
to provide grants for the fund. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. However, at this stage it is not possible to calculate the exact 
amount which is likely to be incurred towards recurring and non-recurring expenditure for 
the purpose. 
5

ANNEXURE 
[Extract from the Advocate  Act, 1961]
(Act No. 25 of 1961)
*                         *                             *             *                *
  2.   (1) *                          *                          *                       *                         *
 
(a) “advocate” means an advocate entered in any roll under the provisions of 
this Act; 
   *                            *                            *                *                         *
(i) “Legal practitioner” means an advocate or vakil or any High Court, a pleader, 
mukhtar or revenue agent;
 *                            *                            *                *                         *
(n) “State roll” means a roll of advocates prepared and maintained by a  
State Bar Council under section 17.
*                         *                             *             *                *
6
Definitions.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Advocates Act,1961. 
————
(Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde, M.P.)