Bm No. 43 of 195' 
THE STATE FINANCIAL CORPORATIONS 
( AMENDMENT) BILL, 1956 
• 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOIC SABRA) 

BiU No. 43 of J 95' 
THE STATE~FINANCIAL CORPORATIONS 
(AMENDMENT) BILL,1956 
(As INTRODUCED IN Los: SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
Further to amend the State Financial Corporations Act, 1951. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the State Financial Corporations Short title 
(Amendment) Act, 1956. :!~:;nt. 
S (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In section 2 of the State Financial Corporations Act, 1951 Amen~ent 
(hel'einafter referred to as the principal Act) ,_ ofsec:tlon a 
(i) for clause (b), the following clause shall be substituted, 
10 namely:-
" (b) 'Financial Corporation' means a Financial Corpora-
tion established under section 3 and includes a Joint 
Financial Corporation established under section 3Aj"; 
(ii) to clause (c), the following E3:J)Zanation shall be added, 
IS namely:-
"Explanation.-The expression 'processing of goods' 
includes any art or process for producing, preparing or 
making an article by subjecting any material to a manual, 
mechanical, chemical, electrical or any other like operation;". 

Amendment 
of section 
3· 
Insertion of 
new aec:tion 
3A. 
Establish-
ment of 
Joint Finan-
aat Corpo-
rationa. 
2 
(iii) after clause (I), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(ff) 'State Government' in relation to a Part C State, 
means the Lieutenant Governor, or as the case may be. the 
Chief Commissioner;". , 
3. In sub-section (2) of section 3 of the principal Act, for the words 
"acquire and to hold", the words "acquire, hold and dispose of" shall 
be substituted. 
4. After section 3 of the principal Act, the followmg section shall 
be inserted, namely:- 10 
"3A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 3, 
two or more States may, after consultation with the Reserve 
Bank, enter into an agreement that there shall be one Financial 
Corporation for the group of States participating in· the agree-
ment and if the agreement is published in the Official Gazette 15 
of each of those States, the Central Government may, by notifica-
tion in the Official Gazette, establish to Joint Financial Corpora-
tion to serve the needs of those States under such name as may 
be specified in the notification. 
(2) An inter-State agreement under sub-section (1) among 20 
the participating States may-
(a) provide for the fixation of the authorised capital of 
the Joint Financial Corporation, the number of fully paid 
up 'Shares into which it shall be divided, and the allocation 
among the participating States of the shares to be distri- 25 
buted under clause (a) of sub-section (3) of section 4; 
(b) provide for the sharing of the liability for the 
gUarantee under section 6 or section 7; 
(c) provide for the number of directors to be nominated 
to the Board by each participating State Government; 30 
(d) provide for the apportionment among the participat-
ing States of expenditure in connection with the Joint 
Financial Corporation; 
(e) provide for the division among the participating 
States of the surplus profits payable by the Joint Financial 3' 
Corporation under sub-section (8) of section 35; 
(f) determine which of the participating State Govern-
ments shall exercise the several functions of the State Gov-
ernment under this Act, and references in this Act to the 
State Government, in relation to the Joint Financial Cor- 40 
poration, shall save as oth~ise expressly provided, be 
conStrued accordingly; 

s 
10 
3 
(g) provide for consultation among the participating 
States either generally or with reference to particular 
matters arising under this Act; 
(h) make such incidental and consequential provisions, 
not inconsistent with this Act, as may be deemed necessary 
or expedient for giving effect to the agreement. 
(3) The Joint Financial Corporation shall be a body cor-
porate by the name notified under sub-section (1), having per-
petual succession and a common seal, with power, subject to 
the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of 
property and shall by the said name sue and be sued. 
(4) Any reference in this Act to 'State' in relation to a Joint 
Financial Corporation established for two or more States, shall 
be construed as a reference to each such State.", 
IS 5. In sub-section (1) of section 5 of the principal Act, after the words ~:nt 
"financial institution", the words "or class of financial institutions"~. • on 
shall be inserted. 
6. In section 7 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the Amcndm~t 
following sub-section shaH be inserted, namely: _ ~~ 8ectlon 
20 "(3) The Financial Corporation may, for the purpose of 
carrying out its functions under this Act, borrow money from 
the Reserve Bank, repayable on demand or on the .expiry of 
fixed periods not exceeding ninty days froIXl the date on which 
the money is so borrowed, against securities of the Central 
2S Government or of any State Government.". 
3S 
1. In section 10 of the principal Act,-
(i) to clause (a), the following proviso shall be added, 
namely:-
"Provided that in the case of a Joint Financial Corpora-
tion, the number of directors shall be such as the State 
Governments of the participating States may, by agreement 
among themselves, think fit to nominate,each participating 
State Government nominating not more than two directors."; 
(ii) in clause (d), the words "from among themselves" shall 
be omitted. 
8. In section 14 of the prinCipal Act, after sub-section (I), the Amendment 
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely: - of 8ection 
"(lA) If the managing director is by infirmity or otherwise 1+ 
rl!ndered incapable of carrying out his duties or is absent on 
leave or otherwise in circumstances not involving the vacation 
of his appointment, the State Government may, after consulta-
tion with the Board, appoint another person to aet in his place 
during his absence.". 

4 
Amendmt,Dt 9. Section 17 of the principal Act shall be renumbered as sub-
~~. sectlOD section (1) thereof and after sub-section (1) as so renumbered, the 
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
Amendment 
of section 
18. 
Amendment 
of lection 
19· 
Amendment 
of lection 
a,. 
II (2) The State Government may, after consulting the Board, 
remove the managing director from office: 5 
Provided that no managing director shall be so removed unless 
he has been given an opportunity of showing cause against his 
removal.". 
10. In section 18, in sub-section (1),-
(a) for the word IIthree", the words "the following" shall be 10 
substituted. 
,(b) to clause (a), the following proviso shall be added, 
namely:-
IIprovided that in the case of a Joint Financial Corpora-
tion, in addition to the one director elected from among the IS 
directors nominated by the Reserve Bank and the Industrial 
Finance Corporation of India, as many directors as there are 
participating States shall be elected by the nominated direc-
tors, one each from among the directors nominated by each 
of the participating State Governments." 20 
11. In section 19 of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), the 
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
u (3A) If, for any reason, a director nominated under clause 
(a) or clause (b) or clause (e) of section 10 is unable to attend 
any meeting of the Board, the State Government, the Central 25 
Board ,of the Reserve Bank or the Board of Directors of the 
Industrial Finance Corporation of India, as the case may be, may 
depute any other person to attend the said meeting and such 
person shall, for all purposes of the said meeting, be deemed to 
be a director nominated under clause (a) or clause (b) or clause 30 
(e), as the case may be, of the said section. 
U. In section 25 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1),-
(i) the word "and" at the end of clause (e) shall be 
omitted; 35 
(ii) after clause (e), the following clause shall be 
inserted, namely:-
II (ee) acting as an agent for the Central Govern-
ment or the State Government or the Industrial Finance 
Corporation of India established under the Industrial 40 
Finance Corporation Act, 1948, in the transaction of any I, of 1~8. 
business with an industrial concern in respect of loans 

I of J956. 
4 of 1882. 
S 
or advances granted, or debentures subscribed, by any 
one of them; and"j 
(b) in sub-section (2), after the words "prescribed by regu-
lations", the words uor unless it is guaranteed as to the repay-
S ment of principal and the payment of interest by the State 
Government, a scheduled bank or a State co-operative bank" 
shall be inserted. 
13. In section 27 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the Amendment 
words, figures and brackets uIndian Companies Act, 1913 (VII of ~~. section 
10 1913)", the words and figures uCompanies Act, 1956" shall be sub-
stituted. 
14. In section 29 of the principal Act,- Amendment 
of section 
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words Uright to sell", the 29. 
words Uright to transfer by way of lease or sale" shall be sub-
IS stitutedj 
30 
35 
(b) in sub-section (2)-
(i) the words uof sale and realisation" shall be omitted. 
(ii) for the words uas if the sale", the words uas if the 
transfer" shall be substituted. 
(c) for sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
U(4) Where the management of an industrial concern is 
taken over by the Financial 'Corporation or any property 
is transferred and realised by it under the provisions of 
sub-section (1), all costs, charges and expenses properly 
incurred by it as incidental to such management or transfer 
and realisation shall be recoverable from the industrial 
concern and the money which is received by it from such 
management or transfer and realisation shall, in the 
absence of any contract to the contrary, be held by it in 
trust to be applied firstly, in payment of such costs, charges 
and expenses and, secondly, in discharge of the debt due 
to the Financial Corporation, and the residue of the money 
so received shall be paid to the person entitled thereto.". 
15. In section 31 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),- Amendment 
of section 
(i) after the words Ufails to make such repayment", the 31. 
words and figures "then, without prejudice to the provisions of 
section 29 of this Act and of section 69 of the Transfer of Pro-
perty Act, 1882" shall be inserted. 
(ii) in clause (a), for the word "Corporation", the words 
"Financial Corporation" shall be substituted 

6 
AmendmeDt 18. 'In section 32 of the principal Act. &iter sul>section (8). the of section 32. following sub-section shall be inserted. namely:-
"(BA) An order under this section transferring the manage-
ment of an industrial concern to the Financial Corporation shall 
be carried into effect, as far as may be practicable, in the man-
ner provided in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, for the pos-
session of immovable property or the delivery of movable 
property in execution of a decree. as if the Financial Corpora-
tion were the decree holder.". 
~ 
Insertio~ of 17. After section 32 of the principal Act, the following new see- 10 new sections . 
32A, 3 2B, tIons shall be inserted, namely:-
32C, 32D, 
32B and 
32F. 
Power of 
Financial 
Corporation 
to appoint 
directors or 
'administra-
tors of an 
industrial 
concern 
when 
management 
is taken 
over. 
Effect of 
notified 
order under 
section 32A. 
U32A. (1) When the management of £111 industrial concern is 
taken over by the Financial Corporation, the Financial Corpora-
tion may, by order notified in the Official Gazette, appoint as 
many persons as it thinks fit,-- IS 
(a) in .c:ny case in which the industrial concern is a 
company as defined in the Companies Act, 1956, to be 
directors of that industrial concern; or 
(b) in any other case. to be administrators of that 
industrial concern. 
(2) The power to appoint directors or administrators under 
this section includes the power to appoint any individud, firm 
or company to be the managing agent or manager of the indus-
trial concern on such terms and conditions as the Financial 
Corporation may think fit. 
32B. On the issue of a notified order under section 32A,-
(a) in any case in which tfie industrial concern is a 
20 
company as defined in the Companies Act, 1956, all persons 
holding office ss directors of the industrial concern and in ~ 
any other case, all persons holding any office having the 30 
powers of superintendence, direction and control of the 
industrial concern, immediately before the issue of the 
notified order, shall be deemed to have vacated their offices 
as such; 
(b) any contract of mmagement between the indus- 35 
trial concern and any managing agent or any director or 
manager thereof holding office as such immediately before 
the issue of the notified order shall be deemed to have 
terminated: 
S of 1908• 
1 of 19S6. 
I of 19S6. 
(c) in the case of an industrial concemwhich is al com-.40 
pany as defined in the C~mpanies Act,1956, the managing 1 of 1956 

I of 1956. 
7 
agent, if any, appointed under section 32A shall be deemed 
to have been duly appointed in pursuance of the said Act 
and the memorandum and uticles of association of the 
industrial concern and the provisions of the said Act and 
S the memorandum and articles shall, subject to the other 
provisions contained in this Act, apply accordingly, but 
no such managing agent shc:U be removed from office except 
with the previous consent of the Financial Corporation; 
10 
15 
35 
(d) the directors or the administrators appointed under 
section 32A shall take stich steps as may be ne,cessary to 
take into their custody or under their control all the pro-
perty, effects and Ection!lble claims to which the industrial 
concern is, or appears to be, entitled, and all the property 
and effects of the industrial concern shall be deemed to be 
in the custody of the directors or administrators, as the case 
may be, as from the date of the notified order; 
(e) the directors appointed under section 32A shall, for 
all purposes, be the directors of the industrial concern duly 
constituted under the Companies Act, 1956, and such direc-
tors, or as the case may be, the administrators appointed 
under section 32A, shall alone be entitled to exercise all the 
powers of the directors or as the case may be, of the persons 
exercising powers of superintendence, direction and control, 
of the industrial concern, whether such powers are derived 
from the s~dd Act or from the memorandum or articles of 
association of the industrial concern or from any other 
source whatsoever. 
32C. (1) Subject to the control of the Financial Corpora- Powers and 
tion, the directors, or as the case may be, the administrators d~ties of .. dlIcctors appomted undersectlon 32A, shall take such steps as may be and ad-
necessary for the purpose of efficiently managing the business ministrato18. 
of the industrial concern and shall exercise such powers and 
have such duties as may be prescribed. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the powers vested 
in them under sub-section (1), the directors or as the case may 
be, the administrators appointed under section 32A, may, with 
the previous approval of the Financial Corporation, make an 
application to a Court for the purpose of cancelling or varying 
any contract or agreement entered into at any time before the 
issue of the notified order under section 32A, between· the indus-
trial concern and any other person and the Court may, if sati~ 
fied after due inquiry that such contract or .agreement had been 
entered into in bad faith and is detrimental to the interests of 
the industrial concern, make an order cancelling 'or varying 

No right to 
compensa-
tion for 
termina-
tion of 
contract of 
managing 
=itn. director. 
etc. 
Application 
of Act 1 of 
1956. 
8 
(either unconditionally or subject to such conditions as it may 
think fit to impose) that contract or agreement and the contract 
or agreement shall have effect accordingly. 
32D. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary con-
tained in any contract or in any law for the time being in force, 5 
no managing agent, managing director or any other 
director or a manager or any person incharge of 
management of an industrid concern shall be entitled to any 
compensation for the loss of office or for the premature tenni-
nation under this Act of any contract of management entered 10 
into by him with such concern. 
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall 
affect the right of any such managing agent or 
managing director, or any other director or manager or any 
such person incharge of management to recover from the in- 15 
dustrial concern, moneys recoverable otherwise than by way of 
such compensation. 
32E. (1) Where the management of an industrial concern, 
being a company ,as defined in the Companies Act, 1956, is taken I of 1956. 
over by the Financial Corporation, tlien, notwithstanding any- 20 
thing contained in the said Act or in the memorandum or arti· 
cles of association of such concem,-
(a) it shall not be lawful for the shareholders of such 
concern or any other person to nominate or appoint any 
person to be a director of the concern; 2, 
(b) no resolution passed at any meeting of the share-
holders of such concern shall be given effect to unless ap-
proved by the Financial Corporation; 
(c) no proceeding for t~e winding up of such concern 
or for the appointment of receiver in respect thereof 30 
shall lie in any court, except with the consent of the 
Financial Corporation. 
(2) Subject to the provisions contained in sub-section (1) 
and to the other provisions contained in this Act and subject to 
such other exceptions, restrictions and limitations, if any, as the 35 
Central Government in consultation with the State Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, 
the Companies Act, 1956, shall continue to apply to such concern 1 of 1956. 
in the same manner as it applied thereto before the issue of the 
notified order under section 32A. 40 

1 of 1956. 
1 of 1956. 
5 
10 
9 
32F. (1) Where the management of an industrial· coneern Restril?tion . • • • on filmg of not bemg a company as defined In the Companies Act, 1956, 18 suits for 
taken over by the Financial Corporation, no suit or proceedings dissolution, • etc., of an 
for dissolution or for partition shall, m 80 far 81 it relates to that industrial 
industrial concem, lie in any court or before any tribunal or COb ~cem not 
ClOg a 
other authority except with the consent of the Financial Cor- company 
poration. when its manage-
ment is 
(2) No proceeding for the appointment of any official taken over. 
assignee or receiver in relation to any industrial eoncem the 
management of which has been taken over by the Financial 
Corporation shall lie in any court except with consent of the 
Financial Corporation.". 
18. In section 33 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the Amendment 
words c.cor in a scheduled bank in consultation with the Reserve ~~. section 
IS Bank", the words "or, in consultation with the Reserve Bank in a 
scheduled bank or a State co-operative bank", shall be substituted. 
18. In sub-section (1) of section 36 of the principal Act, for the Amendment 
, words "two months", the words .. three months" shall be substituted. Of6 section 3 . 
20 
2$ 
ZOo In section 37 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1) ,-
(0 for the words, figures and brackets "section 144 of 
the Indian Companies Act, 1913 (VU of 1913)". the word, 
and figures "section 226 of the Companies Act, 1956" shall 
be substituted; 
(ii) for the words' .. the other", the words "the other 
auditor or auditors" shall be substituted; 
(b) after sub-section (1), the following proviso shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"Provided that where such other auditor or auditors 
are to be elected.· for· the ftrat time after the establishment 
of' the F1naDeial Corporation, the Board may appoint such 
auditor' or auditora who shall hold ofIlce until the election 
is held". 
Amendment 
of section 
37· 

Insertion of 
new section 
37A. 
Inspection 
Amendment 
of section 
38. 
Amendment 
of section 
39· 
10 
11. After section 37 of the principal Act, the following section 
shall be inserted, name1y:-
"37A. (1) The Central Government m.y direct the Reserve 
Bank to inspect the working of any Financial Corporation, and 
if 80 directed, the Reserve Bank shall cause an inspection to be S 
made by one or more of its officers, of the Financial Corporation 
and its books and accounts; and the Reserve Bank shall send 
the report of such inspection to the Central Government and 
to the State Government and shall supply a copy thereof to the 
Financial Corporation. 10 
(2) It shall be the duty of every director or every officer 
of the Financial Corporation to produce to any oftlcer making 
an inspection under sub-section (1) all such books, accounts and 
other documents in his custody or power and to furnish him 
with any statement and information relating to the aftairs of IS 
the Financial Corporation as the said officer may require of him 
within such time as the said oftlcer may specify. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian 
Evidence Act, 1872, or in any other law for the time being in 1 of 1872. 
force, no court, tribunal or other authority shall have power· to ao 
require the Reserve Bank or any of its officers to produce before 
such court, tribtmal or other authority the report of the inspec-
tion made by it under sub-section (1) or any copy thereof. 
(4) The State Government may, after considerine any 
report, sent to it under sub-section (1). give such instructions 25 
to the Board as it considers necessary and it shall be the duty 
of the Board to comply with such instructions.". 
22. In sub-section (3) of section 38 of the principal Act, for the 
words "three months", the words "four months" shall be substituted. 
23. In section 39 of the principal Ad,-
(a) in sub-section (1). after the words "the State Govern-
ment", the words "in consultation with the Reserve Bank" shall 
be inserted; 
30 
(b) in sub-section (3), after the words "laid down by th~ 
State Government", the words, brackets, flgures and letter 35 
"under sub-section (1) of this section or the instructions given 
to the Board under sub-section (4) of tec:tion 37A" shall be 
inserted. 

IDlCrtion of 
new section. 
46A and 46 
8. . 
s 
(0 
IS 
20 
II 
24. After section 46 of the principal Act, the following sections 
shall be inserted, namely:-
"46A. (1) Where a Financial Corporation has been estab- ~~en~i~n of . . jurIsdIctIon hshed for any State and any other State desires that the Finan- of the Fin-
cial Corporation should serve its needs, and the States, after aneia! Cor-
I · . h th R Bank' porataon to consu tation Wit e eserve , enter mto an agreement other States 
which is published in the Official Gazettes of each of those States, by agree-
then the Financial Corporation shall, on the issue of a notiftca- ment. 
tion in the Official Gazette by the Central Government, serve the 
needs of those States in terms of the agreement. 
(2) An inter-State agreement among the particlpating States 
may, as far as may be, make all such provisions as are referred 
to in sub-section (2) of section 3A. 
46B. The provisions of this Act and of any rules or orders Effect 
made thereunder shall have effect notwithstanding anything of Act. on 
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time other aws. 
being in force or in the memorandum or articles of association 
of an industria,1 concern or in any other instrument having effect 
by virtue of any law other than this Act, but save as aforesaid, 
the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in 
derogation of, any other law for the time being applicable to an 
industrial concern.". 
25. In sub-section (2) of section 48 in clause (m) after the words Afmc:n~c:nt 
• 0 section "this Act", the words "fees for attending meetings thereof and the 4R. 
2S conduct of business thereat" shall be inserted. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The working of the State Financial Corporations Act, 1951, dur-
ing the last few years brought to light certain difficulties. These 
were considered on oftlcial levels by the representatives of the State 
Financial Corporations and of the Reserve Bank of India in August, 
1954 and November, 1955, and, certain amendments to the Act were 
suggested as a result of these discussions. 
2. Some of the States including Part C States are experiencing 
some difficulty in establishing separate financial corporations for 
their States. In order to remove such difficulty, it is proposed to 
make a provision which would enable a group of two or more States 
to establish, by agreement among themselves, a Joint Financial Cor-
poration for those States. It also seems desirable to provide for the 
extension of the jurisdiction of an existing financial corporation of 
a State to another State by agreement. As it is often difficult f()r 
the Central Government, a State Government or the Industrial 
Finance Corporation of India to transact business directly with an 
industrial concern in respect of loans or advances to be granted to 
it, it is proposed to empower the State Financial Corporations to 
undertake agency functions on their behalf. It is also proposed to 
amend section 25 of the Act so that industrial concerns engaged in 
small scale' and cottage industries, not having auftlclent tangible 
assets, may avail themselves of the financial accommodation from 
State Financial Corporations. 
3. When the management of an industrial concern is taken over 
by a State Financial Corporation under section 29 or section 32 of 
the Act, it is necessary to vest the Corporation with certain powers 
for the eftlcient management of the concern. It is proposed to insert 
in the Act new sections 32A to 32F for the purpose and these provi-
sions follow closely those of the Industrial Finance Corporation Act, 
1948. It seems desirable to provide for a machinery for the inspec-
tion of the working of State Financial Corporations. Accordingly, it 
is proposed to empower the Reserve Bank to make such inspection 
at the inltance of the Central Govemmmt. 
12 

13 
4. The Bill seeks to achieve these objects. Opportunity has also 
been taken to introduce in the Act some other amendments of a 
consequential or procedural nature keeping in view the amendments 
made from time to time in the Industrial Finance Corporation Act, 
1948. 
A. C. GUHA. 
NEW DELHI,' 
The 10th July, 1956. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Bill envisages formation of Joint Financial Corporations by 
two or more States as some of the smaller States, particularly Part 
C States, are not in a position to establish independent Financial 
Corporations of their own. It is not possible at this stage to estimate 
the expenditure to be incurred out of the Consolidated Fund of India 
in connection with the formation of Joint Financial Corporations by 
Part C States as the number of such States which would avail of the 
pennissive provisions of the Bill are not known. Further, the share 
capital of such Joint Financial Corporations would be fixed only at 
the time of their establishment after taking into account of the needs 
of the States forming them. The contribution which the Central 
Government would be required to make towards the share capital 
of Part C States, which is in the nature of a contingent liability, 
cannot be estimated at this stage. FUrther, clause 4 of the Bill per-
taining to the inter-State agreement provides for the sharing of the 
liability for the guarantee to be given under section 6 or 7. The 
financial liability in respect of the guarantee under section 6 or 7 is 
also a contingent liability and it is not possi'ble to estimate the 
eJ5Penditure involved from the consolidated fund of India. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE STATE FIN~NCIAL CORPORATIONS ACT, 1951 (No. 63 
OF 1951). 
• • • • 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
• • • • 
(Ib) ''Financial Corporation" means the Financial Corporation 
established for the State under section 3; 
• • • • 
CHAPTER II 
INCORPORATION OF STATE FINANCIAL CORPORATIONS, THEIR CAPITAL AND 
MANAGEMENT. 
3. (1) 
• • • • 
(2) The Financial Corporation shall be a body corporate by the 
name notified under sub-section (1), having perpetual succession and 
a common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to 
acquire and to hold property and shall by the said name sue and be 
sued. 
• • • • 
Defipitions. 
Establish-
ment of 
State Fin-
ancial Cor-
poratiQns. 
5. (1) The shares of the Financial Corporation shall not be trans- Restriction8 
ferable except to the State Government, the Reserve Bank or any on transfer 
other financial institution recognised in this behalf by the State of sharell, '; 
Government: 
Provided that the shares subscribed for by the parties referred to 
in clause (d) of sub-section (3) of section 4 shall be freely transfer-
able. 
(2) Nothing contained in this section shall effect the provisions 
of sub-section (5) of section 4. 
• • • • 
IS 

Board or 
directors. 
ExecutIVe 
Commit-
tee. 
BaliDeil 
which Pia-
8DCial Cor-
poradODl 
maytran-
1IICt. 
Power to 
impose 
CODditiona 
for ac:com-
mocIatfou. 
16 
10. The Board of cmectors shall consist of the following, namely:-
• • • • 
(d) three directors elected in the prescribed manner from 
among themselves by the parties referred to in clause (c) of 
sub-section (3) of section 4, one of whom shall be elected to re-
present scheduled banks, another to represent co-operative banks 
and the third to represent the remaining financial institutions; 
• • • • 
18. (1) The Executive Committee shall consist of the managing 
director who shall be the Chairman of the Committee, and three 
other directors, chosen as follows:-
(a) two directors elected by the nominated directors, one 
from among the directors nominated by the State Government, 
and one from among the directors nominated by the Reserve 
Bank and the Industrial Finance Corporation of India established 
under the Industrial Finance Corporation Act, 1948 (XV of 
1948); 
(b) one director elected by the elected directors. 
• • • • 
25. (1) The Financial Corporation may, subject to the provisions 
of this Act, carryon and transact any of the following kinds of busi-
ness, namely:-
• • • • • 
(e) the granting of loans or advances to, or the subscribing 
to debentures of, industrial concerns, repayable within a period 
not exceeding twenty years from the date on which they. are 
granted or subscribed to, as the case may be; and 
• • • • 
D. (1) 
• • • • 
(2) Where one of the conditions imposed under sub-section (1) 
is that a director shall be appointed by the Financial Corporation on 
the board of directors of the Industrial concern to protect the in-
terests of the Financial Corporation, such condition shall be a valid 
condition notwithstanding anything contained in the lndian Com-
panies Act, 1913 (VII of 1913), or in any other law for the time being 
in force or in any instrument relating to the Industrial concern . 
• • • • 

17 
29. (1) Where any industrial concern, which is under a liability R!ghts ,of 
to the Financial Corporation under an agreement, makes any default ~~;:'~a~l 
in repayment of any loan or advance or any instalment thereof or tion in calC 
otherwise fails to comply with the terms of its agreement with the of default. 
Financial Corporation, the Financial Corporation shall have the right 
to take over the management of the industrial concern, as well as 
the right to sell and realise the property pledged, mortgaged, hypo-
thecated or assigned to the Financial Corporation . 
. (2) Any transfer of property made by the Financial Corporation, 
.in exercise of its powers of sale and realisation under sub-section (1), 
shall vest in the transferee all rights in or to the property transferred 
as if the sale had been made by the owner of the property . 
• • •• • 
(4) Where any property is sold or realised by the Financial 
Corporation under the provisions of this section, the money which 
is received by it from such sale or realisation shall, in the absence 
of any contract to the contrary, be held by the Financial Cor-
poration in trust to be applied, first, in payment of all costs, charges 
and expenses properly incurred by it as incident to the said sale or 
realisation and, secondly, in discharge of the debt due to the 
Financial Corporation, and the residue of the money 80 received shall 
be paid to the person entitled thereto. 
• • • • 
31. (1) Where an industrial concern, in breach of any agreement, Specia,l 
makes any default in repayment of any loan or advance or any f~~v!::fur~ 
instalment thereof or otherwise fails to comply with the. terms- of its cc~ent of 
agreement with the Financial Corporation or where the Financial ~r~=cfJ 
Corporation requires an industrial concern to make immediate re- C;:Orpora-
payment of any loan or advance under section 30 and the industrial tlon, 
concern fails to make s\lch repayment, any officer of the Financial 
Corporation, generally. or specially authorised by the Board in this 
behalf, may apply to the district judge within the limits of whose 
jurisdiction the industrial concern carries on the whole or a sub-
stantial part of its business for one or more of the following relief$, 
namely:-
(a) for an order for the. sale of the property pledged, mort-
gaged, hypothecated or assigned to the Corporation as security 
for the loan or advance; or· 
• • • • 

IS 
CHAPTER IV 
Funds of 
the Finan-
cial Corpo-
ration. 
33. (1) 
• • • • • 
(2) All moneys belonging to the fund shall be deposited in the 
Reserve Bank or with any agency of the Reserve Bank other than 
a Government treasury or in a scheduled bank in consultation with 
the Reserve Bank. 
• • • • • 
General 38. (1) A general m.eeting (hereinafter referred to as the annual 
meetiDp. general meeting) shall be held annually at· a place in the State 
where there is an office of the Financial Corporation within two 
months from the date on which the anDlUal accounts of the Finan-
cial Corporation are closed, and a general meeting may be conven-
ed by the Board at any other time . 
Audit. 
Returns. 
• • • • • 
3'1. (1) The affairs of the Financial Corporation shall be audited 
by not less than two auditors duly qualified to act as auditors of 
companies under sub-section (1) of section 144 of the Indian Com-
panies Act, 1913 (Vn of 1913), one of whom shall be appointed by 
the State Government in consultation with the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India and the other elected in the prescribed 
manner by the parties mentioned in clauses (c) and (d) of sub-
section (3) of section 4, and such remuneration as the State Gov-
ernment may .fix shall be paid to the auditors by the Financial 
Corporation. 
38. (1) 
• • • • • 
(3) The Financial Corporation shall furnish to the State Gov-
ernment and to the Reserve Bank within three months of the close 
ot each financial year a statement in the prescribed form of its 
assets and liabilities as at the close of that year, together with a 
profit and loss account for the year, the auditors' report and a 
report of the working of the Financial Corporation during the year 
and copies of the said statement, acco~nt and reports shall be pub· 
lished in the Official Gazette and sliall also be laid before the 
Legislature of the state. 

19 
'CHAPTER V' 
MIsCELLANEOUS 
38. (1) In the discharge of its functions, the Board shall be guided Power to 
by such instructioLS on questions of policy as may be given to it f::.i~:'" 
by the State Government. Financial 
Corpora-
tion on 
• • • • questiODl 
Of policy. 
(3) If the Board faUs to carry out the instructions on the ques-
tion of policy laid down by the State Government, the State Gov-
ernment shall have the power to supersede the Board and appoint 
a new Board in its place to fundion until a properly constituted 
Board is set up, and the decision of the State Government as to 
the grounds for superseding the Board shall not be questioned in 
any court. 
• • • * 
48. (1). • • • Power of Board to 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the make, re-
foregoing power, such regUlations may provide for- JUlataons • 
• • • • • 
(m) the appointment of advisory committees for technical 
and other advice for the purposes of this Act; and 
• • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the State Financial Corporcltions Act, ]951. 
The President bas, in pursuance of clauses (I) and (3) of article 
I 17 of the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha 
the introduction and consideration of the Bill. 
M.N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(S~ri A. C. Gu/uJ, 
Minister of RefJenut and 
Defence Expenditure.) 